THE POPES deadly Wound: Tending to resolve all men, in the Chief and
principal Points now in controversy between the Papists and Us.

Written by T. C. and published by Master Doctor BVRGES, now Preacher to the
English troops in the Pallatinate.

2 TIMOTH. Chap. 3. Verse 8.9. As Iannes and Iambres withstood MOSES, so do
these also resist the Truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
Faith: But they shall prevail no longer, for their madness shall be evident
to all men, as theirs was. REVELAT. Chap. 18. Verse. 2. It is fallen, it is
fallen, Babylon the great City, and is become the habitation of Devils, and
the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful Bird.
REVELAT. Chap. 14 Verse. 9.10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and
receive his mark in his forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God. LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Nath. Newberie, and are
to be sold at the sign of the Star under S. Peter's Church in Corne-hill,
and in Popes-head-Alley. 1621.

To the Christian Reader.
HE that undertakes to commend another man's writings unto the view and reading
of men, adventures his own reputation therein, as Merchants do their stock
in other men's ships. And there be two sorts of men, that do and may adventure
more boldly then others, either goods or credit: First, such as have so much to
spare, as that the loss of their adventure will not pinch them; or such as
have so little to adventure, as no loss can hurt them much: Yet is there a
middle sort that do adventure in hope of good returns.

J take my self a man not utterly desperate, yet of poor estate, knowing
nothing in my self that might procure respect unto another man's writings;
unless perhaps my acquaintance with many men of sundry places, the purchase of
my troublesome pilgrimage, or the loving favor which God of his goodness has
given me with many, far beyond my worth: But if I had more reputation in the
Church of God and my Country then ever J shall have, I would not fear to
adventure all mine own praises in the praise of this little Book, and the
Author thereof.

The Author thereof, Master Thomas Clarke, one of my parishoners in
Sutton-Coldfield, I know to be a man of much gravity, piety, and honesty, and
for one of his sort to be admired for his unwearied pains in reading such
Authors as he could, gathering out of them the pith of their discourses or
disputes, and laboring to improve all, not only to the settling of his own
judgment, but also to the staying and satisfying of others popishly inclined,
by conference or by writing: wherein also his success has exceeded the
harvest of many other men, better languaged and more learned then be.

Touching this his book, it is true that only the moulding of the Arguments
against Popery is his own, fitter perhaps for the vulgar sort, then more
exquisite pieces. The matter it self is to be found in the writings of our
learned Countrymen, dispersed in large or many books, whereof some are not so
easy to be had: But here is compiled and compacted together in this popular
form, and in a style (so far as I can judge) neither curious nor dissolute,
but well becoming the man and the matter.

The end and aim of this good man, I persuade my self to be honest and holy,
not applause of men, nor gain of money, but a true desire to inform his
countrymen that cannot or will not hear often or read much in the knowledge
of the truth, which detayning or reclayming them from Popery, or confirming
them in true religion established in our Land, might yield them better
Christians, better Subjects, better Neighbors.

Many have long called for this Book upon sight of some part of it, or report
of others; these I suppose will gladly read it: such as never heard of it, or
of the man, may please to make a trial, whether or no they may find in it,
that which may refresh the memory of learned and diligent men in much breuity,
or bring light unto the ignorant with as much perspicuity; which is, I
confess, my opinion of the Book.

God quicken up our hearts to more zeal for the Gospel, and against popery,
the zeal whereof in our adversaries should provoke us to more zeal, or will
condemn us though it help not them; God also bless this good Old Man that
has spent himself for common good, aad bless all means that may any way
advance the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus, whether the scepter of Government, the
sword of War, the preaching of the Gospel, or Pen, or Print of wel-aduised
and well-affected persons. Farewell.

Thine, to serve thee in the Lord, JOHN BVRGES Parson of Sutton-Coldfield, in
Warwickshire, and now Preacher to the English troops in the service of the
KING of Bohemia, for the defense of the Pallatinate, under the command of Sr.
Horatio Veere Knight, Lord General.

THE PREFACE TO the Christian Reader.
WE read (Christian Reader) in the second Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians 2. cap. 3 verse, of a general apostacy, or departing from the
true Faith, which the great Antichrist should bring to pass before the coming
of Christ, and before he should be revealed, or made manifest to the world.
And we read also in the 3. chap. and 10. verse of the Revelation of S. John,
of a general temptation or trial that shall come upon the world, to try them
that dwell upon the earth. And in the 17. chap. we read by whom this
temptation shall be made: especially in the 4. and 5. verses, where it is said
of Romish Babylon, that she offered to the world, In a cup of Gold (to wit in
the golden name of Christ) the abomination and filthiness of her fornication.
And in the 3. verse of the 18. chap. that she made all nations to drink
thereof. And in the second verse of the 17. chap. that she made the
inhabibitants of the earth drunk therewith. And therefore it is that the
Angel in the 5. verse calls Christian Rome, Babylon, The mother of
whordomes, and abominations of the earth: and for which (as appears in the
2. verse of the 19. chap.) the Lord has condemned her.

Now by this filthiness of her fornication, all the learned do know, is meant
her whorish religion, as idolatry, superstition, and heathenish worship: which
very many that are yet living do know, did ouerflow this Land, and a great
part of the Christian world, before the days of King Henry the eight, when as
God had appointed the effectual beginning of the reformation and restoring
again of the true Faith and Religion, as may appear by a Prophecy written in
an old book (I know not how many hundred years ago) Entitled, Stimulus
diuinae contemplationis, which says, After the year of Christ's incarnation
1534. good Religion, good Laws, good Peace, together with Faith, Truth, and
sound Doctrine shall return into the world in their proper shape and true
likeness. And this was also at the time of the rising of Luther, when as there
was neither sound doctrine, true faith, nor religion to be found in all the
Romish jurisdiction: according to that Prophecy of their S. Hildegard, a
Nun, which says, In the Apostolic order (to wit, in the Roman Sea) no
religion shall be found.

Truly, (Christian Reader) it seems very apparent, that God has made
special choice of England above all the Nations in the world, to be the chief
for the recovering and reducing of that part of his Church (the Romish
jurisdiction) and the overthrow of Antichrists kingdom and religion. For
whereas in the 17. chapter of the Revelation, the ten horns are declared to
be the maine strength of the seauen-hilled City (to wit Rome) and that the
text declares also those horns to be so many kingdoms, and that the learned
expound them to be these ten head kingdoms of the Romish jurisdiction,
England, Scotland, Denmark, etc. (the first whereof, that withdrew her power
from Rome, was England) it is manifest England is the chief.

I know (Christian Reader) it would be thought strange to say, that that which
was done by King Henry was foretold in the book of the Revelation.
Nevertheless, a very learned man writing upon these words, in the 13. verse of
the 11. chap. (And the tenth part of the City shall fall) says plainly, It
is a thousand to one but that it is meant of King Henry: meaning his
withdrawing his power from Rome. And indeed it is ten thousand to one, but
that it is meant of him: For plain experience does evidently demonstrate
England to be the chief of those ten Kingdoms also, which the 16. verse of
the 17. chap. declares shall be the means of the final fall of the City of
Rome, and power of Antichrist: for that, after this work was set abroach by
King Henry, we saw it so greatly to prevail under the reign of that famous
Queen his Daughter Elizabeth, that at her decease, the Pope had scarce three
of those Kingdoms (signified by those horns) left to adhere with him
entirely. And I do find also by diverse of the old Romish Predictions, that
as God made King Henry the maine beginner of the ruin and decay of the
strength of Romish Babylon, so he has ordained a most worthy King of the name
of Jacob, to second him in that work. And as touching that which shall be
further effected by him, thus has their Robertus a Dominican Friar written
long ago in his second Sermon. But Jacob flying from the Serpents face, (which
Serpent in his third vision, he affirms the spirit told him was Antichrist
the Pope) is joined to those that do praise my name. For which cause (he
declares) the Pope (whom in the same Sermon he compares to Esau) should put
in practice the destruction of the spiritual Jacob, as also for refusing to
join with him, and to be of his society: For there he brings in the Pope,
speaking in this manner to his spiritual sons; Go to my Sons, and enter
into a consultation among your selves, how I may bring him under; for by his
destruction my treasure shall be exceedingly increased: I have need of much,
because the name of my house is great upon the face of the earth. Deglutiamus
eum virum: Come therefore, let us swallow him up alive. Which Prophecy, albeit
we saw fulfilled in the Powder Treason, yet as the same Friar shows, that
all the Pope could do should nothing at all prevail; so, thanks be to our
good God we saw it did not.

Again, the same Friar, in his sixeteenth Sermon, fore-sheweth that it shall
come to pass, that the same Jacob (whom there he calls the Lion King) shall
visit the Emperor, and the rest of the Roman and other Catholic Princes of
Christendom, by his Christian and royal exhortations, to help to subdue the
Pope, and to bring the Church of Rome into the same state of primitive purity,
as it was in the happy days of Constantine the Great, Theodosius, Valentinian,
etc. Whereby he declares, not only how greatly the Church of Rome is fallen
from her primitive purity in religion, but also, that she shall be reformed by
the special means of our Nation of England. And to the like effect are these
words of their Saint Bridgit, (cannonized for a Saint by Pope Boniface the
ninth) in her sixth book of Revelations, 26. chap. where she brings in Christ
complaining of the decayed state of the Church of Rome, showing him to exhort
all Christian Kings what course to take for the perfect reformation thereof,
saying; Wherefore the King for whom thou do pray, ought to call and assemble
a Council of Spiritual men, such as are wise through my wisdom; and he
ought to enquire diligently of those that have my spirit, and ask their
advice, how, and by what means the wall of my Church may be built again
amongst Christians, how God may be restored to his honor, true Religion made
to flourish anew, godly charity made more fervent, my passion more deeply
imprinted in the hearts and minds of men, and my Commandments loved with
greater zeal and respect: Let him therefore gather together the upright and
true kind of Christians, that he together with them, may repair the
spiritual breaches of my Church, the which verily has departed too far from
me.

By which we see, she gives all true Christian Princes to understand, that
God requires of them, that they join together, and use all means by godly
and learned instructers, to reclayme the Romish Church, and to reduce her to
that most ancient Catholic faith and religion, which Saint Paul so commended
her for at the first: which albeit at the first, or on the sudden she will
not receive; but as their Abbot Ioachim upon the 22. chapter of Jeremy says:
Will stop her ears, lest she should hear the charming of the inchaunter,
the voice of him that admonishes her: yet upon the 15.17.18.21. and 22.
chapters, he shows that those admonitions shall, in short time, so work,
that not only the German Empire shall forsake the Church of Rome, but the
Church it self, with her College of Cardinals shall be divided, and fall into
discord among themselves. And upon the 50. and 51. of Jeremy, he shows by the
effect, that those admonitions shall so greatly prevail, that the Pope and the
whole order of his Clergy, his Consistory and State, shall be exceedingly
impaired. For (says he) The Nobles of the Roman Church shall perish, the
Monasteries shall be diminished, the High. Priest shall be purified, and
Christian Religion shall be winnowed as with a fan. And the same also did
their Saint Katharine of Sienne foresee, as may appear by these her words
written in a prayer of hers: But what shall the Lord do to these evil husband
men? he shall come and destroy them, and let out his Vineyard unto others, etc.
By tribulations and afflictions, and in such a manner as we know not, he shall
purge his Church, and to that purpose shall stir up the spirits of his Elect.
After which things (says she) shall ensue such a reformation of the holy
Church, and such a renouation of the godly Pastors thereof, that the very
thoughts thereof makes my spirit to rejoice in the Lord. And as I have told
you heretofore (says she) the Spouse which is now altogether deformed, ragged
and ^orne, shall then be adorned, and decked as it were with precious jewels
and chains: And all faithful people shall be glad when they are thus
beautified with so holy Pastors. Yea, the very Infidells being drawn with the
sweet smell of Christ, shall repair unto the Catholic sheepfold, and be
converted to the chief Pastor and Bishop of their souls. And this is it also
which Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome did foresee, as may appear by these his
words, written in his nineteenth book the ninth chap. upon Job: The Church
after the days of her afflictions, shall afterward, notwithstanding, be
strengthened with great power of preaching.

And that it may yet more plainly appear, that our Nation of England shall
bear some sway in this work, the aforesaid Dominican Friar, in his sixth
vision, declares that it was revealed unto him, That the I Will of Britain
should prove the chief receptacle of the Church of God, and even an Asile or
Sanctuary to the Church of Rome, in the time of the Turkish Persecution, and as
it were her nursing mother, after she should come to be thus reformed: and that
the true Christian religion should be maintained especially by the blessed
means of the people of the aforesaid Isle. For, As the title of his Vision
(says the Translator) is of the future state of the Church, so the Vision it
self does bear how he did seem to be together with some other persons in a
small number in a certain great ship, not well appointed with Ruthers or Oars
in the maine Sea, and that the ship came as it were of it self unto a
certain Island, whereunto (says he) we being but a few, had our recourse for
refuge and safety. Also to the like effect there is this prognosticall verse,
aledged by Ioannes Wolfius in the second tome of his memorable things: in
Latin thus: Europa genit us terra, vir just us and aequus
Pastor erit, Caeli claues non regna gubernans.
Pax erit, and toto surget concordia Mundo
Vna Fides vnus regnabit in omnia Princeps.


In English thus; A certain wight equitable and upright borne in Europe, shall
be the chief Pastor or Bishop of Christendom, such a one as shall manage and
govern the Keys of the kingdom of Heaven, and not the Scepters of the
kingdoms of the earth. There shall be peace and concord in the world one Faith
and Religion, and once Prince imperially reigning over all. Also their
Paracelsus the German Hermit, in his 26. Prediction, makes mention of an
English Prince and his issue, that shall more fully effect this work of
reformation. And in an old Prophecy had out of the Palace of wisdom, in
Rome; and in another Prophecy of Sauanarola, a Dominican Friar, mention is
made of a Prince of the name of Charles, that shall strike a great stroke in
this work, and shall bring to pass, that in the end, according to a Prophecy
also of Nostrodamus, Rome shall be ruled by her old Britannish head.

Cant. 5. quadrin. 99. Quand Rome aurale chef vieux Britantique.
And says Master James Maxwell (the Translater) As the Italian Jesuit
Heronymus Platus in the second book of Religious life, chap. 30. confesses
England to have been more fertile of conuerters of Nations and Countries to
the Christian faith, then any other Land else; so is it not unlikely but that
God will have the same Country to be more fertile of reformers of other corrupt
Churches, especially of that of Rome, then any other Land whatsoever. And that
as there is in no one Country or Nation of the world to be found so many
learned and eloquent Preachers, nor so many complete Divines, for
Iudiciousnesse, Ingenuousnesse and moderation, and for fitness to deserve well
for the peace of the Church, as there is in England; so it is like that God
will honor this Island with the reformation of the Church of Rome, and her
daughters, by sending forth from thence, such godly, judicious, zealous, and
moderate men, as shall reclaim them from their abuses, and restore unto them
their Primitive purity and integrity, such as it was in the happy days of
Constantine the Great, borne in great Britannie. For (says he) To the same
effect sounds this prognosticall verse, which was found in an old manuscript:
Iesse Rosa sanguis Bruti
Portat Crucem Jesus Christi.
The Rose of England bears and brings
the Cross of Christ to foreign Lands.


Also as their Ioachim the Abbot, writing upon the 4.5.18.22. and 30. Chapter
of Jeremy, shows that there shall be certain new Preachers of the Gospel in
the Catholic or Universal Church, strong in faith, and true in Doctrine,
whose Doctrine shall be open and free, and that they shall preach Repentance
both to the Greeks and Latins, and convert many of them to the truth; so is
there a certain Prophecy uttered in the year of Christ, 1119. as writes
Matthew Paris in his 475. Page of this History, which says; They that walk in
darkness, shall turn to the light, and those things that were divided and
scattered, shall be gathered together and united.

Also, the same Abbot shows, how that the Pope and his Prelates will rage
against those whom God shall send to convert them, where he writing upon the
first Chapter of Jeremy, says thus; Such Doctors and Prophets are to be sent,
which shall not only rebuke the people, but also thunder out against the
Priests, and strike earthly and carnal hearts with all manner of plagues, and
put to silence the lofty and swelling Masters, who shall fight against the
aforesaid Preachers which shall be revealed, as once did Judah against Israel,
and the Jews against Christ and his Apostles. By means whereof, the death of
Philip the second King of Spain) in his Sericum mundi filum, does deliver,
that The Lion having the Rose and the Lillies in his arms, shall utterly
destroy the Pope, so as that afterward there shall never be any more Popes.
And then all Christian Princes, being at peace and unity, it seems by a
Prediction found in an old Book, that they shall consent and agree, to choose
out of all, one excellent Man for learning and good life, to be as a chief
Moderator, for the bringing all sorts of people in the whole world to one kind
of Religion, and all Churches into one uniform order: For thus it is written
in that Prophecy, The afflictions of the Church and Clergy being passed; and
after so many and great tribulations, by the will of God, a most holy man shall
be chosen, perfect in all manner of perfection, who shall reform the World in
better, and shall bring back all Clergymen to the ancient and primitive
manner of living, according to the form of the Disciples of Christ: He shall
convert the Infidels, and the Jews, etc. And so there shall be one Law, one
faith, and one Baptism, and one manner of living; and all Christian people
shall be of one mind, and of one heart, loving one another, and their peace
shall last many years: but after the world has been reformed into better,
the malice of men shall again awake, and they shall return to the committing
the former evils, yea they shall do more wickedly then ere they did before,
for the which cause God shall hasten the end of the World. And as the authors
of those Prophesies (who foretold of the utter desolation of Rome) seemed to
allude unto the 21.22.23. and 24. Verses of the eighteenth chapter of the
Revelation, by which words in those Verses, the Angel fore-shewed the same; so
the latter end of this old Prophecy, seems to have relation to these words
of Christ in the 12. Verse of the 24. Chapter of Saint Matthew: And because
iniquity shall be increased, the love of many shall be cold: As also, to these
words in the 22. Verse (according to the understanding of some) And except
those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: But for the
Elect sake, those days shall be shortened. And the former part seems also to
allude unto those words in the six and twentieth and 27. Verses of the 7.
Chapter of the Prophet Daniel, which shows, that after Antichrist and his
Kingdom is overthrown, the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and the
Jews shall be called, and so all shall be converted to the truth, and serve
the only true God. Nevertheless, we may not understand it to be meant of
every particular of all. For howsoever Antichrist the Head, and his successiue
incorporate body, shall utterly be desolued, so as that there shall never be
any more a public Church of Antichrist; yet even as it is now here in
England, and the other converted Nations, some of the members of the mystical
body of Antichrist, will remain scattered here and there in diverse parts of
the World to the coming of Christ to judgment. For to the same effect are
these words of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians, 2. Chapter, where he speaking of
Antichrist and his members, says; Whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit
of his mouth, and abolish with the brightness of his coming.

And as that old Prophecy did foreshew the calling of the Jews, by the means
of a godly and learned Bishop, so in another Prediction had out of the Bishop
of Limoges Library in France, uttered more then 600. Years ago, it is said
that an holy Bishop shall cause a general Council to be called, and shall
persuade Christian Princes to join together all their powers against the
Sarazens, and to rid Jerusalem of them, which being done, the same Bishop,
because of the iniquity of the Romans, shall translate Saint Peter's Chair to
Jerusalem, and shall suffer none other Law, but that only of Jesus Christ.

And to this agrees that Prophecy of Sauanarola the Dominican Friar, which
(to show, that as Jerusalem was the first Church, and the chief of all other,
so it should be at the last) says thus: I saw in a vision in the year of our
Lord, 1482. two Crosses, the one was black, planted in the midst of the City
of Rome, spreading as it were the arms over the whole Earth, and with the top
touching the whole Heaven; whereon was written these words; Crux Irae Dei: The
Cross of Gods anger or wrath: which having seen, behold incontinent, I beheld
and saw the air darkened and troubled with tempestuous clouds, winds,
lightnings, darts, swords, fire, and hail; and me thought I saw an
innumerable number of men destroyed through the force and violence thereof, so
that few were left behind unslain: Afterward, I saw a sweet, fair, and
clear time ensuing; and lo, I beheld, and saw as it were a golden Cross in
the midst of Jerusalem, of the brightness and height of the former, so
bright that it did inlighten the whole World, and filled the same with new joy
and gladness; and it had written upon it. Crux misericordiae Dei. The Cross
of the mercy and favor of God: and lo, incontinent and on a sudden, all the
Nations of the World, of both Sex came in troops from all parts to behold it,
Esaias, cap. 2. Verse 2.
and embraced it. And this Vision seems to agree with that Prophecy of Esaias,
Chap. the 2. where it is said: It shall be in the last days, that the
mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it. And also with these words of Saint Paul, Romans 11. If the fall of
them (to wit, the Jews) be the riches of the World, and the diminishing of
them the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their abundance be?

By which, and other such like Visions (says the Translator) the aforesaid
holy man Sauanarola was forewarned of the future castigation and renouation of
the Church of Rome, and how that the Apostolic Sea should be removed from
thence to Jerusalem, which is likewise according to the Prediction of the
Franciscan Friar, Ioannes de Rupe scissa, and also to another Prediction had
out of Limoges Library in France; and finally, to the Prediction of Marlinus
Caldidonius.

And now (Christian Reader) as it seems apparent by these Romish Predictions
(agreeable to the Scriptures) that God respects England, as the holy Land of
Canaan, so is it made yet more apparent by William of Malmsbury in his second
Book of his Kings, and second Book of his Bishops; where he shows that in
a Vision to holy Brithwall Bishop of Winchester, this voice was uttered; Regnum
Anglorum est Dei: The Kingdom of England is Gods. Which signifies, that
howsoever all the Nations in the world are Gods as well as England; yet has
God made special choice of England above all other Nations in the World, to
effect some notable and extraordinary work; which work we may easily gather
by all the former Predictions, is to be a chief instrument of the propagation
of the Gospel to foreign Lands, both for the calling in of the remainder of
the Gentiles, and also of the whole Nation of the Jews.

To the which I beseech our Lord God, to give good success, and to send peace
and agreement amongst the Electors. For their Astrologian Ruth, in the second
part of his Book, 7. Chapter, shows that there shall be great tribulation
and division amongst them, and therefore admonishes them to agree, lest the
Turk get so great advantage by their discord, as to drive the Bohemian,
Polonians, Danes, and English, to be glad to contract a league of amity with
him: which thing God forbid, and which we ought all to pray God to auert: For
now we see is the time come for the fulfilling of this Prophecy.

Lord give a blessing to my labor: and open the eyes of the blind.
But now, what good effect can we look to have, that the fruit of this our
labor should any thing at all prevail to convert any Papists, seeing we find
in the 16. Chapter, 10. Verse. and 9. Chapter, 20.21. Verses of the Revelation,
that neither the Word of God, nor the judgments of God shall convert them?
surely none, were it not that the Lord in the 4. Verse of the 18 Chapter had
revealed, that even to the final destruction of Babylon, he has yet reserved
some to himself; of which sort therefore, we hope it will take effect in some:
but for the rest, we have had sufficient experience, that the more plainer and
clearer the truth is made unto them, the more they will labor with their
cunning shifts, and sophistical arguments, to obscure it; yea, and if it be
possible, they will make it seem untruth. Howbeit, even hereby they most
evidently declare themselves, to be of the fellowship of those Antichristians
whom S. Paul 2 Thessalonians 2 chap. shows the great Antichrist shall so
strongly delude, that they shall delight rather to believe his lies, then Gods
truth.

And that it may appear to the Reader, they are indeed the same, what can make
it more apparent, then their apposing themselves against the Doctrine of Christ
himself? For whereas the Prophet Malachi chap. 4. foretold of Elias that was
to come, and that our Savior Christ, Matthew. 11. expounds that to be meant of
Saint John Baptist, in saying of him, This is that Elias that was to come; He
that has ears to hear, let him hear: They stick not to appose themselves
against his plain exposition, and constantly affirm, that the same Elias is
yet to come. Also, notwithstanding the Evangelist Saint Luke, in his first
chapter, 17. Verse, shows John Baptist to be the same of whom Malachi
foretold; who, as he says, Came in the spirit and power of Elias, to prepare
the way for Christ: They say that the end of his coming, is to appose himself
against Antichrist. And this is done to make us believe that Antichrist is not
yet come. But in the mean time, their affirming Elias to be yet to come (which
should come but once) and that only to manifest the Messiah to be verily
come; What is this, but by a consequent, to affirm, that the Messiah is yet to
come, and so our faith in him that is come, is made void, and of none effect?

Again, whereas our Savior Christ, as appears Matthew 24. says; And this
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached through out the whole World for a
witness to all Nations, and then shall the end come: They pervert both words
and sense, and say; And then shall Antichrist come. And this also is done only
to make men believe that Antichrist is not yet come, that no man should once
suspect the Pope to be he, albeit the truth forces all men to believe the
contrary. But it may well appear they mean nothing less, then that the truth
should come to light; for then N. D. the Author of the Ward-word, in alleging
the 8. Verse of the 11. chapter of the Revelation, to prove the seat of
Antichrist to be in Jerusalem would not have taken out of the Text, the word
Spiritually (which all men may see, the holy Ghost put in purposely to preserve
the sense) that he might add a contrary, to wit, such a sense of his own, as
should shadow Rome for appearing to be the seat, and the Pope from being
Antichrist. I say, if he had been willing the Reader should have been
resolved by truth, he would never have done it.

But what has he gotten by this his adding, and deminishing too and from the
words and sense of that Prophecy, let him look into the 18. and 19. Verses of
the 22. chap. of the same Book, and he shall find it to be no less then
eternal damnation both of body and soul, because it is wittingly done?

Again, if he had been willing that men should have been resolved by the
truth, he might more easily have found out the seat of Antichrist to be in
Rome, then in Jerusalem; because the 17. chapter of the Revelation shows it
to be in the City with seven hills, and which reigns over the Kings of the
earth; but Jerusalem was never described by seven hills, nor ever reigned over
the Kings of the earth, nor any other City in all the world, but Rome;
therefore not Jerusalem, but Rome, is the seat of Antichrist.

Again, if he had been willing that the truth should have resolved the Reader,
(who he is, that is in deed and truth the great Antichrist) he would never
have wrested and falsified so many places of Scripture, as appears (in his
Ward-word, Page 91.92.) he has done wittingly, to prove him a Jew, and to
dominiere only over that one Nation of the Jews: I say, if he had been
willing that men should have been resolved by the truth, he would never have
done it. If he shall charge us with doing him wrong, for saying he has
wrested and falsified the places he has cited; I say again, not any one of
his places does prove the point: if it did, then he has done himself the
wrong; for that after so many places cited, he brings in the 5. Verse of the
13. chapter of the Revelation, which being understood (as he would have it) of
Antichrist, the three next Verses following, proves him a Gentile, and a
Roman: unto whom (as the Text says) Power was given over every kindred,
tongue, and Nation, and whom the World worshipped. So that here he has utterly
shamed himself, for that this Text (as he understands it) proves all his
former objections but Antichristian illusions, and fond fables.

Again, if he had been willing that the Reader should have been resolved by
the truth, he would not have labored to have enduced him to believe that
Antichrist should seduce the Jews, and that they should receive him for their
Messiah and Savior, seeing he cannot prove by any one place of Scripture (from
the first chapter of Genesis, to the last chapter of the Revelation, that there
shall be any other translation, or alteration of the Jews state to come, but
only that in the 11. to the Romans, which Saint Paul shows, shall be their
conuertion to Christ, and the same to continue to the coming of Christ to
judgment.

Again, if he had been willing men should have been resolved by the truth,
he would never have expounded the Image of the Heathenish Roman government,
to be a painted picture, or a carved Image, the likeness of some kind of
cattle, or beast, only to blind the World, that men should not see the Popish
government to be the Image. Howbeit, let them look into the 8. verse of the
14. chap. and they shall see; and into the 9.10. and 11. Verses of the same,
and they shall know, to their everlasting woe, that by the Beast is meant the
Heathen Roman government, and by the image of the beast, the Popish Roman
government. But he that was the author of the Ward-word, would not that men
should know this. Therefore we see, he is not willing that men should be
resolved by the truth.

Again, if the Papists in general, had been willing the truth should have
come to light, that men might have been resolved in the truth of Babylon, they
would not in the Remish Testament, have expounded Babylon (in the seauententh
chapter of the Revelation) to signify the Universal society of the wicked,
seeing the holy Ghost shows in the same Chapter, that by Babylon, is meant
the City with seven hills, and that reigned over the Kings of the earth: But
to say that the Reprobates of the world, are situated upon those seven hills,
and reigned over the Kings of the earth, is most ridiculous. Therefore, we see
they are not willing the truth should come to light.

Again, if they had been willing that men should have been resolved by the
truth, they would never have given that exposition; seeing that by Babylon, is
signified also the woman offering to the World, in the name of Christ, her
whorish Religion, as appears in the 4. Verse of the same chapter.

Again, if they had been willing to have brought the truth to light, that men
might have been truly resolved in that point; then, seeing the Angel in the
same place, showed to Saint John, that he spoke to him of Romes estate,
offering to the World her Religion in a Golden cup (that is, in the name of
Christ) they would never have expounded it of Heathenish Rome under the Heathen
Emperors; for they know as well as we, that she disdained once to handle that
cup, and persecuted any whosoever offered to her any truth therein.

But why should we stand any longer in the repeticion of these things now,
seeing that by the holy Ghost, the mystery of the Golden cup is revealed, and
the truth laid open, that it is Christian Rome, that the Angel called Babylon,
the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth. And then seeing
Christian Rome is the mother of whordomes and abominations of the earth, the
Pope must needs be the father of whordomes and abominations of the earth: and
he that is the father of whordomes and abominations of the earth, must needs
be the great Antichrist. Therefore here all their mouths are stopped, and all
their cunning arguments desolued, and all their chief points, crafty shifts,
and untruths abandoned, which they would have, should make us to believe that
Antichrist is not yet come, that we should not suspect the Pope to be he.

As touching the exposition of the Golden cup, let them deny it to be the true
meaning of the holy Ghost if they dare; but they have denied too much of the
truth of that Book already, as one day they shall find.

All the benefits of salvation which we receive in Christ, the Prophet David,
Psalm. 116. calls the Cup of salvation. And his name may well be called the
Golden Cup, because as S. Luke says, Acts 4.19. There is given none other name
under heaven, whereby men must be saved.

And yet to show that all that profess Christ shall not be saved, our Savior
Christ fore-telleth, that even under his name many shall be deceived: which
surely is a wonderful great judgment of God, upon that people whosoever they
be.

Erasmus expounding the mystery of that cup, shows, that that which is
offered therein, is nothing else but the Popes religion, which (he says) he
offers in the name of Christ, to deceive the world. And their Abbot Ioachim
witnesses the same, as may plainly appear in his 37. chapter upon the
Prophet Jeremy, where he complaining of the corruption of the Popes, says:
They do neglect Incense and Myrrh, but they seek after Gold, that they may
with Babylon, the great Lady of the world, fill unto men Wine in a golden Cup,
to infect their followers with their abominations.

And thus by the opening the mystery of the Golden Cup, we see the Lord has
now made known to his Church, that Christian Rome is Babylon, and the Pope
professing Christ, is Antichrist. Yea, the same of whom Saint Hylary says:
Hylary contra Auxenium.
Antichrist shall be contrary to Christ, under a color of preaching the
Gospel, so that our Lord Jesus Christ shall then be denied, when a man would
think he were preached. And herein also the Pope agrees to the signification
of the name, as it is in the Greek; namely, to be both for, and against
Christ, 2 Thessa. 2. to sit as the Church, the dear friend of Christ, and yet
to be as Saint Paul says, An adversary: Therefore, doubtless, he cannot be
said to be the great Antichrist, that is, not ouer-ruling all, both for and
against Christ.

Their Saint Vincent, entreating of the end of the World, shows of two kinds
of Antichrists, the one he calls a pure Antichrist, to wit, the Turk; the
other he calls a mixed kind of Antichrist, which he says shall be an evil
Pope, made by an evil prince of great power, alluding to Boniface the third,
who was made the first Pope, by that Murderer Phocas the Emperor of Rome. And
their Astrologian Ruth, speaking of Antichrist, says: He shall be called
Antichristus mixtus, whom the Prelates shall greatly honor. And this he spoke,
not of himself, for he found it so written in an old Prophecy, as himself
confesses in his thirty four Chapter, of the second part of his Book.

To be brief, and to draw to an end; this I advise the Reader to note well,
that forasmuch as the same Apostle, Ephesians, 4.6. shows, that as there is
but one God, and that he alone is the Universal father of all; And that Christ
himself, Matthew 23.9. forbad the title of Universal father to be given to
any, but to the Father of Heaven; it is clear he is a most horrible
blasphemer, that will call the most holiest man upon the earth, universal
Father of all: much more he that will call Antichrist, the Pope, universal
father of all, seeing the Holy ghost calls him, The man of sin, and son
of perdition, 2 Thessal. 2.

Again, forasmuch as the same Apostle, Galatians 4.26. says, Jerusalem which
is above, is the mother of us all: he is a most horrible blasphemer, that will
call the most holiest City here beneath, the mother of us all: much more he
that will call Rome the Mother of us all, which the Angel of God calls
Babylon, The mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth.

Again, forasmuch as the very self and same religion which Rome now offers
to the world in the name of Christ, is by the Angel in the 4 verse of the 17.
chapter of the Revelation, compared unto the stinking filthiness of a whoores
fornication, he must needs be a most horrible blasphemer, that will call it,
The most ancient, true, and holy Catholic religion.

Again, forasmuch as the Apostle Saint Paul 2. Thessalon. 2. declares, that
the coming of Antichrist, shall be with great signs and wonders, yea, so
great and wonderful, that as our Savior Christ says, Matthew 24. If it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect. He therefore that will say, the
Church of Rome must needs be the true Church, because she works miracles,
is a most horrible blasphemer.

Miracles are wrought in the Church of Rome by the spirits of Devils, as
appears in the 16. chapter and 14. verse of the Revelation: Therefore
miracles are not always a true note of the true Church. And this appears
also in the thirteenth chapter of Deuteronomy, where we may see, that a most
vile kind of people, even such as God abhorred, wrought miracles, to draw
others to their religion. And Saint Paul also declares, 2. Thessalon. 2. verse
10. that Antichrist shall work his miracles among them that perish: therefore
miracles are not always a true note of the true Church.

Again, our Savior Christ, Matthew 7.22. declares, that at the day of
Judgment, certain Christian Ministers that were wont to confirm their
doctrine by miracles, when they shall see themselves cast out to be damned with
reprobates, they will admire, and say thus to Christ: Lord, Lord, have we not
by thy Name prophesied, and by thy Name cast out Devils, and done many great
works? And then (says Christ) I will profess to them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work iniquity. Popish Ministers work miracles, our
Ministers work none; they themselves therefore shall be judges in this case,
to which of these sort of Ministers, this Scripture may justly be applied.

Certainly, the greatest judgment that God does lay upon men in this life, is
to blind their understanding with Popery; for then they are willing to
receive any error, and to reject the truth; to be marked with the mark of the
Beast, and to receive the print of his name, and to perish with the Beast and
the false Prophet, as it is most certain they shall: For thus it is written in
the nineteenth chapter of the Revelation verse 20. But the Beast was taken, and
with him the false prophet that wrought miracles before him, whereby he
deceived them that received the Beasts mark, and them that worshipped his
image. These both were alive cast into a lake of fire, burning with brimstone.
Therefore to conclude this, I say to all those that have received the mark of
the Beast, in their forehead, or on their hand; that is, they that have
outwardly professed with their mouths and gestures; and those also that have
defended by Arms, written Books, wrought Miracles, or any way laid to their
helping hand, to do any thing whereby the Popes kingdom and state is
maintained, Damnation shall be their end. For as the Angel of God, in the
foureteenth chapter of the same book, 9.10. and 11. verses says, If any man
worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or on
their hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, yea, of the
pure wine which is powered into the Cup of his wrath, and he shall be termented
in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lamb, and the
smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore: and they shall have no rest day
nor night, which worship the Beast and his image: and whosoever receives the
print of his name, That is, whosoever is content to be called by any such name,
as whereby he may be known to be the Popes faithful subject. Therefore I
advertise them all, in the name of God, that they receive his fatherly
admonitions, and call to mind, how lovingly the Lord in the fourth verse of
the eighteenth chapter of the same Book, calls his Elect out of Babylon,
that they be not partakers of her sins, lest they should also receive of her
plagues. As for those that regard not this loving favor of God, but will
notwithstanding abide in her still, and go on with her in her abominations,
let them go, and do what they will. He that is unjust (says the Lord in the
22. chapter) let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy
still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and he that is
holy, let him be holy still. And behold, I come shortly, and my reward is with
me, to give to every man as his work shall be.

The Titles demonstrating the several points contained in each of the Chapters.
1 Certain Chapters, containing the sum and substance of the Christian
Churches confutations, of the Popish or Antichristian Churches errors,
heresies and blasphemies: The first whereof tends to resolve all men, that
notwithstanding both Papists and Protestants profess but one God, one faith,
one Baptism, and one Lord Jesus Christ: that yet there is so great a
difference in the manner of their profession, that it is not possible that they
both should be combined and conjoined together, to make one and the same true
Church of Christ.

2 An answer to ten several Objections for the clearing the Pope from being
Antichrist, whereof Bellarmine is supposed to be the original author.

3 That Christian Rome (now in her latter days) is that Babylon the seat of
Antichrist, which the Angel in the 17 chapter of the Revelation calls the
mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth: And which the other Angel
in the 18. chapter says is fallen, and become the habitation of Devils, and
hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird: and
out of which, the Lord from Heaven calls all his Elect, lest they should be
partakers of her sins, and consequently of her plagues.

4 That the Popish Church, is the same idolatrous Church, yet professing
Christ, which Saint John in his 13. and 17. chapters of the Revelation shows
to be the Church of Antichrist.

5 That for the first six hundred and six years next after Christ, there was
no Popish Church, neither could be, because there was not as yet an universal
Pope established in Rome, to make it a Popish Church: Therefore as no Husband,
no Wife; so, no universal Pope, no universal spouse of the Popes.

6 That in the year of Christ 607. the Church of Popery, and the succession
of universal Popes, first began. From whence our Church had her first
beginning before Luther; and how our Protestant Bishops, and Ministers which
they have ordained, have lawful callings.

7 Their general Consent overthrown, by general consent of Councels and
Fathers.

8 That the Apostle Saint Peter's authority, was but the same that the other
Apostles were; and therefore the Pope cannot justly claim from him, to be
called Universal head of all Christian Bishops. That the title of Universal
Father, is forbidden by Christ to be given to any but to his own Father.

9 That the true and most ancient Church, had but two Sacraments. How the
other five crept into the Church. That the Mass (by their own confession) was
made by diverse Bishops of Rome, long after the Apostles. That it tends to the
utter dissoluing of the whole Harmony of the Scriptures, both Prophetical and
Apostolical; the overthrow of the power of Christ's death and passion; and the
casting men's minds into a doubtful wavering of their salvation.

10 That the words of Christ touching the eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood; as also his other words concerning the sacrament are but figurative
speeches.

11 That we ought to pray to God alone, and not to Saints: And to worship God
alone, and not Saints. That none can be mediator between God and man, but
only he that is partaker of the natures both of God and man.

12 That the original authors of the doctrine of Purgatory, were the Heathen
Philosophers: How it does confound the judgment of the Popish writers, and how
it does deny the blood of Christ to be sufficient for the purging of sin.

The Chapter of Conclusion shows, that we are justified in the sight of God,
by faith only without works. That we possess Heaven only by the means of
faith: and being there, the fruits thereof are rewarded with the degrees of
glory. That the high way to damnation, is to seek salvation by merits.

The Popes deadly wound: Tending to resolve all Men in the chief and
principal Points now in controversy between the Papists and Us.
CHAPTER I. This Chapter tends to resolve all men, that notwithstanding both
Protestants and Papists profess but one God, one Faith, one Baptism, and one
Lord Jesus Christ, that yet there is so great a difference in the manner of
their profession, that it is not possible that they should be combined and
conjoined together to make one and the same true Church of Christ.
1 IT has been imagined (Christian Reader) that forasmuch as the Papists and
we profess one and the same God, etc. there might well be an union between
us and them, to make one and the same Universal Church: but I trust through
the help of Gods spirit, it shall be made manifest to the whole Church of God,
that it is no more possible, then by mixing with the purity of the Gospel,
the Abomination of desolation, (by which Saint Hierome says, Hierome in his
book upon the 24. of Saint Matthew. w.
We may understand all manner of perverse and false doctrine,) there can be
made one and the same true Christian Religion. True it is, that many notable
Heretics of former times, have professed one and the same God with the Church;
and as Saint Chrysostom says, Chrysostom of the Work upon Matthew.
Had gotten the notes and marks of the true Church, to wit (says he)
Churches, the Scriptures of God, Bishops, and other orders of Clerks, and
likewise Baptism, and the Sacrament of Thanksgiving: and to conclude, Christ
himself: but yet (as he shows) that the true Church of Christ, would not
admit them into the fellowship thereof, nor take them for true members of the
same: The reason was, for that with their profession, they mingled such
erroneous opinions of God, as made him no God, according to that which Saint
Hilary says, Hilary in Ps. 1.
To devise fancies of God, is as horrible as to say there is no God.

2 For we believe and profess but one divine God, according to Deuter. 4.35.
and one mediator between God and man, Even the man Christ Jesus; according to
Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 2.5. The Papists profess that the Lord he is God, but not
God only; and that Christ is mediator, but neither wholly nor only, as this
first Chapter shall plainly demonstrate from their own Doctors; for one
writes thus, Fell. in cap. ego N. de iureiur.
The Pope has the place upon earth, not of a pure man, but of a true God. The
Bishop of Aeix says, Contr Bassinet. vt Hist. Gallica.
Our holy Father the Pope, is an undoubted and true God on earth. In their
Extrauagants, he is termed, Extra coment. in glossa.
Our Lord God the Pope: besides, their Council of Trident Trident. in sexto de
lect.
decreed him to be God. In the Council of Lateraine, one saluted the Pope with
this title; Latr. sess. 4.
Thou art another God on earth; which the Pope accepted as his due: even as
Pope Nicholas seeking authority whereby he might claim that dignity, found
these words treasured up in the Popes Library: Nicholas Did. 96. satis
euidenter.
It is well known that the Pope, of the godly Prince Constantine, was called
God. To which words Augustine Steuche (the keeper of the Popes Library) added,
Steuche libr. Donat. Constant. page 141.
Do thou not hear that the highest Bishop was called of Constantine, God,
and that he was taken for God, and worshipped as God with divine honor?
Whereby it plainly appears, that this title is not given him of flatterers,
against his will; neither fell it out of their fingers, rashly, or by chance,
but with good consideration: and therefore they ascribe also unto him the great
power and authority, not of a terrestiall God, but even of a celestial, and
that in four respects.

3 First, in granting to him as large command as to God himself; for thus
they write, Extrauag. De translat-Episcopi Quinto Hostin.
Sin excepted, the Pope in a manner may do all that God may do. Again,
Counsel. Lat. Leo. 10.
In the Pope there is all manner of power above all power, as well of heaven as
of earth. Also Extrauag. De Constitu. lib. Statuta.
The Pope has power over the Angels both good and bad. And Agrippa de
vanitat. Scient.
The Pope has power to command the Angels, and has power over the dead.
Again, Baldus in li. Barbarius, De officio praetoris.
The Pope is all, and above all. Furthermore, L. Sacrilegij c. de crim. sacril.
ind. c. Ecclesia. vt tit. pend.
It is sacrilege to doubt of the Popes power,* for he is the cause of causes,
therefore we must make no question about his power, seeing there is no cause of
the first cause. Lastly, In Bull. Clem. 6. and in Ant. Flo.
The Pope has so great power both in Purgatory and also in hell, that he may
deliver by his Indulgences, and place in the heaven and habitation of the
blessed, as many Souls as he will. So that in his power of commanding, he is
made equal with God, as if he might be bold to say with our Savior, Matthew.
28. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth.

4 Secondly, they match him with God, in giving him privilege and exemption
from all censure, saying, Did. Satis lib. Don. Constant. page 141.
The Pope cannot at all be either bound or loosed by the Secular power, who as
appears evidently, was called of the most godly Prince Constantine, God,
seeing it is manifest God cannot be judged of men. Another says, Baldus in c.
Eccles. vt tit. pend.
The Pope may do all things above Law, contrary to Law, and without Law.
Moreover, Bonis. Distinct. 40. Si Papa.
If the Pope be found to neglect the salvation of his brethren, unprofitable,
and slack in his office, silent in that which is good, hurtful to himself
and all others: yea though he lead with him innumerable souls by heaps to
the devil of hell, yet may no mortal man find fault with him, or presume to
reprove him for so doing: For as another says, C. inter in corpor. de
translat. Praela. car. Paris in conc. 63. number 162. vol. 4.
Those things he does, he does them as God. So that they say little less of
him, then what Saint Paul Romans 9. says of God. Who art thou that pleadest
against God? Or that which Job says of God. chap. 9. Who shall say unto him,
What do thou?

5 Thirdly, in authorizing his Decrees equal with Gods, saying thus; Alexander
to Philip King of France.
That which the Pope does, is to be received as Canonical. Again, Adrian
cause. 25. q^^st. i.q. genera^^.
It is not lawful to add or diminish any thing the Pope has done. Also
Ibidem.
Whosoever shall violate or break the Popes Decrees. shall be accursed. Again,
Ibidem.
Who so offends in breaking the Popes Laws, shall never be forgiven. And
lastly, Her^^ans de po^^^^ papa cap. 23.
The Pope is by power and virtue the whole Church; we may not swerve from his
judgment, neither to the right hand, nor to the left. Iara in Deuteronomy. cap. 17.
Though he tell thee that thy right hand is thy left; or that thy left hand is
thy right hand, such a sentence must be held for good. Thus are his Laws (in
their account) like those of which Christ speaks in the Gospel, Matthew 5.
Whosoever shall break one of these least commandments, and teach men so, he
shall be called the least in the Kingdom of Heaven.

6 Fourthly, in subiecting Gods word and holy Scriptures unto his censure, as
thus; Summa Angelan Did. Pap.
The Pope may dispense for any Commandment of the Old or New Testament; 6. q.
1. Quicunque. in glossa.
The Popes privileges may be granted against the Law of God: Nicola Cusan.
ad Bohaemos. epist. 2.
There be no commandments of Christ in the Gospel, but such only as are
taken and holden by the Church: Syluester Prierias contra Lutherium.
The doctrine of the Scriptures take their force and authority of the Pope and
his doctrine: Ibidem.
The authority of the Church of Rome, and of the Popes, is above the authority
of the Scriptures. Lastly, Pighnus in contro. De Ecclesia.
The Scriptures are a nose of wax, a dead letter, and dumb Judges: Whereupon
another says; John Maria verracties. Editius est. Anno 1561.
We most humbly confess, that the authority of the Church is above the
authority of the Gospel.

7 So that by all these testimonies out of the mouths of their grauest
Writers, we see plainly, that the Romish church holds and esteems the
Pope to be, not a terrestiall Good, but rather a celestial God: For in that
they will have him called God in a divine sense, and taken, not for a pure man,
but for a true God: and will have him to be worshipped with divine honors as
God: and to have power in heaven, earth and hell; over Angels, Devils and
men: and to be able to deliver from hell, and to give the kingdom of heaven;
and free him from all censure and controlement of any, and make his Decrees,
not only equal with Gods, but above them; they will have him to be a
celestial god, even in the highest degree. For it is clear, that his Laws
and decrees that are the most highest above all laws and decrees, is the most
highest above all gods. And herein they prove him to be indeed, that great
Antichrist, The man of sin, mentioned by Saint Paul, 2 These. 2.
2. Thessal. 2. That should sit as God in the temple of God, showing himself
that he is God, and exalting himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped. That is, not only above all Princes and Maiestrates, (which in
some sense are called Gods) but above the three persons, unto whom all divine
worship and honor is only due, and so we may conclude; but they say no, and
who then shall be Judge between us? that shall these six impartial Judges;
Ioacham Abbas, Iraeneus, Anselmus, Saint Hierome, Gregory the Great, and
Erasmus. Ioacham says, Joacham Abbas.
He it is that exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, which is called Holy Lord and most Holy Pope. Iraeneus says,
Iraeneus lib. 5. lest chapter save one.
Antichrist, notwithstanding he be but a slave, yet he will be worshipped as if
he were God, and proclaimed as a King. Anselmus says, Anselmus. 2. Thessal. 2,
Antichrist shall feign himself to be holy, that he may deceive men under the
color of holiness: Yea, and he shall call himself God, and shall cause
himself to be worshipped, and shall promise the Kingdom of heaven. Saint
Hierome says, Hierom. in Zachar. 11.
This shepherd is so wicked, that he is not called a worshipper of Idols, but
an Idol it self, because he calls himself God, and will be worshipped of
all men. Gregory the Great says, Gregory in his 25. book upon the 34. and 14.
chapter of Job.
Whereas he is a damned man, and not a spirit, living, he faineth himself to
be God. To conclude, Erasmus says thus of the Pope; Erasmus upon the 16. hap.
of the R^u. lat. 2. Sect.
That beast at Rome of whom we spoke before, is the very right Antichrist,
which works against the Gospel of Christ. And yet for a more full
resolution, that the Pope is the same great Antichrist which Saint Paul
calls, The man of sin, and son of perdition, that should exalt himself
above God: their Saint Hildigard, a Nun, Hildig. in her third ^ook, the 11.
Vision.
gives the Pope these very same titles. The man of sin, and son of
perdition. And their proph^^ Paracelsus in his twelft figured Prediction,
directed to the Pope, proves him also to be the same: For (says ^^e) Paras.
12. Prediction.
Thou have lifted thyselfe on high. And a little after, Thou have exalted thy
self above God, and he shall return unto thee the reward thou have sought.
Now then, whereas some have doubted whether the Pope be that great Antichrist;
(for that the great Antichrist should come unto such an exceeding great height
of pride and vainglory, as that none before him could, neither after him
should ever possibly attain unto) here, by this plain demonstration, they
may be resolved: for that they find not any-where in all the Scriptures, nor
by any ancient Writers, that any man, nay that Lucifer himself, ever aspired
to mount up to that great height of dignity, as they see here the Pope has
done. And therefore it is, which their Saint Bridgit in the person of Christ,
says thus to the Pope, Bridget in her first book, 41. chap.
Thou art worse then Lucifer. Wherefore, to profess one God after this
Antichristian manner; namely to have the Pope, and every Pope in his time and
place to be, Not a pure man, but a true God. To be the cause of causes, and
consequently an eternal God. To have power to fetch out of hell as many souls
as he will, and place them in heaven, and consequently to be an almighty God.
To have power over the Angels in heaven; and his Laws and Decrees above the
Laws and Decrees of God: and to be said of him, The Pope is all, and above
all; and consequently the highest God of all; is as Saint Hilary says, Hilar.
in Psa. 1.
To devise fancies of God, and as horrible as to say, there is no God: and
doubtless, as in plain and express terms, to deny God: For it is clear,
that if there be any more celestial Gods then one, there is just none at all.
And thus much to show how little the Papists agree with the Protestants in the
profession of one God; now let us see how they do agree in the profession of
one Savior and Mediator Jesus Christ.

8 We Protestants profess (as is said) one only Savior and Mediator both
of redemption and intercession, even Christ Jesus. Diverse of the Popish writers
seem to hold the letter of the Scriptures, that there is none other name
whereby we are saved, but only by this name Jesus. But as Saint Hilary
foretold of Antichrist, s that He should be contrary to Christ, under a color
of preaching the Gospel, so that our Lord Jesus Christ shall then be denied,
when a man would think he were preached: Even so falls it out with the
Romish profession, whereby he is as plainly denied, as he was of the false
Apostles in the time of Saint Paul, who taught Christ to be the Savior, but
not truly: partly, by denying some virtue of his passion, and partly coupling
others with him as fellow-Sauiours, in like manner as the Popish writers do.
For they distinguishing sins into original and actual, hold, and write,
Tho. of Aquin. de Venerabil. sacra. Alter cap. 1. and Catharinus De Jn^ruento
sacrificio Noui.
that Christ saved only from the guilt of original sin; that is, of that
one transgression of Adam, which we our selves never committed in act, and left
us guilty of all our transgressions, which through our whole life we commit:
which is as much as if one had paid a penny for his friend, which lay in
prison for more then he was ever able to pay.

9 The holy Apostles Saint Paul and Saint John (impartial Judges in this
question) teach otherwise. Romans 5.16.
Paul in the 5. to the Romans, says plainly, that Adams transgression was
one, and spread over all, to condemnation, but the gift of God through Christ,
is in justification of many offenses unto life eternal. And unto Titus thus he
writes: Tit. 2. verse. 14.
Christ gave himself for us that he might redeem us (not from original sin
only, but) from all iniquity. And so Saint John: 1. John 1.7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. By which it is most
evident, that the Romish Doctors are worthy to be accounted among the false
Apostles; which for their worldly gain, and filling their bellies, avowe in
writing, Card. Allen. in Fulk. page 154.
That by the great wisdom of God, the power of Christ's death was limited, and
full power left to the Church and principal Pastors thereof to release sin:
and that Ibidem.
the death of Christ does not discharge us of satisfaction for our own sins,
and of procuring our own salvation by good works. Hereupon they have found
out, and do openly profess many Saviors for actual sins, whose number may
be reduced into five heads.

10 The first is of the Saints, whereof some are truly Saints, but abused by
them, and set up to be Saviors, others are counterfeit, and of their own
canonizing; of whom we may well doubt, whether they themselves be saved or no,
seeing Pope Gelasius says; Gela. in the 2. Canon de co^secra. did. 1. cap.
Placu.
Churches are built in their names, who for ought I can learn, were not
altogether good and faithful men. Of the true Saints, they have specially
abused the blessed Virgin, whom they thus extol; Lipomanus page 289.
Behold, how mighty is the Mother of God, and how no man can be saved but by
her. Again, z
O happy Mother, which do purge us from our sins. Yea more abusedly; a
We must flee from the court of Gods justice, to the court of his Mothers
mercy: For no mercy comes from heaven to the earth, but what passes
through the hands of Mary: she is the mediator of our salvation,
justification, reconciliation, and participation. Again, In a prayer.
Thou art the mediator of God and man. Also, In a prayer.
Our hope and trust is in thee, O blessed Virgin Mary, defend us
everlastingly. And again, d
Thou art the Lady of Angels, thou art the Queen of heaven, command thy
son, show thy self to be a Mother. To conclude, the Scriptures and
Prophecies spoken of Christ, are by them applied unto her. e
Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I will ease you, Math. 11.
I am the door, John 10. etc. The rest of the Saints are less mentioned, or
not so often in their Liturgies, but no less extolled. In Liturgy.
They call Mary Magdalen, The purchaser of their salvation. They say, In a
prayer.
By Saint Swithen our sins are done away. And of the whole multitude in
general, how they believe, it appears in their Mass book; first, where
they pray In the Mass book.
That by the merits of all Saints they may receive remission of sins.
Secondly, in their Jesus psalter, where they desire the Patriarchs, Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Virgins, Widows, Matrons and
Innocents to offer them their merits. And that by the merits and intercession
of Peter, Paul, John, Augustine, Anne, Katherine, Barbara, and all other Saints
that has bin, or yet are to come, they may obtain Gods mercy.

11 Concerning their new coined Saints, Founders of certain Sects among them,
Augustine, Dominicke, Francis, Becket, Swithen, and others, they write so
honorably of them, pray so confidently unto them, extol them with such
praises, and seem to believe so certainly in them, that not only all the
other Saints, but even Christ himself, seems to give place to these: and
these men's rules and orders be preferred above the Gospel. Dominike, say they,
Anth. bishop of Florence in hi^^. Par. 3. tit. 23. and 24.
shead his blood daily, both for those that were conversant in earth, and for
those that are in Purgatory: and therefore it is that they also say, their
church sings thus of Dominike, Page 187.
O wonderful hope that thou have given. Of Frances thus, Conformities
Frances, whom typical Jesus we call, the Captain and Ruler of Minorities
all, grant us in heaven places perpetual. And they say, that whereas Christ
endured the torment of nails in hands and feet but a few hours, he endured
nails in his hands and feet for us, full two years. Of Becket thus, Becket
in a prayer book.
By the blood of Thomas, which for thee he did spend, make us, O Christ, to
climb whither Thomas did ascend. Of Swithen they say, In Liturgy.
By him our sins are done away.

12 Thus do they make many mediators of Redemption, unto whom may be added
their faith in the Pope and his pardons: For he whosoever for the time being,
is in the second rank or order, of whom they write and believe that he is a
Savior: as Simon Begnius, Bishop of Modrusia, said thus to Pope Leo, Council.
Later. Sect. 6. page 601.
O blessed Leo, we have looked for thee to be our Savior. Neither is this
pressed upon him, but willingly received as his due, as may appear in that the
Pope himself suffered the Ambassador of Cicilia to lie prostrate on the ground
before him, and to pray, Paulus Aemilius lib. 7.
O thou that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us; Thou that
take away the sins of the world, give us peace. And to prove that the Pope
is of sufficient power to save, an other writes thus, Bull of Clement the 6.
and Anthon. of Fle^.
The Pope has so great power, both in Purgatory, and also in Hell, that he
may deliver by his Indulgences, and place in heaven, as many souls as he will.
Thus they avowe, not only, that every soul must be saved under the Pope, but,
that the Pope must be their Savior: Neither he himself alone, but those also
that he will authorize. For as one says, Cardinal. Allen in Fulby answer to
a false catholic. p. 71.
The chief and principal Pastors, by their sovereign authority, may wholly
discharge offenders from all pains to come. And yet further, that Christ might
be quite shut out, and there might be many Aberrations, they have set up for
Mediators and helpers unto salvation, Images, prayers to Images, Dirges,
Almes-deedes and Purgatory. Unto the Image of the Cross, thus they pray, In a
prayer book.
All hail, O Cross, our only hope in this time of thy passion, in faithful
people grace increase, and grant of sin remission.

13 Also, notwithstanding he whom they feign to be their Founder, 1. Pet. 1.18.
Saint Peter, says: We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver
and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ: Directly contrary, they teach
and say; Allen in Fulke pa. 202. and 174.
By alms we may redeem our sins, and theirs that are in Purgatory also. And
again, In the same book. pa. 239.
Good works cleanses before hand, delivers. the soul from death, and
lifts it up to eternal life. And lastly, Ibidem.
Regard not the iangler, that will say good works do not purge sin, and win
heaven.

14 Last of all, to the intent that we should find more sufficiency
elsewhere then in Christ, they further write, Allen in Fulke page 202.
The Sacrifices done by us that are alive, do wipe away the sins of those that
be dead. Again, The Popish Doctors.
The sacrifice of the Mass, does take away the sins of the quick and dead.
And again, Allen in Fulke 92.
Purgatory pains does not only serve Gods justice for the punishment of
sin, but also cleanses and quallifieth the soul of man defiled. Moreover,
Allen page 133
In Purgatory we must be holden from life and liberty, till we have paid the
utmost farthing, the toleration of which bonds shall recompense the debt. And
to knit up all in a word: to the Image of Christ, they have entitled a prayer,
beginning thus, In a prayer book.
O Maker of heaven and earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: which of
nothing did make me to thine own similitude and likeness, and did
redeem me with thy own blood, whom I a sinner am not worthy to call upon: I
desire thee, etc. And so forwards for all things needful both for soul and
body.

15 Wherefore then, if the doctrine of the Church of Rome be true, namely, that
Christ, by his death and bloudshedding, saved us but from the guilt of that one
sin of Adam, and that we are saved from the malediction of the multitude of
all our transgressions, by the Popes and their principal Pastors, and by the
infinite number of true and false Saints, and so many names of other means: How
do they truly hold that which Saint Peter says, Acts 4.12. Acts 4.12.
That among men there is given none other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved, but only by the name of Jesus? Or which the Prophet Esaias in the person
of Christ says, 63.3. Esaias 63.3.
I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of all people there is none with me?
Or if Christ cannot, or does not save without all other, or other helps, why
then said the Author to the Hebrews, 1.3. He has purged our sins by
himself? Hebr. 1.3. Acts 13.39.
Or why said Saint Paul thus of Christ? Acts 13.39. By him, every one that
believes, is justified. Or, why did the Angel command the Virgin to call
her Son, Jesus, but because as he said, Math. 1.21. Matthew. 1.21.
He should save his people from their sins? If he, then he alone, and why
then should we seek for so many he, and she Saviors? Wherefore, howsoever
they seem in the outward letter of the Scriptures, to confess Christ to be
the only Savior; yet we see it is none otherwise, then they confess God to
be the only God; which is, instead of one, to have many. To conclude, it is a
true consequent, that so many Saviors, so many Christ's; so many Christ's, so
many faiths; so many faiths, so many baptismes: Therefore, whether professing
one God, one Lord Jesus Christ, one Faith, and one Baptism after this
Antichristian manner, be to hold the foundation sound, or not soundly and
utterly to overthrow the foundation, let the Christian Reader judge, as also,
whether there be so near a conjunction in our profession, that they and we
may be combined and conjoined together, to make one and the same true Church of
Christ: as also, whether this be not fully sufficient, to prove the Pope that
great Antichrist, foretold by Saint Hierome, Hierome ad Algasia. Quest. 11.
that should sit in the Church, as if he were Christ the Savior. But for
as much as they deny it, and that the whole Church of Rome, at this day,
depends upon Bellarmines judgment, out of whose works, as it is verily
supposed, Parsons has published to the view of the world, and deluding of
many, ten several Objections for the clearing the Pope from being Antichrist:
it rests, that in the next Chapter we answer those objections, that so all
doubts may be removed. And herein as the original Author, I will use only
the name of Bellarmine. In the mean time, I demand what hope of comfort we
can look to have at these Popish Gods and Saviors, seeing their own Saint
Bridget, whom Boniface the ninth Pope of that name, canonized, says, Bridget
in her first book, c. 41
All their followers and favorers, shall be cut off, dis-ioynted and pulled in
pieces, like unto a wall that is a casting down, where is not left one stone
standing upon an other; neither shall my love and mercy ever warm them, nor
build them up again into eternal mansion. And as we see the question
resolved, what will be the end of those that depend upon these Gods and
Sauiors, so shall we see hereafter what will be the end of those Gods and
Saviors.

CHAP. II. Containing ten several Objections, for the clearing (if it had
been possible) the Pope from being Antichrist, set forth under the letters N.
D. with answers thereunto.
THou shall understand (Christian Reader) that whom Saint John in his first
Epistle chap. 1 John 2.22.
2. called Antichrists, in the 22. verse he declared to have meant certain
Disciples, which were fallen from the fellowship of the Apostles: and others
that by their means went abroad teaching doctrine, whereby Christ was denied
to be the true Messiah. So that because such Antichristian teachers were then
crept into the church by whom the great mystery of iniquity was begun; which
when the great Antichrist should come, should be fully perfected, he did not
stick to say, but that Antichrist was then come, whereas notwithstanding the
great Antichrist was not then come. 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
For as Saint Paul declared to the Thessalonians, Epist, 2. cha. 2. there was
then an impediment that did stay his coming, which said, He shall let till he
be taken out of the way: Which, as Tertullian, Saint Augustine, and Saint
Chrysostom expounds, was the Roman Emperor; and likewise Saint Hierome in
these words: Hierome to Algasia.
The Roman Emperor, which now keeps all Nations in subjection, must first
be overthrown, and then shall Antichrist come, the fountain of iniquity. By
which it is clear, that by Saint John's Antichrists, we cannot understand the
great Antichrist: therefore the question is, who the great Antichrist should
be: we say he is the Pope of Rome, they say he shall be a Jew of Jerusalem: but
this is but our yea, and their nay; and how then shall it be tried who is in
the right? Bellarmine (supposed) in his Wardword, the answer to Sir Francis
Hastings Watchword, page 91.92. has set down ten several Objections, to
prove him a Jew, which God willing, by these our Answers shall be proved a
Gentile.

THE FIRST OBJECTION.
2 First then (says Bellarmine,) That the Popes of Rome be Antichrist, or the
man of sin, whereof the Prophet Daniel, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles
do speak, and that Rome is Babylon in that sense that these good fellows do
mean, that is, Rome christened, is a mere jest. For that as the true Christ
was one singular man, so shall the true Antichrist be one singular man also,
and not a succession of men, one after another, as the Popes of Rome are. And
this is evidently gathered by the ancient Fathers, out of the words of holy
Scriptures, namely, Daniel 7. and 11. John 5.2. 2 Thessalonians 2. 1 John 2.
Apocal, 13. and 17.

THE ANSWER.
3 Here (Christian Reader) seems a very great likelihood, that by the great
Antichrist, should be meant only one person, seeing he produces no less then
seven places of Scripture, to testify the same. But it is a wonder to see,
that a man learned, and seeming devout, should so apparently wrest the
Scriptures. For it is without all contradiction, that not any one of his
places, do prove his assertion. The likeliest place is the 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
Thessal. 2. in which Saint Paul calls Antichrist, The man of sin: but does
it therefore follow, that he meant only one man; no, no more then by calling
him in the same chapter, The son of perdition, he meant one person. For in
the Scriptures it is very apparent, that by such like titles, are not always
meant one singular person; Esaias 43.27.
seeing we find in the 43. chapter of Esaias 27. verse, is meant a great number
of men, included in the name Father. Exodus 4.23. Romans 9.27. Dan. 11.
And in Exodus the 4. chap. 23. verse, all the Israelites, whose number Saint
Paul says, Romans 9.27. are as the sand^ of the Sea, are included in the title
of a Son, And in Daniell 11. the whole succession of Kings in their several
kingdoms, are included in the person of one King. And therefore seeing that
under the title of a Man, or a Son, is included more thousands then the Popes
are hundreds, Bellarmines ignorance in the manner and phrase of the Scriptures,
is laid open, and his mouth stopped, for accusing us of ignorance, in including
all the Popes in the person of the man of sin, or Son of perdition. And the
rather, because they themselves, ordinarily use also the like phrase of speech,
as when they call the whole succession of Popes, that one head of Christ's
Church: Therefore if the Scriptures had not taught us so to speak, we might
yet have learned of them, how to call the whole succession of Popes, that one
head of Antichrists church.

4 And whereas to dazzle the eyes of the ignorant, he produces the Fathers,
upon his places of Scriptures, as though they by Antichrist, had meant one
proper person. Let him hear therefore how they have used to speak of him.
Saint Hierome said. Hierome in his book upon Matthew. 24.
The abomination of desolation, shall stand in the Church until the
consummation of time, and show himself as God. Now it is clear he could not
mean this of one particular person, for that he knew as well as we, no one man
could live to the consummation and end of time. Also that ancient Writer
Eusebius, speaks of Antichrist in the plural number thus, Eusebius in his 7.
book of Preparation.
This is a token (not that he, but) that they hate God, for that they will have
themselves called by the name of God. Again, their Saint Bridget says, that
she was commanded in a vision to signify to Bridget in her 6. book of
Reuelat. chap. 8.
Mathias of Sueden, the Gloser of the Bible, that Antichrist consisted of many
persons; that so he might give Notes to the Church of Rome, that Antichrist is
not a singular, but a plurality of persons. By which therefore we see, that
the Fathers did also speak of Antichrist, as well in the plural number as in
the singular. Wherefore seeing that by Antichrist, they did not mean one
singular person, why may not all the Popes be that great Antichrist, The man of
sin? But they say no, and who then shall be judge between us? that shall
these two testimonies of their writer Auentine, in whose Chronicle there is
extant this complaint of Frederick the second, Auentine printed at Ingo^stad
1554. in the Epistle which he wrote to Otho Duke of Bauaria
The Popes of Rome do seek after Lordship and divine power; namely, that they
may be feared of all, no otherwise: yea, more then God; for it is evident that
there be many Antichrists among the Romanists. So then we see, that as there
are many Popes, there are many Antichrists, and yet as there is at no time but
one Pope, there is but one Antichrist.

5 Secondly, in the same book, Auentine himself complaining of the whole
incorporate body of Popes, says, Ibidem.
The chief Priests of Babylon, desire to reign alone, they cannot abide any
equal. Thus in the plural number: and a little after, in the singular number,
thus, Ibidem.
That wicked man whom commonly they call Antichrist, in whose forehead is
written a name of Blasphemy, I am a God, I cannot err. By which we see it
most evident, that the whole succession of Popes, and every particular of them,
in their times and places, one after another, is that great Antichrist, the man
of sin, and son of perdition, prophesied of by the Prophet Daniel, our
Savior Christ, and his Apostles: and therefore it is not (as Bellarmine says)
a jest so to say, but a very stale jest to say the contrary. And now whether
christian Rome be Babylon, in that sense that our good fellows do mean, our
next Chapter shall plainly demonstrate.

THE SECOND OBJECTION.
6 Moreover, the Jews shall receive the true Antichrist for their Messiah, as
they refused Christ: and so Christ says plainly, John 5.43. I came in my
fathers name, and ye received me not; if another come in his own name, him
shall ye receive: but it is not likely that the Jews will receive the Popes
of Rome for their Messiah, and much less so many Popes as are already dead.

THE ANSWER.
7 These words of Christ (Christian Reader) we see he would apply to the
Jews of the latter end of the world, to prove that a little before his coming
to judgment, they should receive the great Antichrist for their Messiah: and
that we should believe Antichrist to be one singular person he cites those
words of Christ in John chap. John 5.43.
5. as though Christ by those words had meant some one singular person, whereas
indeed, the word Him, is an indiffinit speech, like as in Esaias 57.17.18.19.
Esaias 57.17.18. Hosea 13.13. and 14.5.
Hosea 13.13. and 14.5. where the word Him, does include an infinite number, or
many persons: So Christ shows under the word Him, that they would be more
ready to receive any him, that would go about to seduce and draw them from
him, then to receive him whom the Father had sent to draw them unto him, that
they might be saved. But if they will have those words to be understood in
their sense, namely, that Christ therein did appose himself against
Antichrist, and that he should seduce the Jews only; yet must they of force
understand it to be of that seducement that was in the Apostles times, and of
Saint John's Antichrists, who were the chief means of keeping back the Jews
from embracing Christ, and of bringing their whole posterity into the state of
infidelity, into which they fell: yea, of force I say, because the Scriptures
not any where at all, mentions any other alteration of the Jews state to
come, but that only which Saint Paul speaks of in Romans the 10.19. Romans
10.19. and 11.11.
and 11.11. which there he shows shall be their conversion to Christ; in
which state all sides do grant, they shall continue to the end. Again Saint
Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
2 Thessa. 2. declares as plainly, that the great Antichrist shall not
withold Jews from receiving Christ and the Christian faith, but shall cause
Christians to fall from the faith they had received (as we shall prove at
large in our third Chapter, the Pope has done) so that he shall not delude
Jews, but Christians. And this is it which S. Chrysostom says, Chrisost. 49.
Hom. upon the imperfect work Matthew.
Antichrist is therefore called the abomination of desolation, because he
shall cause the souls of many Christians to be desolate and forsaken. And
which S. Hillarie says, (contra Auxentium) Antichrist shall be contrary to
Christ, under a color of preaching the Gospel. Ergo, etc.

8 But whereas we say that in our third Chapter, we will prove the Pope to be
that seducer and deluder, in the mean time they will deny it, and who then
shall be Judge between us? that shall these three learned Doctors, Erasmus,
their Bishop Cornelius, and their Albertus Magnus. Erasmus says, Erasmus on
the 13. chap. of the Reuela.
This Kingdom of the Papacy (whereof the Pope is the Head) took upon it all
the power of the first Beast, the Roman Emperor, and compelled the Christians
to Idolatry, and service of false gods, under a private color, and secret
pretense, as to further the true Faith. Cornelius says, Cornelius Oration.
Cornelij Epist. bitonti 3. dominica aduent. in Council. Trid. habita.
Would to God they were not fallen with one consent, from Religion to
Superstition, from Faith to Infidelity, and from Christ to Antichrist.
Albertus says, Albertus in John, cap. 10.
Those which now rule in the Church, be for the most part thieves and
murderers, rather oppressors then feeders, rather spoylers then tutors,
rather killers then keepers, rather peruerters then teachers, rather seducers
then leaders. These be the Messengers of Antichrist, and the vnder-miners of
the flock of Christ. And for the Pope himself, which is the Ringleader in
this horrible seducement, I will conclude this point, with these words of Saint
Bridget, spoken unto Pope Gregory the Eleventh, in the person of Christ,
Brigit in her 4. Book 142. chap.
Thou pluckest from me violently innumerable Souls, and sendest to Hellfire
almost all those that come to thy Court. And in another place, speaking also in
the person of Christ, she says, In her 6. Book of Reuela. 15. chap.
They do say and boast that they understand my Law, and yet it is but for the
deceiving of others. By which then we see the Pope, that spiritual
Head-gouernour in the Romish jurisdiction, is that very same seducing
Antichrist. Yea, doubtless the same, which not Jews hereafter, but as the
middle part of our former Chapter proves, Christians long since have received
for their Messiah and Savior, seeking remission of sins, and everlasting
salvation at his hands. And therefore seeing the great Antichrist is a
Christian, and received of Christians for their Messiah, Bellarmine may very
well say, it is not likely that the Jews (unto whom the very name of
Christians is odious) should receive the Popes for their Messiah, who carry
the name of Christians, nor that they should receive the great Antichrist for
their Savior.

THE THIRD OBJECTION.
9. The Doctrine and Gospel of Christ must be first preached to all Nations
before the true Antichrist come, Matthew. 24. and 2. These. 2. and so the consent
of old Doctors upon the same place do agree: which thing is not yet fulfilled,
as S. Augustine in his time did largely declare, Epist. 80. and we also show in
ours much more, by the vast infidel Countries daily discovered.

THE ANSWER.
10. Behold (Christian Reader) how to shadow the Pope from being revealed to
be Antichrist, he proceeds in perverting the Scriptures. For whereas in the
24. chap. of S. Matthew. ^4.14.
Matthew, Christ said; This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached through
the whole World, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come:
He thus peruerteth both words and sense, and says; And then shall Antichrist
come. And this comes to pass, only by his misse-vnderstanding these words
that follow in the Text: When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place, etc.
For this he understands to have been spoken of Antichrist, whereas it is
clear, that it is meant of the Idols which the Romans should set up in the
Temple, and that Heathenish worship which those Gentiles should spread over all
Iewrie, whereby the Doctrine of the Gospel, should be most horribly corrupted
immediately after the death of Christ, when as the daily Sacrifice should
cease, according to that Prophecy of Daniel, 12.11. And hereof it is which S.
Chrysostom says thus, Chrisost. in his 40. Hom. upon the imperfect work of
Math.
When you shall see the abomination of desolation stand in the holy place, that
is (says he) when you shall see the ungodly heresies, which is the army of
Antichrist, stand in the holy place of the Church, in that time, let him that
is in Iewrie flee unto the Hills, that is (says he) let them that be in
Christendom, resort unto the Scriptures. And for Antichrist not coming before
the Gospel be preached to all Nations, that proves nothing that he is not
already come, seeing the Gospel has already been preached to all Nations.
For not only the Apostle S. Paul says of the Apostles universal preaching,
Romans 10.18. No doubt their sound went out through all the Earth, and their
words to the ends of the World; but they themselves in their Rozarie, most
evidently declares, that they did preach all the World over. For there, say
they, Peter first preached in Iewrie, then in Syria, Antioch, and other places,
and last of all in Italy; Andrewe in Achaia; James the Great, in Spain; John,
in Asia; Thomas, in India; James the Less, in Jerusalem; Philip, in Phrigia;
Bartholmewe, in Scythia; Matthew, in Aethiopia; Simon, in Persia; Thadeus, in
Mesopotamia; Matthias, in Palestina; Paul, in most parts of the World. Again,
he cites the ^ Thessal. 2. in which there cannot be found any one word, that
does prove his Assertion. But this I find in the 7. verse, by the judgment of
Tertullian, Saint Ambrose, S. Augustine, and those words of S. Hierome before
cited, Hierome unto Algasia.
The Roman Emperor which now keeps all Nations in subjection, must first be
overthrown, and then shall Antichrist come, the Fountain of Iniquity; that
the time of Antichrists coming was then when the Emperor of Rome was removed
out of his place to Constantinople, and the Empire brought to confusion: which
time they know as well as we, was between the reign of Augustus, and Carolus
Magnus. For in that 300, and odd years space, to wit, from about the year of
Christ, 500. to 800. by sedition the Empire stood void, Palmer.
as both Euagrius and Palmar witnesses, Euagrius lib. 2. cap. 16. Chronic.
in which compass of time, as Erasmus testifies, Erasmus upon the 13. cap.
rose up in Rome, that spiritual Beast resembling Christ the Lamb, mentioned
in the 13. chap. of the Revelation, unto whom (as the Text declares) power was
given over Nations and Kingdoms: and as the Popes Kallender declares, that by
the means of Phocas the Emperor, which murdered his Predecessor, Boniface
the third Bishop of Rome, of that name, obtained that universal power, even to
be called Universal Bishop, and in stead of Christ, to be Head of Christ's
universal Church: Therefore we see it evident, that in this Boniface was
Antichrists first rising. But they say no, and who then shall be judge
between us? that shall their S. Vincent, and the great Bishop of Rome,
Gregory. Saint Vincent in (...) Treatise of the end of the ^orld.
Vincent prophesied of the falling from the true Catholic Faith, and of the
coming of two kinds of Antichrists: The one he called a Pure Antichrist, (to
wit, an open professed adversary of Christ, which all men know is the Turk:
For he proclaymeth open war against both sorts of Christians; therefore he
calls him pure, because he is without hypocrisy, or color of feigned
friendship.) The other he calls, a Mixed kind of Antichrist, and this shall
be (says he) an evil Pope, made by a certain evil Prince of great power,
who shall place his evil Pope in the field or plain of the Province of
Babylon, because there shall be nothing then but confusion; unto this mixed
Antichrist (says he) many Princes shall adhere. Gregory, when he perceived
by John, Bishop of Constantinople, that an Universal Bishop should be made (in
that Moricius the Emperor maintained him in that ungodly Title of Universal
Bishop, which he took upon him) said he, Gregory in his 34. Epist.
What else is signified hereby, but that the time of Antichrist is at hand?
Lib. 4. Epist. 38.
The King of Pride is at hand, and an army of Priests is prepared, which is a
wicked and an horrible thing to be spoken. And indeed that all men might
clearly discern him when he was come, he thus described him unto them,
saying, Ibidem,
He is Antichrist that shall claim to be called Universal Bishop, and shall
have a guard of Priests to attend upon him. And about two years after
Gregory's death, this Boniface was so exalted. Now then forasmuch as all the
successors of Boniface from time to time, have claymed and retained both the
Title and Dignity, as their right and due, (though many Nations may be called
before the coming of Christ to judgment) yet all men may see plainly, that
Antichrist is already come; and that the Pope, and every Pope in his time and
place is he. Yea, this is the Luciferiall aspiring fellow, of whose rise and
fall, their Paracelsus says, Parasel. in his twelfth figured Predi^^ on
directed to the Pope.
Oftentimes one does place himself well, but it is in vain, except his seat
be such as cannot fall, together with him that sits thereon. And behold,
thou have lifted up thy self on high, but it is not thy place, neither shall
thou abide above: for thou are a yoke and a burden unfit to be borne; hence
it is holy Father (S.P.) that thou fallest. Thou have placed thy self above
God, and he shall return unto thee the reward thou have sought: to wit,
worldly glory and praise, which thou have greedily heaped upon thine head; but
as all worldly things do, so shall thou perish. So that who sees not but that
Antichrist is come?

THE FOVRTH OBJECTION.
11 The proper Antichrist, by all reason and likelihood, must be a Jew borne,
and circumcised, and will profess, at least for a while, to keep the Jews
Sabbath, and other Ceremonies of the old Law, to draw them after him, and
they shall accept of him for their Messiah, as before has been showed out of
Christ's own words, which they would never do, except he were a Jew, both by
generation and profession; which two things, can neither be verified of the
Popes of Rome, to wit, that they are either Jews by birth, or do profess the
Jews Doctrine.

THE ANSWER.
12 Here (Christian Reader) is a long circumstance, including many properties
of Antichrist; but not so much as any one Scripture, or Father, to confirm any
one point; therefore I may sufficiently answer him, by bare denying all that
he affirms, and thereupon conclude, that by all reason and likelihood,
Antichrist shall neither be a Jew by birth, nor yet by profession, but a
Gentile and a Roman. Howbeit, for as much as bare negatiues no more disprooue
any thing, then bare affirmatiues prove any thing of either side, the matter
shall not so pass. First then, as concerning Jewish Ceremonies, who knows
not how full of them their Church is, as abstenance from certain meats,
washings, purifyings, and sacrificing for sin. As also, the retayning
certain ceremonial garments, as the Myter, the Cope, the Ephod, sensing the
Priests, with Incense, holy Oil, holy Bread, the Wafer-kake, Arons Bell, and
to many such like, too tedious to repeat; and for Jewish Doctrine, in the
maine point, for the overthrow of manssaluation, they rightly agree with them,
who held of justification by the works of the Law, as they do. Secondly,
whereas he says that Antichrist shall be a Jew, both by generation and
profession, it is neither his yea, nor my nay, that shall serve; but we will
have indifferent Judges between both, and who shall these be? even S. Ireneus,
who they may not refuse, and their Abbot Ioacham, who they cannot refuse.
Ireneus, out of the number of the Letters. Apoccalips 13. says, Jreneus in his
fifth Book and Epistles of Antichrist.
Antichrist is Zatinos, a Roman. Ioacham Abbas.
Ioacham says, Antichrist long since was borne in Rome, and shall be higher
advanced in the Apostolic Sea. So then, Antichrist shall be a Roman, not a
Jew, and the same that shall be exalted into Peter's Chair, which he cannot
deny to be the Pope only, therefore he cannot deny the Pope only to be the
great Antichrist.

THE FIFTH OBJECTION.
13 Antichrist when he comes shall pitch his Kingdom in the City of
Jerusalem, and go about to restore the Temple of Solomon, as is plainly
gathered out of Saint John's words, Apocal. 11. where he says, that the bodies
of Henoch and Elias that shall be slain by him, shall lie unburied in the
streets of the great City, where their Lord was crucified. And the same is
deduced out of the same Book, cap. 17. and out of Saint Paul's words, 2.
Thessal. 2. and by many ancient Writers. And how then can the Popes of Rome be
Antichrist?

THE ANSWER.
14 Here now to induce us not to look for Antichrist in Rome, he tells us,
he shall pitch his kingdom in Jerusalem; and for proof, he cites three places
of Scripture: the first out of the 8. verse of the 11. chap. of the Reuela.
which he abuses most damnably. For all men may see by the Text, that the Holy
Ghost (purposely to preserve the sense) put in the middle of the verse, these
words; Which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt: Which words he has left
out, and cunningly closed up both ends of the verse together in Roman Letters,
as though those words had not been in the original Tongue; which caused me
to have the Greek Coppies searched, and also to see their own translation in
the Remish Testament, in both which these words are extant. So that it
appears, that because he saw, that neither according to the express words of
the Text (as the Holy Ghost had set them down) nor yet according to the sense,
the place would prove Jerusalem properly to be the seat of Antichrist, he
therefore fraudulently omitted those words, to frame the rest for his purpose;
which if he had done the like, in the 17. chap. these words: A mystery great
Babylon. And also these words: The seven heads, are seven Mountains, whereon
the woman sits; all the Divines in the World could never have found out the
great Antichrist, nor his seat: But the case is clear, that forasmuch as the
place where Christ was crucified, is there noted to be the seat of Antichrist,
but in a spiritual signification; the Holy Ghost did not mean Jerusalem, but
Rome, because Rome then reigning over Jerusalem, Christ was put to death in her
jurisdiction, and by her only authority: John 18.31.
for Pilate (Romes deputy) was his Judge, who finding Christ guiltless, would
feign have shuffeled him off into the Jews hands to have condemned him, but
they refusing, said, We have no authority to put any man to death: Whereupon
Pilate proceeded, and gave sentence of death upon him: therefore Rome may well
be said to be the place where Christ was crucified, and the City where the
Holy Ghost means Antichrist should pitch his Kingdom. But they say no, and
who then shall be Judge between us? that shall that notable Divine Erasmus,
who says thus of Rome, Erasmus upon the 11. chap. of the Reuela.
This City is in sigure and similitude, the City of Jerusalem.

15 Secondly, Antichrist should go about to build again the Temple of
Jerusalem, in which there is not any one word to be found that does prove it.
But this gloss also he sets upon the Text, to blind the eyes of the
ignorant, and to make them believe that that should be the Temple of God, in
which S: Paul 2 Thessal. 2. said, Antichrist shall sit as God. But I demand
how this can be said to be the Temple of God, where God never sat, ne put his
name, ne was served, but should be built only for that great Idol Antichrists
use? S. Augustine says, Augustine de Ciuitate Dei. (...) 20. cap. 19.
The Temple of an Idol, or of a Devil, the Apostle would never call the
Temple of God. And therefore seeing (as we heard before) S. Hierome said, that
by the Temple is meant the Church; this can neither be that Temple in which S.
Paul said Antichrist should sit as God; nor Bellarmines Jew, be that
Antichrist, which Saint Paul meant should sit in the Temple of God. Now
therefore the question is, whether the Pope of Rome, be he which S. Paul said,
should sit as God, in the Temple of God, exalting himself above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped. They say no, we say yea, and who then shall
determine the matter? that shall four of their own side. Bernard, Ioacham
Abbas, Paracelsus, and Auentine. Bernard bewailing the state of the Church
under the Popes of his time, says, Bernard Sermon. 6. in Psalm. 91.
There remains nothing now, but that the man of sin be revealed, even the
son of perdition, which is not only changed into an Angel of Light, but is
exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. Ioacham shows
plainly in diverse places of his Writings, Ioacham in his Commentary upon
Jeremie, besides other places in diverse of his Predictions.
That he it is which exalts himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped, which is called holy Lord, and most holy Pope. Their Paracelsus
wrote thus to the Pope, Paracelsus in his 12. sigured Prediction.
Behold thou have lifted up thy self on high, but it is not thy place, neither
shall thou abide above. And a little after: Thou have placed thy self above
God. Their writer Auentine says thus of the Pope, and every particular of
them, Auentine in his Chron. printed at Ingolstade, anno 1554.
They sit in the Temple of God, and they be exalted above all that is
worshipped: He which is the servant of servants, does covet to be Lord of
Lords, as if he were God: He speaks great things, as if he were God: He
changes Laws, he establishes his own; he robs, he spoyleth, he
couseneth, he slays; that wicked man, whom commonly they call Antichrist; in
whose forehead is a name written, a name of Blasphemy; I am God, I cannot
err. He sits in the Temple of God, and bears rule far and wide. And
thus we see the matter determined, by these four impartial Judges, and the
question fully resolved, that the Pope is that great Antichrist the Man of
Sin, which S. Paul foretold should Sit as God in the Temple of God, exalting
himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. And this may also
suffice for the answering the third place, which he cites out of that 2 These.
2. to have proved the seat of Antichrist to be Jerusalem. Now to the second
place.

The second place which he cites, is the seventeenth Chapter of the
Revelation, then which he could not have brought a more plainer place to prove
the contrary. For in that the Angel calls that City which he there speaks
of, The great City, which reigns over the Kings of the earth: He did not
only clear Jerusalem, (for that it never reigned over the Kings of the earth)
but also certifieth us, that he meant Rome; because Rome only reigned over the
Kings of the earth; and the Emperor of Rome, was then Emperor of the World.
Again, for as much as the Angel notes out that City (which S. John there
speaks of) by seven Hills whereon it is built: He not only cleared
Jerusalem, but also assures us, that he meant Rome. And all (that are of any
reading) do know, that Jerusalem was never described by seven Hills, and that
Rome, and none other City in all the world, is so described as Rome is, by the
names of these Hills; Capitolinus, Palatinus, Auentinus, Cicilius, Scuen Hills.
Exquilinus, Veminalis, and Quinalis. So that forasmuch as that City mentioned
in the seventeenth Chapter is distinguished from Jerusalem, by those two
special notes; namely, by reigning over the Kings of the earth, and by being
built upon seven Hills, it is clear without all contradiction, that Rome only
is that place where the great Antichrist should pitch his Kingdom, and
consequently, that the spiritual gouemour thereof (and none other) is he. But
they say no, and who then shall be ludge between us? that shall their Abbot
Ioacham, Erasmus, and their Bishop Cataldus Finius. Ioacham writing upon that
seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation, says, Joacham.
The very Text it self does teach, that the Woman begilded with gold, and
which commits spiritual fornication with the Princes of the earth, is the
very Church of Rome. Erasmus writing also upon the same Chapter, says,
^rasmus Sect. 3.
These Hills agree with the hills of Rome. Again, The woman in the great
City, is he which has exalted himself for a Bishop over all Bishops, and
that reigns over Emperors and Kings: sitting also in the place of Christ.
And in the Chapter going before thus, Erasmus.
That beast of Rome, of whom we spoke before, is the very right Antichrist,
which works against the Gospel of Christ. Cataldus says, Cataldus Bishop of
Trent in a Prophesic of his.
Rome is Babylon, the damned pit of Priests. And how then can Bellarmine with
any credit or show of truth, say that Antichrist shall pitch his Kingdom in
Jerusalem, or that the Pope is not he?

THE SIXTH OBJECTION.
17 Three principal heads of Antichrists deuillish Doctrine when he comes,
are plainly gathered out of holy Scripture. The first that he shall deny
Jesus to be Christ, 1. John 2. cap. 22. and consequently deny Baptism, and all
other Sacraments and Doctrines brought in by Christ. The second, that he shall
teach himself to be Christ, and the Jews shall believe him, John 5. The
third, that he shall affirm himself to be God; and so require to be adored
for God, 2 Thessal. 2.4. But the Popes of Rome do not teach these points of
Doctrine hitherto, and therefore cannot be Antichrist.

THE ANSWER.
18 The former Chapter plainly proves the Popes of Rome, to teach all these
three points of Doctrine, and therefore Bellarmine himself must grant the
Pope, and every Pope in his time and place, to be that Antichrist.

THE SEVENTH OBJECTION.
19. Again, the Scripture teaches us that Antichrist when he comes shall
do many wonderful miracles in the sight of men, Matthew. 24. and 2. Thessal. 2.
and some of those miracles are specified. Apoc. 13. to wit, that he shall make
fire descend from heaven, and the Image of a beast to speak, and saine
himself to die and rise again. But these miracles no Pope hitherto has
wrought, Ergo, etc.

THE ANSWER.
20 Here he notes out Antichrist, by three special miracles, which he says
he shall work: which because no Pope hitherto has wrought, they cannot be
Antichrist. Touching the first, namely, that he shall make fire descend from
heaven: we say, That forasmuch as there is no time set down, when that
miracle shall be wrought: and that there remains a Pope, and how many shall
succeed him, who can tell, all which make the great Antichrist: therefore till
the full end and term of their reign, and that it can be proved, that not any
one Pope, ever wrought that miracle, none of the predecessors are cleared from
being Antichrist: for we find throughout the whole Scriptures, that whatsoever
is done by any one of them, is imputed unto all.

21 But as touching the true sense of those words, diverse of the Learned do
conclude, that by making fire descend from heaven, is meant, that he should do
such miracles, and so great wonders, as should as greatly prevail, to draw the
people from God to himself, as the fire, that came down from heaven (at the
prayer of Elias) did prevail to draw the people from Baall to God: 1. Kings
18^^. 38.39.
and that it is no more meant, that Antichrist should cause fire really to
descend from heaven, then in the eleventh chapter, that material fire should
proceed out of the two witnesses mouths, and destroy their enemies: or in the
ninth chapter, that out of horses mouths, should issue fire, smoke and
brimstone to devour men.

22 Secondly, he says that Antichrist shall make the Image of a beast to
speak: We answer. The text says not, of a beast, but of The beast. That is,
as the verse going before says: The Image of the beast which had the wound of
a sword and did live. Which as Erasmus expounds, was the Heathenish
domination under the Heathenish Emperors of Rome. Whose heathenishnesse was
almost stricken clean dead, by the sword of the Spirit, which Saint Paul,
Ephesians. 6. Ephesians. 6.17.
calls the Word of God: which wound was afterward salued, but fully healed
by that spiritual beast, which the 11. and 12. verses of the 13. chapter of
the Reuclation declares, rose up in the Roman kingdom, resembling Christ the
Lamb; for (as the Text says,) He did all that the first beast could do
before him. Whereby he brought the latter Domination so lively to resemble the
former, as any picture or image could possibly be made to resemble any beast:
therefore by the second Domination under the Popes, is meant that image which
Antichrist should make to speak; that is, should cause to publish, and
proclaim, that as many as would not be conformable to all the heathenish
ordinances thereof, as in the former Domination, should be killed. By which
means it came to pass (as who so will read the latter end of the thirteenth
chapter shall see) that all were brought to be subject to his Lore. Now
therefore, whether we may understand this great work, to be accomplished by a
painted picture, or carved image, and that by that same image which Antichrist
should make to speak, should be meant the image of some carnal beast, or
whether this be not a mere carnal interpretation of theirs, let the discreet
Reader judge.

23 Thirdly, he says, Antichrist shall feign himself to die and rise again:
which thing, if any one of his places do prove, I do here promise to recant.
Wherefore, as the Popes not working those three miracles (actually) are not
thereby cleared from being Antichrist; so do not these miracles prove
Bellarmines Jew to work them, to prove him to be Antichrist. Therefore let us
come to some further trial with them for the better finding out of Antichrist,
by the miracles which he shall work, in which no better course can be taken,
then by searching out the place where he shall work them: for if he shall work
them in that one City, or Nation of the Jews, then it is likely he shall be a
Jew; but if all the world over, in the Cities and Nations of the Gentiles, then
it is more likely he shall not be a Jew, but a Gentile.

Now, as the 13. verse of the 13. chapter of the Revel. Reu. 13.13.
says of Antichrist, He made fire come down from heaven; so the next verse
says: By the signs which were permitted for him to do, he deceived them
that dwell on the earth. By which it is most apparent, that Antichrist shall
not work his wonders, in that one City of Jerusalem, nor yet in that one
nation of the Jews, but over a great part of the whole earth, among the
Gentiles; therefore this proves, he shall not be a lew, but a Gentile. Again,
Saint John in his 16. chapter of the same Book, speaking of Antichrist and his
miraclemonger, and the place where they should work their miracles, says. And
I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, Reu. 16.13.
come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and
out of the mouth of the false Prophet; for they are the spirits of devils,
working miracles, to go unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world.
Also in the eighteenth chapter that Angel speaking there of Babylon the seat
of Antichrist, says: With thine enchantments were deceived all Nations. By
which then we see, that the case stands clear, that Antichrists miracles,
shall not be wrought in that corner of the world, among the Jews, but all the
world over, among the Gentiles; therefore Antichrist shall not be a Jew, but a
Gentile. Also, seeing we our selves in this our age, do see how the Papists,
every where, incline themselves to miracles, and that the Pope does daily send
his Seminaries abroad, to work his wonders, all the world over; by plain
experience we may be bold to say, the Pope is that Gentile: But they say no,
and who then shall decide the matter? that shall he whom they confess to b^e
indifferent between both, Erasmus; who has thus written upon the same place
of the Revelation, Erasmus.
What wonderful tokens (says he) have been wrought in the Papacy, and to
what end, Christ himself did prophecy long ago unto his Disciples, and gave
them warning of them.

Again, touching those three unclean spirits which should deceive the Kings
of the earth, and the greatest part of the world by their miracles, he says,
Erasmus upon the 16. chap.
The first is the devilish Dragon: the second is the beast at Rome, the very
right Antichrist.: the third is the false Prophet, not one person, but a whole
order, and multitude of Bishops, and religious persons, Monks, Friars, etc. And
a little after. These are three such foul and unclean spirits, as none can be
found more unclean, and yet do they work miracles. Wherefore then seeing that
Antichrists great miracles, are wrought in the Papacy, the Sea of Rome, and
else where, by the authority of the father of Perdition, the Dragon of Hell,
and his Son of Perdition, the Pope of Rome; with what impudency can
Bellarmine say, the Pope cannot be Antichrist?

But now (Christian Reader) whereas they will have their Church to be the true
Christian Church, because she works Miracles, and our Church the counterfeit,
because she works none: it is clear, we could not justly prove their
Church to be the Church of Antichrist, did she not work miracles. 2. Thessal.
2. Antichrist works miracles.
For we find 2. Thessalonians 2. where Saint Paul speaking of Antichrist, the
head of their Church, says thus of him. Even he whose coming is by the
working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and in all
deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness, among them that perish, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved: And therefore God
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies, that all they
might be damned which believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

25 At the day of Judgment (Christian Reader) when many of those that profess
themselves Christians, shall see themselves cast out to be damned, and will
object against Christ and say, Matthew. 7. Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name
prophesied; and by thy name cast out devils; and by thy name done many great
works? Yet for all their miracles done in his name, seeing they were done but
to confirm false doctrine, whereby souls were drawn from Christ, to
Antichrist, Christ says, he will then say thus unto them; Depart from me, ye
workers of iniquity, I know you not. Therefore it was not without cause, that
Saint Augustine opposed himself against such miracle-mongers, saying;
Augustine in John tractat. 13. Matt. 24.
Against these Mongers of miracles my God has armed me, saying: In the latter
days there shall rise up false prophets, working signs and wonders, to
deceive the Elect of God, if it be possible. True it is (as Saint Chrysostom
says) Chrysostom. in Matt. Hom. 49.
In old time (meaning in the time of the Apostles) it was known by Miracles,
who were the true Christians, and whom the false; but now the working of
miracles being taken away, is rather found among them that be false Christians.
Again, to fore-warne us of the latter age of the world, to take heed of being
deluded by workers of Miracles, he says; Chrysostom in Matt. 49. hom.
In the end of time power shall be given to the devil, to work profitable
signs and Miracles: so that then we cannot know the Ministers of Christ, by
that they work profitable Miracles, but by that they work no Miracles at all.
To conclude this point, Saint Augustine reproo^ing those of his time, that
would not believe without Miracles, said; August. De ciuitate Dei lib. 22. cap.
8.
Whosoever yet requires Miracles, to bring him to the Faith, is himself a
great Miracle: that, the world believing, remains still in unbelief. Now
therefore, what use can there be of Miracles among those which generally
believe in Christ, but to draw them to a new christ, even to Antichrist, as
all men may apparently see, Popish Miracles wholly tends unto?

THE EIGHT OBJECTION.
26 Antichrist, when he comes shall reign but three years and an half, as
is gathered by the ancient Writers out of the Prophet Daniel 7. and 12. and
out of the twelfth chapter of the Apocalypse, where it is said: That he shall
reign, a time, times, and half a time: for so Saint John himself
interprets the matter, chap. 11. and 13. saying, it shall be for forty two
months, which make just three years and an half: but the Popes of Rome have
reigned for more ages then these are years, and consequently cannot be
Antichrist.

THE ANSWER.
27 Here now by the time of Antichrists reign, he would prove the Pope not
to be Antichrist; which he might very well have done, if those three years
and an half, had been to be understood of our common years: but that cannot
possibly be; for that, so many, so mighty, and so marvelous are the Acts which
Antichrist shall effect, as that it is not possible, they should be effected in
three, Revel. 9.11. 2 These. 2.4.
nor yet in three hundred of our years and an half. For amongst many other
things (which would be ouer-tedious here to recite) he shall attain to be
made Ring of the Clergy; and this is proved in the 9. chapter of the
Revelation 11. verse: and 2. Thessal. 2. chap. 4. verse: and by these words of
Gregory the Great, Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 34.
Antichrist is the King of pride, Lib. 4.38. Reuelat. 17. cap. 2 verse, and 18
verse.
The universal Bishop of Bishops. Secondly, he shall bring a great part of the
Christian world into subjection to his Heathenish, Idolatrous and Antichristian
Religion, and almost all true Religion to be corrupted by his power. And this
is proved in the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation verse 2: and chap. 18.
verse 3. and by these express words of Saint Hierome; Hierome to Algasia.
Antichrist shall cause Religion to be subject to his power. Thirdly, he shall
attain to a superiority over the kingdom of all the kingdoms of the world
(which was the Romain Empire) and this is proved in the thirteenth chapter of
the Revelation: and by these words of Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom in his 4.
Hom. upon the 2 These. 2. cap.
When that the Empire shall stand void, Antichrist shall invade the state, and
shall labor to pull unto himself, the Empire both of God and man: and also by
these words of Saint Augustine, Augustine upon the 9. Psalm.
It is written of Antichrist, he shall conquer all Kings, and obtain the
kingdom himself alone. So that by these three accomplishments (omitting all
the rest) we see the Pope is sufficiently proved to be Antichrist. And whether
it be a thing likely, that a new vpstart fellow, a Jew of but three years
standing, should attain to so great power and dignity, in three of our years
and an half, whereby he might be proved Antichrist, let all that are not out
of their right wits be Judges between us. But forasmuch as the Pope
himself, did not accomplish so mighty matters, in three of our years and an
half: we must search further, to see what kind of years the holy Ghost meant.

28 Andrew Osiander writing upon this point, affirms them to be Angels
years, which the Angel in the twelfth chapter of the Revelation calls, A
Time, times, Reuelat. 12.
and half a time: which some do call Prophetical years, because the
Prophets in times past, did use to count by them, which are to be searched out
by Angels days, and months. Now an Angels day, as we find in the ninth
chapter of Daniel, Angels days and months.
is a year; for there, both in the seventy weeks, and sixty two weeks, a
day is a year. And even after this manner, is the spiritual counting, by the
direction of God himself, as appears in the foureteenth chapter of Numbers,
to Moses; and the fourth chapter of Ezekiel, where the Lord said unto him: Thou
shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty years: I have appointed
thee a day for a year, even a day for a year. So that even by this rule, must
we count the time of Antichrists reign, even by these Angels days: Angels
days I say: for as the said O siander says, Osiander in his book of
coniccture of the end of the world, and time of Antichrists reign, page 10.
Notwithstanding with us which be concluded under the heavens, the course of
the Sun from East to West, finisheth our day in four and twenty hours, yet
with the Angels, that dwell above the Circles and orbs of the planets; their
day finisheth her course whiles the Sun moves in her Zodiac, from the
South to the North; and again from the North to the South, which is not
finished but in one of our years. Therefore it is certain, there be Angels
days, and those days are years. Daniel 12.12. Reuelat. 13.5. Ang^ls years.
An Angels year does contain 360. years, after 30. days to a month which
the Greek Astronomers call a Time.
Now an Angels month we find in the twelfth chapter of Daniel, to contain
just thirty of those Angels days; and by the forty two months, in the 13.
chapter of the Revelation, which Bellarmine cites, we find that an Angels
year, does contain twelve of those Angels months; for that three times
twelve is 36. and six months for the half year, makes just 42. which make
just three Angels years and an half: which albeit they be not by the Angel in
the twelfth chapter of the Revelation, nor by Daniel in his seventh chapter
called years, in express words, but A Time, times, and half a time: yet may
we truly gather by Daniels words, in his fourth chapter, that by times he
meant years; for that he there calls Nebuchadnezzars seven Years, seven
Times. By which then we see, that as in that chapter, by Times he meant
Years, so in the seventh chapter, he, and likewise the Angel in his twelfth
chapter of the Revelation, by Angels times, meant Angels years: one of which
contains just 360. of our years, after thir^ie days to a month; which the
Greek Astrologians also call a Time.

29 Now then, the time of Antichrists reign, being set down to be three
years and an half; it is clear, they be Angels years, and not three of our
years and an half. And the rather, because the Angel in the 3. verse of the
11. chap. and 6. verse of the 12. chapter has set down, that those years by
which we must count, must contain just 1260. days, which ours do not, but
has 17. days and an half over; which if it were but the half day, would
mar their whole matter. Therefore seeing those three Angels years and an
half, do contain just those 1260. days, and that so many of those days, are
so many of our years, after 30. days to a month; Antichrists reign shall
continue (rising and falling, 1260. years; of which counting from Boniface the
3. in whom Antichrist first rose (which, as we proved before, in the third
answer, was in the year of Christ 607.) Antichrist has now reigned a
thousand and twelve years, and two hundred forty and eight, are yet to be
accomplished, if God with the shortning of the world (as some understand) for
her iniquity, do not also shorten his time for his iniquity.

30 But now, notwithstanding we have thus plainly proved the Pope to be he
that shall reign forty two months; and consequently to be Antichrist, yet as
their manner is, I know they will deny it; and who then shall decide the
matter? Truly Bellarmine himself shall be one, Saint Bernard another, and
their Robertus the Dominican Friar another. Bellarmine, howsoever in all his
former objections, he labored to prove a Jew to be Antichrist, that should
domintere over that one nation of the Jews only; yet here he wresteth the
Scripture, to have us to understand, that Romish Gentile, mentioned in the
thirteenth chapter of the Revelation (unto whom the Text says, Power was given
over every kindred, tongue and nation,) to be he. So that hereby he has proved
all his former Objections, but very fond conjectures, and mere fables. Also,
whereas the Text says, that unto the same beast, Was given a mouth to speak
blasphemy, and to keep war with the Saints: their Saint Bernard also
understanding this of the great Antichrist, says thus of the Pope: Bernard, in
his 25. Epistle.
That beast that is spoken of in the book of the R^uelation, unto which beast
is given a mouth to sp^ake blasphemy, and to keep war with the Saints, is
now gotten into Peter's Chair, and there sits as a Lion, prepared to his
prey. Again, speaking of the Popish Priests and Ministers he says plainly
thus; Supra can^^ sermon. 33.
They serve Antichrist. Ergo, the Pope is Antichrist. Their Dominican Friar
says, Rovertus in his 3. vision.
I saw in a vision in the Palace of Lateraine, and in the Porch before the
Chair of Prophero, where trial is made whether the Pope be a man or not, how
that an huge Serpent tumbled it self upon a thick and great reed, making a
great noise, and the Spirit said unto me: This Serpent is Antichrist, and his
condemnation is at hand. To conclude this matter, their Bishop Cornelius
bewayling the miserable estate of both Spirituality and Layetie (in the Romish
^urisdiction) says, Cornelius oration Cornelij. Epistle Bnon (...) 3. Dom^^^ca
aduent. in Con^^l. Trident. habita.
Would God they were not fallen wholly with one consent from Religion to
Superstition, from faith to infidelity, and from Christ to Antichrist. Ergo,
the Pope is Antichrist by their own confession.

31 But now whereas we affirmed Antichrist first to arise in Boniface the
third Bishop of Rome of that name, because in him was the order of universal
Bishops established by the Emperor Phocas, let us hear what their Saint
Vincent says hereof, Vincent
in his Treatise of the end of the World, amongst other things, fore-shewing of
two kind of Antichrists, one to be an open professed enemy to Christ, and all
sorts of Christians; the other, he said shall be a mixed kind of Antichrist.
And this (said he) shall be an evil Pope made by an evil Prince of great
power, who shall place his evil Pope in the Province of Babylon. And to this
mixed Antichrist (says he) many Prelates shall adhere. Also their Saint
Bridgit having declared the great ruin of the Church under the Popes, and the
desolation of many souls by their means, says, Bridgit 3. Book, 27. Chapter.
Yet know for all that, that between the time of humble Peter, and the time
that Boniface did mount up to sit in the seat of Pride, many did ascend into
Heaven. Which is as much as to say, before there was an Universal Pope made
and established, and consequently a Popish Church, many souls were saved in
the Romish jurisdiction: but afterward (as she says, Ibidem.
Both Clergy and Laity are scattered, and run several ways, carried with
the immoderate love of (worldly) commodity, neither do they care a whit for
the incommoditie and damage of their souls.

THE NINTH OBJECTION.
32 Besides this, the Scriptures teaches us plainly that before Antichrist
come, Henoch and Elias shall return to oppose themselves against him, and in
the end shall convert the Jews, Malachi. 4. Eccle. 4.8. Matthew. 17. Apocca. 11.
But we see not this point fulfilled to prove the Pope to be Antichrist.

THE ANSWER.
33 Here to blind the eyes of the ignorant, he tells them a tale of a tubbe,
to wit, that before Antichrist come, Henoch and Elias shall return, to oppose
themselves against him, and shall convert the Jews: and for proof he cites
four places of Scripture, of which if any one of them do prove his Assertion,
I dare recant all that I have written, For, as touching the return of Henoch,
there is no such thing mentioned in all the Scriptures; and for that Prophecy
of Malachi, which foretold of the return of Elias, if we may believe our
Savior Christ, that was fulfilled in Saint John Baptist, Matthew. 11. Where in
the 7. Matthew. 11.7.
verse it is said, Jesus began to speak unto the Multitude, of John. And in
the 13. verse, Christ said, All the Prophets and the Law prophesied unto John;
and if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was to come: He that has ears
to hear, let him hear. And in the tenth verse, Matthew. 11.10.
he declares John to be the same Elias which the Prophet Malachi (in that
fourth Chapter which Bellarmine cites) foretold should come, in that he there
repeateth the very words of Malachie. And hereby our Savior Christ confuted
that erroneous opinion of the Jews, Matthew. 17.10.
who thought that Elias should return into the world in his own proper
person, as the Papists do at this day. Also by these words of Saint Luke,
spoken of John, Luke 1.17.
( He shall go before him (to wit Christ) in the spirit and power of Elias) is
plainly confuted that erroneous opinion of some of the Rabbines, (who held
that Elias should rise either in his own body, or his soul to enter into
some other body) in that he shows him to return only in power and spirit,
in the person of John Baptist. And as touching the calling of the Jews by
Enoch and Elias, forasmuch as no place in all the Scripture does show the
return of Enoch, and that Saint John Baptist was only that same Elias that
the Prophets foretold should come; it is clear, the Jews shall not be
converted by them: Romans 11.11. ver.
And the rather, because Saint Paul declares, Romans 11.11. verse, that their
conuertion shall be by the Christian Gentiles; and that Erasmus writing upon
the same place, Erasmus Paraf.
declares that when the fullness of the Gentiles be come into the Christian
Church, and all be of one Religion (the Jews only excluded) they will storm
and rage at the Christians for a while, but ere long, will join themselves
unto them: therefore they shall be converted by the Christians, and not by
Enoch and Elias. Wherefore what prophecy is there yet to be fulfilled, that
should prove the great Antichrist not yet come, or what one sound argument has
Bellarmine made, to prove the Pope not to be the same?

THE TENTH, and last, OBJECTION.
34 This Objection is to prove the day of Judgment, a day certain to be
known of man; which because our Savior (as he was man) said was uncertain to
himself, I leave to meddle with that matter: but whenever it does come, I
doubt it will come too soon for Bellarmine, and all that are led by him, to
cleave unto the Beast of Rome, as may appear in the 14 Chapter of the
Rouelation, where it is thus written: Reuelat. 14.9, 10, 11.
If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or on his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of
God, yea, of the pure wine which is powered into the Cup of his wrath; and he
shall be tormented in fire and brimstone, before the holy Angels, and before
the Lamb, and the smoke of their torments shall ascend evermore: and they
shall have no rest day nor night, which worship the Beast and his Image, and
whosoever receives the Print of his name. And this is it which their Saint
Bridgit (cannonized for a Saint by Pope Boniface the ninth) says of the Popes,
their Prelates, and all that are seduced by them, Bridgit in her first Book,
41. Chap.
In stead of honor they shall have eternal shame and confusion; and look how
high they have ascended above others, through pride, as low shall they be
brought under others in Hell. Their members, that is to say (says she) all
their followers and favorers, shall be cut off, disioynted, and pulled in
pieces, like unto a wall that is casting down, wherein is not left one stone
standing upon another: neither shall my love and mercy ever warm them, nor
build them up again into eternal mansion in the Heavens, but they, with their
heads, secluded from all good comfort, shall be tormented eternally. Wherefore
it behooves every man as he tendereth his own salvation, to turn from Popery
in time, lest dying therein, he be utterly deprived of eternal salvation. And
thus much for answer to these Obrections for the clearing the Pope from being
Antichrist. Now it remains in the next chapter to answer the other
Objections, which deny Christian Rome (now in her latter days) to be that
Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, which the Angel in the 17. Chapter of the
Revelation, Reuela. 1 l. and 18. Chap.
calls the Mother of Whordemes and abominations of the earth: And which the
other Angel in the eighteenth Chapter says, Is fallen, and become the
habitation of Devils, the hold of all foul spirits, and Cage of every unclean
and hateful Bird.

CHAP. III. Tending to resolve all men, that Christian Rome (now in her latter
days) is that Babylon, the seat of Antichrist, which the Angel in the 17.
Chapter of the Revelation, calls the Mother of Whordomes and abominations of
the Earth: And which the other Angel in the 18. Chapter says, is fallen, and
become the habitation of Devils, the hold of all foul spirits, and cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird.
1 Whosoever will diligently pervse the thirteenth Chapter of the Revelation,
Reuela. 13.1, 2.
shall evidently perceive, that Romish Babylon is described by two manner of
Beasts; the one corporal, the other spiritual. The corporal Beast is
disciphered by the similitude of an ugly Monster, being in shape like unto a
Leopard, his feet like Bears feet, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion. The
spiritual Beast is only said to have two Horns like the Lamb. Under the
first Beast, Rome, for the space of near three hundred years. This corporal
Beast, was Heathenish Rome and Regiment, which the Papists would make the World
to believe, the Angel in the seventeenth Chapter only called Babylon.

2 The first Beast we see, is set forth in a visible shape, to our corporal
eyes; the second, in no shape, therefore to be discerned with spiritual eyes:
only it is said to have two Horns like the Lamb: that is to say, to seem to
have the two Testaments, the Law of God, and Gospel of Christ, to be the only
strength of his Kingdom, and Priesthood, as Christ himself had. By which it
is certain, that by this second Beast (so resembling Christ) is meant
Christian Rome, and her Regiment. Now the first beast, they confess was well
worthy the name of Babylon; for that it did as well resemble old Babylon, (in
tyranny, Idolatry, and all manner of abominations) as if it had been the
very same: therefore, if we can prove that the second beast, became so
lively to resemble the first beast, as the first beast did the first Babylon,
then the case will stand clear, that the second beast is as well worthy the
same name. Now for proof hereof, what better Author can we bring, then the
Angel himself, who of the second beast says thus, Some of our Writers have
doubted that, because it is said he did all that the first beast did before
him, or in his sight: that this cannot be meant of the Popes spiritual
Regiment; but the 20. verse of the 19. Chap. will show them it is.
And he did all that the first beast could do before him, and he caused the
Earth, and them that dwelt therein, to worship the first Beast: that is,
commanded all upon the earth within his Dominions, to lay to their helping
hands with him, to bring the Christian state into the first beasts form and
order: and also to bring all the inhabitants, within his jurisdiction, to
conform themselves in reverence and humble obedience unto the same, and so to
worship the first beast, in honoring his old Heathenish Ordinances, by which
it is without all contradiction: the second beast is no whitlesse worthy the
same name.

3 But yet for more plainer proof, that by the second beast is meant the
spiritual Regiment of Christian Rome, let us hear how Erasmus does interpret
those words of the Angel in the thirteenth Chapter: his words be these,
Erasmus upon the 13. Chap. 5. Sect.
When as the Roman Kingdom, after the time of Iulianus, began to be divided
into East and West, and to diminish for a season, then began a new Roman
Kingdom and jurisdiction, namely, the Popes pomp: And a little after, Jbidem.
This Kingdom of the Papists took upon it all the power of the first beast,
the Roman Emperor, and compelled the Christians to Idolatry and service of
false gods, under a pretense of honoring Christ and Saints. By which it is
most apparent, that by the second beast is meant the Popish Christian Regiment
of Rome. And this is very sufficient for the proving, that by the two beasts in
the thirteenth Chapter, is meant the Heathenish Roman Regiment, and the Popish
Christian Regiment. Now it requires that we prove also, whether by the beast
mentioned in the seventeenth Chapter, which the Angel called, Babylon, the
Mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth, be meant Heathenish Rome,
and her Regiment, under the Pagan Emperors, or of Christian Rome, and of her
Regiment under the Popes.

4 Erasmus having discoursed at large, of the matters contained in the
thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth Chapters, coming to the
seventeenth Chapter, he says thus, Erasmus upon then 7. chap. Sect. 1.
One of the seven Angels, which spoke of the second Kingdom, and of the
jurisdiction of Rome, and of the beast with two Horns, comes now again, and
will speak more plainly. So that he gives us to understand, The spiritual
beast in the 13. chap. and that in the 17. chap. are one.
that the same beast in the thirteenth Chapter, and that in the seventeenth
Chapter are both one. Now we heard before, by what sufficient arguments he
proved, that by the second beast was meant Christian Rome, and her Regiment;
but let us also see by what inducements he is lead, to affirm, that that beast
in the seventeenth Chapter is the same. The first motive, I take to be this;
namely, for that the same beast, which the Angel in the fifth verse called
Babylon, the Mother of whordomes and abominations of the Earth, in the 8.
verse, he saw, he had expounded to John to be a City; Evident notes to prove
Christian Rome Babylon.
and in the ninth verse, to be that only City, that compasses within her
seven special Hills; which was sufficient to persuade him, that by the beast
in the seventeenth Chapter the Angel meant Rome. Secondly, to induce him to
understand, that the Angel meant Christian Rome, he saw the Angel spoke of
Romes estate in her latter days: for that so soon as he had declared unto
John, the beast to be a City, and with one and the same breath to add these
words; which reigns over the Kings of the Earth: And also, for that he saw
him to prevent John before in the twelfth Verse: for understanding them of
Kings in his days, in saying thus of them: Which yet have not received a
kingdom, but shall receive power at an hour with the beast. As also, for that
by these very words, he declared unto him, that he did not speak of the first
beast, because that beast was then in his full power, and reigned over both
Jews and Gentiles.

5 Thirdly, for that he saw the Angel had declared unto John, that those
Kings which afterward should rise up with the beast, should continue with her
to the end of her days, and should grow into so great hatred against her, that
they should pursue her to her utter destruction. For as in the twelfth verse,
he described those Kings, by the similitude of ten horns, so in the
sixteenth and seventeenth verses, he said unto John thus of those horns: And
the ten Horns which thou saw upon the beast, Reuelat. 17.
are they that shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, for God has put in their hearts
to fulfill his will, and to do with one consent, for to give their kingdom
unto the beast, until the words of God be fulfilled. Fourthly, the fourth
verse of the seventeenth Chapter, enforced him to understand the beast which
the Angel there calls Babylon, the Mother of whordomes and abominations of
the Earth, to be the Christian state of Rome, in her latter days; for that
the Angel there said, She offered to the World the abomination and
filthiness of her fornication, in a Golden Cup: that is (as the learned
expound it) her idolatries and whorish Doctrine and Religion, in the name of
Christ: which cup Erasmus declares, Heathenish Rome, disdayned once to handle,
and abhorred what good soever was offered to her therein: therefore he could
not otherwise understand, but that the Angel meant the Christian Church of
Rome, in her latter days; which under the glittering and golden show of the
name of Christ, poisoned a great part of Christendom, with that whorish
filthiness of her Heathenish Fornication, Reuelat. 17.2. Reuelat. 18.3.
and the third verse of the eighteenth Chapter. And thus we see the four
principal points, which fully resolved that most learned Erasmus, and may also
as fully resolve all men, that by Babylon, the Mother of whordomes and
abominations of the Earth, the Angel meant Christian Rome in her latter days.
Now let us hear how Erasmus concludes of Christian Rome; thus he says.

6 This whorish Woman Erasmus upon the 17. chap. Sect. 1.
has decked and garnished her self, not like Peter and Paul, with diverse and
many virtues, but with Silver and Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls: And
the Cup of Gold which she offers to the World, is not the love of Christ, the
Christian Faith, nor the Law of God, but her own Decrees and Ordinances, that
she may play the Whore at her pleasure, with pomp, authority, and lust,
without all shame or fear, beyond all measure, and all under the pretense and
name of Christ. Again, he says, Erasmus upon the 16. chap. Sect. 3.
The whole order of Bishops and multitude of Spirituaell Pastors, which by
their office and calling, ought to maintain and support the true Doctrine of
God, have bent themselves, their whole life and state, utterly against the
Doctrine of the Gospel, that nothing can be more unlike the state of the
Apostles, in doctrine, religion, or life, then is their order and state.
Again, he says, Erasmus upon the 16. chap. Sect. 2.
This second beast with his two horns, is twice as had as the first; for as
much as through her two horns, it had power both of body and soul, over the
Doctrine, and over the politic Laws, with mouth and hand against God, the
temporal government, Christ and his Ministers. And again he says, Erasmus
upon the 27. chap. Sect. 1.
The blood of the holy Prophets, and Preachers, has this Whore (the Papacy)
shed without measure, till she was so drunk therewith, that she took and
esteemed her tyranny for godly zeal. Therefore he concludes with the very
head of the Romish Church thus, Erasmas in the words going before.
For the name of the Christian Church, he has deserved anonother name, even to
be called the Whore of Babylon, the Mother of all abominations, idolatry, and
of falling into Heathenish superstition. And thus (Christian Reader) thou see
most apparently proved, that by Babylon is meant the Christian Church of Rome,
now in her latter days. Now let us entreat a little of the fall of Babylon,
for that will make this matter yet more apparent.

7 This Angel in the seventeenth Chapter having finished his testimony
touching spiritual Babylon; Saint John in the beginning of the eighteenth
Chapter says thus: And after these things, ^euelat. 18.3.
I saw another Angel come down from heaven, having great power, so that the
Earth was lightened with his glory, and he cried out mightily with a loud
voice, saying: It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great City, and is become
the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of
every unclean and hateful Bird: for all Nations have drunk of of the Wine of
the wrath of her Fornication, and the Kings of the Earth have committed
Fornication with her. Now we heard before by the other Angel, that Christian
Rome is Babylon, therefore if this also be spoken of Christian Rome, then is
Christian Rome so wonderfully fallen, as that she may rightly be called Babylon.
And that it may appear indeed, that this Angel did also speak of Christian
Rome, let us hear how Erasmus does interpret his words, thus he says,
Erasmus upon the 18. chap. Sect. 1.
This is spoken principally against the second Regiment of Rome, which under
the pretense of the name of Christ, has dealt so rebelliously against all
faithful Christians. And a little after, Jbidem.
Now is it known, that she has been an Habitation for the wicked,
unfaithful, and filthy Sodomites. And again, Erasmus upon the 18. chap.
Sect. 3.
With this Babylon have Princes and Prelates, yea whole Kingdoms committed
Whordomes. So that by this we see most apparently, that the same which is here
spoken, touching the wonderful great fall of Babylon, is spoken of Christian
Rome.

8 True it is that some do understand this to be meant of the fall of the first
beasts power, the Heathenish Empire, which was overthrown by Constantine the
Emperor, when he was converted to Christianity, about three hundred years
after Christ: but this cannot be, for by Constantines means, the Romans
became Christians; therefore, if we should understand it of that time, and
state, we should understand that the Angel called Rome Babylon, and the
habitation of devils, in respect that it was wholly become the habitation of
Christians: and that the Christians were those devils, foul spirits, unclean
and hateful birds; which were most ridiculous so to say. Again, those words
of the Text, which say, And is become, imports a time when she was not so,
which could not be meant of that time when she was Impious and Pagan, for then
she was no better; but of a time after, when she was risen and fallen. And that
it may appear, Rome risen and fallen.
that Christian Rome (under the Popes) did so fall, as that she became this
hellish habitation, none can make it more of credit, nor more apparent, then
the Romanists themselves have done, as we shall now see by these their own
testimonies following.

9 Their Bernard (which lived almost a thousand years after Heathenish Romes
days) writing of the state and manner of the Romans (in his days) says thus,
Bernardinus de considerat. ad Eugenium lib. 4.
The Romans are wise to do evil, good they know not how to do: they are
irreligious toward God, presumptuous against holy things, they be Wolves, not
Sheep. And a little after, speaking of the Pope, and of his spiritual
Pastors, he says, Jbid.
Of such art thou Shepherd, if I durst speak all, they be rather the pastors
of devils, then of sheep. And again, complaining of the diue^lishnesse of his
time, and the ripeness of the Church of Antichrist, among the Romans, he
says further thus, Bern. Sermon. 6. in Psalm. 91.
It only remains that the man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition,
a devil, not only of the day, but also of the noonday. Likewise their Writer
Holcote, complaining of the Romish Priests and Prelates in his days, says,
Holcot in lib. Sapientiae lectro 182.
They be like the priests of Baall, they resemble the priests of Dagon, they
are the priests of Priapus, and Angels of hell. So then hereby we see, that
the Pope and his Prelates, are the chief of those devils, of whom the Angel
says, Rome is become the habitation. Now let us see also who be those foul
spirits, unclean and hateful birds.

10 Their Writer Auentine says, Auent. analiu^ Boierum. lib. 6.
I am ashamed to say what manner of Bishops we have; with the revenues of the
poor, they feed horses, hounds, I need not to say whoores. Saint Bernard
says, Bernard. sup, Cant. sermon. 33. Sermo ad Clerum, etc.
It is a shame to name those things which our Bishops do in secret. Their
Mantuan says, Mantuan. Calamitatum. lib. 3
It is in every man's mouth, Cities and Countries talk of it, and the very
brute thereof has quenched all care of virtue. Also their Bishop Cornelius
says, Oration Cornelij Epist. Bitonti. 3.
With what monsters of filthiness, with what channel of uncleanness, with
what pestiferous contagion, are not both priests and people defiled, make your
selves Judges, and begin at the Sanctuary of God. Also their Palingenius
says, Paling. Marcell. Paling. Zodiaci vita lib. 5. in Leon.
Let no Friar, Monk, or any other Priest come within thy doors: take heed of
them, no greater mischief, they are the dregs of men, the fountains of
Folly, the sinkes of sin, Wolves under Lambs skins, deceiving the simple
with a false show of honesty: and under the shadow of Religion, hide a
thousand of unlawful acts: Jdem lib. 6. in Virgin. Idem lib. 9. Sagittario.
committers of Rapes, abusers of boys: the Priests and Monks that should be
chaste, spend night and day, either openly with whoores, or closely with boys.
O shame (says he) can the Church endure such hogs? Whereupon their Platine
says, Platine vita Marcellini.
What shall we think will become of this our age, wherein our vices are grown
to that height, that they have scant left any place with God for mercy; how
great is the lechery of all sorts among the priests, and especially among the
chief Rulers? To conclude, Mantuan gives the definitive Sentence, and
plainly affirms, that they of the Church of Rome, are only those foul
spirits, unclean and hateful birds: for says he, Mantu. Calamitatum. lib. 3.
They are hateful to heaven, and loathsome with unclean lusts; alas, in vain
attempt they sacred rites with incestuous hands, they rather kindle and provoke
God, then appease him: Therefore says he again, Jbid.
Never hope for help, so long as such pray for you. And thus as we saw
proved before, by their own testimonies, who were those devils; so here also
we see as plainly proved by their own Writers, who be those foul spirits,
unclean and hateful birds, whereof Rome and her regiment in her latter days,
is become the habitation. And thus much for the proving, that by the fall of
Babylon, is meant the great fall of the Christian Church of Rome, under the
Popes of Rome. Now let us see the time when she began to fall, and her full
perfection whereunto she fell.

11 Touching the first point, Tertullian seems to be the first that makes
any mention thereof, (he lived about two hundred years after Christ) who then
bewayling the declined estate of the Christian part of Rome, thus exclaimed
against it, Tertull. in Apologitico.
O Rome, how much art thou changed from old Rome? thou which wast once the
chief in all the World, art now become the chief in all naughtiness. Also,
about one age after that, Saint Hierome perceiving how she began to be
corrupted in doctrine, thus exclaimed against her, Hierom. idem aduersus
Jouianum lib. 2.
Was there (says he) none other place in all the World to receive this
voluptuous doctrine, but that which Peter's preaching had built on the Rock
Christ? Again, he said to the maintainers of this doctrine, To Pammachius.
Thou that art a maintainer of this new doctrine, spare thy Roman ears,
spare thy faith which is so commended by the Apostles own mouth; to this day
the Christian world has ever been without this doctrine. And again he
says, Jdem praefact. in lib. Dydimi de spiritu sancte.
Whiles I stayed at Babylon, and was an inhabitant of that purple whore, and
lived among the Romans, Behold, the pot which was seen in Jeremy, from the
North began to seethe; and the Senate of Pharisees, made an vproare: and the
whole faction of rude and ignorant, as it were in defiance of learning
conspired against me. Furthermore, he crying out against the idolatry which
was then crept into the Church, and also against the Idole-makers, says: In
his 11. book 10. chap. upon Jeremy.
He adorneth his Image with silver and gold, that by the shine and glittering
of both mettalls, he may deceive the simple: which error (says he) is now
crept in among us. Also, within less then twenty years after that, Saint
Augustine declares, how their idolatry was defended by the Idolaters, to be
no Idolatry; namely, because they took not their Image for God: but (said
he) Augustine in his sermon upon Matthew.
Let no man say to me, the Image is no divine power, they know it is not God; I
would to God (says he) they so knew it as we know it; but what they have, and
in what sort they have it, and what they do about it, the Altar bears
witness. Therefore from hence it was which in another place he says,
Augustine in psalm. 44.
They have made us the Citizens of Babylon, we have left our Creator, and have
worshipped the creature; we have left him that made us, and have worshipped
that which we have made our selves. Wherefore their Ambrosius Ansbertus, thus
concluded even of Christian Rome, saying, Ambro. in Ap^calip. lib. 6.
Rome is the second Babylon.

12 Furthermore, about some thirty years after that, Saint Christostome,
speaking of the decaying estate of the Christian Church, says, Christ. in 1.
ad Corinthi. Hom. 36.
The Church at this day is like unto a Woman that has quite l^st her old
modesty: that is, her sober and chaste behavior toward her Husband Christ,
and does begin to wax wanton toward new Lovers; with whom whiles she dalted,
rose up a spokesman, to make a match between Ancichrist and her; which was
John Bishop of Constantinople, whom Gregory the Great, therefore called,
Gregory in his 6. Book Epist. 30.
The forerunner of Antichrist. But as Pelagius, before Gregory's days, stayed
the marriage from being solemnized, so did Gregory during his days: who
perceiving that the Church was like to have a new Husband, to wit, an
Universal Bishop to be made, and to become her head in stead of Christ: He
confessed with tears, that the state of the Church, was like to fall to
ground. For (said he) Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 52. and 55.
Seeing the order of Priesthood is fallen within, it cannot now stand long
without. And thus much concerning the fall of the Church, especially of that
part under the Patriarkedome of Rome, before there was an Universal Pope
established in Rome. Now it remains that we see how it grew to perfection,
under Universal Popes, in these four principal points, Doctrine, Faith,
Religion, and general Apostacy: Which God willing shall be made evident by
their own Writers also.

13 Touching the first point, their Saint Vincent says, Vincent in his
Treatise of the latter end.
The religious orders are become unto men's souls the way of perdition. And a
little after, he shows the reason to be this. For (says he) the most part
of Preachers, preach now adays, not the simplicity of the Gospel, but the
subtlety of Aristotle. Their S. Bridgit speaking in the person of Christ,
says, Bridgit lib. 4. cap. 133.
They annull and make of no effect my Word, they affirm and teach their own
lies, and deny my truth, etc. In lib. 6. of her Revelation, chap. 26.
My Word is unto them intolerable, and my wisdom and doctrine in their
account but vain. Therefore Lib. 4. cap. 132
They do not preach and publish to the people my Word, neither do they teach
my doctrine, etc. Lib. 6. of her Reuelat. cap. 26.
They follow their own fancy, so that their own inventions are unto them a
Law, etc. Lib. 6. Reuelat. cap. 15.
They say and do boast that they understand my Law, and yet it is but for the
deceiving of others, etc. Lib. 4.132.
For of the upright man they make a wicked man, of the simple they make a
Devil. And this comes to pass as then Cardinal Beno shows because Beno
de vita and ges^s Hudeb.
They are led by the spirit of error, and doctrines of D^u^ls. Whereby, as
their Bishop Corn^lu^s says, Cornelijorat. Trident.
The savor of life, is turned to the savor of death: So as their Matthew
Paris the Monk says, Paris in Henrico 2. sub. 1160.
Whence Christians were wont to fetch the water of Righteousness, there they
find a poisoned puddle. And even thereby does their Abbot ^oacham prove the
Pope and his Clergy to be that Whore of Babylon, mentioned in the seventeenth
Chapter of the Revelation, which offers to the World the Abomination and
Filthiness of her Fornication in a golden Cup. Ioacham upon the 37. chap. Jere.
The modern Vicars of Christ (says he) do neglect Incense and Myrrh, but
they seek after Gold, that they may with Babylon the great Lady of the World,
fill unto men Wine in a Golden Cup, to infect their followers with their
abomination. Now therefore I demand of our Roman Catholics, how it is
possible for Doctrine to grow unto any greater perfection of corruption, then
to be squared by the spirit of error, and Doctrines of Devils, whereby good
men are made wicked men, and simple men made Devils?

14 Touching the second point, namely, Faith: their Saint Bridgit in her fourth
B^oke, finding Rome to have seduced the Romish Church from her primitive
purity, calls her a wretched and an v^ happy City. And a little after she
says, Bridgit lib. 4. cap. 30.
Marvel not that I called Rome an unhappy and a wretched City, because of
the aforesaid abuses, and others the like, much contrary to the Statutes of
the Primitive Church. Wherefore it is to be feared, lest the Catholic Faith
do shortly sail. Their Saint Hildegard a Nun, having in a vision seen the
Pope in the show of a great and ugly Monster, and other fearful sigues over
the Church of Rome, wrote thus of the head thereof: Hildegard in her second
book of her Sciuias.
The son of perdition shall endeavor through a most wicked deceit, to seduce
men for a time sweetly and smoothly, by making crooked the pathway of the
Christian Faith. That Astrologian Ruth, speaking of the state of the Romish
Church, when the Pope should be installed in his Seat, wrote thus, Ruth in his
3. chap. of his Book.
When as he shall enter into his House, then shall the Romans stumble in the
Faith. Their Abbot Ioacham says, Ioacham upon the first and second of Ierem.
The Pope considers not in how perverse a manner the Lion of Faith is thrown
down. And a little after he says, The religious orders do defile the Faith
by their errors, teaching peruersly. If in the head (says he) is not the
soundness of Faith, much less is there in the heart the sincerity of hope,
and yet further off from the foot is the diligence of doing charitable deeds.
And albeit the Faith of Rome was of old published through the whole World, yet
afterward her Faith has been turned into perfidie and heresy. Again,
speaking of the whole Church of Rome, he says, Jbidem.
This is the Synagogue of Satan, and his Seat: This is that Fig Tree which
is dried up in the Faith, by the means of the curse of transgression, etc.
even the latter Church, the Ship of Saint Peter. Their Bishop Cornelius says,
Oration Cornelij Trident.
Would to God they were not fallen with one consent, from Faith to Infidelity,
and from Christ to Antichrist. To conclude, Ioacham yet shows of a more
admirable perfection of falling from the true Faith in Christ, in that he
says, Ioacham upon the first and second chap. of Jeremy.
They have chosen Antichrist for Christ, the Devil for God, and Hell for the
Kingdom of Heaven. Wherefore, whether it be possible for men to fall from the
Faith in any greater measure, let the learned Reader judge.

15 Touching the third point, to wit, Religion. Their Saint Bernard, bewayling
the desperate estate of Religion in his time, says, Bernard. supra Cant. Ser.
33. and gest. Hildebrand.
Behold these times very much defiled with the work that walks in
darkness. Woe be to this generation because of the leaven of the Pharisees,
which is hypocrisy: If it may be called hypocrisy, which is now so rife, that
it cannot, and so shameless, that it seeks not to be kept secret. A rotten
contagion creeps at this day through the whole body of the Church. And a
little after: The wound of the Church is inward, and incarable. Their Cardinal
Beno says, Beno Cardinalis de vita and gestis Hildeb.
Their Religion sauoureth nothing but of traiterousnesse and covetousness,
being led by the spirit of Error, and Doctrines of Devils. Their S. Elizabeth
thus cries out against the Romish Clergy, Elizabeth in her 2. book of
Visions, chapter 18.
Woe be unto you Hypocrites, which hide the Gold and the Silver, to wit, the
Word of God, and the Law of the Lord, which is more precious then either Gold
or Silver; but howsoever ye seem unto men religious and innocent, you are
full of craftiness and uncleanness. And lib. 3. cap. 14. Christ says
therefore, Your Religion does accuse you before me. Their Saint Katherine
says thus also of the Romish Clergy, Katherine of Siene in a prayer of hers.
The religious Orders are become the weapons or soldiers of the Devil,
corrupting Religion inwardly in themselves, and outwardly in the secular sort
and Laity. And a little after, she says, The Laity and secular persons are
seduced and deceived by their blind guides, which are (alas) ignorant Idiots.
Their Saint Hildegard, says, Hildegard in her second book of Sciuias.
I saw in a vision a monstrous black Head in the Church, with fiery eyes, an
Asses ears, a Lions nosthrils, with a mouth breathing out the fury of
unlawful fire, with the unpleasant noise of contradiction among Men, whereby
the white purity of true Religion is obscured and diminished in the children
of the Church. Abbot Ioacham says, Ioacham upon the first and second chapter
of Jeremy.
The infancy of Solomon represents unto us the zeal of the Primitive
Church, and his old age signifies or shadoweth out the present corrupt state
of the Church, and that as Solomon in his old age fell into Idolatry, so has
the Church of Rome done. Again, upon the seventeenth chapter of Saint John's
Revelation, he says, Upon the 17, of the Revelation.
The very Text it self does teach, that the Woman begilded with Gold, and
which commits spiritual Fornication with the Princes of the Earth, is the
very Church of Rome, which Babylon- like plays spiritually the Whore with
Stocks and stones. To be brief, whereas their Robertus, a Dominican Friar,
Robertus Gallus a Friar in his 5.6. and 8. Sermon.
affirms the Pope to be the great and head Idol of the Romish Church, whom
the first part of our first Chapter shows plainly, the Church of Rome
holds to be a celestial God, and that their Saint Bridgit says in the
person of God, Bridgit in her 4. Book, chap. 133.
They make an Idol of me: What fall can possibly be in Religion, then to make
the arch-Idol of the world, God; and the God of all worlds, an Idol.

16 Lastly, concerning the fourth point, which has three divisions. The first,
concerns the falling from God: The second, from Christ: The third, from the
true Church. Which because the three former has in part proved a general
Apostacy, I will but briefly touch. Their Saint Bridgit says (as it were in
the person of God;) Bridgit ibidem.
Israel does now neglect me, that is to say, (says he) the Priests, and they
love another God. For they love (as I said before) the golden Calfe, etc.
Moreover, they make an Idol of me, and shut upon me lest I should enter. In
her 135. chapter.
Thus do these cursed Priests by me. And a little after: I call them to me
as the Bridegroom does his Bride, or the Husband his wedded Wife: I do all I
can, but the more that I call them, the further they go from me. Ioacham
shows, that the whole Clergy of Rome is so far fallen from God, that as he
says, Ioacham upon the first and second chapter of Jeremy.
They have chosen the Devil for God.

17 Touching the second division. Their Mathilde, a Prophetess, thus
exclaimeth against the Romish Clergy, saying, Mathilde in a Prophecy of hers.
They are fallen away from Christ, and become ravening Wolves, devouring and
cutting the throats of Christ's Sheep. Ioacham Abbas says, Ioacham upon the 1.
and 2. chap. of Iere.
The Church of Rome, like unto another Tribe, has departed from Christ; Hating
all such (as their S. Bridgit says, Bridgit in her 1. Book, 56, chap.
as walk in his ways. Yea, and as in another place she says of Pope Gregory
then, Lib. 4. cap. 142.
He hates Christ, he robs him of his sheep, he plucketh them violently
out of his hand, and sends them to Hell fire. By which the case is made
clear, that all that are won to the Pope, are lost from Christ. And as
Ioacham in that place before cited, showed the Church of Rome to be so far
fallen from God, as that she chose the Devil for God, so in the same place, he
shows that she is so far fallen from Christ, that she has chosen Antichrist
for Christ.

18 Now for the third division, concerning the falling from the true Church,
their Robertus brings in Christ thus repr ouing the Romish Church, for
falling away from the true and ancient Christian Church, Friar Robertus in his
12. Sermon.
Daughter of Babylon (says he) thou art estranged from thy mother, my Dove,
that bare thee, and art gone after gold and silver, and precious ornaments.
Like an adultresse thou have forsaken me, and have joined thy self unto
strangers: Thou lie prostrate, and such as are pleased to play the whore,
repair unto thee. And in the same Sermon in the person of Christ he says:
Ibidem.
Why have the children of my Dove departed from me, and are become black?
They are become estranged by abandoning the simplicity of their mother. Again,
in the same Sermon, Ibidem.
he calls the Clergy of Rome, A disloyal generation, and the adultrous
sons of Christ's Dove. And in his thirty two Sermon, the Lord says thus unto
him: 2^. Sermon.
All the children of my beloved, saving only a few, shall play the Apostates.
And in his twenty one Sermon, the Lord says thus to the whole Clergy of Rome.
This mine house shall be destroyed because of you which make the children of my
beloved to play the Apostates. And this is it which Ioacham fore-tolde, where
he says, Ioacham upon the seauent^enth chapter of the Reu^la^tion.
The Lord shall stir up (as it were) with an hissing voice the French men and
Germans to conspire against the Church which has played the Apostate in the
person of the warrefaring Popes: who with their Clergy and their adherents (as
a prophecy had out of the Abbot of Clunies Library says) In an old book.
shall fight against the true Church. Also the Abbot Ioacham painteth out one
most cruel Pope, which he says, Ioacham in his 9. Prediction.
Shall wound and scourge with most cruel stripes the most meek Lamb, opening
his mouth against Christ the Lord, and darkening the Stars of heaven.
Wherefore says Saint Bridgit to the Pope, Bridgit in her 6. book of her
Revelation 26, chapter.
The King for whom thou do pray, ought to assemble and call a Council of
spiritual men, such as are wise through my wisdom. And a little after. And
let him gather together the upright and true kind of Christians, that he
together with them, may repair the spir^tuall breaches of my Church, the which
verily has departed too far from me.

19 If the Church of Rome, were not clean departed from Christ and the true
Christian Church, then would not their Platina have said thus of the universal
heads thereof, Platina in Joan. 10.
The Popes are clean departed from Peter's steps. Neither would their own
prophecy have foretold, In Clunies Library.
That they would follow the footesteppes (not of Simon Peter, but) of Simon
Magus. Neither would their Petracha have said thus of the mother of their
Church, Petracha in his 20. Epistle.
Rome the whore of Babylon, is the mother of all Idolatry and fornication, the
Sanctuary of heresy, and school of error. Neither would their Mantuanus have
given this council to all true Christians, saying: Baptista Mantuanus.
All that will live godly, be packing from Rome, for there all things else are
lawful, but to live godlily it is not lawful. Neither would their Bishop
Cataldus have said thus of Rome. Cataldus in his Prediction.
Thou unhappy Babylon, the damned pit of priests. Neither would their Abbot
Ioacham have said thus of the whole Romish Church: Ioacham upon the first and
second chapter of Jeremy.
This is the Synagogue of Satan and his seat. Neither would their Saint
Katherine in her Prayer have said thus of the Church of Rome: Katherine ibidem.
O Tabernacle, but of the devil. And also thus in the person of Christ to the
whole Clergy of Rome; I have chosen you to be like unto Angels on earth, but
ye are rather incarnate Devils. Neither would their Saint Bridget have said,
Bridget in her fourth book 135. chapter.
They are accursed, and worse then the Devil, and therefore except they amend,
they shall be drowned deeper then all the devils in Hell. Neither would she
have said to the Pope thus of his whole Sea, Thy Sea like unto an heavy stone
shall go down into the deepest deep. I say, if the Church of Rome, had not
clean departed from the true and most ancient Apostolic Church, then would
not these most holiest of their Church, have thus written. But forasmuch as the
case is clear, that she is departed from the most ancient Christian Church,
our Church must needs be that most ancient Christian Church, because there are
none other Christian Churches in all the world, but what are comprehended under
these two Titles, Christian and Antichristian: which we now commonly call,
Protestants and Papists. But yet for the better clearing of this point, namely,
that our Church is the most ancient by 606. years next after Christ his
incarnation, our fifth chapter shall plainly demonstrate. And thus much for the
proving Christian Rome in her latter days to be that Babylon which the Angel
in the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation calls, The mother of whoredoms
and abominations of the earth. And which the other Angel in the eighteenth
chapter says, Is fallen, and become the habitation of dinells, the hold of all
foul spirits, and eage of every unclean and hateful bird. And as we (in
this our age) have seen the spiritual fall of Babylon, (the Church of Rome,)
so by the judgment of some of the Learned, our young children shall see the
corporal and final desolation of the city of Rome: After which time (as they
write) she shall be the corporal habitation of foul devils and devilish
spirits, as I have showed she is now of incarnate devils, filthy and hateful
birds.

CHAP. IIII. Tending to resolve all men, that as Saint John in his 17. chapter
of the Revelation, declares the Church of Antichrist, to be a Church
professing Christ, and yet an Idolatrous Church; so the Popish Church must
needs be that idolatrous Church, because there is no more Churches in the
World (professing Christ) but theirs which use Images, and ours which use none:
which are now distinguished (therefore) by the titles of Papists and
Protestants.
1 THE Papists bear the World in hand, they are no Idolaters, and that for
these three causes. First, for that notwithstanding they use the Image of God,
in the worship and service of God; yet they take it not for God. Yea, they say,
they no more take it for God, then Dogs do take a painted Fox for a Fox,
or a painted Hare, for a Hare. Secondly, because (as they say) they worship not
the Image, but God by it. Thirdly, because (as they also say) they received the
same manner of worshipping, See Bilson 580. page.
by tradition from the Apostles (who were no Idolaters,) therefore they are no
Idolaters: to which three illusions we answer.

2 It is evident by this first illusion, that God in his just judgment has
given them the spirit of slumbering eyes, that they should not see: for
notwithstanding their great learning, they suppose that there are no Idolaters,
but such only, as outwardly worship the image for God: therefore touching this
first point, we answer first by the 17. cap. of Judges, Judges 17.5. 1 Kings
15.13. 2 Chro. 25.14.15. 2 Chronicles. 33.1.2.3.10. 2 Kings. 7.33.34.
which condemns Micha for an Idolater. Secondly, by the 15. cap. of the first
book of Kings, which condemned Maachah for an idolater. Thirdly, by the 25.
cap. of the second book of Chronicles, which condemned Amaziah for an
Idolater. Fourthly, by the 33. cap. of the same book, which condemned Manasseh
for an Idolater: and yet not any one of these, worshipped their image for God,
but all of them acknowledged the true God. Lastly, we answer them by the 17.
cap. of the second book of Kings, which condemned certain Samaritans for
Idolaters, of whom the Text says, They feared the Lord, and served their
images also. So that if our counterfeit Catholics did no more worship the
image for God, then the Jews did, but feared God, and served their images as
those Samaritans did, or that it were true, that they no more take their image
for God, then dogs do take painted Foxes and Hares, for Foxes and Hares, yet
we see that even by their affecting images, and using them in the spiritual
worship and service of God, they are plainly proved Idolaters.

3 And now whereas they say, they no more take the image for God, then dogs
do take painted Foxes and Hares, for those living creatures, that will we
further try with them, even by these two effects. For whereas dogs use
neither to run, nor to open their mouths upon those senseless pictures, they
have accustomably used to gad unto them from Town to Town, and from Country
to Country: As to the Lady of Walsingham, to the Lady of the Tower of
Couentrie, to S. Mudwne of Burtone, to the sweet Rood of Chester, and diverse
others, using before them such holy, humble, and reverend gestures, as to God
himself: prostrating themselves at their feet, kneeling unto them on their
bare knees; lifting up both eyes and hands unto them, and putting forth their
voices upon them, with many devout prayers; amongst which this prayer to the
Image of Christ, In a prayer book.
O maker of heaven and earth, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: which of
nothing did make me to thine own similitude and likeness, and did
redeem me with thine own blood, whom I a sinner am not worthy to call upon:
I desire thee, etc. And so forwards for all things needful both for soul and
body. And that indeed it may appear, that this prayer is not made unto Christ
by the Image, but even to the very Image it self; this Title over head (A
prayer to the Image of the body of Christ) does make it most manifest.
Therefore, whether this be no more to take the Image for God, then dogs do
take those Images for the creatures themselves; or whether it be possible for
people to use greater means, or to make a more manifest appearance, that by a
consequence they take it for God: Let the impartial Reader judge. But it is
clear by their common practice, that they are of that sort of counterfeit
Christians, who in Saint Augustines time, would have cloaked their Idolatry
with cunning speeches, whom notwithstanding he thus reproved for Idolaters,
saying, Augustine in his Sermon of the words of Christ in Mat.
Let them not say to me they take the Image for no divine power, they know it
not to be God: I would to God (says he) they so knew it, as we know it; but
what they have, and what they do about it, the Altar bears witness.
Wherefore let them say what they will, and shadow their damnable idolatry, as
closely as they can (under the mystery of iniquity here in this life) their
practice shall sufficiently prove (at the day of judgment) whether they be
Idolaters, or no; and whether they be not of that sort which Epiphanius
speaks of, Epiphan. lib. 3. in oratione de Fide Catholica.
Which abhor the sight of Idols, and yet fall down and worship them.

4 The second reason whereby they would prove themselves no Idolaters, we
heard to be this, namely: They worship not the Image, but God by it; to which
we answer: To worship God by an Image, is flat Idolatry, and a breach of the
second Commandment, which utterly forbids any at all to be used in any part
of Gods worship, in that it forbids any at all to be made for Spiritual
use. Therefore it is clear, that if God had not accounted it Idolatry, to be
worshipped by Images, he would not have said, Exodus 20.4.
Exodus 20. Thou shall make thee no graven Image. Neither would he have said,
Deuteronomy. 27.15.
Deuter. 27. Cursed be the man, that shall make any carned or molten Image,
which is an abomination unto the Lord. Therefore seeing the Image maker is
accursed, and the Image it self abominable; it must needs be an accursed and
abominable Idolatry to worship God by an Image. Also, forasmuch as the Lord
accounts the Image abominable, and the maker accursed; they must needs be
abominable and accursed, that will compel him to be worshipped by it. Yea
doubtless, and they also must needs be abominable and accursed, which allow
accursed and abominable Images, to be holy monuments in the Church, and
profitable, as true Teachers of the ignorant: seeing the Lord by the Prophet
Jeremy chap. Jeremy 10.8.
10. has said thus of those that make any such reckoning of them. They
altogether dote and are foolish, for the stock is a Doctrine of vanity. And
seeing also by the mouth of the Prophet Habakkuk chap. Habak. 2.18.19
2. he has said: What profits the Image; for the maker thereof, has made it
an Image and a teacher of lies? Nay, seeing he has also by the same Prophet
denounced an everlasting woe against all those that desire such Teachers,
saying: Woe to him that says to the wood, Awake, and to the dumb stone, Rise
up, it shall teach thee. As also seeing their own Canonical Scripture, the
15. of Wisdom, says thus of them and their Images. Wised. 15.5.6.
Whose sight stirs up the desire of the ignorant, so that he coueteth the
form that has no life; even of a dead Image: they that love such wicked
things, are worthy to have such things to trust unto; and they that make them,
and they that worship them, and they that desire them, That is, Esaias 57.13.
they all are worthy to have no better help in the great day of need, then
can come from those Images. Therefore the Lord by the Prophet Esaias chapter 44.
Esaias 44.11.
has thus denounced the definitive sentence against the whole fraternity of
them, saying: All that are of the fellowship thereof, shall be confounded. To
wit, all that Esaias 45.16.
make Images for spiritual uses; all that use them as Lay men's books, to
stir up their devotion; all that worship God by them, all that worship them
for God, or that use them in any part of Gods worship, or does but desire them
(living and dying in the same mind) shall at the last day be confounded
together in the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, Revel. 19.2.20. and 21.8.
and 22.15.
as appears in the 19. chapter of the Revelation; and also in the 21. and 22.
chapter, and Psalm 97. Esaias 45.16. verse.

5 This devilish device (Christian Reader) of worshipping one by another, was
both the father and mother of the whole worlds Idolatry; which, as the
fourteenth chapter of Wisdom shows, came first up in this manner, Wisd.
14.14, 15
When a father mourned grievously for his son, that was taken away suddenly,
he made an Image for him that was dead, whom now he worshippeth as a God: and
ordained to his servants ceremonies and sacrifices; thus in process of time,
this wicked custom prevailed, and was kept as a Law; and Idols were
worshipped by the commandment of tyrants. So that hereby we see how Idolatry
first crept in among the Heathen, which afterward was imitated amongst the
Jews, and after them, among the new converted Christians (as we shall prove
hereafter. In the mean time, as we see by this first device, how Images came
(in time) to be worshipped for God, among the Heathen; so let us see also, what
good effect the practice thereof has wrought among the Papists; which we shall
find made manifest, in the tenure of the Doctrine of the Romish Church, in
which it is thus written, In the false Council of the Greeks, Citantur inlibro
Caroli Magni.
He that fears God, adoreth an Image as he would adore the Son of God.
Again, Tho. Aquin. part. 3. quest. 25.
Since Christ is adored with divine honor, it follows that his Image must be
adored with the selfsame divine honor. And again, Jacob Nanclantus in
Epist. ad Romans cap. 1.
We must therefore confess, that the faithful in the Church, do without any
quallification adore the Image with the same kind of worship that is due to
the original. Moreover, In the false Council of the Greeks, Citantur in libro
Caroli Magni.
He that adoreth an Image, and says, this is Christ, offends not; he
offends that adoreth not an Image, he that refuses to adore an Image, is an
heretic: we must adore an Image with the same kind of worship and
reverence, wherewith we adore the holy Trinity. Now if this be only to worship
God by the Image (which as we proved before, is damnable Idolatry) and not the
Image also for God; let the discreet Reader judge. As also, whether Idolatry
can be committed in any higher degree, then to pray thus to the image of the
Cross, A prayer to the Cross.
All hail, O cross, our only hope, in this time of thy passion; in faithful
people grace increase, and grant of sin remission. And thus also to say of
it, Tho. Aquin. part. 3. quest. 25.
The Cross of Christ is to be worshipped with the same worship, that Christ is
to be worshipped with. Yea, and whether this Doctrine of worshipping the very
Image it self, may not truly be said to be the doctrine of the whole Church
of Rome, seeing it was (as the Popes own Decretall testifies) established by
the Pope, with the assent of many hundred Bishops, and seeing also it has
been maintained ever since, by Gregory the third, and by all his successors,
let the Reader judge. And thus much for the second point, to prove whether the
Papists be Idolaters, or not.

6 Thirdly and lastly, they say they are no Idolaters, for they received their
manner of worshipping God by Images, from the tradition of the Apostles:
wherein we may note, first their blasphemy; secondly, their shamelessness,
that bash not to make those blessed Apostles of Christ, the authors of their
most damnable idolatry. But as in this, so in many other principles of their
religion, do they deal with those holy ones; fathering all upon their
Traditions, be the things never so vile. But what will they answer? I suppose
they will say, they are able to prove, that that same kind of Doctrine was
taught, and the same manner of worshipping practiced even by the very
Christians, in the time of the Apostles, and we answer: We believe they are
able, but withal, we believe also, that they are as well able to prove, how
the same was approved of, among the Apostles. For albeit that Clement the
first, and one of the seventy Disciples, testifies, that some of the new
converted Gentiles did so, and that in the very time of the Apostles; yet the
same Disciple testifies also, how himself did approve of it, when writing to
Saint James the Apostle, for redress, thus complained against it, Clement to
James the Just and Bishop of Jerusalem, worshipping God by Images, came from
the Devil.
The devil (said he) by the mouth of others, uses to bring forth these
words; We to the worship of the invisible God, worship the visible Image. Now
in that he says, the devil, this makes the matter manifest, how that
doctrine of worshipping God by Images, was not approved of among the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ: and also that it came from the devils suggestions,
and not from the Apostles traditions. Wherefore this openly conuicteth the
Papists of most horrible impiety, in fathering this devilish device upon the
holy Apostles of Christ. And the rather, because they cannot possibly be
ignorant, that it was brought into the Church by those new conuerts, which were
not then clean removed from their old Heathenish superstition, and condemned
by the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, for devilish and damnable.

7 Furthermore, it is clear, that if this argument could have held good,
namely, that because those new converted Christians, supposed, that as they had
used to worship their false gods by Images, so they should worship the true God
by Images, and that this their practice began in the time of the Apostles, that
therefore it was a tradition of the Apostles: then might we also conclude,
that because certain Israelites (in the time of Moses and Aaron, and others of
the Prophets) used the like, it was a tradition of Moses and Aaron, and other
of the Prophets: but how Moses, Aaron, and the Prophets did approve of their
doings, all those judgments which they have denounced against them, for so
doing, does plainly declare, through out the old Testament, as we shall see
anon, by the places which we will cite: but in the mean while let us see how
the ancient Fathers approved of it, after the Apostles.

8 That ancient Father Eusebius, speaking of the manner of those new converted
Christians worshipping, says, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 18.
It is no marvel though the Heathen which received so great benefits by our
Savior, did these things: for we have seen the Image of Paul, of Peter, and
of Christ, drawn in colors, and it is well to be thought, that men in old
time, being not yet removed from their old superstition of their Fathers,
used after this manner to worship them by an Heathenish custom. Also that most
notable Divine Athanasius, in reproving such superstitious Christians, as would
be taught to know God by images, said thus unto them, Athanas. against the
Gentiles.
If a living man cannot teach thee to know God, how shall a carved stock or a
stone do it that is dead? Also that ancient Father Epiphanius, to reclaim
some of that Sect in his time, thus dehorted them from their old Heathenish
superstition, saying, Epiphanius lib. 3. tom. 2. against Coll. 79. heresy.
My dear Brethren, be ye mindful that ye bring no images into the Churches,
and that ye erect none at the burials of the dead Saints, but evermore carry
God in your hearts: Nay (said he) suffer not Images to be, no not in your
Houses: for it is not lawful to lead a Christian man by his eyes, but rather
by the study and exercise of his mind. Also Charles the Great, most sharply
reprehended such, saying, Charles lib. 4. cap. 2. of Images.
An unhappy memory is that, which to remember Christ, who never ought to
depart out of the heart of the just man, stands in need of a sightfull
conceit, nor otherwise can have the presence of Christ within him, unless he
have his Image painted on the wall, or expressed in some other matter. And a
little after; Most madness is that (says he) that our minds, by the means
of material Images, must be put in remembrance, lest we forget him. Likewise,
that ancient Father Lactantius, thus reproves their folly, and condemns
their madness, saying, Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 2.
They are afraid lest their Religion be void, and to no purpose, if they see
nothing that they may worship, and therefore they make them counterfeits. And a
little after he says, What madness is this, either to frame those things which
they may after fear, or fear those things which they have framed. And then
deriding them with the words of their common answer, he says, No forsooth
(say they) we fear not that, but them after whose Image they be made, and to
whose names they beconsecrated. Again, whereas they doubted their religion to
be void without Images, he thus resolves their doubt, Lactant. lib. 2. cap. 19.
Out of all doubt, where there is an Image, there is no religion. If then where
an Image is, there true religion is not; and that in the Popes jurisdiction,
every Church is full of Images; it is clear, that in all Churches within the
Popes jurisdiction, true Religion is not, and consequently, no religion. And
this is it whereof their Saint Hildegard thus foreshewed would come to pass,
saying, S. Hilde guard a Nun lib. 3. Vision 11. Sciuias.
In the Apostolical Order, to wit, (says she) of the Roman Sea, no religion
shall be found. To be brief, Saint Augustine (by rendering this reason, why
that sort of counterfeit Christians were so addicted to Images, saying,
Augustine in his book against Admantus the 13. cha.
They would seem to favor Images, to make the Heathen to think the better of
their most miserable and lewd Sect) plainly proves the Papists to be, not
true Catholics, but most miserable and lewd Sectaries, who we see had rather
join themselves with the barbarous Heathen, in their damnable idolatry and
superstition, then with true Christians, in the sincerity and purity of the
Gospel of salvation. And thus much touching the third and last illusion.

9 But now, forasmuch as they have induced the ignorant, to believe, that in
this their manner of worship, they please God well; it is our parts and duties,
to make known unto them, how it pleased God in them of old time, that so
thereby they may the better judge, how themselves therein please God. Exo.
32.27.28.
The thirty two chapter of Exodus plainly declares, that the Israelites (who
acknowledged the true God; for worshipping an Image, were slain in one day,
three thousand. The tenth chapter of Hosea, Hosea 10.1. to the 8.
declares as plainly, that because the peoples hearts, were divided in
affection between God and Images; the Lord caused the Prophet to denounce
such, and so great desolation to come upon them, as that they should wish the
hills and mountains to fall upon them. Also the first chapter of Zephaniah
declares, Zephan. 1. cha. 1. to the 5.
that because Judah and Jerusalem, had imparted the worship of God, to the Host
of heaven, and his glory to the idol gods; in swearing by the Lord, and by
Malcham (as the Papists do, By God and By the Roode, By God and By the Mass)
the Lord threatened to destroy all things upon the earth, all things in the Sea,
the fowls of Heaven, and the inhabitants of the Land: So then by this the most
ignorant may evidently perceive, how in this their manner of idol worship they
please God.

10 And now for that the Romanists are found Idolaters in the highest degree,
in that so directly contrary to the revealed will of God, and knowledge of his
express Law (which the Heathen had not) make a Stock and a Stone God (in
giving unto it the same divine worship and honor, that is due to God himself,
who has said by the mouth of the Prophet Esaias chap. Esaias 42.8.
42. I am the Lord, and my glory will I not give to any other, neither my
praise to graven Images, and also in praying unto it for all things needful
both for soul and body: and that also this idollworship, was established by
Pope Gregory the third, then head of their Church, and maintained ever since,
by his successors Bishops of Rome) it is clear that the Church of Rome, is
that idolatrous Church professing Christ; which in the 17. Revel. 17.4.5.
chapter of the Revelation, is said to be the Whore of Babylon, offering to the
world in a golden Cup, to wit, in the name of Christ) the abomination and
filthiness of her fornication. Revel. 19.2.
And in the nineteenth chapter to be condemned for corrupting the earth with
her fornication. But lest for all this, they should with impudent and brazen
faces, still face it out, and deny it; Let them hear how it is confirmed by
their own Writers. Ioacham Abbas, speaking of the corrupting of doctrine by
the Priests of Rome, says, Joacham upon the 37. chapter of Jeremy.
They neglect Incense and Myrrh, but they seek after Gold, that they may
with Babylon the great Lady of the world, fill unto men wine in a golden Cup,
to infect their followers with their abomination. And upon the seventeenth
chapter of the Revelation he speaks yet more plainly and says, Upon the 17.
chapter of the Revelation.
The very Text it self does teach, how that the woman beguiled with gold, and
which commits spiritual fornication with the Princes of the earth, is the
very Church of Rome, which Babylonlike, plays spiritually the whore with
stocks and stones. Again, he says of the whole Clergy of Rome, Upon the
21. chapter of Jeremy.
They are Idolatrous Pastors and Prelates. Again he says, Upon the 1. and 2.
chap. of Jeremy.
As Solomon in his old age fell into Idolatry, so has the Church of Rome
done. And therefore it is which Robertus the Dominican Friar says thus of the
Romish Church, in the person of Christ, Robertus in his 12. sermon.
Like an adultresse thou have forsaken me, and have joined thy self unto
strangers. And of which their Paracelsus concludes thus, Paracelsus in his 4.
figured Prediction.
The whore has divided her love.

11 So that the Romanists and Papists, being thus so plainly proved Idolaters
(in worshipping God after the manner of the Heathen, which he commanded his
people the Jews, they should not do, if they would look to continue in his
favor, and to avoid his judgments, Deuter. 12.) this makes that good, which
we affirmed in the beginning of our first Chapter, namely, that it is not
possible, that they and we should be combined and conjoined together in
Religion, to make one and the same true Church of Christ. For as the Apostle
Saint Paul says, 2. Corint. 6. 2. Cor. 6.16.
There can be no agreement between the Temple of God, and the Temple of
Idols. Therefore it behooves us to look warily unto our selves, that we be
not deluded by their crafty and subtle arguments, to be seduced to their
idolatrous religion. And thus much for the satisfying the Reader in this point
also.

CHAP. V. Tending to resolve all men, that for the first 606. years next after
Christ, the Papists had no Church, neither could have; because till then it had
no universal Pope to make it a Popish Church: Neither was that first Church of
Rome (which Saint Peter planted) the Mother, but one of the Daughters of the
Mother Church, in which Christ himself first planted that Faith and Religion,
(which afterward by means of his Apostles should be made Catholic) 14.
years before Peter came to Rome. So that hereby we shall see the Antiquity of
their Church overthrown, and Jerusalem to be the most ancient, and true figure
of the universal Mother Church, to wit, heavenly Jerusalem, and not Rome.
1 THeir Cardinal Cusanus says; Cusanus ad Behemos. Epist. 2.
The members united to the Chair, and joined to the Pope, make the Church. By
which he grants, that without an universal Pope, there could be no Popish
Church. Now that for the first 605. years, next after Christ, there was no
universal Pope approved of, nor publicly allowed to be the head of the
members of the body of Christ, these testimonies of Pelagius the second, and
Gregory the first, will make it most manifest. Pelagius in his days,
perceiving that Mauricius the Emperor, went about to make and establish an
universal Pope, very bitterly inueighed against it, and not only so, but thus
Decreed against it. Pelagi. Distin. 99. an. 580.
No Bishop, no, not the Bishop of Rome himself ought to be called universal
Bishop. Gregory (the successor of Pelagius) likewise finding the Emperor to
persist in his enterprise, wrote diverse Epistles unto him, to let him
understand, that he went about an unlawful thing, amongst which, in one
Epistle, he sought to dissuade him by this reason; because (said he) Greg. lib.
4. Epist. 32.
Peter is not called universal Apostle: inferring, that seeing Peter was not,
none of the other Apostles were; and then how could it be lawful for any
Bishop to take that title upon him? Again, when as he perceived the Emperors
Bishop (which was then John of Constantinople) willing to take that title and
supreme authority upon him, he thus inueighed against his arrogance, and
said; Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
What will thou answer to Christ the head of the universal Church, at the last
judgment, that thus go about by the name of universal Bishop, to make all
his members subject to thee? Whom do thou imitate, in this so perverse a
name, but Lucifer, that would have been singular, and alone over all his
fellow Angels? Again, he says, Greg. lib. 6. Epist. 30.
I speak it boldly, whosoever calls himself universal Bishop, or desires
so to be called, is in the pride of his heart, the forerunner of Antichrist,
because he prefers himself before all others, and would be alone without
any equal. Now by the best Authors, we find that this Gregory, ended his
days about the year of Christ, 605. therefore we see this point stands
clear, that during so many hundred years (and odd, after Christ) there was
not an universal Pope approved of, nor allowed by the Bishops of Rome
themselves, to be head of the members of Christ, and therefore as yet there
could be no Popish Church.

2 But now to cast a must before the eyes of the ignorant, they come in with
this blind distinction, and say. Notwithstanding, this be spoken (both by
Pelagius and Gregory) against the having an universal Pope, to be head of the
universal Church; yet the question is, what manner of Popes, or universal
Bishops they meant; whether such as the Bishops of Rome (who allowed other
Bishops under them) or such as the Bishop of Constantinople, The B. of
Constantinople no more sought to exclude all other Bishops, then the Bishop of
Rome ever did.
who would have had none other in all Christendom but himself. I answer, this
is but a deluding distinction; for that the Bishop of Constantinople no more
sought to exclude all other Bishops, then the Bishop of Rome ever did: for had
he of Constantinople, once attempted that, that had been nuttes for Gregory:
for then might he in some one Epistle or other, have charged him therewith, but
we find not any such matter: neither in any of these Epistles does he charge
him with any such thing; only he condemns him of arrogance, for preferring
himself before all other Bishops, and for seeking to bring them into such
subjection under him, as whereby he might have reigned over them, as Lord and
King. And even herein only was it, that he charged him to imitate Lucifer.
Therefore this distinction of titles, is but a mere misty matter. Yea, their
own records, and some of their own English Doctors, plainly confess, that
the same title and dignity, which the Bishop of Constantinople sought to
obtain, was only one and the same, which Boniface Bishop of Rome attained
unto by the means of Phocas the Emperor, two years after Gregory's death,
and which they have holden ever since. For in their Book called Chronicon
Chroni. Euscbij. An. 607.
they are proved both one. Also their Writer Sabilicus Sabilicus Ennead. 8.
lib. 6.
affirms them to be one and the same. Likewise their Writer Vrspergensis
Vrspergensis, in Phoca.
acknowledges the same: And that which is more, the chief of their adherents
here in England, in their answer returned to me, Page 4. in these plain and
express words confess the same. The Emperor Phocas, defended the righteous
and ancient title of the Popes supremacy and jurisdiction over the universal
Church of Christ, and suppressed the arrogance of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who challenged to be universal Bishop. And thus we see how
themselves have confounded their subtle distinction of titles.

3 But yet for all this, they will prove that the Bishop of Constantinople,
would have had excluded all other Bishops, because Gregory wrote thus to some
of the chief of them, Gregory lib. 7. Epist. 69.
If one be universal Bishop, it remains that you be no Bishops: Howbeit, it
is very apparent, that Gregory meant by these words, that if one should be
admitted to be universal head over all Bishops, their powers then consisting
only in that one, they by a consequent should be as none. For to the very same
effect are these his own words, Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 36.
If one Patriarch be called universal, he derogateth from the other
Patriarchs. And a little after; If this name may go current, honor is taken
away from all the Patriarchs: But far may it be from any Christian mind that
any man should desire to take that unto himself, whereby the honor of his
brethren, should seem in the least wise to be diminished. By which it is most
manifest, that he did not mean, that John of Constantinople, would have
excluded all Bishops, neither his fellow Patriarchs; but that by diminishing
their titles and honors, he would make them as no Bishops: even as all
Bishops under the Popes are made, by tollerating an universal head over them.
For as their Cardinal Sabarella says, Sabarella Citanture ad Illyrico De
Sectis.
The Pope has invaded, and entered upon the right of all the inferior
Churches, so that all the inferior Bishops may go for naught: And unless God
help the state of the Church, the universal Church is in danger.

4 But now notwithstanding, they come in yet with another objection, and say
that Gregory has also these words. Gregory in their answer to me. Page 1.
Whosoever he be that desires to be Priest alone, or the only Priest. By
which they would infer, that the Bishop of Constantinople, would have been
Bishop alone, without any others: nevertheless, it is clear by these his
words that follow, (He exalts himself above other Priests) he meant, that he
whosoever exalted himself for to be universal Bishop, or supreme head over
all other Bishops, would be Priest alone, because he would not admit any
equal with him. And for this cause (in the words going before) he compared
John of Constantinople to Lucifer, who he does not say would have had no Angels
but himself (for that had been more then he could have proved). And
therefore we see it is only this kind of Priesthood which Gregory meant, that
would admit no manner of equality, which we shall see anon, he said would be
the downfall of the ancient order of Priesthood.

5 But now in the mean time, we may not let pass, to answer another
Objection, which happily may arise out of our English Catholics words, which
before we cited. For in that they say, The Title which the Bishop of
Constantinople took upon him, was the Bishop of Romes right and ancient
Title: they would bear the world in hand, that Gregory condemned it for
unlawful in the Bishop of Constantinople only, but allowed it in the Bishop
of Rome, for their right and lawful Title: for to this effect indeed did they
allege these very words: Howbeit we shall see plainly by Gregory's
testimonies following, that he condemned the Title to be as unlawful in the
Bishop of Rome, as in the Bishop of Constantinople. For he writing to the
Emperor against his Bishop, for his arrogant pride, in taking upon him the
Title of Universal Bishop, said, Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 32.
O my gracious Lord, do I herein quarrel for mine own right? Lib. 6. and
30. Epist.
I speak it boldly, whosoever calls himself Universal Bishop, or desires
so to be called, is in the pride of his heart, the forerunner of Antichrist:
and more then so, he says, Gregor. libr. 4. Epist. 38.
He is Antichrist that shall claim to be called Universal Bishop, and shall
have a guard of Priests to attend upon him. Yea, it is clear, that he knew
both the Title and Office to be odious, even in the Bishops of Rome, else would
he not have sought to have purged all before his time from it, as from a Title
of shame, setting down the manner of his purgation thus: Gregor. libr. 4.
Epist. 32. and 36.
None of my predecessors, Bishops of Rome, ever consented to use that ungodly
name: no Bishop of Rome ever took upon him that name of singularity: we the
Bishops of Rome, would never receive this honor, being offered unto us. Also,
in that Eulogius his fellow Patriarch of Alexandria, seeing the Bishop of
Constantinople so willing to have taken the Title upon him, would rather that
Gregory (then Bishop of Rome) should have had it, and therefore to urge him to
have taken it upon him (in the superscriptions of certain Letters which he
wrote unto him) offered him the Title; but Gregory to declare his detestation
thereof, not only besought him to offer it him no more, but because he saw he
would not give over urging him, he thus flowted him for his folly: Gregor. lib.
7. Epist. 30.
Ecce (says he) behold even the Title of your Letter, ye have written the
proud poesy, meaning me the Universal Pope, notwithstanding I have forbidden
it, I beseech your Holiness do so no more: for whatsoever is given to any
above reason, is taken from your selves. Also, when as he saw that such an
Officer was like to be established in the Church, as should be made Prince of
all Christian Priests, he counted that his rising to that dignity, would be
the deadly downfall of the old and ancient order of Priesthood: and therefore
said, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 52. and 55
Seeing the order of Priesthood is fallen within, it cannot now stand long
without. By which he plainly declares, that it was contrary to the ancient
order of Priesthood, that one should be universal head of all Priests. Again,
to declare how dangerous a thing it would be, if one should be made supreme
head of the whole universal Church, he said further thus: Gregor. libr. 4.
Epist. 32. Admaueri.
If we have but one head, the fall of that head is the fall of the Whole
Church: If any man presume to take upon him the name of Universal Bishop, the
whole Church falls down from her estate, when he falls which is called
Universal; but far may that name of blasphemy be from all Christian minds.

6 So that hereby (Christian reader) we see the case to stand clear, that
notwithstanding Gregory, the great Bishop of Rome, allowed the order of Bishops
in the universal Church, yet did he acknowledge it utterly unlawful for
himself, or any other Christian Bishop to take upon him the title of
universal Bishop, and to be supreme head of the universal Church: condemning
it for ungodly, blasphemous, and Antichristian: and therefore dehorteth all
true Christians to be far from that mind. And here we may further note,
that forasmuch as himself would none of it, he condemns that brag for a very
fond fable, that the title and dignity of universal Bishop, descended to the
Bishops of Rome, by succession from S. Peter the Apostle. Gregory condemns
that for a fable, that the title of universal Bishop, descended to the Bishop
of Rome from S. Peter.
Also seeing he confesses (as we heard before) that Peter himself was not
called universal Apostle, he does acknowledge, it could not come from him. And
thus much for the proving that the Papists had no Church for the first 605.
years after Christ: For as no husband, no wife, so no universal Pope, no
universal spouse of the Popes. And therefore the most ancient and Apostolic
Church (next after Christ) was the same true Catholic Church, yea, the very
self and same whereof we are now; which as now, so then, it had no other
universal head but Christ Jesus, only and alone: even as Gregory also makes
it most manifest, in that when as he reproved John of Constantinople, for
seeking to be head of the universal Church, asked him (as we heard right now)
how he could answer that point at the dreadful day of judgment, to Christ
the head of the universal Church, as did S. Augustine before his days, as
appears in his book of the unity of the Church. cap. 2. cap. 3. cap. 16.

7 Now it remains that we speak of the other year, to make out our number
of 606. Decretall.
Know ye, that next after Gregory, succeeded Sabinianus, who continued but one
year, and then next after him, entered Antichrist, even Boniface the third, who
with an impudent face, fell to contend openly with the Bishop of Constantinople
for his Antichristian title and dignity; and by the means of Phocas (the
murderer and Emperor) obtained it, and got to be established to him and his
successors, to be called supreme head of Christ's universal Church, and
father of all Christian Bishops, and Rome the mother of all christian Churches.
And for plain proof hereof, the Popes own Decretall says thus of this
Boniface. Decretall.
This man by the means of Phocas the Emperor, obtained against the Patriarch
of Constantinople, that the Sea of Peter should be the head of the Church. As
also Platina in these words, Platina of Bonifacius.
Pope Boniface the third, obtained of the Emperor Phocas, that Rome should be
called the head of all Churches, but with great contention and much ado. And
here was now the first singular universal Pope established, and marriage
making, between Antichrist and the Church, which was no doubt in Gods justice
brought to pass, for that she was now become most corrupt in doctrine, and
lewd in life: as not only Gregory witnesses, but also other histories at
large do declare. But of the first beginning of their Church, we shall have
occasion to speak more plainly in the next Chapter, in the mean time, we
will satisfy the reader, what manner of supreme government themselves affirm
the Christian Church had, from the time of the Apostles to the rising of
Boniface, which will also prove, that to his time, there was no singular
universal Pope, allowed and established to be supreme head of the universal
Church.

8 Their great Doctor Master Harding says, Harding Apology, chap. 4. division
2.
In great Cities where the highest Courts for justice were kept, and where the
chief Pagan Priests of the Latins, named Primi Flamines, were resident before
the coming of Christ, there after Christ's coming, were Patriarchs or Primates
placed: by whom the weighty matters of Bishops should be decided. Which if he
will have us to believe, then must we also believe, that the first supreme
government that was ordained by the Apostles, over Bishops, and their
universal causes, was by certain chief or head Bishops, and not by one; and
then where was this singular supreme government of the Pope, over all Bishops
to be found? But now to salve this fore comes in their Johannes Boemos, with
these words, and says, Boemos in his book of the beginning of Arts, Chap. 12.
of the first rising of Christians.
The holy Apostles did all consent, that Peter and all that followed him in the
seat at Rome, should for ever be called Papa; universal Father of Fathers. A
most horrible and blasphemous title, forbidden by our Savior Christ, to be
given to any mortal man, Matthew. 23.9. Call no man your father upon earth, for
there is but one, even your Father which is in heaven. Therefore seeing this
title is proper to God alone, The title of universal Father, forbidden by
Christ.
and forbidden by our Savior to be given to any other, how can we believe,
that the Apostles of Christ durst consent to give it to Peter: or, that Peter
durst ever take it upon him: and yet notwithstanding, he adds further and
says: And that he should at Rome be President over the universal Church, as
the Emperor there was ruler over the World. And to match the Consuls (which
were twain) they appointed four head fathers, in Greek, named Patriarchs:
one at Constantinople, another at Antioch, a third at Alexandria, and the
fourth at Jerusalem. And hereby he would prove the Bishop of Rome; to be
supreme head over all: but if Gregory the Great, had not condemned this for a
fond fable, by confessing that Peter himself was not called universal
Apostle, and that no Bishop of Rome before his time, ever had that title or
dignity, yet he himself has. For whereas he affirms, the Patriarchs (at
the first ordination thereof) to be four in number (which indeed they were,
before there was a sift at Constantinople) and would have Constantinople to be
one of the four, by the Apostles own ordination; it is granted by our
English Catholics In their answer to me, about Page 4.
that till after the Council of Nice, there was not so much as the name of
Constantinople once heard of, which was above three hundred years after
Christ, and about two hundred years after the decease of all the Apostles:
therefore how Constantinople could be one of the first four, by the Apostles
own ordination and deed, let the Reader judge. As for the time before, when
she was poor and ruinous Byzantium, she could be none: for as we heard by
their Doctor Harding right now, that the Patriarchall Cities, were the great
and chief Cities. But in this his foy sting in Constantinople for one of the
first four Patriarchs, we see it evident, he did it only to exalt the Bishop
of Rome a degree above the Patriarchs, which as we heard in the 3. Section,
Gregory in my 3. Section.
Gregory condemned, in that he said: If one Patriarch be called Universal,
he derogateth from the other P^^triarkes. Also, If this name may go current,
honor is taken away from all the Patriarchs, of whom he confesses himself to
be an equal and a fellow brother. Again, seeing he also confesses that to
his time, no Bishop of Rome was above a Patriarch, he proves Boemous his
testimony false. Also, M. Hanmar in his Ecclesiast. History of the first 600.
years after Christ, Fol. 564. to 600.
M. Meredith Hanmar Doctor of Divinity, albeit he be of their mind, that the
Patriarchs had their beginning from the time of the Apostles, and would prove
it by Eusebius, Epiphanius, Socrates, Euagrius, and others, in this successiue
manner, setting down the most ancients first and not last, as Boemous does,
Jerusalem. The four Patriarkdomes.
Antioch. Rome. Alexandria James the just. Peter. Peter. Mark. Simion
Cleophas. Euodius. Linus. Anianus. Iustus a Jew. Ignatius. Clement. Abilius.
Tobias. Heroes. Cletus. Cerdo. Benjamin. Corneli. Anacletus. Primus. John.
Marcus. Auerastes. Iustus. Matthias. Cassianus. Alexander. Eumenius. Philip.
Theophilus. Sixtus. Maricus. Senecus. Maximinus. Thelesphoras Celadian. Iustus.
Seraphion. Higenius. Agrippas. Leui. Asclepiades. Pius. Iulianus. Ephrem.
Philetus. Anicetus. Demetrus. Joseph. Zebinus. Soter. Heraclas. Judas. Babilas.
Elutherius. Alexander. Marcus. Fabius. Victor. Dionisius. Cassianus.
Demetrianus Zeuerinus. Maximinus. Publius. Paulus. Calistus. Theonas. Iulianus.
Domnus. Vrbanus. Peter. Caius. Timeus. Pontianus. Achillas. Iulianus.
Cyrillius. Anterus. Alexander. Capito. Dorotheus. Fabianus. Athanasius.
Maximus. Tyrranus. Lucius. Gregory. Antonius. Vitalis. Steven. Peter. Valens.
Phiologonus. Xistus. Lucius. Dolichi^ Eustatisius. Dionisius. Timothy.
Narcissus. -- Felix. Theophilus. Dio^. Eight years it was void. Eutichianus.
Cyrilius. Germamon. Caius. Dioscorus. Gor. -- Marcillinus. Protorius. Narcissus
and Eulalius. Marcilius. Timothy. Alexander. Euphronius. Eusebius. Basilinus.
Masabanes. Placitus. Miltiades. Peter. Himineas. Steven. Siluester. Athanasius.
Zambadas. Leontius. Marcus. Hermon. Eudoxius. Julius. Matarius. Anianus.
Liberius. Maximus. Meletus. Damasus. Cyri^^ius. Euzoius. Siricus. Herenius.
Dorotheus. Anastatius. Herenius. Paulinus. Innocentius. Heraclius. Euagrius.
Zozimus. Hilarious. Dorothus. Bonifacius. Cyrillius. Meletus. Calestinus. John.
Flauianas. Xistus. Nepos. Prophirus. Leo. Prayllius. Alexander. Hilarious.
Iuuenalis. Theodotius. Simplicius. Polychronius. John. Felix. Theodosius.
Domnus. Boniface. Anastasius. Maximus. John. Martrius. Martyrus. Agapetus.
Salustius. Iulianus. Siluerius. Helias. Basilius. Vigilius. Petrus. Peter.
Pelagius. Marcari. Steven. John. Eustochius. Martirus. Benedict. John.
Calandio. Pelagius. Petrus. Gregory the Cnapheus. Great. Palladius. Flauianus.
Seuerus. Paulus. Euphremius. Domnus. Maximus.

Yet he proves Rome to be but one of the four Patriarkdomes, and but the
third in antiquity, and consequently the Bishop of Rome but one of four
equals, and therefore no singular supreme universal head over all. Wherefore
how vainly do they stand upon Ireneus his numbering the Bishops of Rome to
his time, and Saint Augustine to his time, to prove the succession of Popes
from Peter's time, seeing neither of them gave them the name of Popes, but
Bishops and Priests. Number the Priests from Peter's seat (says S. Augustine)
August. in Psalm. contra partem Donati.
and see who succeeded one another in that row of Fathers. And elsewhere he
gave them the name of Bishops, but never the name Popes; therefore to his time,
which was about four hundred years after Christ, those that Ireneus, and he,
two hundred years after numbered, were not Popes, as the Popes of Rome are
now, but such Bishops as we have now. Also with small credit can they stand
upon the succession of universal Popes, seeing their Prophetess Saint Bridgit
says of Boniface the first universal Pope, Bridgit in her 27. chap. of her
third Book.
He did mount up to fit in the Chair of pride: Which shows the Popes
Chair, not to be the Chair of Peter. Also their Pa^acelsus (in a Prophecy
of his) said thus to the Pope, Paracelsus in his 12. figured Prediction.
Behold thou have lifted up thy self on high, but it is not thy place; neither
shall thou abide above: for thou art a yoke and a burden too heavy to be
borne, hence it is holy Father (S. P.) that thou fallest: Thou have placed thy
self above God, and he shall return unto thee the reward thou have sought.
Again, in vain do the Popes themselves boast to be of that sort of Bishops
which succeeded the Apostle Saint Peter, seeing their Saint Elizabeth says
thus unto them in the person of Christ, Elizabeth against the Church of Rome,
lib. 3. cap. 14.
They swallow up the carnal and temporal things of my people, and do not
minister unto them spiritual things, and even they that do walk under my
name, do not fear to persecute me in my members. Behold and consider (says
to her the Angel of her vision) how the sovereign high Priest, the Lord Jesus,
in the days of his obedience walked in the midst of his Disciples, not in
the height and haughtiness of a Lord, but in the humility of a servant, etc.
Behold his blessed seed, the ministers of your spiritual vocation, the holy
Apostles, and their successors, of whose society ye do glory, etc.
Consider, if their ways were like yours, do not believe that they were, for
their ways were fair and straight, but yours are disordered, filthy, and
foul. They did not walk in the haughtiness of their hearts, nor in the
tumultuousnesse of a proud train, nor in covetousness of worldly wealth, nor
in the costlinesse of clothing, etc. Neither was there running after Hawks and
Hounds, but in all sincerity they traced the footsteps of the great Pastor,
etc. Behold the head of the Church cries, but his members are dead; for the
Apostolical Sea is beset with pride and avarice, and is filled with iniquities
and wickedness. They scandalize my sheep, and make my people to err. Again,
their Saint Bridgit in the person of Christ, expostulating the matter with Pope
Gregory the eleventh, says thus unto him, Bridgit lib. c. ^ap. 142.
Why do thou hate me so much? and wherefore is thy boldness and presumption
so great against me? for thy worldly Court marreth and spoyleth mine that is
heavenly, and thou presumptiously robbest me of my Sheep. Moreover, thou
pluckest from me violently innumerable souls, and sends to Hell fire almost
all that come to thy Court, because thou do not give diligent heed to those
things that belong to my Court. Therefore how can we believe that these Popes
are of the same rank of Bishops which succeeded the Apostle Saint Peter, or
what credit does the Church of Rome gain by the succession of her Popes?

9 Again, They are never able to prove that Peter was ever called by the Popes
titles; or that Peter ever called the Church his Spouse.
how can we believe that the Popes are the successors of Saint Peter, seeing
they are never able to prove, that Peter, or any of those Bishops which next
succeeded him, was ever called by any of the Popes titles. For in what book or
Chapter of the Scriptures do they find that Peter was ever called, Our Lord
God the Pope. An undoubted and true God on earth. Not a pure man, but a true
God: as we proved in our first Chapter, and second Section, the Pope is called?
Or, where find they that any one of all the Apostles, ever called Peter, Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings: Or Supreme head of the universal Church: or that
Peter ever called the Church his Spouse, as the Pope does? If they cannot show
so much as any one place to prove it, what reason have we to believe it.
Therefore, forasmuch as we find universal Popes, not to be the successors of
S. Peter, but of Boniface the first universal Pope, made and established in
the year of Christ 607. And that they all hold, that without an universal
Pope to be head, there can be no Church, it is without all contradiction, that
for the first six hundred and six years next after Christ, the Papists had
no Church. For as no head, no body, no husband, no wife; so, no universal
Popes, no universal spouse of the Popes. By which we see that plainly
condemned for a mere illusion of Antichrist, which is so common among them,
namely, that the Popish Church was the most ancient mother of all Christian
Churches. And as we see it not to be true, so shall we further see also that
neither was that first Church which Saint Peter planted in Rome, the most
ancient, and mother Church. For as both Jerome, Jerome. catalog. eccles. Scrip.
and Eusebius testifies, Eusebius. eccles. his lib. 2. cap. 14.16.
Peter came not to Rome, till the second year of Cladius the Emperor, which
was in the year of Christ, 44. and fourteen years after he was called to
be an Apostle. During which time, he and the other Apostles, had planted many
Churches in the world, and yet was none of them the mother Church: For that
only must needs be the mother, which was first, in which Christ himself
first planted and taught that Faith and Religion, which afterward (by the
means of his Apostles) should be made Catholic; which as S. Matthew. Matthew.
26. Luke 21. Matthew. 10.5.6.
chap. 26.55. and Saint Luke, chap. 21.37.38. shows, was Jerusalem, which
Faith and Religion (as appears in Matthew 10.) Christ commanded not to
reveal to the Gentiles, till they had spread it throughout the Regions of
Jerusalem: therefore Jerusalem, and not Rome, was the first and most ancient
Church.

10. Again, when as afterward, the Gospel was preached to the Gentiles, it
was not first taught to the Romans, no not by S. Peter himself.) For as
themselves confess, Peter after he had preached well near seven years about
the coasts of Jerusalem, went to Antioch, and taught there other 7. years,
before he came to Rome; therefore that very first Church of Rome, could not
be the most ancient Mother of the true Catholic Faith and Religion. If not
the first, which was planted by Peter, then not the second, that was planted by
Boniface, above five hundred years after.

11 And that it may yet more manifestly appear, that she was not the Mother,
but one of the chief Daughters, not the head, but a chief member of the
Mother Church, these words of Tertullian (which lived in the next age after the
Apostles) will make it plain: Tertul. de praescription. contra. Haereticos.
Run over (said he) and behold the Apostolic Churches, whereas the Apostles
Chaires are yet still continued, and whereas the Authentical writings of the
Apostles are pronounced, sounding out the voices, and representing the faces of
each one of them. The next Country to you is Achaia: There have you the Church
of Corinth. If ye be not far from Macedonia, there have you the Church of
Philippi, and the Church of Thessalonica: If ye may go over into Asia, there
have ye the Church of Ephesus. If ye border near to Italy, there have ye the
Church of Rome. And further, to prove Rome but one of the chief members of the
whole Church, he says thus; Tertul. De praescription. contra Haereticos.
These so many and so great Churches, are all that same one first Church,
planted by the Apostles, from whence issued all the rest. And so are they all
first Churches, and all Apostolic, in that they follow all one unity. By
which who sees not, but that even that same Church of Rome, which was first,
was but one of the Daughters of Jerusalem, from which the Church Triumphant had
her name derived, and not from Rome; and yet indeed was she but the figure of
the universal Mother Church: For as Saint Paul said, Galathians 4.26.
Jerusalem which is above, Galat. 4.26.
is the Mother of us all; therefore it is flat blasphemy, to say that Rome is
the universal Mother of all Christian Churches: and the rather, for that as
her state stands now, the Angel says, Reuelat. 17. She is the mother of
whoredoms, and abominations of the earth.

12 Again, The Church triumphant, and the church millitant being but one, can
have therefore but one head.
in that the Apostle says, Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of us all;
it shows the Church Triumphant, and the Church millitant, to make both but
one Church: And therefore whereas the Papists would make these two parts of the
Church, two several Churches, that so they might set upon the millitant part
another head besides Christ; what else do they thereby, but make that part an
adultresse, and consequently the Whore of Babylon. For by Saint Paul's doctrine,
Romans 7.3.
Romans 7. she that has two Husbands at one time, is an Whore. And
doubtless, howsoever she is rightly called Babylon, for resembling old
Babylon, in Tyrany, Idolatry, and other abominations; yet is she called an
Whore, chiefly for coupling her self to another Husband besides Christ.

13 In the time of the Apostles, Christ only is the Head.
it is clear by Saint Paul, in diverse of his Epistles, that both the parts of
the Church, as well that beneath, as that above, and both together, Christ
only is the head.
had none other head but Christ. For first Ephesians 1. cap. verses 20.21.22.
he speaking of Christ, says. Ephesians. 1.20.21.22.
God set him at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, and might and domination, and every name that is
named, not in this World only, but also in that that is to come. And has made
all things subject under his feet, and has given him over all things to be
the head of the Church, which is his body. And Colossians 1.18.19. He is the
head of the body of the Church: Colos. 1.18.19.
he is the beginning and the first begotten of the dead, that in all things he
might have the preeminence: For it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell. Also to show that the Church has only but this one head, he
writing to the Church of Corinth, 2 Epistle 11.2. said thus unto her: 2 Cor.
11.2.
I have prepared you for one Husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to
Christ. Which plainly declares, that as the Church under the Law, had none
other Husband, but God himself; Under the Law the Church had no husband but
God.
(For as the Prophet Esaias said to the Church of the Jews, cap. 45.5. He that
made thee, is thine Husband, whose name is the Lord of Hosts) so likewise
under the Gospel, that the Church has none other Husband but only the Son
of God.

14 And now also that it may as plainly appear, that for 605. years next
after Christ, this doctrine of one headship, was only approved of even by the
Bishop of Rome himself, to wit, Gregory the Great; these his own words,
written against the Bishop of Constantinople, which sought to be universal
head with Christ, will make it clear. Gregory. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
If (said he) Saint Paul would not have the members of the Lords body to be
subject to any heads but to Christ, no, not to the Apostles themselves; what
will thou answer to Christ the head of the universal Church in the last day of
judgment, which goes about to have all his members subject to thee by the
title of universal? Whom do thou imitate in so perverse a name, but
Lucifer? So that here we see the case made clear, that the Romish Church with
two heads, (Christ and the Pope) as yet had not any being at all, neither the
name of Pope approved of, as we showed in the fifth Section, in that when as
Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, offered to Gregory, (in the superscription of
his Letters) the title of universal Pope, Gregory not only flowted him for
his folly, but also besought his holiness to offer it him no more, for that as
he said it was a title beyond all reason to be given to any.

15 The first that I find that went about to arrogate unto himself the Title
of Pope, The first that sou^ht to bring in the name Pope.
was Leo, Bishop of Rome, as may appear, in that his Legates in the Council
of Chalceden, contended both for the title and authority, howbeit they were
withstood by the whole Council, and decreed against, as I shall prove in the
19. Section of the 8. Chapter.

16 Well then, all things being made clear, that before there was a Church
planted at Rome, there was a Christian Church, which had then none other
universal head but Christ, and that seeing the Church which we have now, does
acknowledge none other head; who can justly deny our Church to be a true
member of the most ancient Apostolic Church? Again, forasmuch as the matter
is made as apparent, that the Church planted afterward by Peter and Paul, (for
by both of them was the Romish Church planted) to Gregory's days ( to wit, to
the year of Christ 605.) did not approve, nor tolerate any other universal
head; who can deny the Church of Rome (during that time) to be a fellow member
with our Church, of the most ancient Catholic Church?

17 But now albeit we have proved, that for want of an universal Pope to be
head (so many hundred years) there could be no body, or Popish Church: yet
forasmuch as we see that there is now such a Church, and know also that it has
been of long continuance, it rests that in the next Chapter we show, both
when it first began, how far and wide it did extend it self; and how
ignorantly many have dealt in their writings, to give that title of Popish
Governors, to the successors of Saint Peter, calling them Popes: and more
wickedly the Papists, in calling them universal Popes; to the horrible
deluding of the multitude, in making them to believe that the Popish Church,
and the Church which Saint Peter planted in Rome, were both one and the same;
which if it be true, then was the founder thereof Antichrist; for so says
their Saint Bernard, the Pope is: And so says their Ioacham the Abbot. And so
says their Auentine; and so says Gregory the Great. And so says their Saint
Vincent, and proves Boniface the third, to be the head, as the other and
diverse more proves his successors to be his incorporate body, as appears in
our second Chapter; and as now in the next Chapter, we shall more largely prove.

CHAP. VI. Tending to resolve all men, that the Popish Church, and the
succession of singular universal Popes, had their first beginning but in the
year of Christ 607. and that also from that time that they had a Church, we
had a Church continually among them, till about 20. years before Luthers time.
And as before they had a Church, which did extend it self far and wide, so
even then and at all times, in other parts of Christendom, ( as in Asia,
Africa, Macedonia, Misia, Valachia, Russia, Muschouia, etc.) we had as great a
Church as they, if not greater. Which being proved, both their antiquity,
universality, and succession of universal Popes, will prove but a fond fable,
and a mere illusion of Antichrist.
1 THE Papists have of long time borne the World in hand, that we had no Church
before Luthers time; howbeit, as we proved in the former Chap. by sufficient
testimonies, that for the first 606. years next after Christ, they had no
Church; so will we now (God willing in this Chapter) prove that their Church
had her first beginning, but in the year of Christ 607. Note therefore
(Christian Reader) what their Writer Vrspergensis says, his words be these;
Vrspergensis, in Phoca.
At the request and suite of Pope Boniface, the Emperor Phocas appointed the
Sea of the Apostolic Church of Rome to be head of all Churches. Also their
Writer Sabellicus says, Sabellicus Ennead. 8. l. 6.
Pope Boniface the third, at the first entrance into his office, was an
earnest su^ter unto the Emperor Phocas, that the Church of Rome, might be head
of all Churches, which thing hardly and with great labor was granted to the
Apostolic Sea of Rome. Now (Christian Reader) judge thou, how true it is like
to be, that the Church of Rome, had preeminence from Saint Peter's time, seeing
it is granted unto her but now in the year of Christ 607. as also the Popes
own Decretall, and Platina does witness, as we showed in the former Chapter.
Wherefore the Bishop of Rome, being now in this year first made and
established universal Father of all Christian Bishops, and Rome the mother of
all Christian Churches; it is clear, that in this year of Christ their Church
first began. For as before Christ was, there could be no Christian Church; so
before there was an universal Pope, there could be no Popish Church. But now
an universal Pope being made and established supreme head of the Church, they
may be bold to say they have a Church; and we may be as bold to say, that from
this year of Christ, and no further, they may demand of us, where our Church
was to Luthers time; and also to answer them, The head of Antichrist, and the
body of Antichrist.
that so much of it as was comprehended within the Romish jurisdiction, was
from thence, first under this head of Antichrist, Boniface: after him, under
this his incorporate body of Popes.

Boniface 2. Popes Callender.
Vitalius 1. John 3. Steven 2. Dusdedit 1. Deodatus 1. John 4. Hadrian 1.
Boniface 3. Domnus 1. Sisinus 1. Leo 2. Honorius 1. Agatho 1. Constantinus 1.
Steven 3. Seuerinus 1. Leo 1. Gregory 1. Paschalis 1. John 1. Benedict 1.
Gregory 2. Eugenius 2. Theodore 1. John 2. Zachary 1. Valentine 1. Martin 1.
Cuno 1. Steven 1. Gregory 3. Eugenius 1. Sergius 1. Paul 1. Sergius 2. Leo 3.
John 10. Honorius 2. Bonifacius 6. Benedict 2. Domnus 2. Inocentius 1. Benedict
8. Nicolas 1. Benedict 4. Calestinus 1. Clement 4. Hadrian 2. Boniface 5.
Lucius 1. John 18. John 5. Benedict 5. Eugenius 3. Benedict 9. Martinus 2. John
11. Anastatius 2. Clement 5. Hadrian 3. John 12. Hadrian 4. Inocentius 5.
Steven 4. John 13. Alexander 2. Vrbanus 4. Formosus 1. Gregory 4. Lucius 2.
Gregory 10. Bonifacius 4. Siluester 1. Vrbanus 2. Vrbanus 5. Steven 5. John 14.
Gregory 7. Boniface 7. Roman 1. John 15. Clement 2. Inocentius 6. Theodore 2.
Sergius 4. Calestinus 2. Gregory 11. John 6. Benedict 6. Innocentius 2.
Alexander 4. Benedict 3. John 16. Honorius 3. John 19. Leo 4. Benedict 7.
Gregory 8. Martin 5. Christopher 1. Gregory 5. Calestinus 3. Eugenius 4.
Sergius 3. Clement 1. Inocentius 3. Nicholas 5. Anastatius 1. Damassus 1.
Alexander 3. Calistus 2. Lando 1. Leo 8. Vrbanus 3. Pius 1. John 7. Victor 1.
Clement 3. Paul 2. Leo 5. Steven 8. Gregory 9. Xistus 1. Steven 6. Nicolas 2.
Inocentius 4. Inocentius 7. John 8. Alexander 1. Haedrian 5. Alexander 5. Leo
6. Gregory 6. John 17. Pius 2. Steven 7. Victor 2. Nicolas 3. Julius 1.
Martinus 3. Vrbanus 1. Martin 4. Leo 9. Agapitus 1. Paschalis 2. Honorius 4.
John 9. Gelasius 1. Nicholas 4. Leo 7. Gallistus 1. Calestinus 4.

2 These even from the very time of the decease of their predecessor and head,
began to put in practice their Antichristian authority, received from him, for
the subduing of all Churches that did resist them; amongst which the Church of
Rauenna was one: which as the Popes Decretall testifies, thought scorn to be
brought in subjection to Rome: nevertheless the same Decretall declares, that
in the end, Pope Domnus made her to yield. And this was about 64, years after
the first universal Pope. Also the same Decretall declares, that the Church
of Aquila resisted, but yet about some 20. years after the other, Pope Sergius
got the victory, and forced her to yield. And thus did they continue
vanquishing all Churches, in the West part, till near Luthers time. But yet
not so, but that maugre the heads of all the Popes, we had a Church continued
in the Romish jurisdiction, till within some 20. years before Luthers rising;
though not always a standing state, but a dispersed company, scattered here
and there, by means of persecution: Reuelat. 12.14.15.16.
wherein that prophecy was fulfilled, Revel. 12. which testifies that in the
time of Antichrists reign, the Church of Christ (within his dominions) should
be driven into the wilderness of this world, and great floods of persecution
sent after her to ouerwhelme her; but as the Text says, The earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed up the flood: That is, she was preserved by mere
temporal and earthly people, for amongst the spirituality, both she and her
seed were holden as heretics, and that chiefly for these causes. First, for
that when as they saw, that universal dominion which the Pope had gotten over
the Clergy; they affirmed him to be that Angel of the Bottomless Pit,
prophesied of in the 11. verse of the 9. chap. of the Revelation, that should
attain to be king of the Clergy, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, and in
Greek named Appolyon; which in English signifies a destroyer. Secondly, for
that when as they saw the Pope to bring into the Church (and establish for
Principles of Religion) his Heathenish unwritten verities, The Pope revealed
himself to be Antichrist.
and those old heresies, wherewith the false Apostles and other Heretics had
corrupted the purity of the Gospel, and that he did offer them to the Church
in the name of Christ's Gospel, they affirmed him to be that whore of Babylon,
foretold in the 4. verse of the 17. chap. of the Revelation, that should offer
to the world, The abomination and filthiness of her fornication, in a golden
Cup, to wit, in the name of Christ. Thirdly, for that when as they saw the Pope
gotten above the Secular powers, and that Emperors and Kings did yield him
such subjection, as to fall down before his footstool; to kiss his feet, to
carry him upon their shoulders, to lead his horse, to hold his stirhop whiles
he gets on horseback, yea, even to become his Vassalles, they affirmed him
to be the same great Antichrist, mentioned in the 13. verse of the same chap.
unto whom the Text declares, The Kings of the earth should give their power
and authority. Fourthly, for that when as they saw the Pope to be come to that
great height of pride (as we plainly did demonstrate in our first Chapter)
namely, to take upon him the title of God, and to suffer himself to be called
our Lord God the Pope: An undoubted and true God on earth; And to suffer men to
prostrate themselves before him, and to cry unto him: O thou our Savior,
which take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. And to exalt his
power over the Angels in heaven, devils in hell, and over the dead; and his
decrees above the decrees of God, and to have power to fetch out of hell, as
many souls as he will, and place them in heaven: they affirmed him to be same
Man of sin, and son of perdition, foretold by S. Paul, 2 These. 2. That
should sit as God, in the Temple of God, showing himself to be God, and
exalting himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. Lastly,
for that when as they saw, that with tooth and nail, he labored to frame and
fashion all things to the similitude of the first beast, (The Heathen Empire)
they affirmed him to be that second beast mentioned in the 11. and 12. verses,
of the 13. cap. of the Revel. which should arise in the Roman kingdom, after
the Roman Emperors, of whom S. John says thus. And I beheld another beast,
Revel. 13.11.12
coming up out of the earth, which had two horns like the Lamb, but he spoke
like the Dragon: and he did all that the first beast could do before him, and
he caused the earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast.
That is, by bringing them to honor, reverence, and observe all the former
Heathenish and Idolatrous ordinances, set up again by him: Whereunto because
that part of our Church (among them) would not yield, it grew into contempt
with them, and was most grievously persecuted, and the faithful Christians
driven from place to place, and from country to country, being of the most
part (among them) taken and holden for notorious heretics, such as they hold
us to be at this day. And because they grounded all their assertions, upon
those and such like places of Scriptures, whereby the Popes calling began to be
called into question, the Scriptures were forbidden to be written any longer in
a known tongue, and for that cause also it was, that they so blasphemously
depraved the Scriptures, calling them Pigghius Hierar lib. 3. cap. 3. fol. 203.
A nose of wax, an inkie letter, a dead letter, and a black Gospel: and that
they are none otherwise to be understood, then the Pope and his Church will
interpret them: and that they must follow the Church, and not the Church them:
and that the authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, is above them. Asoius
and Hosius.
Hence it was also that Lay men were forbidden to read the Scriptures,
persuading them that they did but lead men into error, and that ignorance is
the mother of devotion; howbeit all this did nothing prevail: for the
faithful in every Coast and Country among them did the more diligently follow
Christ's commandment, ( John 5.) Search the Scriptures: Ioh. 5.39.
and that even in the greatest heat of persecution, which was during those
fiery five months, mentioned in the 5. Reuelat. 9.5.
verse of the 9. chap. of the Revelation, which some of the learned do
interpret to be those last 500. years before Luthers time, in which Antichrist
was grown up to his full height and power: and even then did God stir up a
great company of corragious Champions to withstand the Pope, and openly, and
boldly, to write, speak, and preach against him and his proceedings, till well
toward the rising of Luther, a great part of which we will now produce, as
they thus follow in particular.

3 About the year of our Lord 1158. (which was almost four hundred years
before Luthers days) Garhardus, and Dulcinus Nauarenses, did earnestly preach
against the Church of Rome; and taught, that the Pope is Antichrist; that the
Clergy and Prelates of Rome were rejected, and were become the very whore of
Babylon, prefigured in the book of the Revelation. These (as the histories do
testify) came into England, The two witnesses as they follow, are said to be
two, because they bear witness to the two Testame^ts.
and brought certain others with them, who were by the King and the Prelaetes,
burned in the foreheads, and sent out of the Realm, and afterward were put to
death by the Pope. In the year 1160. Waldus.
Waldus, one of the chief Magistrates of the City of Lions in France, was
terrified at the sight of one that fell down dead suddenly: he showed great
fruits of repentance, both by exercising the works of mercy, in relieuing the
poor; and also by instructing himself and his family in the word of God; and
in exhorting all that resorted unto him to the same, and by translating
certain places of Scriptures into the French tongue, which he declared unto
many: He, and a great number that received instructions by him, maintained the
same doctrine, drawn out of the holy Scriptures, which we do now; condemning
the Mass to be wicked, the Pope to be Antichrist, and Rome to be Babylon,
etc. They were threatened, and by violence of persecution scattered into many
places, and some of them remained long in Bohemia. In the year 1212. An
hundred burned in one day.
the Pope caused an hundred persons in the Country of Alsatia (whereof diverse
of them were Noble men) to be burned in one day, for maintaining doctrine
against the Romish Church. About the year of Christ 1230. The Graecians
renounced the Church of Rome.
almost all the Church of the Graeciaens renounced the Church of Rome, because
of their execrable Simony, and such like abominable wickedness. In the time of
the Emperor Frederike the second, about the year 1240. there was in the
Country of Sweuia many Preachers, which preached freely against the Pope and
his Prelates; affirming that they were Heretics, Simonackes, and such like.
About the year 1250. rose up Arnoldus de nona villa, a Spaniard, Arnoldus.
a man famously learned, and a great Writer; he impugned the errors of the
Popish Church, and taught, Guilielmus.
that the Pope led the people to hell. About the same time, Guilielmus de
sancto Amore, a master of Paris, and chief ruler of that University, applied
all the testimonies of Scripture (which are touching Antichrist) against the
Popish Clergy. About the year 1290. Laurence, an Englishman, Laurence.
and a master of Paris, mightily proved the Pope to be Antichrist, and the
Synagogue of Rome to be Babylon: the Pope after his death, caused his bones to
be taken up and burned. Robert Gallus.
At the same time Robert Gallus, a man of noble parentage, impugned the Pope of
Rome, and his Clergy, calling the Pope an idol. Robert Grostid.
Also about the same time, Robert Grostid, Bishop of Lincoln, a man famously
learned in three tongues, wrote diverse Inuectiues against the Pope, proving him
to be an heretic: after his death, the Pope would have had his bones dug
up, but was terrified by a Vision. About the year 1350, the Lord raised up
diverse learned men, Gregory Arminensis.
which openly and boldly impugned the Pope and the Church of Rome. Gregory
Arminensis, who laid open the abuses of the Romish Synagogue, and confuted the
Popish doctrine of free will. In Germany a Preacher taught likewise. Petracha.
Franciscus Petracha, at the same time, called Rome. The whore of Babylon, the
Sanctuary of heresy, and School of error. Johannes derupe Scissa.
And a little before that, Johannes derupe Scissa, was cast into prison, for
rebuking the Popish Prelates for their detestable enormities; and for that he
called the Church of Rome, The Whore of Babylon, the Pope the Minister of
Antichrist, and the Cardinals false Prophets. And being in prison he wrote a
book, prophesying of the afflictions which hanged over the heads of the Romish
Clergy. Couradus Hager.
Also there was master Conradus Hager, who taught more then twenty years
against the Mass: he was afterward shut up in prison. Gerardus Ridder.
Michael Cesenas. Petrus de Carbona. Johannes de Poliaco.
Also one Gerardus Ridder, wrote a book against the Monks and Friars, which
he entitled, Lachrime ecclesiae. About the same time Michaell Cesenas, and
Petrus de Corbona, and Johannes de Poliace, were condemned by the Pope and his
adherents. The said Michaell wrote a book against the pride, tyranny, and
primacie of the Pope, accusing him to be Antichrist, and the Church of Rome,
Babylon, That whore drunk with the blood of the Saints. He left behind him
many followers, of whom a great part were slain by the Pope, and some of them
were burned. Two Friars.
About the same time, two Friars were put to death in Auinion, for matters
which they had against the Pope: one of them was called Johannes Rochetailiada,
who did preach that the Church of Rome is Babylon, the Pope and Cardinals
Antichrist. About the year 1360. was set forth a writing against the Pope and
his Clergy; The Plowmans complaint. Armachanus.
called the Complaint of the plow man. About the same time, Armachanus an
Archbishop in Ireland was raised up against Antichrist; he was a man of great
learning and godliness; his troubles were many, and his deliverances great by
Gods providence. In the year of Christ 1364. Nicolas Orme.
Nicolas Orme preached a Sermon before the Pope and his Cardinals, in which he
rebuked the Popish Prelates, and affirmed their destruction not to be far
off. About the year 1370. lived Matthew Parisiensis, a Bohemian, Math.
Parisiensis.
who wrote a large book of Antichrist, and notes the Pope to be the same.
About the year 1384. Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica, Nilus.
wrote also a large book against the Roman Church. About the year 1390.
many were put to death for the Gospel, refusing the doctrine and worship of
the Church of Rome: as at Bringa there were burned six and thirty Citizens of
Maguntia. Many put to death for refusing the Romish religion.
In the province of Narbone, there was to the number of an hundred and forty,
which chose rather to suffer all torments, than to receive the Romish religion,
and so to deny the truth of the most glorious Gospel. And a good while before
this time, there was four and twenty put to death at Paris; there were four
hundred noted to be heretics, four score beheaded; Prince Armericus was
hanged, and the Lady of the Castle was stoned to death. In the days of King
Edward the third, about the year 1371. began John Wickliffe of Oxenford,
Wickliffe.
openly to deal against the Pope, and Popish doctrine. The times were then
very grievous, the Popish kingdom of Antichrist being risen up unto a very
great strength and cruelty. King Edward himself being very well learned, and
a valiant Prince, greatly withstood Popery; he much favored and defended
Wickliffe, and so did diverse Noblemen, insomuch that M. Wickliffe and others
preached against the Church of Rome, the Pope and his Prelates doing what they
could, were not able to hurt him. After the death of King Edward, he was
greatly supported by the Londoners; and so escaped the hands of his
adversaries, still proclaiming the holy and heavenly doctrine of the Gospel,
against the Romish Antichrist. It pleased God by his preaching, and by his
books, to give light to many in the Land: sundry were put to death, The Lord
Cobham.
of whom the Lord Cobham was one; and diverse fled out of the Land, because they
would not deny the truth which they had learned of him. That Popish Council of
Constance, forty one years after his death, condemned his doctrine, and
caused his bones to be dug up and burned. And as Wickliffes doctrine took
place here in England, and spread far, so were some of his Works carried
into Bohemia, where they did more prevail: John Husse.
for about the year 1410. rose John Husse, who taught in Bohemia, with diverse
others, the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ, which a multitude zealously embraced,
and thereupon renounced the Church of Rome. He was cited to appear before the
Pope, which he avoided; and about the year 1414. he was charged again to
appear, then he was excommunicated, and much molestation followed, but he
continued a faithful witness of Christ, and openly impugned the Romish Church
and Synagogue, until the Council of Constanoe, where he was condemned as an
heretic, Hierome of 'Prage.
and burned. In the same Council, Hierome of Prage, a worthy servant of
Christ, for resisting the Romish Harlot, was condemned and burned. These men
were put to death, but Antichrist and all his power could not root out the
Gospel in Bohemia. God raised them up a valiant Captain John Zisca, John Zisca.
and they put to flight great armies of the Papists that came against them.
About this time, there followed great persecutions in England, and many were
put to death, whom they called Lolards. Veselus Gronigensis.
God also raised up one Veselus Gronigensis, he was so worthy a man, that he
was called Lux mundi, the light of the world: He disputed mightily and boldly
against Popery, and proved their doctrine false and wicked, and that the Popes
Keys do not open, but shut heaven Gates. This man ended his days in the
year of Christ 1499. Sauonarola
In the year 1500. Hieronomus Sauonarola a Monk in Italy, with two other
Friars, Dominicke and Siluester.
Dominicke and Siluester, were condemned to ^eath at Florence: they taught and
maintained against the Popish doctrine, the things which we do now.

4 And thus having slain and put to death all within the Romish jurisdiction,
that did any way gain say them, The two witnesses are both slain.
they have now gotten all in quiet possession, leaving none that would not be
conformable to Antichrists lore. And this is it which Saint Augustine did find
by the Scriptures, the great Antichrist should bring to pass, as may plainly
appear by these his words: For that we believe that Antichrist shall come
unto such an height of vainglory, it shall be lawful for him to do such
things, both toward all men, and also toward the Saints of God, that many
weak men shall think, God has forsaken the care of the world. And also we
see that prophecy here fully verified in the 13. chapter of the Revelation,
which says thus of the Romish spiritual governor: He caused that as many as
would not worship the Image of the beast, should be killed. That is, all that
would not be conformable to all the old Heathenish ordinances, set up again by
the Pope, and preach and profess the same, should be killed. So that herein
also is fulfilled that prophecy in the eleauenth chapter of the same book,
concerning the killing the two witnesses, whom the tenth verse of the same
chapter declares, The 9. and 10. verses shows, that by the 2. Witnesses are
meant all the Preachers that should vex Antichrists vvhol^ kingdom; which in
the sixth verse of the 14. chap. are included in the person of one Angel with
all other throghout Christendom.
should vex Antichrists whole kingdom: for which cause he should slay them.
But whereas Bellarmine would have them to be only two persons, and that they
should contain themselves, within that one nation of the Jews; the Text is
plain to the contrary, in that it says, And they of the people, and kinreds,
and tongues, and Gentiles, shall see their corpse three days and an half, and
shall not suffer their carkeises to be put in graves: and they that dwell on
the earth shall rejoice over them; and be glad, and send gifts one to another:
for these two Prophets vexed them that dwelt on the earth. Now in that the text
declares that the two witnesses were slain among the Gentiles, in diverse
nations of the earth: and that those nations every where, saw their dead corpse
lie among them, which they counted not worthy to be buried in Christian men's
moulde (as they call it) it is clear, they were not two persons, but all those
Preachers which every where bare witness to the truth of the two Testaments,
whereby they vexed Antic^rist, and the Antichristians, wheresoever they did
inhabit upon the face of the whole earth.

5 But now in that it is said, They lay dead three days and an half: and in
the words following: After three days and an half the spirit of life coming
from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand upon their feet: This is
to be understood of the time, from the killing the last of the witnesses, to
the rising again of the first of them, and not of the 1260. days, the whole
time of Antichrists reign, mentioned in the third verse of the 11. chapter of
the Revelation, as some do understand it: for it is very absurd to say, that
the witnesses should lie dead, during the whole time of their prophesying, and
yet prophecy too. Now for that we find that the next that rose after their
death, to oppose themselves against Antichrist, and to set up the Gospel
again in his kingdom, was that man of God Luther: therefore in him did the
two witnesses first begin to rise again: for it is clear, it is not meant,
that the same should rise again in their own persons, but that even as Elias
was revived in Saint John Baptist (not in the same person, Luke 1.17.
but as Saint Luke says, chap. 1.17.) in the same spirit and power: so should
they after a little moment, rise in power and spirit, in the persons of others.
And this first rising, was about the year of Christ, 1520. So that counting
from those three last, which were put to death in the year of Christ, We had
a Church among the Papists till about twenty years before Luther.
1500. we had no appearing Church left in the Romish jurisdiction, for the
space of twenty years before the rising of Luther: which time is called but
three days and an half, in respect of the three Angels years and an half
(the time of Antichrists reign) wherefore seeing they had their Church alone,
without our Church, but twenty years before Luther: how wickedly do they
delude the multitude, in making them to believe, they had the Romish Church,
and all other Christian Churches (universally) from Saint Peter's time; and that
we had no Church till Luthers time: whereas we see it proved most apparently,
that for the first 606. years, next after Christ, our Church was, and theirs
had no being at all: and that the very first beginning of their Church, was the
entrance upon our Church in the Romish jurisdiction, of which we see a part
continued in view till about twenty years before Luther, which if we had not
had, yet will we now prove, that continually from the Apostles time, to
Luthers time, we had elsewhere as great a Church as they, if not greater.

6 Understand therefore (Christian reader) that albeit the whole Christian
Church was one, yet afterward it was divided into two parts, to wit, East and
West, so till the Council of Florence (which was about fourteen hundred
years after Christ) they possessed but the West part. The Council of Florence.
And notwithstanding Michael Paleolgus Emperor of the East, in hope of some
aid of the Pope, and the Princes of the West against the Turk, did his good
will to have brought the East part in subjection to the Popes of Rome, yet as
their Paulus says, Paul Aemil. in Philippo 4.
his people so detested him for it, that after his death, they would not admit
him common Christian burial. Again, it is certain, that the Greeks counted
the Romans a most polluted and an infectious people: for in their late
Council of Lateran, it is said, Jn Council. Lateranen. Cap. 4.
The Greeks began so much to abhor the Romans, that if it had happened the
Lattine Priests to have ministered upon their Alters; they would not offer any
oblation upon them before they had washed the same. Again, albeit the Legates
of the East, in the Council of Florence, was persuaded to yield to be subject
to the Pope, yet doubting it would not be well taken at their return home,
they half recanted and said The Council of Florence.
We have no leave nor commission to speak these words. And notwithstanding at
their return home they labored so with the Greeks, that they consented to
yield, yet this continued not, for as their Platina says, Platina in Eugenio.
Not long after, they fell to their old bent again. But had it continued to
this day without reuolting, yet had it come too too late to have maintained the
antiquity of the Popes universality: yea too late by at the least 1300.
years. And therefore it was that Illyricus, which dwelt upon the borders of
Grecia, wrote thus, Illyricus Testibus Veritatis. page 5.
The Churches of Grecia, and the Churches of Asia, Macedonia, Misia, Valachia,
Russia, Muschouia, and Africa, joined thereunto, that is to say, (says he) in
a manner all the whole world, or at the least the greatest part thereof, never
granted the Pope his supremacy.

7 So that (Christian reader) thou see, that howsoever the Emperor Phocas
did give that prerogative to the Bishop of Rome, to be universal head of all
Christian Bishops, and Rome to be chief of all Christian Churches; it does not
therefore follow, that all Christian Churches were content therewith, or did
yield thereunto; or that Rome ever attained thereunto: only she obtained to be
universal superior over the West Churches, as is plainly confessed by their
Doctor M. Harding, in his Book of Confutation of the Apology, Harding Apolog.
chap. 23. division 2.
where he says; Rome is the Mother of all the West Churches: If but of the
West, then not universally of all, both East and West: therefore by M. Hardings
own confession, here falls to the ground the Popes universality. And
therefore, as we saw proved in the former Chapter, that for the first six
hundred and six years, their Church had not any being at all; so here we see
proved as plainly, that after they had a Church, they had it but by measure,
and not universally as they fondly fable. Wherefore (christian Reader)
whenever they shall hereafter demand of thee, where our Church was before
Luthers time, answer them thus. It was by Gregory the Greats confession six
hundred and five years before there was an universal Pope, to make a Popish
Church: having then none other, but only the same universal head, that now
the true Christian Catholic and universal Church has, of which we are now
apart: and that afterward, when an universal Pope was ordained, and made
supreme head of the Church, and had gotten dominion over the West part
thereof, yet even there was our Church in reasonable quietness, till about
four hundred years, when as Pope Hildebrand began to be a firebrand. For
indeed about that time, Antichrist began to lay himself open to the world, by
his tyranny which he began then to exercise against those that did withstand
him: and afterward when as he was growing up to the full measure of
iniquity, and that our Church (among them) could no longer bear his
detestable enormities, then during the next five hundred years following
(through their grievous persecutions) it was driven into holes and corners; and
as many as they found, they destroyed, and the rest would have destroyed, had
they not fled into those other parts of our Church before mentioned, where they
were preserved by Gods providence, from the son of perditions tyranny,
according to the prophecy in the fourteenth verse of the twelfth Chapter of
the Revelation, which says: But to the woman, (to wit, the true Church) were
given two wings of the great Eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness,
into her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time,
from the presence of the Serpent. The Church of Rome is proved to be a
persecuter of the true Church.
And bid them now brag of the visibilitie of their Church, and of the
standing state it always had, since it was a Church (because thou can not
deny it them) but withal, give them to understand, that even thereby, is our
Church proved that true Church, which the Angel in that chapter foretold should
be driven from home, and dispierced abroad: and theirs to be the tyrannical
and persecuting Church, which should drive it out of her Country. And thus
much for the proving when their Church first began, and how far it did extend
it self, as also the first beginning of universal Popes, to be six hundred
and six years after Christ; whereby both their antiquity and universality
is utterly overthrown. Now to the conclusion of all.

8 Forasmuch as we (which now are distinguished from them by the title of
Protestants) confess, that in this their Romish jurisdiction we had no Church
left at the rising of Luther; they demand of us, from whence our Bishops had
their callings, and how our Ministers which they have ordained ever since, can
have lawful callings, seeing there was then no Protestant Bishops to ordain
them: neither that by the Apostles, ever any Christians had that title given
them. We answer: For the title Protestant, we stand not upon; for we grant
that in the time of the Apostles there was not any Christians called by that
name, no more then there was any called by that name Catholic. The only
title proper to the professors of Christ, was given by the Apostles, in the
City of Antioch, which was, to be called Christians (as appears in the 11.
of the Acts of the Apostles,) but afterward, when as counterfeit professors
of Christ, as the Arians, Macedonians, Eun^nians, were grown to be Sectaries,
and Heretics, and each of them to challenge unto themselves the title of the
true Church: There was another sort in Rome, called Homousians, which were
indeed of the true Church: these to distinguish themselves from those
counterfeit Christians, entitled themselves, Christian Catholics. Whereupon,
as Socrates testifies, Socrates lib. 5. cap. 10.
that worthy Prince Theodosius hearing thereof, caused these four sorts of
Christians to be brought before him, and every Sect to bring their several
opinions in writing; which when he (and his Bishops there assembled) had
thoroughly perused and examined, he tore in pieces the Papers of the three
Heretics, and approved only of the Homousians, finding it only to agree
with the Doctrine of the Scriptures. And thereupon made this Decree: All people
subject to our Empire, How and when the name Catholic was given to Christians.
we will have to continue in that Religion which Saint Peter the Apostle
delivered to the Romans, as the faith kept from his time to this day does
declare, and the which it is evident, Bishop Damassus, and Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, a man of Apostolic sanctity do profess: to wit, that according
to the Apostolic and Euangelique Doctrine, we believe one Godhead of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, of like majesty in sacred Trinity. The
obseruers of this Law, we command to be taken for Christian Catholics; the
rest, as mad and frantike, we adiudge to bear the reproach of Heretics:
which must look to feel first the vengeance of God, and next such penalties
as the motion of our hearts directed from above shall appoint. And this was
about two hundred years before the Papists had a Church, therefore this act
being done only in our Church, it is without all contradiction, we only must
needs be of that sort of Christians, unto whom the title Catholic was then
given; and consequently, of the true and most ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Church. So likewise afterward, when as the West part of the
Church, did under the title of Christian Catholics, profess Christ after an
Antichristian manner; then certain true Christians, withstanding them,
protested a contrary manner of Christian profession, agreeable to the ancient
Catholic Faith and Religion; and by their protesting, did distinguish
themselves from that counterfeit company, which they then saw (as we now have
declared at large in our former Chapters) were clean swarued from the true
Faith and Religion: And from thence, we following their true Faith and
religion, retain the same title, to distinguish our selves from our most
counterfeit Christian Catholics. But would God both these new titles were
laid away, and that both sorts might be called by their own proper titles, to
wit, Christians and Antichristians: for so the Church of Christ should the
better be known from the Church of Antichrist.

9 Now for the lawfulness of our Bishops callings, we say, that when the time
drew near, that the Gospel which Antichrist had suppressed in the Romish
jurisdiction, should be set up again (according to that old Romish prophecy,
entitled, Stimulus diuinae contemplationis, written I know not how many
hundred years ago, bearing that after the year of Christ's Incarnation, 1534.
In an old Book.
Good Law, good Religion, good peace, together with Faith, Truth, and sound
Doctrine, should return again into the World in their proper shape, and true
likeness) then about that time, when by the means of that man of Cod, Luther,
some Bishops were converted to true Christianity again, and that others had
time to converse with them, concerning the present necessity of electing and
ordaining Christian Ministers: then they entered by the old ordinances of
those Christian Bishops which were before Popery was, and so ordained
ministers by the rules and authority of the first Apostolic order, which had
always continued in those other parts of our Churches, which (as we showed)
were never members of the Popish Church: For otherwise, had they not bin first
converted, they and all the Ministers which they have ordained, should have
been the servants of Antichrist, even as those were before, and at this day
are, which have their calling from Antichrist the Pope. For so their S.
Bernard, speaking of Bishops and Ministers (which have their calling from and
by the Popes ordination) says* Bernard supra cant. Sermon. 33.
They serve Antichrist. Also their Albertus Magnus says, Albert in Jehn 10.
They be the Ministers of Antichrist, and the underminers of the flock of
Christ. And therefore whether it be likely that our Ministers (which be
ordained by Bishops of an ordinary calling from the Apostles of Christ) have
lawful callings; or such as have their calling from Antichrist the Pope, let
the Christian Reader judge. And the more to inlighten his judgment, and better
discerning the truth hereof, let him consider these fruits and effects of their
calling. Their Saint Bridgit brings in Christ thus complaining of the Romish
Clergy, Bridgit lib. 1. cap. 56.
They feign themselves to be mine, and in the mean time they work wickedly
against me. Their Saint Elizabeth brings in Christ thus reporting of them,
Elizabeth against the corruptions of Rome lib. 3. cap. 14.
They that walk under my name, do not fear to persecute me in my members.
Their Prophetess Mathilde says, Mathilde in a prophecy of hers.
They are fallen from Christ, and become ravening Wolves, devouring and cutting
the throats of Christ's Sheep.

10 And that the impartial Reader may yet be the more fully resolved, that
these Priests which have their callings from the Pope, are not the Priests of
Christ, their Saint Bridgit brings in Christ thus disclaiming them utterly,
saying, Bridgit lib. 1.47.
Behold such Priests are not my Priests, but very traitors; for they both sell
me, and betray me like Judas. Wherefore notwithstanding they carry the name
of the Priests of Christ, as Judas carried the name of an Apostle of Christ;
yet the Reader may plainly see, they are but counterfaits, and as very
traitors to Christ, as Judas himself was. And thus much for the answering
these objections; namely, that their Church was the most ancient and
Apostolic Church: That the succession of Popes descended from Saint Peter:
That we had no Church till Luthers time: That our Protestant Bishops and
Ministers, have no lawful callings. Now it rests in the next Chapter, to
try whether the Popes own calling be proved a lawful calling, by general
consent of Councels and Fathers, as they avow, or whether it be not a mere
illusion of Antichrist so to say.

CHAP. VII. Tending to resolve all men, that the Papists great boasting of
their general consent from Saint Peter's time, is but a very Antichristian
illusion: that their antiquiy of the Popes universal Supremacy, is but a
fallacy: that the succession of universal Popes descended from Saint Peter,
is without verity: and all of them together flat forgeries: even as we have
already proved their other Principles to be, and as in this Chapter (God
willing) we shall prove them all to be.
FIrst, N. D. in his Wardword, Bellarmines assertion.
the Answer to Sir Frances Hastings Watchword, page 102. (whereof Bellarmine is
supposed to be the original Author) to enduce us to believe that from Saint
Peter's time, the Popes universal Supremacy was approved of by all Counsels
and Fathers, says: All the Christian world has ever made this most certain
and infallible deduction, that Christ gave not to Saint Peter these imminent
prerogatives of authority, and superiority for himself alone, but for his
posterity, and successors also that should ensue him in his seat and charge
over the Church of Christ to the worlds end: For this cause have they
reverenced and respected so much the Bishops of Rome, as by all general
Councels and Fathers, and Ecclesiastical Histories appear.

THE ANSWER.
2 First, as touching the ground of his Argument, namely, Peter's Supremacy, we
shall prove at large in our next Chapter, that it was but the same that the
other Apostles had, and therefore from him the Pope cannot claim any such
prerogative of authority, to be called universal Bishop, Christ's Vicar
general, or head of his universal Church. Secondly, we have already proved in
our fifth Chapter, that for the first 606. years next after Christ, there was
no universal Pope approved of, nor established. Thirdly, their great Doctor
Master Harding says, Harding Apolog. cap. 4. diuis. 2 affirms the first
supreme government to be by four, therefore not by one.
In great Cities where the Highest courts for justice were kept, and where the
chief pagan Priests of the Latins, named Primi Flamines, were resident,
before the coming of Christ, there after the coming of Christ, were
Patriarchs or Primates placed, by whom the weighty matters of Bishops should be
decided. Which if they will have us grant to be true, then must they grant,
that from the Apostles times, the first supreme government that was over
Bishops and their great and weighty matters, was by certain head Bishops, and
not by one, and how then can that be true, that from Saint Peter's time, the
Bishop of Rome was supreme head over all?

3 The first of all the Prelates that began to insult over other, were the
Bishops of Rome, for that more honor began to be given to the Bishop of that
Sea (partly, because Rome was then the most famous for Religion, and partly
also, because it was then the Seat of the Emperor of the world) they began
proudly to usurp authority over their fellows, the first of which was
Victor; whose arrogancy when other Bishops espied, they opposed themselves
against. Amongst whom was Policrates and Irenaeus, who most sharply
reprehended him for it, as Eusebius witnesses. Eusebius.
And this was about the year of Christ 189. and therefore how is the
consequent of Bellarmines assertion true, that by the testimonies of all
Histories, the Christian world ever approved of the Popes superiority above
all?

4 To the year of Christ 205. Every Bishop sate^ chief in his own City.
or near thereabout, were holden these chief Synodes or Councels. The first
in Rome, the second in Caesarea, the third in Pontus: the fourth in France: the
fifth in Ostroena, and the sixth in Ephesus: of which if they can prove the
Bishop of Rome to sit as chief in any but in that of his own City, the
victory shall be theirs. But it is evident by all these testimonies of
Eusebius lib. 5. cap. 21. 22. 23. 24. lib. 1.21. and other places of his
books, that the Bishop of Rome sat as chief, only in his, and the other in
theirs: wherefore how can that be true, that all Councels and Fathers (from
Saint Peter's time) ever approved of the Popes chief^tie?

5 About the year of Christ 254. a Council was holden at Carthage, in which
Saint Cyprian being Bishop of the same Province sat as chief, who openly thus
inueighed against the superiority, which Stephen then Bishop of Rome began
to claim from Saint Peter, and also thus cleared himself (and the other
Bishops there assembled) from that arrogancy, saying; Cyprian. in sententijs
Concilij Carthag. ad Quirinum.
None of us makes himself a Bishop of Bishops; neither was Peter so arrogant
to take things so insolently upon him, as to advance himself as Primate, and
one unto whom the rest as Nouices and Punies should be subject. Now therefore
seeing Peter never had that prerogative of Superiority, and that so soon
after Saint Peter's death, this Council condemned the Bishop of Rome, for
attempting to aspire to that height of pride: how is Bellarmines allegation
true, that all Councels and Fathers, ever approved of the Popes Supremacy? and
the rather for that Saint Cyprian reproving Cornelius (Bishop of Rome) for
receiving Appeals from others jurisdictions, wrote thus unto him: Cyprian.
lib. ^. Epist. 3.
Those that be under us, must not run thus about to Rome, unless perhaps a
few desperate and loose companions take the authority of the Bishops of
Africa to be less then at Rome. Now then, if those in that time, so near the
Apostles, which counted the authority of the Roman Bishops higher then the
Affrican Bishops, were accounted but as the offscomes of the Country, why
should we think otherwise of such now: or that Bellarmines consequence can be
true, That the Bishop of Romes superiority was ever above all?

6 About the year of Christ 325. the first general Council was holden by
three hundred and eighteen Bishops at Bethynia, in the city of Nice; which
Council finding the Bishop of Rome to intrude himself upon the jurisdiction
of the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria; to prevent his proceeding, made
this Decree, Nicen Council. Cannon 6.
Let the old custom be of force, which is in Egypt, Libia, and Pentipolis,
that the Bishop of Alexandria have authority over all these, because the
Bishop of Rome observes the like custom. Whereby we see, that as the Bishop
of Rome did govern his own Patriarkedome, and would not suffer his fellows
to incroch upon his right, no more would this Council suffer him to do upon
theirs; but that even according to the old and ancient custom, their
privileges should be like to his. And hereof it is which Ruffinus (who lived
about the same time) wrote thus: Ruffinus of the Histories of the Church. lib.
1. cap. 6.
It was decreed in the Council of Nice, that in Alexandria, and in Rome, the
old custom should be kept; that the Bishop of Alexandria should rule over
Egypt; and the Bishop of Rome, over the Churches of his suburbs. And yet more
largely it is thus expounded by Nilus: Nilus in his Book of the supremacy of
the Bishop of Rome.
That it may the more plainly appear, that the Pope has no government over
all other Churches, read the sixth Cannon of the Council of Nice; there it is
expressly commanded, that the Bishop of Alexandria shall have the rule over
certain Churches, and the Bishop of Rome over certain; and the Bishop of
Antioch over certain; and that it should not be lawful for any one of them to
invade another jurisdiction; if any one not content with his own, crave
dominion over others, he ought of right to be called a breaker of the customs,
and also of the holy Cannons.

7 Now then forasmuch as the first of all the general Councels, reduced the
Bishop of Rome to his first order, and thereby hedged him in, to rule only his
own Patriarkedome; how is that true which Bellarmine affirms, namely, that
all Councels and Fathers throughout the Christian World, ever approved of the
Popes universal supremacy? Yea, or how can that be true, which is so common
among them, namely, that this Council gave that prerogative to the Bishop of
Rome, to be universal Father of all Christian Bishops, and Rome the Mother of
all Christian Churches, seeing that great Divine, Athanasius, who (as some
write) sat as chief in that Council, says; Athanas. ad solitarium vita
Magentes.
Rome is the Mother of the Romish jurisdiction: Nay, seeing their own great
Doctor Master Harding says as expressly, Harding Apology, c. 23. Division 2.
Rome is the mother of the west Churches. If but of the Romish, or West
Churches, then not universally of all. Wherefore this proves Bellarmines
alligation most untrue, that all the Christian World over, the Pope was ever
held to be supreme head of all Christian Bishops, and Rome the universal
mother of all Christian Churches. And the rather, because Aeneas Syluius a
little before he was Pope Pius the second, wrote these plain and express
words, Aen^as Siluius. Epist. 288.
Before the Council of Nice, every Bishop lived severally to himself, a
little regard was there then had of the Church of Rome.

8 About the year of Christ 379. the second general Council was holden by
150. Bishops, in the City of Constantinople, where for the conseruing each
Patriarchs privileges, and other Bishops rights, it was thus decreed. Council
of Constantinople, cap. 2.
Let not the Bishops which have their several Diocese, incroch upon the
Churches that are without their bonds, neither let them confound their
Churches: but according to the Cannons, let the Bishop of Alexandria govern
only those things that are in Egypt, and let the East govern only the East;
and let the Church of Antioch retain her dignity, declared in the Nicone
Synod. Upon which decree Socrates writes thus: Socrat. lib. hist. eccl. 3.
They confirmed the faith delivered by the Nicene Synod, and they appointed
Patriarchs in the described Provinces; that Bishops being placed and set over a
certain Diocese, might not thrust themselves into other men's charges. And a
little after. Notwithstanding, reserving to the Church of Antioch, the chief
degree of honor and dignity. Therefore most untrue is it, that all Councels
and Fathers granted the Bishop of Rome to be supreme head of all Bishops, or
Rome to have the chief degree of dignity above all Churches.

9 About this time lived Saint Hierome, who because he saw many flatterers to
ascribe unto the Bishop of Rome, to be the alone Apostolical successor, and
the Bishops themselves, to have made a custom of usurping authority over their
fellows; and to challenge a more excellency of dignity; he wrote thus against
their arrogance. Hierome to Euagrius.
Neither riches. nor poverty, makes a Bishop higher, or lower; all Bishops are
of one worthiness, and all the Apostles successors; What bring you me the
custom of Rome, being but one City? if we seek for authority, the whole World
is greater then the City of Rome. Now then, if this worthy Priest of Rome,
yoaked all Bishops of the World, in equality of dignity, with the Bishop of
Rome, and affirms, that all Bishops are the Apostles successors as well as
he; how can the consequent of Bellarmines assertion be true, that all Councels
and Fathers, all the Christian World over, ever approved of the Popes singular
supremacy, and acknowledged him to be the alone Apostolic successor?

10 About the year of Christ 383. lived Saint Augustine, who finding the
Bishop of Rome to go about to draw all appeals unto himself, and the
multitude to begin to flock unto him; for the redress thereof, he with the
assent of 216. Bishops, in the Council of Africa, made this decree: Concilij
Africa. cap. 9.2.
If any do appeal to tribunals abroad, let none within Africa receive him
to communion. And this is that whereof Saint Cyprian (an hundred years before
Saint Augustines days, in the Council of Africa,) reprehended the Bishop of
Rome, as appears in the fifth Section. Again, when as the Bishop of Rome had
begun to take and receive proud and haughty titles, and other of the Patriarchs
to follow; in the same Council wherein Saint Augustine was present, it was
thus decreed: The third Council, ^6. Cannon.
Let not the Bishops of any of the first Seas, be called Prince of Priests, or
Highest Priest, or by any other like name, but only a Bishop of a first Sea.
And how then is the consequence of Bellarmines assertion true, that all
Councels and Fathers, all the World over, ever approved of the Popes supreme
titles and authorities? See the next Chapter 19. Section, whether these words
do not concern the Bishop of Rome, as well as others.

11 About the year of Christ 410. lived Saint Chrysostom, who finding the
Bishop of Rome to exalt the City of Rome in excellency of dignity above all the
Cities in the World; to pluck down her proud Peacockes-tayle, wrote thus in
disdain of her pride: Chrysostom Hom. 35. the 40. distinct. Multi.
Our City of Antioch is most dearest to Christ, above all others: And like as
Peter did first preach among the Apostles, so among Cities, this had first of
all the name of Christians, as a certain wonderful Crown, and no City in
the World has this besides, no, says he, (in scorn of Rome) not the City
of Romulus. Again, in that book called Opus imperfectum, which goes under
the name of Chrysostom, the unlawfulness of the Popes supremacy, is in these
words made manifest: Hom. 3. ad Pop. Antiche.
He that seeks primacie in earth, in heaven he shall find confusion, and he
that does but once entreat of primacie, is not worthy to be numbered amongst
the servants of Christ. Now then, if the Pope for seeking supremacy in earth,
shall find confusion in heaven, and is not worthy to be numbered amongst the
servants of Christ, because of his horrible ambitious pride, how is that true,
that all Councels and Fathers, ever approved of the Popes universal supremacy?

12 About the year of Christ 431. there was a third general Council holden
of two hundred Bishops, in the City of Ephesus, where for the preserving the
privileges of the other Patriarchs, and provincial Bishops, it was thus
decreed: Council of Ephesus, last chap.
It seemed good to the holy and universal Synod, keeping to every Province
pure and sound their privileges, which by ancient custom and from the
beginning, belong to the same. Wherefore the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, Antioch,
and Alexandria, having had by ancient custom, the same prerogatives, which
they had with Rome in the universal government: by virtue of this Decree, we
see they shall have the same privileges to continue still, and all Provincial
Bishops under them, as they had at the first, by their ordination: And where
then as yet is to be found the Bishop of Romes singular dominion over all?

13 About the year of Christ 451. the fourth general Council was holden by
six hundred and thirty Bishops in the City of Chalcedon, in which it was
thus decreed: Council of Chalcedon. chap. 28.
Our fathers worthily gave the first place of honor to the Sea of old Rome,
because that City then reigned; and upon like consideration, the one hundred
and fifty Bishops in the royal City of Constantinople, has given the like
degree of honor, to the same City being new Rome. Wherefore then, seeing the
highest degree of honor that was given to the Bishop of Rome, was (...) sit
highest in Councels and Assemblies, and that not of any right from Peter; but
only because his Sea was the most ancient seat of the Emperor, and that
after the same Emperor was removed from Rome to Constantinople, for the same
cause, the like degree of honor was given to the Bishop of Constantinople: and
also for that little degree of honor, seeing it was not established to the
Bishop of Rome, till the Council of Nice, which was above three hundred years
after Christ, how can that be true, that from Christ and Peter, the Pope had
not only the chiefest place, but was Prince and ruler over all?

14 About the year of Christ 540. there was a fifth general Council holden at
Constantinople, in which also it was thus decreed, Council of Constantinople.
chap. 35.
Renewing those things which were ordained by the one hundred and fifty
Fathers, which were assembled in this City; and by the six hundred and
thirty which were gathered together in Chalceden, we decree that the Sea of
Constantinople have like and equal dignity with the Sea of old Rome. So that
hereby we see still continued, and confirmed, the Bishop of Constantinoples
equallitie with the Bishop of Rome, only whenever it should happen that they
were both in place, the Bishop of Rome should have the highest place. But I
demand what was here now, for him to challenge an universal dominion by? It
is one thing, for some one Noble man to have that honor in Councels and
Assemblies, to sit in the highest room; and another thing, to take upon him
therefore to be supreme head of all the Kings Dominions: if any should be
found so presumptious, should he not soon be convicted of high Treason? yea
verily, and well worthy. Also, what is here to be found by these Councels and
Fathers, to prove the Popes universal supremacy approved of by general
consent, or not the contrary? Again, if the truth thereof would have served
their turn, what needed they then to have sought such shifts by flat forgeries
as they have done? For whereas these words are further added in that Cannon:
Forgerig.
And in ecclesiastical matters, the Sea of Constantinople be advanced as
far forth as the Sea of elder Rome; The Popes Law has put in (be not) as
appears in Distinction 22. Renouantes, turning the affirmative into a
negative, thereby utterly perverting the true sense, to their great shame.
Again, because some when they were excommunicated in Africa (to shift off
their punishment) appealed to Rome: the Council of Africa, made this decree,
Cause. 2. quaest. 6. placuit.
If any within Africa, offer to appeal over the Seas, let none within Africa
receive him to the communion, they have foysted in these words: Except they
appeal to Rome. And so, that which the Council did, to keep men chiefly from
Rome, their Law peruerteth to draw them to Rome, Cause. 2. quest. 6. placuit.
Again, whereas to draw universal authority to Rome, for the hearing all
appeals, Zozimus then Bishop of Rome, (when the Council was holden at Africa,
Council of Africa, chap. 101.102.103.104.105.
whereat Saint Augustine was present) alleged for himself, a Cannon of the
Council of Nice. But the Council withstanding his claim of universal
authority, answered: We have the Council of Nice, in which we find no such
Cannon. And therefore Alypius, who was also present at the same Council, being
then Bishop of Tagasta, finding himself greatly grieved at such iugling by the
Bishop of Rome, said thus, Council of Carthag. 6, chap. 4.
This thing moves me much, that when we laid together, and examined the
originalls of the Nicene Council, written in Greek, these things (concerning
the superiority of the Pope) we found not there. And thus (Christian Reader)
thou see that saying of Bellarmine to be but a fond fable; to wit, that all
the Christian World over, the Popes universal supreme authority, was
approved of by all Councels and Fathers. Now it remains that we answer an
Objection, which the Jesuits made to me in their late answer, whereby
notwithstanding, they would prove the Popes universal supremacy to be
universally approved of before this our prescribed time; and the rest, which we
say was not till two years after Gregory's death. These be their words, The
Jesuits answer to me, page 4.
Besore his time the Doctrine of the Popes supremacy was current: And for
proof they bring in Justinian the elder, Emperor of the East, and Valentinian
the Emperor of the West: both which gave to the Bishop of Rome, the title of
universal Bishop. But what of this, does it therefore follow, that because
these two Emperors did so, the one of the East, the other of the West, they
may conclude, that the Popes universal supremacy was approved of by general
consent of Councels and Fathers, from East to West? Mauricius would have had
his Bishop of Constantinople to be supreme. Frederick counted the Popes
supremacy Antichristian, in Epist. to Otho.
If this be a sound conclusion, then is this also as sound; namely, that
because two Emperous, Mauricius, the Emperor of the East, and Frederick the
second, the Emperor of the West, denied the Bishop of Rome supremacy,
therefore it was denied by general consent of Councels and Fathers from East
to West: and then what have they gained by their two Emperors?

15 True it is, that Justinian at the first, gave that title to the bishop of
Rome, and sought means to advance his Sea a degree above his fellows the
Patriarchs, as may appear by these words, Cod. de summa Trinita. and Fide
cath. Inter ^^aras.
We labor to advance the honor of your Sea, and the authority thereof: We
labor to subdue and to join all the Priests of the East part unto the Sea of
your holiness: Thus shall the authority of your Sea increase. Then which
nothing can make it more manifest, that albeit he gave him the title of
universal Bishop, as yet he was not so from East to West, which was well
toward six hundred years after Christ. Also the effect does plainly prove,
that the title which Justinian gave to the Bishop of Rome, and the supreme
dignity which he seemed to labor to advance him unto, was only but in
policy, even to lift him up a degree above his place, and fellow Patriarchs,
that he might place his Bishop of Constantinople in his room, to be
established a commissioner among the Patriarchs: which thing when he had
accomplished, he thus rejoiced thereat, and said, Cod. de sacrosan. Eccles.
omninouation.
Now our City of Constantinople, enjoys the prerogatives of elder Rome. Also
it may appear, that he did it only but for that very same purpose, for that
when as he had effected that matter, immediately he took from him both the
title and authority, as does evidently show, in that first he made his title
common with the other Partriarkes, when he said, Justinian. 230. Nouel.
We command the most blessed Patriarchs, that is the Pope of Rome, and of
Constantinople, and of Alexandria, and of Antioch, and of Jerusalem, seeing it
is acustome. Secondly, in that as soon as his aforesaid Council was
dissolved, a Letter was sent to the Bishop of Rome, with this commandment:
Gena^ius ad omnes Metropol. ad Papam Roman.
Let your Holiness see unto your own cures, and to the Bishops that be
subject unto you. As also afterward, he making another new Patriarch, gave
unto him as great authority as he gave before to the Bishop of Rome. And this
appears by these his own words: Justinian. Nouel. 131.
Let the Bishop of the first Iustiniana, have under him the Bishops of Dacia,
etc. and let him be consecrated by them: and let him have the same privileges
over them, which the Bishops of Rome has over the Bishops that are placed
under him. And thus we see this Emperor to make so little for the Popes
universal supremacy, as that he makes directly against it. Now let us come
to Valentinian the Emperor of the West.

16 Thou shall understand (Christian Reader) that what titles or dignities he
gave to the Bishops of Rome, was as little material: for he being a very
simple minded man, was never willing to trouble his head with any matter of
controversy, as may well appear, in that when as the Bishope of Hellespontus,
and Bithynia besought him to have the hearing and disputing of a matter in
question between the Arrians and them, he refused and said: Sozmen. lib. 6.
cap. 6. and cap. 7.
For me that am but a Lay man, I think it not lawful to search curiously into
such deep matters. Therefore we see he might easily be seduced to give any
manner of Titles to the Bishops of Rome, which they challenged for their due.
And therather, for that as their Doctor Master Harding declares plainly,
Harding Apolog. cap. 6. Diuis. 10.
that from the beginning of the first Christian Emperors, they were taught by
the Bishops themselves, what titles they should give unto them. Therefore what
can be effectually drawn from these two Emperors, to prove that the Popes
universal supremacy, was approved of by all Councels and Fathers, from East
to West: or rather, who sees not, that Justinians words directly prove the
contrary, in showing that the Bishop of Rome had but a patticular Cure, in
which only those Bishops were subject unto him. And now being come within the
compass of less then one hundred years of our full number of six hundred and
six, let us see how the rest were accomplished.

17 Briefly in a word: after this it fell out, that as by giving to the Roman
Emperors Bishop a degree above his fellow Patriarchs, he sought to be
universal head over all: so by making the Greek Emperors Bishop his fellow
Patriarch, and his equal, he also sought to be supreme head over all. Hence
it was that that great contention grew between him and the Bishop of Rome,
which fell out for the Christian Churches great good: for even thereby it
pleased God to bring the truth of our cause to light. For when as the Bishops
of Rome (who from the time of Irenaeus sought to aspire to that dignity, as
first, Victor, whom as we proved in our third Section, was reproved for the
same by Irenaeus and Polycrates, as also by diverse others. Secondly, Stephanus,
whom we proved in our fifth Section was reprehended by Saint Cyprian, and other
Bishops in the Council of Africa. Thirdly, Cornelius, as we proved in the
same Section, for receiving Appeals from the jurisdictions of others, was
reprehended by Cyprian. Fourthly, Sozimus and Bonifacius, who for seeking
superiority over Africa, was withstood by Saint Augustine, and two hundred
and sixteen Bishops in the Council of Carthage; where it was proved, the
Bishop of Rome not to have universal authority, nor his Title which he
claimed from Peter, to be called Prince of Priests, or, Highest Priest, to be
lawful, as appears in the tenth Section. Fifthly, Leo, whose Legates (in his
behalf) stood for the Title and Authority of Universal Bishop, in the
Council of Chalcedon, which Council would not yield him that prerogative,
only because his Sea was the most ancient seat of the Emperor, he should
have the highest place in Counsels and Assemblies, and that was all, (as we
proved in our thirteenth Section,) I say, when as the Bishops of Rome, saw that
the Bishop of Constantinople was like to be made and established Universal
Bishop of Bishops (which they could never attain unto) then as we heard in the
first Section of our fifth Chapter, Pelagius the second Bshop of Rome, of that
name, decreed, That no Bishop, no not the Bishop of Rome himself, should be
called Universal Bishop. Gregory the Great, when he came, he made an out-crie
against the Title, calling it an ungodly title, a title of shame, and fit for
no Christian, but for Antichrist alone: and sought to clear all his
predecessors from either receiving, or desiring the Title or Dignity, as
appears in the fifth Section of the fifth Chapter, where he said, Gregor. lib.
4. Epist. 32.36.
None of my predecessors, Bishops of Rome, ever consented to use that ungodly
name: We the Bishops of Rome, would never take upon us the name of
singularity, we would never receive that honor being offered unto us. To be
brief, to induce the people to believe, that notwithstanding these words of
Gregory, yet he had the universal dominion over all Bishops; Cardinal Allen
bids them not look to his words, but to his practice. I answer: If the
practice of Gregory was such, as his own words condemned for ungodly,
blasphemous, and Antichristian, we were best to be led by his Words, and not by
his Practice. Again, whereas their Doctor M. Harding says, Harding Apolog.
cap. 4. Diuis. 3.
Give us the Thing, and we will not strive for the Name, (as though Gregory had
had all Bishops universally under his government) nothing can be made more
plain to the contrary, then these words of Gregory himself has made it,
where he found himself grieved, that Maximus Bishop of Salona, was made Bishop
without his consent, and maintained in his place by the Emperor,
notwithstanding he was a criminal person: Gregor. lib. 4. cap. 78.
If (said he) the faults of those Bishops which be committed to my charge, be
borne out by my gracious Lords, etc. What make I here in this Church, while
that mine own Bishops contemn me? Which makes the case clear, that he had
Bishops of his own, and a peculiar charge to govern, and not an universal
dominion over all: All which proves Bellarmines assertion most untrue, that by
all Counsels and Fathers the Popes universal supremacy was approved of from
Saint Peter's time. To conclude, forasmuch as both by Counsels and Fathers, we
have overthrown the antiquity of their Church, their universality, the Popes
supremacy, Succession of universal Popes, and general consent; and proved,
that they were not approved of by general consent, nor publicly established
before Gregory's decease, which was in the year of Christ, 605. nor of two
years after, when as the great Antichrist rose in Rome: let them bring never
so many testimonies out of those Counsels and Fathers (which were afterward)
I would wish no man to vouchsafe the answering any one of them; but utterly to
disclaim them all, as Antichristian. For what should we look for under
Antichrist, but that all things should be ordered and done, to uphold him, and
to maintain his kingdom. And thus much for this point. But now for that the
maine foundation, whereupon all their Assertions are grounded, is an imagined
conceit of Saint Peter's supreme and universal authority; let us see what we
can say to that point more specially.

CHAP. VIII. Tending to resolve all men, that the Apostle Saint Peter's
authority was but the same that the other Apostles was: and therefore that
supreme authority which the Pope Claymeth from Saint Peter, is fabilous. That
Christ alone is the supreme head of the Church, even of that part that is
Millitant, as that which is Triumphant. That Jerusalem is the most ancient
Mother of the Catholic Church: that the Popish is the Church of Antichrist,
and therefore it is blasphemy to affirm it to be the same which Saint Peter
first planted in Rome. That there was no Church planted in Rome till the year
of Christ 44 before which time there were many Christian Churches planted in
the World, therefore Rome could not be the Mother, but a Daughter of the Mother
Church.
1 IT has of long time gone for current Doctrine (Christian Reader) that our
Savior Christ made Saint Peter supreme head and Prince of all the Apostles.
Popish blindness, went through the Romish jurisdiction for Catholic
doctrine, which God-willing shall be proved but fond fables.

2 First then, whereas they say that Christ made Saint Peter Prince and head of
all the Apostles; this may easily be proved a fable, because there is nothing
in all the Scriptures made more manifest, then Saint Matthew, Saint Mark, and
Saint Luke, has made it to the contrary. Luke 22.23.24.25.26.
For as Saint Luke declares, that there was a strife risen among the Apostles
about principality and supreme dignity, and that they began to enquire among
themselves, which of them should seem to be the greatest. So Saint Matthew and
Saint Mark declares, that when their Master Christ perceived whereabout they
went, he did not make so light a matter of it, as to give them leave to
determine it among themselves, but with great care, he called them unto him,
and sat down; and as they all stood before him, Matthew 20, 25.26.
he decided their question (according to Saint Matthew thus,) Ye know that the
Lords of the Gentiles have domination over them, and they that are great
exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so among you; but whosoever
will be great among you, let him be your servant. According to Saint Mark
thus: Mark 9.33.34.35.
If any desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant unto
all. So that by this we see it very apparent, that Christ allowed no supremacy
or principality at all among the Apostles; therefore the Popes principality,
and supremacy which he challenges from Peter's authority, is fabulous. For it
is clear, that if Christ would have had under him any such singular universal
head, over his Church; now, by reason of this present occasion, had been the
only time to have made it known: but in that he said in so plain and
express words, It shall not be so among you; he made it plain to the
contrary. Hence it was that Saint Bernard applied these words of Christ, and
also the words of Peter himself, against that false challenge of the Pope,
saying: Bernard 2. Book of consideration.
Peter could not give that he had not; did he give Lordship? hear what he
says: Not as over Gods heritage, but being a pattern to the flock. And least
(said he to the Pope) thou think it to be spoken only in humility and not in
truth; it is the voice of the Lord in the Gospel. The Kings of the nations
reign over them; but you shall not be so. It is plain (says he) the Apostles
are forbidden Lordship, therefore go thou and usurp greedily unto thy self,
either Lording it Apostleship, or being Apostolic Lordship, thou are flatly
forbidden either. All which most evidently declares, that the Popes universal
supremacy, which he claims from Saint Peter, is flat forgery.

3 Secondly, they say, To Peter only Christ committed the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven. For the clearing of which point, we are first to make
known what those Keys are; for by that the most ignorant may the more easily
judge, whether to the rest of the Apostles, Christ did not also give the Keys.
Luke 11.52.
Christ himself in the 11. Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, Matthew 16.19.
declares the first key to be Knowledge: and in the 16. Chapter of Saint
Matthews Gospel, the second to be Power. For the first key ( to wit,
knowledge) it is clear by Saint John in his 17. John 17.8.
Chapter of his Gospel, that Christ gave it as well to the other Apostles, as
to Peter. For in praying for them all in general, he uttered these words to
his Father: I have given thy words unto them which thou gave me, John 15.15.
and they have received them. Again, Chapter 15. speaking to all his Apostles
in general, he said. All things that I have heard of my Father, have I made
known unto you. Likewise in the 14. John 14.26.
Chapter, speaking to them all in general, he said: These things have I spoken
unto you being present with you, but the comforter which is the holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring
all things to your remembrance which I have told you: So that hereby it plainly
appears, that Christ gave this first key to all the Apostles in general, and
therefore not to Peter alone.

4 Now touching the second key, namely, the power of binding and loosing,
remitting and retaining sins, it is as clear, that Christ gave it
indifferently to all the Apostles. Matthew 16.19.
For as Saint Matthew in his 16. Chapter shows, that he said to Peter;
Whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou
loosest in earth, shall be loosed in heaven: Matthew. 18.18.
so in the 18. Chapter he declares, that Christ spoke these very same words to
all the Apostles, saying: Whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever ye loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And
likewise Saint John in his 20. Chapter witnesses, that he said also to them
all in general: Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted unto them;
John 20.23.
whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Therefore it is manifest that
Christ gave this key also to all the other Apostles as well as to Peter. And
therefore it is which Saint Origin says; Orig. in first Treatise on Matthew.
This saying, to thee will I give the Keys, is common to all the rest of the
Apostles; and the words that follow, as spoken to Peter, are common to all.
Likewise Saint Augustine says; August. 124. Treatise upon John.
When they were all asked, Peter alone does make answer, and it was said unto
him: And I will give thee the keys; as though he alone had received authority
to bind and loose, whereas he had spoken that for them all, and received this,
as bearing in himself the person of unity. Wherefore in another place,
reproving those Roman heretics of his time, who would needs have those words
to be spoken to Peter alone, and him to be the Rock on which Christ said, he
would build his Church, said; Augustine in his Book of the troubles of the
Christians.
Wretched men, whiles in Peter they understand not Christ, that is the Rock:
and whiles they will not believe that the keys are given to the Church, they
have quite lost the Keys out of their hands. In his Treatise upon John.
For (said he) if this was said only to Peter, to thee will I give the Keys;
thou the Church has them not. And thus much touching the second point: But now
before I come to the third point, I must crave pardon to digress a little, for
that because the Pope challenges from the authority of the keys, to have an
absolute power to forgive sin, and to give the kingdom of Heaven; I think
it very needful to open that mystery of the use of the Keys, and how far
their powers do extend.

5 Thou know (Christian Reader) that the use of Keys, are to open and to
shut; to let in, and to keep out such as are not meet to come in. Now from
these metaphors and their properties, have the spiritual keys their titles
and resemblances of properties; and do in this manner both open and shut, to
wit, by the sentence of the Law, to shut the lock of excommunication against
open offenders; and by the sentence of the Gospel, to open it again, to those
that openly repent and confess their sins. And this is it which their Haymo
says: Haymo in Homely upon the feast of Peter and Paul.
By Keys we must understand knowledge and power to discern between good and
bad; that those whom thou see to abide in the true faith, thou shall judge
them worthy of Heaven; and those whom thou see to depart from the true faith,
thou shall judge them worthy of hell fire. The Bishops (says he) Ibidem.
bind men, when they separate them from the society of the Church, and keep
them from receiving the body and blood of Christ: he loses them, when as
after repentance made, he receives him in again into the fellowship of the
Congregation, and admits him to the Lords Table. And this is now all the
power the Church has by the two Keys; as for sin, Christ himself has
said, Matthew 16.19. and 18.18. it is both bound and loosed in heaven by God
himself. Howbeit, we deny not that it is done according to the true sentence,
and censure of the Minister, even as the same Writer says: Jbidem.
By thy sentence in earth, I shall confirm it in Heaven. So that by this we
see, that the ministerial binding and loosing, remitting, and retaining
sins, is nothing else, but by denouncing the binding sentence, and
pronouncing the loosing sentence, to declare unto men, that they are both bound
and loosed by God in heaven. And hereof it is which that master of the
sentences, (Peter Lumbard) says: Lumb. 4. Se^m. 18. did. Nec ideo.
God has given Priests power to bind and loose, that is to say (says he) to
declare unto men, that they be either bound or loosed. It were against us
(says Saint Augustine) August. 2. book 11. chap. Permentanus.
that we should be compelled to grant that this thing were done of men, but
not through or by men. Again he says, August. in his Book of the ladders of
Paradise.
The Lord granted the office of Baptizing unto many; but the power and
authority in Baptism to forgive sins, he has reserved only to himself.
And to this agrees that which Saint Ambrose says, Ambrose in his 9. Book^ 76.
Epistle.
The Lord remains alone, for no man can be partner with God in for giving of
sins. And thus then who sees not, that albeit sin be ministerally
remitted and retained, yet is it actually done of God himself. So that whereas
the Pope would craftily ascribe this absolute power to Saint Peter; all men may
apparently see, he does it but to draw the same power to himself, that so men
might esteem of his pardons, and take them of his own price. And thus much
touching the use of the keys, and how far their powers do extend.

5 Thirdly, whereas they say, To Peter Christ committed the care and charge of
the whole Church: we answer, that it is not any where to be found in all the
Scriptures, that Christ said to Peter, To thee I commit the care and charge of
the whole Church: but this we find in the 2 Corinthians. 2. Cor. 11.28. Gal. 2.7.
11. cap. that Saint Paul said of himself: I am cumbered daily, and have the
care of all Churches. Again, we read in the second chapter to the Galathians,
that Saint Paul speaking of Peter's charge and his own, said: The Gospel over
the uncircumcision was committed to me as the Gospel over the circumcision
was committed to Peter. Now then, seeing that circumcision was but that one
Nation of the Jews, and the uncircumcision all the other Nations of the World;
who had the more universal charge? not Peter, but Paul: and yet indeed and
truth, to say that every of the other Apostles charge was not as universal,
Acts 9.15.
as either Peter's or Paul's, i^ as plain foolerie, as to say, that because the
Lord said to Annanias of Paul: He is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my
name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and children of Israel; therefore none but
Paul. Or, because Peter said of himself, Acts 15.7.
God chose out me, that the Gentiles by my mouth, should hear the words of
the Gospel, and believe. Ergo, not by the mouth of Paul, nor any other of the
Apostles, but by Peter's alone. John 13.13.
Or to say, because John is said, John 13.23. to be the Disciple whom Jesus
loved, therefore none but John. Or because Saint Chrysostom said of John,
Chrisost. ad Pap^^. Antioch. Hom. 73.
He was the Pillar of all the Churches in the World, therefore none but he. To
be brief, it is clear by Saint Matthew, chapter 28. verses 19.20. and
chapter 18. verse 19. and by S. Mark, chapter 16.15. and to the end of the
chapter, that Christ committed the care and charge of his whole Church, to all
his Apostles indifferently; and that by his own commission, every of their
authorities, was as great and as large as either Peter's or Paul's. And
therefore fabulous is it, that the Pope does challenge, from the right of Saint
Peter, to have the universal care and charge of the whole Church committed
unto him, or any one man in all the world. S. Ambrose speaking of this point at
large, concludes thus, Ambrose of the dignity of Priesthood.
The sheep and flock which Peter received, we all received the same together
with him. Now, they will not say that S. Ambrose was a Pope of Rome, therefore
they must needs grant that he spoke this generally of all Bishops, Pastors,
and Ministers, and not of the Popes of Rome alone.

6 Fourthly, they say, To Peter Christ committed the office of feeding both
Sheep and Lambs, old and young: to which we answer; It is clear, that by
feeding, Christ meant the feeding of the soul by preaching the Word of
eternal life: Now, whether this office of preaching, was committed to Peter
alone, and not generally to all the other Apostles, the very plain and
express words of their general commission, set down by Saint Matthew, and
Saint Mark, does declare. Saint Matthew notes them thus from Christ's own
mouth, chap. 28.18.19. All power is given to me in heaven and in earth:
Matthew 28.18.19. Mark 16.15.20.
Go therefore and teach all Nations. Saint Mark, chap. 16.15.20. thus: Go ye
into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every creature. And in the same
chapter it follows: And they went forth and preached every where. Now then,
what sheep or Lambs, old or young, had Peter to feed, that the other
Apostles had not? his commission could extend no further, then all the World
over, and to every creature, and so far did theirs extend as well as his.
Therefore, how can the Pope justly claim from Peter, to be the only feeding
Father of Gods universal Church? Saint Augustine says, August. in his Book
of the troubles of Christians, chap. 3.
Those words spoken to Peter; Feed my Sheep; when they were spoken to Peter,
they were spoken to all Priests and Ministers: If to all, then not to any one
alone, and consequently not to the Pope.

7 Fifthly, they say Peter was that Rock on which Christ said he would build
his Church, against which the Gates of hell should not prevail; which being
true, how was it then, that the gates of hell, ( to wit, the power of Satan)
did so prevail against him, that he failing in the fundamental point of
Religion, attempted to debar the recovery of the most happy estate of the
universal Church; for which Christ called him Satan? For no sooner had Christ
imparted unto him, what things he was to suffer at Jerusalem, for the recovery
thereof, but presently he gave Christ council he should not do it: Matthew.
16.22.
Master (said he) pity thy self, this thing shall not be unto thee. So
that if Christ had followed his counsel, every particular member of his Church
had been damned. Therefore it is clear, Peter was not that Rock on which
Christ said he would build his Church, against the which the gates of hell
should not prevail.

8 Furthermore, if Peter had been that Rock, against which the power of the
Devil should not have prevailed; how was it, that Saint Paul found him a
desembler in Religion, for which himself says, Gala. 2. Gala. 2.11.12.13.
he reproved him before all men in the City of Antioch. Also, if he had been
that Rock against which the power of hell should not prevail, whence was it
then, that he became an Apostata, by cursing himself, if ever he knew Christ,
and by denying him with an oathe. Matthew. 26.72.73.74.
Therefore it is evident, he was not that maine Rock, against which the Gates
of hell should not prevail, nor on which Christ said he would build his
Church: yea, the very express words of the Text declares that he did not
mean upon Peter: for the words are not upon thee, Matthew. 16.18.
but upon this Rock. That is, says Saint Augustine, August. in his 3. S^r.
upon Matthew.
upon this Rock which thou have confessed, upon this Rock which thou have
acknowledged, saying, Thou art Christ the son of the living God, I will build
my Church. I will build thee upon me, and not me upon thee: for men willing
to build upon men, said; I hold of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I hold of Peter:
But others that would not build upon Peter, but upon the Rock said, I hold of
Christ. And this interpretation of Saint Augustine, their Doctor Beda so
approves of, Beda upon the 1. Cor. the first chap.
that in his interpretating the same words, he observes Augustines words
verbatim. Likewise their Docter Haymo, thus expounds the same words, Haymo of
Peter and Paul.
Because (says he) thou have professed me truly to be the son of the
living God; upon this Rock, that is upon me whom thou have confessed to be the
son of the living God, I will build my Church. Thus then we see that Christ
himself is that Rock, on which he said he would build his Church, and not
Peter. And the rather, because it is not any where found in all the Scriptures,
that the power of hell did ever any way prevail against him, but may evidently
be proved, it did more prevail against Peter, then against any other of all
the Apostles: therefore it is without all contradiction, that Christ himself
is that maine Rock; yea the same on which Saint Hierome witnesses Peter
himself did help to build the Church. For he complaining how the Christian
Doctrine was then in his time corrupted in Rome, said, Hierome idem aduersus
Iouianum.
Was there none other place in all the World, to receive this voluptuous
Doctrine, but that which Peter's preaching had built on the Rock Christ?
Declaring thereby, that Christ was that maine Rock, and not Peter. 1. Cor.
3.11.
And therefore it was that Saint Paul. 1 Cor. 3.11. speaking of the maine Rock
or Foundation, concludes hereof thus: Other foundation can no man lay, then
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

9 But here now perhaps they will object and say, Did not Christ say to
Peter, thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a Rock, or a
Stone? We answer, He did. For if we speak of the Ministerial foundation,
no man can deny but that Peter was therein a Rock, or a Stone, as the Prophets
and the other Apostles were: for that Saint Paul speaking of the ministerial
foundation, Ephesians 2.20. says plainly; Ephesians. 2.20.
It is built (to wit the Church) upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone. But in that he
brings in Christ among them, and ascribes unto him only the prerogative of
singularity; it is clear, that even in the ministerial foundation, he
allowed none singular but Christ alone: And therefore that prerogative of
singularity, which the Pope would claim by right from Peter, is even flat
forgery, and a foolish fantasy.

10 I am not ignorant what a shuffling they keep with Saint Hierome, to prove
Peter one singular in the ministerial foundation; but if it be possible for
any man to speak plainer words to the contrary, then these, let the Reader
judge: Hieron. lib. 1. aduersus Iouian.
Ye will say (said he) the Church is founded upon Peter: notwithstanding in
another place, the same thing is done upon all the Apostles, and all received
the Keys of the kingdom of heaven, and the strength of the Church is founded
equally upon them all. And hereof it is which Saint Origin says, Origin. in
16. Matthew. tract. 1.
If only upon Peter thou think the whole Church to be built, what will thou
say to John and every of the Apostles? And a little after. For, if this speech,
To thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of heaven be common to all, why
then should not all that which goes before, and that which follows after (as
spoken to Peter) be common to them all? By which we see plainly, that seeing
Peter is not a Singular in the Ministerial foundation, the Pope very unjustly
challenges that prerogative from him.

11 Sixthly, they say, For Peter the prayer was made: as though Christ had not
prayed as well for the other Apostles, as for him. But for the blowing away of
this miste, I refer the Reader to the seventeenth chapter of Saint John's
Gospel, where he shall see, that Christ prayed as well for all the other
Apostles, as for Peter: whereupon it was, that Saint Augustine wrote thus
against those Heretics of his time, Augustine in his first book of his
qu^stion upon the Old and New Testament, the 75 question.
Did Christ pray but for Peter, and not for James and John? It is manifest,
that all the Apostles were meant in Peter, because in another place he says:
I pray for them whom thou have given me, and I will that where I am, they may
be also.

12 Lastly they say thus: Peter had an ordinary power from whence all the other
Apostles received their power and authority. For answer whereof, and for
brevity sake, I am compelled also to refer the Reader to these places of
Scripture, John 20.21.22.23. Matthew. 18.18.19. and 10.5.6.7.8. and 28.18.19.20.
John 14.26. Acts 2.1.2.3. which does plainly prove, that all the Apostles in
general, and every particular of them, received their power and authority,
immediately from Christ, as Peter himself did. And hence it was that Saint
Cyprian knitteth up the conclusion thus, Cyprian of the simplicity of Prelates.
Christ gave to all his Apostles, like and equal power and authority. And
where then was that ordinary power of Saint Peter, that the Pope should
challenge from him that prerogative, to have a singular power and
principality, to give power and authority to all Bishops, Pastors and
Ministers, just no where to be found. For albeit our Savior Christ, seeing
Peter so forwards above the rest, and foreseeing also, how prone and ready he
was to fall before any of the rest; took the more care of him, and pains with
him, and used greater motives to encourage him to constancy: it does not
therefore follow, Peter, Peter, none but Peter. Nay, we see it most evident, to
be altogether no such matter: only it was a subtle illusion whereby they did
cunningly conueigh all power in the Romish jurisdiction to the Pope, and by
which they labor still to retain it; and not only that power which they
feign Peter to have had above the other Apostles, but even that also which God
himself has above all: for thus do they write, See Chap. 1. Sect. 3.
In the Pope there is all manner of power above all power, as well of heaven as
of earth. Again, Ibidem.
The Pope has power over the Angels both good and bad. Again, Ibidem.
The Pope has power to command the Angels, and has power over the dead.
Again, Ibidem.
The Pope has so great power both in Purgatory, and also in Hell, that he may
deliver by his Indulgences, and place in the heaven, and habitation of the
blessed, as many souls as he will. Again, Ibidem.
The Pope is all, and above all. By which, what else will they prove, but that
the Pope is the God of all power, and consequently an almighty God? Moreover,
thus do they write, Ibidem.
It is sacrilege to doubt of the Popes power, for he is the cause of causes;
therefore we must make no question about his power, seeing there is no cause of
the first cause. And hereby they will prove him to be an eternal God. But
forasmuch as they fain the Pope to have received al his power from Peter; let
them show us, first in what place of Scripture they find Peter to have received
this power from Christ: secondly, where any of all the Apostles have thus
written of Peter's power: if they can show none, then it is certain Peter never
had that power, and therefore the Pope could not receive it from him: and yet
notwithstanding do they further write thus, Cha. 1. Sect. ^
The Pope has the place upon earth, not of a pure man, but of a true God.
Again, Ibidem.
Our holy Father the Pope is an undoubted and true God on earth: Therefore
Sect. 4.
Those things he does, he does them as God: Sect. 2.
And is to be taken for God, and worshipped with divine honor as God. And to
ratify the truth hereof, they close up the whole with this title; Sect. 2.
Our Lord God the Pope. Therefore forasmuch as none is to be found in any part
of all the Christian Churches in the universal world, that does claim to
himself the essential properties and prerogatives of God, but the Pope: it is
without all contradiction, none but the Pope is that Antichrist, The man of
sin, and son of perdition, foretold by Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians 2. That
should sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself to be God. To be
brief, as they cannot show any one Scripture, by the authority whereof the
Pope may justly claim from Peter these essential prerogatives of God, or the
title of God; so can they not show by any one place of Scripture, that Christ
cuer gave to Peter any such titles or dignities, as the Pope yet further
claims from him; as to be called the Vicar of Christ: Supreme head of the
Church: or Prince of Priests. Nay, albeit the contrary may be directly proved,
in that when as the strife was risen amongst the Apostles about supreme
principality, Luke 22. Christ himself took in hand the matter, and thus
resolved them, saying, Luke 22.24. Matthew. 20.25. Mark 10.24.
Matthew. 20. Mark 10. It shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, shall be your servant; and whosoever will be chief of you, shall be
servant to all the rest: yet will they have Peter to be the Prince of all the
Apostles, that so they might derive that dignity to the Pope. to make him
Prince of all Priests. Therefore, for the knitting up of all that hitherto we
have entreated of, and the manifest opening and clearing of the whole matter,
and of all that we have said concerning this point: this I say, that forasmuch
as we have proved this maine fundamental principle, not to stand upon a sound
ground, whatsoever is built thereon can not stand. For seeing Christ gave no
greater principality to Peter, then he did to any of the other Apostles, it
was not possible, that Peter could be the supreme head of Christ's universal
Church. And that it may also appear, how unlawful it was for Peter, or any
but Christ alone, so to be; Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, himself
plainly proves from Saint Paul, as may appear, where he reprehending John
Bishop of Constantinople, for attempting to be supreme head of the Church,
gave him to understand, that therein he declared himself to be the forerunner
of Antichrist: And to show him that he was never able to answer that injury
done to Christ, he demanded of him this question, saying; Gregor. lib. 4.
Epist. 38.
If Saint Paul would not have the members of the Lords body to be subject to
any head, but to Christ, no not to the Apostles themselves; what will thou
answer to Christ the head of the vuiuersall Church at the last judgment, that
thus goes about by the name of Universal Bishop, to make all his members
subject to thee? Whom do thou immitate in this so perverse a name, but
Lucifer, that would have been head over all the Angels in heaven? By which he
proves this saying of Cardinal Cusanus, Cusanus ad Bohemos epist. 2.
The members vmted to the Chair and joined to the Pope make the Church to be
but an Antichristian delusion; and the Pope for taking upon him to be supreme
head of Christ's universal Church, to be that great Antichrist which the Church
of Rome should take for her other husband besides Christ, whereby she should
prove her self to be indeed the whore of Babylon, mentioned by the Angel in
the seventeenth chapter of the Revelation. For it is manifest by Saint Paul,
Romans 7.2. That she that has two husbands at once, is an whore. And
therefore this makes the case to stand clear, that Rome cannot be the Mother
of all Christian Churches, unless we may conclude that all Christian Churches
are the children of an whore, which God forbid.

13 The Church of God under the Law, The Church under the Law, had God only to
her husband as the Church under the Gospel has Christ only.
had none other Head or husband but God himself, as appears by the P^ophet
Esaias 45.5. where he said to the Church of the Jews: He that made thee, is
thine husband, whose name is, the Lord of Hosts. So by the words of Saint
Paul, it appears as plainly, that under the Gospel, the Church has none
other head, but Christ: yea, as well that part that is Millitant, as that that
is Triumphant, and both together, because they both make but one Church. And
therefore writing to the Church of Corinth, in his 2 Epistle 11. chapter, 2.
verse, he said thus unto her. I have prepared you for one husband, to present
you a pure Virgin to Christ. And to the intent that all might know, that the
Church Triumphant, and the Church Millitant, has both but one and the same
head, he writing to the Church of Ephesus, chapter 1.20.21.22.23. said thus
unto them, of Christ. God has set him at his right hand in heavenly places,
far above all principality and power, and might, and domination, and every
Name, that is named, not in this world only, but also in that that is to come.
And has made all things subject under his feet, and has given him over all
things to be the head of the Church, which is his body, even the fullness of
him that fills all in all things. And to the Colossians, chapter 1. verses
16.17.18. thus: For by him were all things created, which are in heaven, and
which are in earth, things visible and invisible: whether they be Thrones or
Dominions, or Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him, and for
him. And he is before all things, and in him all things consist. And he is
the head of the body of the Church: he is the beginning and the first begotten
of the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence: for it pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. By which it is manifest,
Christ Jesus alone is the head of the whole Church, The Pope cannot claim
antiquity of Bishopric from Peter, because Peter was not the first bishop,
but James.
and not Peter; and therefore the Pope cannot rightly claim the universal
headship from him. If Peter had been the supreme head of the Church, why was
he not then the first Bishop of the Church, but agreed with James and John, to
make James the Just the first Bishop, as Clement the first witnesses, in these
words; Clement. lib. 6. Hypotip. Jerusalem the most ancient mother church and
not Rome.
Peter, James and John, after the Assumption of our Savior, challenged not
this prerogative unto themselves, but appointed James the Just Bishop of
Jerusalem? And as these words of Clement prove Peter not to be the first
Bishop; so do they prove Rome, not to be the first Church, where the first
Apostolical Bishop was placed, but Jerusalem: therefore not Rome, but
Jerusalem, must needs be the most ancient Apostolic Church.

14 That must needs be the most ancient Apostolic Church, whose ministers
Christ himself appointed the Apostles first to be, which was the Church of
Iewrie, as appears by S. Matthew chap. 10.5.6. where, after he had repeated
the names of the twelve Apostles, which Christ had chosen, said: These twelve
did Jesus send forth, and commanded them, saying: Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into the Cities of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go ye
rather to the lost sheep of the bouse of Israel. Therefore the Church of
Jerusalem, was the most ancient Apostolic Church, and not the Church of Rome,
which was the chief of the Gentiles

15 Again, that Church must needs be the Mother of the most ancient
Catholic h^urch, in which Christ himself first planted the Faith and
Religion which should be Catholic; and by the means of whose Ministers the
Catholic Church should receive it: which Faith and Religion Saint Matthew,
chap. 26.55. and Saint Luke chap. 21.37.38. witnesses Christ taught unto the
people daily in the Temple of Jerusalem, and commanded her Ministers (the
Apostles) to publish the same afterward to the universal world, Matthew
28.19.20. therefore Jerusalem, and not Rome, is the Mother of the most ancient
Catholic Church.

16 Moreoue^r, There was no Romish Church at all 14. years after Peter was
called to be an Apostle,
Jerusalem must needs be the mother Church of all Christian Nations, for that
in her all the Apostles received the holy Ghost, and the gifts of tougues, that
every Nation might be taught by them in their own language, what to believe,
and do, to be saved; the which they had largely put in practice, during
well-neere fourteen years immediately after their calling, before Peter came
to Rome. For they cannot deny but that Peter came not to Rome, till the second
year of Cladius the Emperor, which was in the year of Christ his incarnation
44. Before which time Peter planted many Churches in diverse Coasts. For
themselves affirm in their Rozarie, that before he came to Rome, he spent his
time preaching in Iewry, Syria, Antiochia, and other places: Many Churches were
planted in the world before Peter came to Rome,
Therefore seeing that besides those other Churches which were planted by the
rest of the Apostles, Peter planted many before he planted a Church at Rome, it
is clear, that when as he had planted a Church in Rome, she could be but one
of the Daughters, and not the Mother of the most ancient Catholic and
Apostolic Church.

17 Lastly, it must needs be the most ancient Church, and the Mother of all the
Churches Millitant, from which the Church Triumphant, has her name derived;
but Saint Paul, Galathians 4, and Saint John, Revelations 21. shows her name
to be derived from Jerusalem, therefore Jerusalem (and not Rome) was the Mother
of all Christian Churches Millitant: That is to say, the only figure of the
universal Mother; for as Saint Matthew, Chapter 23.9. shows the universal
Father to be, not in earth, but in Heaven: so Saint Paul, Galathians 4.26.
shows the universal Mother, not to be in earth, That must needs be the most
an^i^nt Church Millitant, tro^ which the Church Triumphant has her name
der^ued.
but in Heaven.

18 And now (Christian Reader) as we showed thee at large in our fifth
Chapter, that before the year of Christ 607. there was no Popish Church in
Rome; and here, that before the year of Christ's incarnation 44. there was no
Romish Church at all; so will we now show thee more plainly, that after there
was a Romish Church, and that she was become most famous for her Faith and
Religion, that yet even then, she was not the Mother, but a Daughter, not the
head, but a chief member of the Apostolic and Catholic Church. Tertullian,
who lived in the next age after the Apostles, wrote thus: Tertul. de
praescription. centra Haereticos.
Run over, and behold the Apostolic Churches, whereas the Apostles Chaires
are yet still continued, and whereas the Authentical writings of the Apostles
are pronounced, sounding out the voice, and representing the face of each one
of them. The next Country to you is Achaia: There have you the Church of
Corinth. If ye be not far from Macedonia, there have you the Church of
Philippi, and the Church of Thessalonica: If ye may go over into Asia, there
have ye the Church of Ephesus. If ye border near to Italy, there have ye the
Church of Rome. Tertullian De praescription. Cotra Haereticos.
These so many and so great Churches, are all that same one first Church,
planted by the Apostles, from whence issued all the rest. And so are they all
first Churches, and all Apostolic, in that they all follow one unity. And
thus we see, that albeit at this present time, when Tertullian wrote this,
Jerusalem was destroyed by enemies, Rome was yet then but a chief part of the
Church, and not as they write; The mother and mistress of all: neither as they
write, that 24. q. 1. c. Rogamas etc. Sacro sancta.
therefore all Churches are subject to the Sea of Rome, because Peter's Sea was
tranflated from Antioch to Rome, seeing Saint Cyprian in the open Council of
Africa, reprehending Stephanus Bishop of Rome for seeking that subjection,
said; Cyprian ad Qair^um.
Peter was never so insolent, or arrogant, as to advance himself as Primate,
and one unto whom nouices and punies should be subject. But here they have
marred their whole matter, and overthrown the antiquity of the Sea of Rome
(which they of long time have borne the World in hand, was established by
Christ himself; and that Peter was installed therein, immediately upon the
death of Christ) in that they affirm Peter's first Sea to be at Antioch, where
Eusebius witnesses; Anton. chro. part 1. t^^. 6. cap. 4. para^ 1. Eliseb.
(...). lib. 3. cap. 1.4.
He was Bishop, and resident upon that charge seven years, (even as Gregory
the Great also witnesses) before he came to Rome. And thus we see how wickedly
they have deluded the World, touching Peter's supreamacy, and the Antiquity of
the Church of Rome.

19 But now whereas they allege succession of universal Popes; and will prove
it both by Saint Ireneus and Saint Augustine, in that they numbered the Bishops
of Rome from Peter. Irenaeus (they say In their Callendar.
) numbered the Successors by name from Peter's time, thirteen: but let them
prove that any one of them, was by him, or any other before him, called
universal Pope, and the victory shall be theirs: if they can prove none, then
it is certain, that to his time there was none. Also whereas their Doctor
Master Harding says, Harding Apol. cap. 5. Diuisio 1. Augustine Epist. 165.
Saint Augustine, having reckoned up in order the Bishops of Rome to
Anastasius, Successor to Siricus, who was the eight and thirty after Peter
says, that in all that number and role of Bishops, there is not found one that
was a Donatist: and therefore he concludes: Ergo the Donatists be not
Catholic. So we say by the same rule, that forasmuch as Saint Augustine found
in all that roll not one that was, or had the title of universal Pope, but
Bishop only, it is clear that universal Popes cannot be Catholic. Again,
that it may appear that Saint Augustine did not approve of any such haughty
titles, nor allowed any lawful, but the name of Bishop. He with the assent of
215. Bishops in the third Council of Carthage, made this decree: Council
Carthage. Cannon 26.
It has liked us that a Bishop of a First See be not called Prince of Priests,
or Highest Priest, or any such like, but only a Bishop of a First See. Which
words albeit their Doctor Master Harding Harding Apolog. cap. 4. Diuis. 2.
would not have to extend to the Bishop of Rome; yet in the words following, by
a consequence he grants it does. For says he, By these two words, Prima
Seeds those Fathers understood any City, in which a Patriarch or Primate has
his See. I call it a First See, or rather (if it might be permitted) a Primate
See. In great Cities where the Highest Courts were kept for Justice, and where
the chief Pagan Priests of the Latins, named Primi Flamines were resident
before the coming of Christ, there after Christ's coming were Patriarchs or
Primates placed, by whom the weighty matter of Bishops should be decided. And
we proved in our 5. Chapter and 8. Section, that the four first Patriarkall
Cities were these. Jerusalem, Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria. Therefore the
words of the Councels Decree, must of force as well concern the Patriarch of
Rome, as any of the other three Patriarchs. And that it may appear they do,
their Gration alleging the words of that Council, applies them to the Bishop
of Rome. Also in the gloss are these words: Did. 99. Prime.
This is the third part of this distinction; wherein it is said, that the Pope
ought not to be called universal Bishop. And as to this Council, I find not
in any Provincial Council the name of Pope; so neither in the first, second,
nor third general Council, do I find the name of Pope once mentioned, but
the name Bishop only. True it is, that in the fourth general Council, holden
at Chalcedon, Council of Chalcedon. Action 16.
about the year of Christ 451. the name Pope was given to the Bishop of Rome,
but not by the Council, but only by the Bishop of Romes Legate, Lucentius; as
appears in the 16 action. Who when he saw that the Council had set down a
Decree (for the restraining the Bishop of Rome from the universal authority
which he challenged) and would not reuerse it, he said in the behalf of
himself, and Paschasinus his fellow Legate: If ye will not put the matter
again to voices, yet let our protestation against it be set down in record,
that we may know what to inform the Pope of the universal Church. The Judges
answered: That which we pronounced, the whole Council has approved. The title
which this Council gave to the Bishop of Rome (as appears in the beginning
of this 16. Action) was the same which they there gave to the Bishop of
Constantinople, which was Archbishop, and not Pope.

20 And now whereas their Master Harding says, Harding. Apolo. cap. 4.
Division 3.
that Gregory the Great, affirms, that this Council did offer to Leo (then
Bishop of Rome) the title of universal Pope, and he refused it, this we see
not to be so; but had it been as they say, that this Council did offer it
unto him, and he refused it; it makes as well to prove the title not lawful,
nor to descend from Saint Peter, as that the Council refused to give it unto
him. For if the Title had descended successively from Peter, and been a
lawful Title, what cause had he to refuse it? Again, if the Title bad been a
lawful Title, why did Gregory himself refuse it, when Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria did offer it unto him, and not simply refused it, but thus flowted
him for his folly? Gregory. lib. 7. Epist. 30.
Ecce (says he) Behold even the Title of your Letter, ye have written the
proud poefie, meaning me the universal Pope, notwithstanding I have forbidden
it; I beseech your holiness do so no more. Again, if the Title had been a
lawful Title, why did he call John Bishop of Constantinople, Gregory. lib. 6.
Epist. 30.
The forerunner of Antichrist, for seeking to bring it into the Church: And
say; Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 34.
By this pride of his, what else is signified, but that the time of Antichrist
is at hand? Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 34.
The King of pride is at hand, and an Army of Priests is prepared, which is a
lamentable thing to be spoken. Yea, and why to make all men to know him by that
Title, did he thus describe him, saying; Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 38.
He is Antichrist, that shall claim to be called universal Bishop, and shall
have a guard of Priests to attend upon him? And also to seek to clear all his
Predecessors to Peter's time, from ever claiming that Antichristian Title,
saying: Gregory, lib. 4. Epist. 32.36.
None of my Predecessors Bishops of Rome, ever consented to use that ungodly
name, no Bishop of Rome ever took upon him that name of singularity. And
further, to show what an unlawful Title it was to be called the universal
head of Christ's Church, and the danger that might ensue, said; Gregory, lib. 4.
Epist. 32.
If we have but one head, the fall of that head, is the fall of the whole
Church: If any man presume to take upon him the name of universal Bishop, the
whole Church falls down from her estate, when he falls which is called
universal; but far may that name of blasphemy be from all Christian minds.
By which it appears plainly, that the Romish that is now, which has an
universal Pope for her Husband and head, is not the Church of Saint Peter, but
the Church of Saint Antichrist. And therefore to say that the Romish Church
which Saint Peter first planted in Rome, was one and the same that the Church
of Rome is now, is most horrible blasphemy, and a means to bring a great
scandal upon that part of the Primitive Church. For if she was the same; then
was she that Whore of Babylon, mentioned by the Angel in the 17. Chapter of
the Revelation. For so says Ioacham Abbas of the Popish Church. Joacham on the
17. chapter of the Revelation.
The very Text it self does teach (says he) how that the woman beguiled with
gold, and which commits (pirituall fornication with the Princes of the
earth, is the very Church of Rome, which Babylonlike plays spiritually the
Whore with stocks and stones. Again, if that first Church of Rome was the
same that this Church under universal Popes is; then was she the same which
the Angel in the 18. Chapter of the Revelation says, Is fallen, and become the
habitation of Devils: for so their Saint Katharine of Siene says the Church
under the Popes is: Katharine in a prayer for the reformation.
Selling (says she) through Symony the grace of the holy Ghost, abusing
ecclesiastical matters, corrupting and killing the souls which Christ has
redeemed with his blood, etc. O Tabernacle, but of the Devil. And of which
Ioacham also says: Ioacham upon the 1. and 2. chapters of Je^emy.
This is the Synagogue of Satan, and his seat. Therefore to say that this
second Church of Rome, is the same that Saint Peter first planted in Rome, is
most damnable blasphemy. And thus much for the conclusion of all that which
we have hitherto entreated of. Now let us proceed.

CHAP. IX. Tending to resolve all men, that the Popish Church cannot be the
true and most ancient Catholic Church, because the most ancient Apostolic
Church was known by having only two Sacraments, and theirs has seven; which
just number, as they can not be found in Scriptures; so can they not be found
once named by any of the four first general Councels, or any Provincial
Council, or any of the ancient Fathers, till after the rising of the great
Antichrist in Rome. Also that their Mass was invented by man, and not the
ordinance of Christ and his Apostles. That it tends to the overthrow of the
power of Christ's Sacrifice on the Cross; casts men's minds into a doubtful
wavering of their salvation, and finally dissolueth the whole harmony of the
Scriptures, both Prophetical and Apostolical.
1 THE Papists have wonderfully deluded the multitude, in making them to
believe that the most ancient Catholic Church, received from the institution
of Christ, and the ordinance of the Apostles these seven Sacraments. The
first, the Sacrament of Baptism. The second, the Sacrament of Confirmation.
The third, the Sacrament of the Altar. The fourth, the Sacrament of Matrimony.
The fifth, the Sacrament of Orders. The sixth, the Sacrament of Penance. The
seventh, the Sacrament of Extreme Unction. But because they cannot prove by
any one place of Scripture these seven to be Sacraments, nor the number of
seven to come from the institution of Christ, or the ordinance of the
Apostles; some of them would prove it by this reason. The books in the
Apocalypse have seven Seals: The seven Angels have their seven Trumpets:
Christ has in his right hand seven Stars: Christ walks in the mids of
seven golden Candlestickes Zachary saw seven Eyes upon a stone: There were
seven Candlestickes in the Tabernacle. Now if this manner of reasoning will
serve to prove that in the true Church of Christ, there must needs be seven
Sacraments, then will this manner of reasoning prove, there must needs be but
two. First, for that the first Church consisted only but of two persons, Adam
and Heuah: Secondly, for that the first public places, wherein God appointed
himself to be served, was in number but two, the Tabernacle and the Temple:
Thirdly, for that God gave his Law to the Church in two Tables: Fourthly, for
that the whole tenure of the Doctrine, wherein God would have his Church
instructed, is contained in two testaments, Old and New: Fifthly, for that the
witnesses of those testaments, are said to be two: Sixthly, for that the
supreme governors which God set over his Church, were but two, Moses and
Aaron: Lastly, because the whole duty of all Church-gouernours, are included
in these two words, Vrim and Thummim, there must be but two Sacraments in the
Church of Christ. But their Doctor M. Harding well perceiving that this manner
of proof, will not serve the turn, he takes a better course (as he thinks)
for he will prove his five added Ceremonies, to be Sacraments, because they
were called Sacraments by some of the ancient Fathers, as indeed we grant
they were: but what of this, seeing we can prove, that they called, not only
five other Ceremonies Sacraments, but many more: as for example, Tertullian
called the general state of the Christian Faith, The Sacrament of Christian
Religion, Tertull. contra Marcionem. li. 4.
Saint Hierome called Martyrdom a Sacrament, Hierome ad Oceanum.
Saint Augustine called the form of the Cross a Sacrament, Aug. in Sermon. De
Sanctis 19.
Leo called the Vow of Virginity a Sacrament: Leo inter Decreta Leonis. cap.
14.
Saint Bernard, he called the washing of feet, The Sacrament of daily sins:
Bern. in Sermon. de Coena Dom.
And yet besides these other five, were many more called Sacraments: Saint
Hillarie Hilar. in Mat. Cannon. 11.12. and 23.
in diverse places of his writings calls Prayer a Sacrament: Fasting a
Sacrament: Weeping a Sacrament, and the whole tenure of the Scriptures, a
Sacrament. For as the Jews, before the coming of Christ, had brought into a
custom, to call their Oblations, and whatsoever tended to the worship and
service of God, Sacrifices: So after the coming of Christ, had the Christians
brought into a custom, to call almost all whatsoever tended to the worship and
service of Christ, Sacraments. Saint Augustine speaking of these and other such
new devices (which were then crept into the Church) says; August. in his 219.
Epistle.
Albeit they be not against the faith, yet with servile burdens they so
oppress our very religion, which God of his mercy would have to be free under
few and most manifest Sacraments of divine service, that the state of the Jews
is much more tolerable: for the Jews, notwithstanding they knew the time of
liberty, yet were they subject only to the pacts and burdens of the Law of
God, and not to the devices of men. Again he says; In his third Book of
Christian Doctrine, 6. cap.
Our Lord and his Apostles have delivered unto us a few Sacraments instead of
many, and the same in doing most easy, in signification most excellent, in
observation most reverend; as is the Sacrament of Baptism, and the celebration
of the Body and Blood of our Lord. Again, in another place he says; De
Symbolo ad Catechumenos.
These be the two Sacraments of the Church: If these two, then not Scauen.

2 Furthermore, that it may plainly appear, that the true Christian Church,
is to be known only by having two Sacraments, and not Seven: Let us hear
what Saint Chrysostom says, his words be these: Chrysostom. of the Work^ upon
Matthew. hom. 49.
All those things which appertained to Christ indeed, have the Heretics in
their Schisms, Churches, the Scriptures of God, Bishops, and other order of
Clerks: likewise Baptism, and the Sacrament of thanksgiving, and to
conclude, Christ himself. So that hereby we see it plainly proved, that to
Saint Chrysostomes time, (which was about two hundred years before the Papists
had a Church) the true Church of Christ was known by having two Sacraments,
and not Seven: and therefore the Popish Church, by retaining seven
Sacraments, is apparently known to be not the true Church of Christ. That man
of God Martin Luther (which before had been a Papist), speaking of this
matter, says thus; Luth. Babilonicall Captin.
In proper speech, those we call Sacraments, which are promises with signs
annexed, the rest that have no signs, are bare promises; wherefore speaking
hereof precisely and strictly, there are only two Sacraments in the Church of
God, Baptism and the Bread, forasmuch as in these only, we find the signs
ordained of God, and also the promise of remission of sins. But here because
it may be, they will object and say, that Luther was but of a latter hatch, and
but of less then one hundred years standing, let them hear what he says that
lived but in one age next after the Apostles, Tertullian by name, thus he wrote
against Martion the Heretic: Tertull. lib. 4. against Marti.
How do thou break marriage, neither coupling the man and the woman
together; nor being coupled, otherwise admitting them to the Sacrament of
Baptism, and thanksgiving. Note (says the Translatour) how he strikes away
five of the Popish Sacraments, which of their own heads they have devised.
Yea, and let them hear what he says that lived in the next age after that,
S. Cyprian by name, thus he says: Cypr. lib. 2. Epist. 1. ad Stephan.
Then may they be thoroughly sanctified, and become the children of God, if they
be newborn by both the Sacraments. Now in that he says, both, it is clear,
that he acknowledged but only two Sacraments. But why should we trouble the
Reader any longer about this matter, seeing the question is resolved by these
two Writers of their own. Bessarion and Paschasius? Bessarion says, Bessa. of
the Euchar.
We read that these only two Sacraments were delivered us plainly in the
Gospel. Paschasius says, Pascha. of the Supper of our Lord.
These be the Sacraments of Christ in the Catholic Church, Baptism, and the
Body and Blood of our Lord. Therefore forasmuch as by Scripture, they cannot
prove their five ceremonies to be Sacraments; nor by the ancient Fathers
(before the rising of Antichrist) the number of Seven only; and that we have
proved, that for four hundred years next after Christ, there was but only
our two Sacraments in the Christian Church; that must needs be a counterfeit
Christian Church, and of a latter hatch, that will be known to be the true
Catholic Church, by retaining more then two, nay then three times two
Sacraments. And that indeed it may more plainly appear, that by retaining
more then two, it is not the true Church: one of the Popes own Pen men,
describing the true Church by her own notes and marks, says thus: Nicol.
Cusanus De potestate Ecclesiae Romanae, Epist. 1.
In this sensible world that is here beneath, we must learn by sensible
Tokens to know the very Church of Christ: for otherwise we are not able to
reach the truth. And a little after: This Church stands of them that declare
by sensible and outward tokens, that they be partakers of Christ, as they be,
that confess Christ to be the Son of God. And therefore this Church has
certain holy Tokens, or Sacraments, ordained to that end, that thereby we may
know them that be of Christ, so far forth as by such Tokens coniecturall
knowledge may be gathered. Therefore I say, That this Church of Christ, by this
coniecturall judgment is counted holy, notwithstanding wicked men and
Hypocrites cover themselves under the same outward tokens. And what those
tokens are, he expresses in these words following: And receive Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, as well as the Godly. And thus much for this point. Now let
us see what we can say to the Sacrament of the Altar, or Mass.

3 Their Mass they would bear the world in hand, was the ordinance of Christ,
and formed and framed by the Apostles: and that Saint Peter said their Mass at
Rome, and Saint James at Jerusalem. But how true this is, these words of their
Johannes Boemos, will plainly demonstrate: Johan. Bohem. In his Book of the
beginning of things. cap. 1^.
The Mass (says he) so call they the Sacrifice, was first used to be done in
such simple sort, as is yet accustomed on Good Friday, and Easter even, with
certain Lessons before it: But then Pope Celestinus put to the office of the
Mass. Thelesphorus, Gloria in excelsis: But Hilarious of Pictauia, made, Et in
terra. Samachus ordained it to be sung. The Salutations which by the term of
Dominus vobiscum be made seven times in the Mass, were taken out of the Book
of Ruth, by Clement and Anaclet, and put in, in their places. Galasius made up
all the rest to the Offertory, in the same order they be used, except the
Sequences and the Creed: whereof Nicholas put to the first, and Damassus the
next: according to the Synod of Constantinople. Another added the Confiteor:
Gregory linked on the Offertory. Leo, the Preface. Gelasius the great Cannon,
and the less. The Sanctus, blessed Sixtus: and Gregory the Pater noster.
Sergius tacked on Agnus, and Gregory the post communion. The closing up of all
with, Ite missa est, Benedicamus, Deo gratias, was Leoes invention. Now
forasmuch as themselves witness, that their Mass was but the invention of
man, and not fully framed and finished of more then six hundred years after
the decease of all the Apostles: How untrue must it needs be, that Saint Peter
and Saint James said this Mass, or that the antiquity thereof came from
Christ and his Apostles? Now that we may see also whereunto it tends, and
know the better how to answer unto it, let us observe their own definition:
thus they define it.

A propitiatory Sacrifice; a Sacrifice to satisfy Gods justice for sin, and
to reconcile him and his people together, by the daily, or often offering the
body of Christ for the sins of the quick and dead. 4 Now touching this
definition, we are advisedly to consider how it can possibly stand with the
truth; for if it be of necessity unto salvation, to have the body of Christ
daily, or oftentimes offered for sin; then is it certain, that Christ by the
Sacrifice of his death upon the Cross, did not take it away: and then are all
these Scriptures confounded, which deny it needful to have any more oblations
for sin, or the body of Christ any more offered for the same: namely, where
the Author to the Hebrews says, Chapter 10.14. Heb. 10.14. Heb. 10.1. Heb.
9.26.
For with one oblation has he consecrated for ever them that be sanctified:
and where he also says, Chapter 10.10. We are sanctified even by the offering
of the body of Jesus Christ once made: and again, where he further says,
Chapter 9.26. Now in the end of the World has he appeared once to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself: Heb. 10.18.
and also where he concludes of this point thus, Chapter 10.18. Where
remission of these things is, there is no more offering for sin. Wherefore if
it be true, that of necessity Christ must continually be offered for sin;
then are these testimonies most untrue: but in that they are yea, and Amen,
they most truly declare the definition of their Mass to be false, and that the
necessity of daily sacrificing for sin, is not grounded upon the truth. Also
seeing that under the Gospel, there must not only be but one only oblation
for sin, but also but once offered, and that by Christ himself; the Papists
are condemned for notorious heretics, that will have so many thousand
oblations, and so many times offered by others, For do they not thereby make
that one Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross, as insufficient for the taking
away of sin, as the daily sacrificing the bodies of beasts, and shedding the
blood of Calves in Moses Law, which were daily offered, because they served
only for sins past, and not for sins to come, and therefore as the holy
Ghost says, Hebrews 10. made nothing perfect? Wherefore who sees not, but
that the bringing into the Church the necessity of daily sacrificing for sin,
brings in with it the utter overthrow of the efficacy of Christ's death and
bloud-shedding. But forasmuch as the holy Ghost (speaking of the daily offering
of Christ for sin) says Hebrews 7.27. Which needed not daily, as those high
Priests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples; for that did he once when he offered up himself: their daily
sacrificing for sin, is not only superfluous and vain, but also most
heretical and blasphemous.

5 But what shall we say now, have they nothing to answer? yea verily, for
thus in effect they say: Thomas of Aquine. De venerable. Sacra. Alter. cap.
We acknowledge and confess, that Christ by the sacrifice of his death, freed
us from the guilt of original sin (that is, from that one sin of Adam) but
for the malediction of all our actual transgressions, that to be taken away by
the blessed sacrifice of the Mass: which being true, then are we more
beholden to their sacrifice, then to Christ's sacrifice. For if Christ by his
sacrifice, took away only the guilt of that one sin, and left us guilty of
many thousand sins; what has he done for us? but the sacrifice of the Mass,
1. Epistle of John, 1. chap. 7 verse.
which takes away the whole multitude of our sins, that is it which we are
beholden to indeed. But how true it is, that Christ by the sacrifice of his
death and bloud-shedding, cleansed us but from that one sin only, these
words of Saint John will make it plain, where he says, 1 Epistle, 1 Chapter,
7 verse. The blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin: and also these words
of Saint Paul; Titus 2 Chapter, 14 verse. Titus 2 chap. 14 verse.
He redeemed us from all iniquity: and likewise these words, where he speaking
of our condemnation by original sin, and the restoring us again by Christ,
says; Romans 5 Chapter, 16 verse. om. 5.16 ver.
Neither is the gift so, as that which entered in by one that sinned: for the
fault came of one offense to condemnation, but the gift is of many offenses to
justification.

5 Again, if it be true, that the suffering and death of Christ, served but
for the healing the wound of original sin, and not also for our actual
transgressions; then is not this true which the Prophet Esaias says, Chapter
43.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities;
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
Therefore it is very clear, that if the Papists doctrine be true, the doctrine
of the Prophets and Apostles are merely false. But if we shall believe them,
that Christ by his sacrifice upon the Cross, did satisfy the wrath and
justice of God, for one part; and they by their sacrifice upon the Altar for
another part, and so Christ with them, and they with Christ, as fellow-helpers
and copartners together, do fully satisfy Gods justice for all sin; how
shall we believe the Prophet in another place? where (in the person of Christ)
he says, Esaias 63.3.
Chapter 63.3. I have trodden the Winepresse alone, and of all people there is
none with me. Or, that which the Author to the Hebrews says of Christ, Heb.
1.3.
Chapter 1.3. He has purged our sins by himself: or that which he says,
Heb. 9.26.
Chapter 9.26. He has put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Wherefore
as I said, if we must embrace their doctrine for truth, then must we reject the
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles as erroneous. But what says Saint
Ambrose to this partnership in taking away sin? even thus he says: Ambrose
in his 9. Book, 76. Epistle.
The Lord remains alone; for no man can be partner with God in forgiving of
sins, this is Christ's only office, that has taken away the sins of the
World. Therefore to restrain the power of Christ's sacrifice to that only one
sin of Adam, that so the multitude of our transgressions might be done away
by the sacrifice of their Mass, is utterly to overthrow the proper prerogative
of Christ, and the whole virtue of his death and passion, in which the matter
of remission of sins, justification, and salvation, does only consist. For
as the Apostle Saint Paul says, Colossians 1.22.
Colossians 1.22. In the body of his flesh through death, he made us holy and
unblameable, and without fault in the sight of God: and set at peace, through
the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the things in heaven.
Wherefore to bring in any other sacrifice for sin, but only the oblation of
Christ's body broken, and his blood shed, and that offered by himself once for
all; is utterly to overthrow all whatsoever Christ has done for man's
redemption; to cast men's minds into a doubtful wavering of their salvation,
to prove the Prophets and Apostles false witnesses, and finally, to dissolve
the whole harmony of the Scriptures, both Prophetical and Apostolical.
Hebrews 9.14
For in that the holy Ghost says, Hebrews 9.14. Christ offered up himself;
it is clear, that no sacrifice can serve for sin, but where Christ himself
is the Priest. Also seeing he says, verse 22. Without shedding of blood,
there is no remission of sins; Cap. 9.22.
if Christ himself should come amongst us, and offer himself never so often,
and not shed his blood, it could do us no good. Again, seeing he says
likewise thus of Christ, Verse 25. Not that he should offer himself often,
Cap. 9.25.
for then must he often have suffered since the foundation of (...); he
offering himself never so often, without as (...) death, could do us as
little good. Therefore w^^^^eeth not but that the sacrifice of the Mass,
whereat Christ is not the Priest, nor in which the blood of Christ is shed, nor
he suffering death, how often soever it be celebrated for our sins, profits
just nothing at all, nor does any good? Nay, rather who sees not what hurt it
does, in that men are induced to look for that there, which indeed is not
there to be had? For whereas they make the multitude to believe, that they
sacrifice in their Mass the very body of Christ for their sins; the
Scripture denies him to be there, or any where else but in heaven. Heb. 10.12.
For as the Author to the Hebrews says, Chap. 10.12. This man after he had
offered one Sacrifice for sins, sits for ever at the right hand of God,
and from thence tarrieth till his enemies be made his foote-stoole: which as
Saint Luke shows, Acts 3.21. is till the end of the World: and therefore how
can they come by his body to offer in their Mass? As for that they say, it is
easily to be come by, because by the words of consecration, the bread is
transubstantiated into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood; is
easily confuted by Saint Chrysostom, Theodoret, Pope Galasius, and their
Bishop Fisher, Chrysostom says, Chrysostom Ad Caesatima Monachum.
The bread when it is sanctified by means of the Priest, it is exalted to the
name of Lords body, yet the nature of bread does still remain. Again he
says, Hom. 11. on Matthew.
The very body of Christ it self, is not in the holy vessels, but the mystery
thereof is there contained. Theodoret says, Theo. in Diologue 1.
The sacramental signs go not from their own nature after sanctification.
Pope Galasius says, Gala. against Eutiches.
There leaves not to be the substance of bread and wine, nor the nature of
wine. Their Bishop Fisher says; Fisher against Luther.
No man shall prove by the very words of the Gospel, that any Priest in these
our days does consecrate the very body and blood of Christ. And a little after
he says. Neither is there any word found here (meaning in the new Testament)
to prove that there is the true presence of Christ's flesh and blood in our
Mass. So that by this who sees not how impiously they delude the ignorant, in
making them to believe that they have the body of Christ in the Pixe, or
Priests box, to sacrifice for their sins: and cause them also to commit
idolatry, in adoring the bread for Christ?

6 Now therefore (Christian Reader) forasmuch as thou heardest before, that the
holy Ghost makes it a necessity, that so often as Christ is offered for
sin, he must as often be crucified to death; it is clear, that the Papists
necessity of daily offering, brings in with it, a necessity of daily
crucifying and killing of Christ. Wherefore in ordayning an order of daily
sacrificers of Christ; what else do they, but establish an order of daily
crucifiers and killers of him? in which therefore it is evident, they show
themselves much more horrible and vile, then Judas did in betraying of Christ:
For notwithstanding Judas for filthy lucre delivered his Master to be
crucified; yet did he not seek to procure an order for the continual
crucifying of him: neither to justify his action, did he contend with the
gain sayers; but with great horror of conscience, condemned it as evil, and
after a sort repented, and brought again the money, the hier of his fact, and
delivered it back to the owners: but these murderers; not only contend for
the necessity of that they do; but also have received great sums of money,
oftentimes to sacrifice, and consequently to crucify Christ: and yet have they
not by restoring any part thereof, showed so much as that sign of Judas his
outward repentance. Moreover, it is very clear, that this their doings, has a
far worse effect, then Judas his action had; for Judas his action (in respect
of Gods determinate counsel,) furthered man's salvation: but the necessity of
daily sacrificing for sin, (under the Gospel) utterly overthrows man's
salvation. Malac. 1.11.
And yet notwithstanding, they stick not to say, that this is that Sacrifice
of the New Testament, which the Prophet Malachie fore-tolde, God had appointed
the Christian Gentiles, to offer unto him in every place: whereas it is clear
it is meant of the whole spiritual worship and service of GOD under the
Gospel, which consists of preaching, praying, and thanksgiving, as may
plainly appear by these ancient Fathers interpretations upon the same place
of the Prophet. Tertullian says, Tertullian in his Exhortation unto Chastity.
The pure Sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, that should be offered in every
place, is the preaching of the Gospel to the end of the World. Saint Hierome
says, Hierome upon the first of Malachie.
The Prophet Malachie means hereby, that the prayers of holy people should
be offered to God, not only in Iewrie, but also in all places. Also Justinius
Martyr says, Justinius Martyr, in Dialoguo cum Triphone.
Esaias promised not the restoring of a bloody Sacrifice, but the true and
spiritual Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving. Therefore we see that the
spiritual Sacrifice under the Gospel, is preaching, praying and thank
esgiuing. To conclude, whereas they would have made the world to belecue, that
their Mass (and the use thereof) is but the application, or applying of the
Sacrifice of Christ's Death and Blood unto us: we see it tends to the utter
destroying of Christ's Sacrifice, for that they make their Sacrifice of the
Mass, the very substance of the thing it self.

CHAP. X. Tending to resolve all men, that the words of Christ, in the sixth
Chapter of Saint John's Gospel (touching the eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood) are only but figurative speeches: as also those his other words, when
he instituted the Sacrament, and delivering the Bread to his Apostles, said:
Take, eat, this is my body which is given for you.
1 OUR Savior Christ, John 6.59.
teaching in the Synagogue at Capernaum, delivered these words unto the Jews,
saying: I am the living Bread that came down from heaven: If any man eat of
this Bread, he shall live for ever: and the Bread that I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Verse 51.
Again, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man, Verse 53. Verse
54.55.56.57.
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. And again, Whosoever eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: he
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As
the living Father has sent me, so live I by the Father; and he that eats me,
even he shall live by me.

2 Now in these words (Christian Reader) we are chiefly to observe these three
things. First, that the scope and drift of our Savior Christ, was to enduce
the Jews to have understood, that he was the second person in the Godhead,
equal with the Father; and that it was of necessity unto salvation, that they
should eat and feed on him, as he was God. And this is it which he said. I am
the living bread which came down from heaven: If any man eat of this bread,
he shall live for ever. Secondly, he would they should have known, that he
being the second person in the Godhead, had taken into his divine nature flesh
and blood: and that it was also of as great a necessity unto salvation, that
they should eat and drink the same, and feed on his flesh and blood. And
this is it which he also said. Christ must be eaten as he is God, as he is
man, and as he is both God and man.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. Thirdly, he would they should have perceived, that as he was both
God and man, so it was also of as great a necessity unto salvation, that they
should feed on both his natures vnitedly together. And this is it which he
further said unto them. He that eats me, even he shall live by me. By which
we see it evident and plain, that none can be saved, but those that do eat
Christ; not only as he is God, but also as he is man; and also as he is both
God and man. Eaten then he must be of necessity, (as both the Papists and we
confess) but the manner how he must be eaten, is all the matter in question;
whether spiritually by faith, or corporally with the mouth and teeth.

3 The Jews supposing Christ had been man only; when they heard him say he
was the bread of God that came down from heaven to give life unto the World,
To eat and feed on Christ's flesh, is to believe that by the suffering in his
flesh, he took away the sin of our flesh.
and that he that did eat thereof, should not die; they were offended: but
when he added further, and said; And the bread that I will give, is my flesh,
which I will give for the life of the World, of which whosoever shall eat,
shall have everlasting life; they raged and murmured among themselves, saying.
How can this man give us his flesh to eat? This is an hard saying; who can
hear it? But when our Savior perceived their carnal understanding, in which
they so grossly erred in the manner of eating, by imagining they should have
eaten him with their mouths and teethes, as their Fathers did eat Manna; then
in the 58. verse fully to resolve them, that he meant no such kind of eating,
he said. The Jews erring in the manner of eating, could profit nothing by the
matter they should eat.
Not as your Fathers did eat Manna. And yet more fully to resolve them, that
indeed he meant a spiritual kind of eating; in the 57. verse he said
plainly thus: As the living Father has sent me, so live I by the Father, and
he that eats me, even he shall live by me. By which words he declared unto
them, that as he did not live carnally by the Father, but spiritually; so
should they live spiritually by him. Howbeit, The cause was, they would none of
his interpretations.
such was their perverseness, that they would none of his interpretations, but
because he had said, they must eat his Godhead, they would no otherwise
understand, but that he meant, they should eat it carnally; and also because
he had said they must eat his manhood, they would no otherwise, but that
they should eat his flesh corporally: then said Christ further unto them, It
is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: Meaning as they
understood it should be eaten; for otherwise his flesh was as profitable as
his Godhead (unto those that did eat it after that manner as he meant) else
would he not have said. Whosoever eats my flesh, has eternal life: and
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. But therefore they failing in the manner, could profit nothing by
the matter they should eat, The manner wherein they erred, Christ himself
shows, Verse 64.
and the manner wherein they failed, he declared in the 64. verse, was,
because they did not eat him spiritually by faith. For said he: But there are
some of you which believe not.

4 Thus then we may be fully resolved, that the manner of eating which Christ
meant, was spiritually by faith, which he made plain unto them, not only in
that 64. verse, but almost throughout the whole Chapter: for we may there see,
that whenever he spoke of eating; still he added believing; only to
manifest unto them, that by eating, Eating and believing, is both but one thing.
he meant believing. Also that they might the more plainly have understood,
that by eating and believing, he meant but one, and one only thing, he
expounded it unto them, by that one only effect, which he declared, both
eating and believing has. For as in the 54. verse, he said: Whosoever eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at
the last day. So in the 40. verse he said: This is the will of him that sent
me, that whosoever sees the Son, and believes in him, should have
everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. Wherefore seeing he
showed them so plainly, that the effect of eating and believing, was but one
and the same thing, they might the more easily have understood, that by eating
and believing, he meant but only one and the same thing; and so consequently,
that they should eat him spiritually by faith, and not after a carnal and
corporal manner.

5 And thus (Christian Reader) have we found out the true meaning of those
words of Christ, touching the eating and feeding on him: even by conferring
place with place, and verse with verse; which is doubtless the most surest way
for the bringing the truth to light, even by expounding one Scripture by
another. For as Saint Chrysostom says; Chrisost. in his 12. Hom. Genesis.
The holy Scripture expounds it self, and suffers not the Reader to err.
And as Saint Augustine says; August. in his Bocke of questions, 83. the 69.
quest.
The circumstances of the Scriptures, is wont to give light, and to open the
meaning. As also in another place, 3. Book, 29. Chap. of Christian doctrine.
Dark places are to be expounded by more plain places. The surest way of
expounding the Scripture, is to expound one Scripture by another. But the
Papists refusing to take this course, have most grossly erred in the true
understanding of Christ; and also most ignorantly charged us to hold that
heresy of those obstinate and blind Capernaites, whereas indeed, themselves
hold the heresy. For their heresy was (as we see) that Christ meant a
corporal kind of eating, even as they hold; but we hold clean contrary: and
therefore not we, but they are of the fellowship of those first Authors of that
heresy; who as the Text declares, did therein so fall from Christ, as that
they forsook his company. Wherefore, all that will wilfully fall away from
Christ, let them with those cauilling Capernaites, hypocritical Disciples, and
our counterfeit Catholics, hold that heresy.

6 But now forasmuch as it is an usual thing with them, whenever they see
themselves convicted by Scripture, to tell us, that no Scripture is of any
private interpretation; and therefore unless we can show them, that the same
Scripture is so expounded by the ancient Fathers, they will not admit it, be
the sense made never so plain: Let them therefore hear how the ancient
Fathers testimonies do expound those words of Christ.

7 Saint Origin writing upon those words. Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, says; Origin in
his 7. Hom. upon Leuiticus.
Consider that these things written in Gods Book, are figures, and therefore
examine and understand them as spiritual, and not as carnal men: for if you
understand them as carnal men, they hurt you: for even in the Gospel there is
found a letter that kills: for if you follow the letter or words of this that
Christ said; Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, this letter kills. Again, Origin upon the same words says: Orig. in
his 7. Book upon Leuiticus.
This letter kills; but if thou take it spiritually, it kills not but in it
is a quickening spirit: understand therefore spiritually those things that be
spoken. Also Saint Augustine upon the same words says: Augustine in his 3.
Book of Christian doctrine.
Now this saying of Christ, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you, seems to command a heinous and a
wicked thing, therefore it is a figure. Again, writing upon those words: It is
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, thus he expounds
them. Upon the 98. Psalm.
Ye shall not eat this body that ye see, neither shall ye drink that blood
that they shall shed which crucify me; I have commended unto you a certain
Sacrament, being spiritually understood, it will give you life. Again, In his
27. Treatise upon John.
When you shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before, then shall
you understand that he gives not his body in such sort as ye imagine, neither
that he is to be consumed by bits and morsels. Also fully to resolve all true
Christians that Christ meant, that none could eat him effectually unto
salvation, but such only as eat him spiritually, he says; In his 26 treatise
upon John.
He that eats inwardly, not that eats outwardly; he that eats in heart,
not that presses with the teeth: to believe in Christ, that is the eating the
bread of life; prepare not your mouths, prepare your hearts. And again he
says; In his 26 treatise upon John.
Our Lord called himself the bread that came down from heanen, exhorting us
to believe in him; for to believe in him, that is the eating the bread of life:
he eats that believes in him. Also in reproving all those in particular,
that would eat Christ carnally, he says: In his Book against the Jews, 9
cap.
Why do thou prepare thy belly and thy teeth, believe, and thou have eaten.
Therefore says Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom in his 46. Hom. upon John.
If any man understand those words of Christ carnally, he shall surely profit
nothing thereby; for what mean these words: The flesh profits nothing, he
meant not his flesh, God forbid; but he meant of all these that fleshly, and
carnally understand those things which Christ spoke, and what is carnal
understanding else, but to understand them as they be spoken? And therefore it
is which in another place he says: In his 14. Hom. upon John.
God will not that we understand the words of holy Scripture simply and
plainly as they lie, but with great wisdom and discretion. And that indeed
it may more plainly appear, that by retaining more then two, it is not the
true Church: one of the Popes own Penmen describing the true Church by her
own notes and marks, says thus. In Ioh. Hom. 39.
In this sensible world, that is here beneath, we must learn by sensible
tokens to know the very Church of Christ: Nicol. Cusaenus, De potestate
Ecclesiae Romana, Epist. 1.
For otherwise we are not able to reach the truth. And a little after. This
Church stands of them, that declare by sensible and outward tokens, that they
be partakers of Christ, as they be, that confess Christ to be the Son of
God. And therefore this Church has certain holy tokens, or Sacraments,
ordained to that end, that thereby we may know them that be of Christ, so far
forth as by such tokens coniectured knowledge may be gathered. Therefore I say,
That this Church of Christ, by this coniecturall judgment is counted holy,
notwithstanding wicked men, and hypocrites cover themselves under the same
outward tokens. And what those tokens are, he expresses in these words
following: And receive Baptism, and the Lords Supper, as well as the godly.
And thus much for this point. Now let us see what we can say to the Sacrament
of the Altar, or Mass. And thus we see that those words of Christ, are
spiritually to be understood, and not carnally, as the Papists understand them:
neither do I see how they can properly apply those words to the Sacrament; for
that we see, the scope and drift of Christ, was only there, to draw them to
the knowledge of him, as he then was, to wit, both God and man, and that he
being God, was become man, to satisfy the wrath and justice of God for man, in
the same flesh that man had offended in, that so they might have believed, that
he was the same Messiah and Savior, foretold by Moses, on whom they did rely:
but no one word of the Sacrament: therefore it seems to me, those words do
not directly concern the Sacrament, or Sacramental eating. And the rather
also may they be of my mind, for that these of their own side, have thus
written, Michael vehe Michael vehe contra Lutherum.
of eating the Sacrament, Christ in the sixth Chapter of Saint John, spoke
nothing. And this he there proves. Their Doctor Doring says: Doring. in Psalm.
110.
That saying has no foundation, or warrant in the words written by Saint John.
Therefore to speak of the receiving of the Sacrament, in true understanding,
it has no force. And a little after. For this was spoken long before the
Sacrament was ordained. Therefore out of those words, they can make no good
proof, touching the communion of the Sacrament, seeing the Sacrament at that
time had no being. Wherefore let us now come to the words, which properly and
directly appertains to the Sacrament, or Sacramental eating. Which when
Christ delivered the Sacrament to his Apostles, were these. 1 Cor. 11.24.
Take, eat, this is my body, which is given for you: or as Saint Paul says:
Which is broken for you.

8 Now touching these words (Christian Reader) which they would have also
literally to be taken, and not figuratively to be understood, it will plainly
appear, that they are but figurative speeches. First, for that when as Christ
delivered the bread, and said, Take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for
you; his body was not then broken, but was broken the next day after. Secondly,
for that it was his very body that delivered the bread, which he called his
body, and it is certain he had not two bodies: therefore in calling the bread
his body, and the wine his blood, they were only such figurative speeches, as
he used at other times; as when he called himself a door, John 10.7. John
15.1. John 10.11. Apoc. 5.5. Apoc. 14.1. Genesis 33.20. Judge. 6.24. Romans 4.17.
a vine, a shepherd, etc. and where he is called a Lion, a Lamb, etc. And as
are used in many other places of the Scriptures, as Genesis 33. Where Jacob
called the Altar which he had set up; The mighty God. And likewise in Judges
the 6. where Gideon called his Altar Jehovah: which were none of them so, but
figuratively. And therefore it is which Saint Paul says, Romans 4. God calls
those things which be not, as though they were: even as himself also did, when
he called the stony Rock Christ: which as Saint Augustine says; August. in
his 57. question upon Leuit. Genesis 17.10.
Was not Christ by substance, but by signification. And as God himself did,
Genesis 17. where he called circumcision, which was but the Sacrament, or sign
of his covenant, The Covenant. Therefore it is certain, that those words of
Christ, in calling bread his body, and wine his blood; were but the like
figurative speeches. And that the Reader may be the more fully resolved, that
they were indeed but figurative speeches, let him diligently observe these
testimonies of the ancient Fathers.

9 Tertullian says; In his Book against Martion.
Jesus took bread, and giving it among his Disciples, made it his body,
saying: This is my body; that is to say (says he) a figure of my body. Saint
Ambrose says, Ambrose 4. Book 5. Cha. of Sacraments.
The Priest says; Make unto us this oblation to be acceptable, which is the
figure of the body and blood of Christ. Theodoret says; Theodoret in his 1.
Dialogue.
It is clear that they are the figures of those things whereof they bear the
name. So that howsoever, as Saint Cyprian says: Cyprian de unction Chrismatis.
Christ in his last Supper gave to his Apostles, with his own hands, Bread and
Wine, which he called his Body and Blood, yet on the Cross he gave his very
body to be wounded with the hands of Soldiers, that the Apostles might declare
to the World, how, and in what manner, bread and wine may be the flesh and
blood of Christ, and the manner he straight ways declares thus: that those
things which do signify, and those things which are signified by them, may be
both called by one name. And therefore it is also which Saint Augustine says;
August. 57. question upon Leuit.
A thing which signifies, is wont to be called by the name of the thing which
it signifies. And in another place, In his 23. Epistle to Benifacius.
For if Sacraments had not some similitudes or likeness of those things
whereof they be Sacraments, then they should be no Sacraments at all; but for
their similitude and likeness commonly they have the names of those things
whereof they be Sacraments Therefore (says he) after a certain manner of
speech, the Sacrament of Christ's body, is Christ's body, the Sacrament of
Christ's blood, is Christ's blood. And in another place thus; In his 18. Book,
48. Cha. of the City of God.
All signs and tokens, seem in a manner to bear the persons of the things
themselves, that they signify: So the Apostle says; The Rock was Christ, for
that the Rock whereof it was spoken, signified Christ. And thus we see the
matter made as clear as the Sun that shines at noone day; that those words
of Christ, in calling bread his body, and wine his blood, were only but
figurative speeches: and therefore the bread and wine, are only but figures of
his body and blood. But yet forasmuch as the Antichristians have so besotted
the multitude, in making them to believe, that after the words of consecration,
the bread and wine is transubstantiated into the natural body and blood of
Christ; let us hear a little further what the Fathers say more fully to this
point.

10 Saint Ambrose hereof says thus: Ambrose in his Book of those things that
are declared by the mist ries, the last Chap.
Before consecration, another kind is named: but after consecration, the body
of Christ is signified. Theodoret says: Th^odo. in his 1. Dialogue.
Christ did honor the visible tokens with the names of his body and blood, not
changing the nature, but adding grace unto nature. Again he says; In his 2.
Dialogue.
The sacramental signs go not from their own nature after sanctification.
Also Saint Chrysostom says: Chrisost. ad Caesatium Monachum.
The bread before it be sanctified, is called bread; but when it is sanctified
by the means of the Priest, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is
exalted to the name of the Lords body, yet the nature of bread does still
remain. And therefore in another place he says plainly thus: In his 11. Hom.
upon Matthew.
The very body of Christ it self, is not in the holy vessels, but the mystery
or sacrament thereof is there contained. But that which is more then all this,
the Pope himself says, even Gelasius by name: Gelasius against Eutiches.
There leaves not to be the substance of bread and wine, or the nature of
wine: and indeed the image, or representation of the body and blood, and the
likeness thereof, is published in the ministration of the mysteries. Therefore
it is which their Bishop Fisher says: Fisher against Luther.
No man shall be able to prove by the very words of the Gospel, that there is
the true presence of Christ's flesh and blood in our Mass. To conclude, Saint
Augustine says: August. in his Book of profit of repentance.
It is a dangerous matter, and a servitude of the soul, to take the sign
instead of the thing that is signified. And here have we sufficient experience
in the Papists, who by taking the sign for the thing it self, commit most
horrible idolatry, in adoring the bread for Christ.

CHAP. XI. Tending to resolve all men, that we ought not to pray to Saints,
but to God only: neither to worship Saints, but God alone: And that it is
Sacrilege to do either.
1. A Great part of the World (Christian Reader) has of long time been carried
away with the multitude of Popish delusions, amongst which this is one. Namely
to say: We must go to God by the mediation of Saints, as by noble men we go
unto a King. Hereby have they drawn the people to impart the glory of the
Creator, to the creature: even to pray to Saints, whereas they should pray
only to God. For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, Psalm 50. Psalm
50.15.
Call upon me in the day of thy trouble, and I will hear thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Now therefore seeing the Lord commands us to come unto him, why
should we go first to any other, yea, first or last? Again, seeing the Lord
accounts it a part of his glory to be prayed unto, is it not a stealing from
him a chief part of his glory to pray unto others? yea, verily. And therefore
all those that make any intercession to Saints, can no more look to obtain any
good at the hand of God, then thieves can look to obtain good at the hands of
those from whom they rob and steal.

2 Our Savior says, Matthew 23. One is your Doctor, Matthew 23.8. Acts 3.22.
1 Cor. 1.30.
even Christ. Saint Luke says, Chap. 3. Him must we hear in all things.
Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 1. He is our wisdom. Now if Christ be our Doctor and
Teacher, and him whom we must hear in all things, and also our wisdom by
which we are to be directed: then ought we to learn of him, both to whom we
should pray, and also the manner how to pray. And hereof have we a plain
example in the Apostles, who knowing that the whole World was to be taught by
him, desired him to teach them how to pray. Luke 11.^.
Master (said they) teach us to pray, as John also taught his Disciples: and
Christ being as willing to teach them, as they were to learn, began thus to
instruct them, not only in the manner how, but also to whom they ought to
pray. When ye pray (said he) pray unto your Father which is in secret, and he
shall reward you openly. Again (said he) After this manner pray ye. Matthew
6.9.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Now if Christ were wise enough to teach
his Apostles, then are we to learn by his directions, not only not first to
go to Saints, but not at all, but only to God the Father of Heaven.

Wherefore then this utterly condemns the Papists of most wretched impiety,
that will teach men first to go to Saints. Also it flatly condemns them of
arrogance, in taking upon them to be wiser then Christ; who in his heavenly
wisdom, knew best how to instruct Gods children in the right way, for the
most speedy and surest obtaining their petitions.

3 It was not without great cause (Christian Reader) that St Paul said: Christ
is our wisdom. For had ^e sent us to the Saints departed, yea, had he picked
out of all the Patriarks and Prophets, Abraham the Father of the faithful, to
have prayed unto, that by his mediation we might have come to God, what had it
auayled, seeing the Prophet Esaias says, Chap. Esaias 63.16.
63. Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not? Yea, seeing Solomon
the wise, says; The dead know nothing at all? But therefore we see Christ did
it not; otherwise, he should have condemned himself of Popish ignorance, in
sending us to seek help at their hands, who are ignorant of us, and knows
not how to do us any good. Saint Augustine reproving those heretics of his
time (which sought for help of the dead) declared plainly unto them, that
they did but delude themselves, and spend their labor in vain; for said he:
August. in his Book of the spirit and soul 29.
The souls of them that be dead, are there where they do not see, nor hear,
what things are done, or chance in this life: Such is the care they have for
the living, that they know not what we do, even as our care is for the dead,
that we know not what they do. And therefore it is, which in another place he
says: In his Book of free will.
We are not commanded to go to any creature, that we might be made blessed;
but to the Creator and maker of all things, of whom if we be persuaded
otherwise then the truth is, we are deceived with a damnable error. Saint
Chrysostom likewise, having to deal with the same kind of heretics, that
supposed they could not come to GOD, but by the means and mediation of Saints,
thus reproved their error, saying; Chrysostom. in his Sermon. of going forward of
the Gospel.
There is no need of a Porter, or Mediator: say only, Lord have mercy upon
me: we have no need of an Advocate with God, nor of any running or gadding
about, for to speak saire unto others; for although thou be alone, and without
an Advocate, and pray unto God by thy self, thou shall obtain thy petition.
For God does not so easily hear us, when others pray for us, as when we pray
our selves, although we be full of much evil and unrighteousness. And yet to
prove that we are indeed sooner heard when we pray our selves, then when
others pray for us, he brings the example of the woman of Canaan, of whom he
says unto us thus: In his 2. Hom. of the woman of Canaan.
Thou see how Christ denied and put her back, when other men prayed for her
(meaning the Apostles) but as soon as she cried for her boon and gift, he
granted it. Behold (says he) the wisdom of the woman: she prays not to
James, she entreats not John, she goes not to Peter, she did not get her
self to the company of the Apostles, she sought for no Mediator. By which he
gives us to understand, that the most surest way for the obtaining our
requests, is to pray to God our selves, and not to trust to spokesmen: for as
Saint Ambrose says; Ambrose in his Book upon the 1. Chap. t. the Romans.
To obtain Gods favor, from whom nothing is secret, as knowing what every man
is meet to have, we need no spokesman, but a devout mind, for wheresoever
such a man speaks to God, God will hear him. By which we see, how vain a
thing it is to say; We cannot come to God, but by the mediation of Saints. Yea,
the same Father, in the words going before, does prove such speeches but vain,
and to proceed out of the mouths, not only of vain men, but of a perverse
Sect past shame. For says he; Ibidem.
Men through shame use accustomably every where this miserable excuse, why they
neglect to come to God, saying, that by them we go to God, as by Noble men we
go unto a King. Ambrose accounted it treason to God, to make Saints
intercessours unto him for us.
And then flouting them for their foolery, he thus finisheth up his speech,
saying. Well said; is there any man so mad, or so unmindful of his health, to
give unto a Noble man the honor due unto a King only? for that if any in such
sort behave themselves, they are justly condemned as guilty of treason. And
(says he) shall these men not think themselves guilty, which give the honor
of the name of God, unto a creature, and forsaking their Lord, do worship
their fellow servant? as though there were any thing greater then God, to whom
a man might do service. For therefore (says he) do we go to a King by
tribunes, and Noble men; because the King is a man, and knows not whom he may
be sure to trust. And indeed for diverse causes, it is not meet that every man
should have free access into the Kings privy Chamber, and chiefly for fear of
treason against his person, as experience does plainly teach us; and as no
doubt it would soon be seen, if our inuocators of Saints might have free
passage. Nevertheless, where is there any such decree made, that no man may
speak to the King, but by some Noble man? Does not the King allow any man or
woman to deliver their Petitions unto him with their own hands, wheresoever
they meet him? and is there any other decree made by God, to debar any from
delivering their Petitions unto him by their mouth? Therefore what ground of
truth have they, to debar men from going to God, without having some one
Saint or other, to be their Advocate, Mediator, or intercessour?

4 All the Principles of Popish Religion (Christian Reader) they say they hold
by antiquity, The antiquity of this heresy.
of which this is one: for we see it was sprung up twelve hundred years ago:
and therefore no marvel though they claim it by antiquity. Nevertheless, it
was not so ancient, but that as we see, it was as anciently confuted, and
condemned for sacrilege and treason to Gods own person, both by the
Scriptures and Fathers. No Patriarch, Prophet, or Apostle, ever prayed one to
another.
Neither yet was it so ancient, as that they can prove, that any one Patriarch,
Prophet, or Apostle, ever prayed one to another, which if they had done, we see
they had been condemned by the ancient Fathers for thieves and traitors to
God, as they condemned those heretics of their time, and the counterfeit
Catholics of our time, who most peruersely withstand the manifest truth of
the Scriptures, which allow no more Advocates, Mediators, or Intercessours,
then there are Gods, which is but one; and he only, which is partaker of the
natures both of God and man, as we shall now see evidently proved. Saint Paul,
1 Timothy, 1 Timothy 2.5.
2 Chapter, says: For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man,
the Man Christ Jesus. Upon which words Saint Augustine wrote thus: August. lib.
2. cap. 8. to Paermeni.
Paul (says he) makes not himself a mediator between God and the people,
but wills them to pray one for another. Also in another place, to show that
none can be Mediator between God and man, but he that is both God and man, he
says; Upon the 134. Psalm.
Thou O man could not come to God, until God became man, that thou being a
man, may come to God; and he was made Mediator of God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. Again, in another place he faith: In his Hom. of Sheep, the 12.
Chap.
One Mediator between God and man, etc. and he was God with the Father, and
was man with men. The manhood is no Mediator without the Godhead. And in
another place thus: In his Enchiridion to Laurence the 108 Chap.
We could never have been delivered by that only mediator of God and man,
the Man Christ Jesus; unless he had been God also. So that who sees not, but
that he that is not both God and man, is not allowed to be Mediator between
God and man? And thus much out of the words of Saint Paul, and Saint Augustine
upon his words. Now let us hear some others upon this point.

5 Theophilact writing upon the same words of Paul, says thus: Theophi. upon 1 Timothy 2. Chap.
That the Mediator should be the Son of God it was requisite, for he should
be the reconciliation and perfect mediator, for he is a mediator of two: for
he put himself as a mean or middle thing, to join contrary things together.
Therefore he is the Son of God, and Mediator of men; for he is partaker of
both natures. And hereof it is which Saint Chrysostom says: Chrisost. upon 1 Timothy a Chap.
The Mediator ought to be joined by society of them both, of whom he is
Mediator, for it is the part of a Mediator, to be partaker of them both of
whom he is Mediator. And a little after, he concludes thus: For it was
requisite that such a Mediator should speak with God. Also hereof it is which
Saint Cyrill says: Cyrill in his 12 Book, 10. Chap. of Treasure.
Christ Jesus is Mediator between God and man, not only because he has
reconciled man unto God; but also because he is naturally and substantially
both God and man in one person. And after this manner (says he) God has
reconciled us unto him for otherwise how could Saint Paul say, that there is
one Mediator, Christ Jesus? Wherefore then, seeing that none can be Mediator
between God and man, but he that is both God and man, no Saint can be
Mediator. And thus much of Saint Paul; now let us hear what Saint John says,
and the ancient Fathers upon his words.

6 Saint John in his 1. Epistle, 2. Chapter, says: 1 John, 2 Cha. 2 verse.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Just,
and he is the reconciliation for our sins. Upon which words Saint Augustine
says; August. in his first Treatise upon the Epistle of S. John.
He did not say, ye have an Advocate with the Father, but we have: Neither did
he say, ye have me for your Advocate: But brethren, we have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the reconciliation for our
sins. He that has holden this (says he) has holden no heresy he that has
holden this, has committed no schism. And a little after (speaking of Saint
John) he says thus: He had rather put himself in the number of sinners, that
he might have Christ his Advocate, then put himself an Advocate, whereas
Christ should be his Advocate, and be found among the proud men that shall be
damned. And for conclusion of Saint John's words, thus he says in another
place: August. in his 2. Book, 8. Chapter against Parmenian.
If Saint John would say, this have I written unto you, that ye sin not; and
if you sin, ye have me your Advocate before God, and I will entreat for you,
what good and faithful Christian could abide him, as the Apostle of Christ, or
rather not think him to be Antichrist? And thus (Christian Reader) thou see
that to allow any other then Christ to be an Advocate, Mediator, or
Intercessour, between God and man, is to allow heretical, Antichristian, and
damnable doctrine. And to affirm the Saints in heaven to take this office of
Christ upon them, is a part of that blasphemy mentioned, Revel. 13.6. even to
blaspheme them that dwell in heaven.

7 That ancient Father Epiphanius, describing the alone and true Mediator,
says: Epiphanius, fol. 433.
For the Mediator of God and man, is thus; being God, and made man, not having
changed his nature, but according to both of them, he is Mediator. But what
should we stand to cite any more testimonies out of the Fathers, seeing some
of their great Doctors and canonized Saints affirm the same? Their Abbot Saint
Bernard says thus: Bernard in his 3. Sermon. of the Annuntiation of the Virgin
Mary.
This Christ Jesus is the true and faithful Mediator, as in one person of God
and man. Also their Saint Thomas of Aquine says: Thomas of Aquine upon the 1.
Tim. 2 Chap.
It may be said, that Christ is a Mediator according to both natures; that is
to say, as touching his Godhead and manhood, inasmuch as he is God and man:
for because that he that is a Mediator, ought to take part of both natures,
and these are God and man. Now therefore, if there had been no one ancient
Father to have proved our assertion, yet these two their canonized Saints, had
been sufficient. Wherefore we see how vain the Papists are, to pray to Saints,
and to make them their Mediators to God.

8 It is a world to see that men so wise and learned, should be so besotted in
their senses, as to imagine, that Christ himself should not be all, and
altogether fully sufficient by his only intercession, to reconcile men unto
God, seeing the Author to the Hebrews says, Chapter 7. Hebrews 7.25.
He is able also perfectly to save them that come to God by him, seeing he
lives ever to make intercession for them. Doubtless, if Christ had not known
himself wholly sufficient, he would not have said, John 14. No man comes to
the Father but by me. John 14.6. John 16.23.
Neither would he have said, John 16. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my
name, he will give it you. Wherefore seeing Christ is sufficiently able to save
by his intercession, those that come to God by him: and that none can come to
God but by him: and that those things which we ask in his name, we shall
obtain; why should we delude our selves, in seeking reconciliation by the
intercession of others? Nay, we now see plainly, that those are deceived,
which hold not Christ allsufficient, but will therefore go to God by others,
and that seek to obtain their requests in the names of others. But I marvel
what hope they can have to obtain their Petitions, which pray to God in the
name of others, seeing Christ commanded them to pray in his name. Saint Cyrill
says: Cyrill in h^e Book upon the r. of Esaias.
We must pray in the name of our Savior, if we will look to be heard of the
Father. And in another place he rendereth his reason, saying; In his Book of
right faith.
For why is it more meet to give Saints their asking, and grant them their
petitions, then for him which is only by his own nature, and truly God? Saint
Augustine says: August. in 108. Psalm.
All prayers that are not made unto God by Christ, not only does not put away
sin, but also are turned into sin. So then, if to pray in the name of any
but Christ, be to cause our prayers to be turned into sin, and so to provoke
God to wrath; why should we, nay, how dare we pray in the name of others? Yea,
and why will we be made such fools, as to ask any thing of the dead Saints,
which can neither give, nor grant our requests? If we pray to God in the name
of Christ, he has promised, John 14. Chapter, that both his Father and he
will hear our petitions, and grant our requests. And this is it which Saint
Cyrill says of Christ: Cyrill in his 11. Book upon John.
He put to in my name, to show that he was a Mediator, and a granter, and a
giver with God; which prerogative no Saint has.

9 Again, forasmuch as Christ himself says, John 10. By me if any man enter
in, he shall be saved: and in the 1. verse. He that enters not in by the
door into the sheep fold, but climeth up another way, he is a thief and a
robber: it is clear, that all those that enter into the Church, by any other
way then by Christ, or into the Kingdom of Heaven, by the means and mediation
of Saints; they are but thieves and robbers: therefore if they repent not, and
forsake their error, they shall be sure to have their part and portion with
thieves and robbers: And thus much touching praying to Saints. Now a word or
two touching the worshipping of Saints: which we will but briefly touch,
because the matter is so plain in the Scriptures, that nothing can be made
more plain to be erroneous; therefore it need not any long discourse.

10 In the 14. Acts 14.8. to the 16.
Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, mention is made that Saint Paul having
healed a criple that was borne lame, the people did so admire thereat, that
they supposed Paul and Barnabas to have been Gods come down from Heaven in
the likeness of men; whereupon (as the Text says) They brought Bulls with
garlands; beasts bedecked with flowers, to have sacrificed unto them, of which
(as the Text also says) When Paul and Barnabas heard, they rent their
clothes, and ran in among the people, crying, and saying: O men, why do ye
these things? we are even men subject to the like passions as ye be. By which
it is clear, it was not lawful to worship the Apostles; if not the Apostles,
then not any other Saint. Revel. 19.10.
Also in the 19. Chapter of the Revelation, the Text declares, that Saint John
fell down before the feet of the Angel, to have worshipped him; but he said
unto him, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy
brethren, which have the testimony of Jesus: worship God. Now therefore, if
neither the holy Apostles of Christ, nor the glorious and unspotted Angels of
Heaven may be worshipped; how may any other inferior Saint be worshipped?
Wherefore, this utterly condemns the Papists of most pestilent perverseness,
that will so directly, contrary to so evident a truth, teach men to worship
Saints, yea, and not only so, but that which is most horrible to hear, the
very dumb pictures and Images of Saints.

11 Saint Augustine (writing against Fostus the heretic) brings in these
two places of Scripture, to prove that it is not lawful to worship Saints; for
said he, August. an his 20. book against Faustus, Chap 201.
The very Saints themselves, whether they be dead men, or Angels, will not have
honor given to them, which only is due to God. This (says he) appears in
Paul and Barnabas, when the men of Licaonia, astonished at their miracles, would
have done sacrifice unto them, as if they had been Gods: For they renting
their garments, confessing and persuading them that they were not Gods; forbad
such things to be done unto them. This (said he) appeared also in the Angels,
as we read in the Apocalips: The Angel forbidding himself to be worshipped.
And therefore in another place he says: In his Books of true Religion, 55.
Chap.
Let not the worshipping of dead men be counted holiness among us. And a
little after: The thing that the highest Angel worshippeth, must also the
lowest man worship. Let us believe this, that the best Angels, and the most
excellent Ministers would that we should worship one God with them. That
ancient Father Epiphanius, speaking against old doting and ignorant women,
which then worshipped the Virgin Mary, says; Epipha in his 3. Book of
Heresies, 59. heresy.
Let no man eat of this error, touching Saint Mary: For though the tree be
fair, yet is not this fruit to be eaten. Although Mary be beautiful, and
holy, and honorable, yet is she not to be adored and worshipped: but these
women worshipping Saint Mary, renew again the sacrifice of wine, mingled in
the honor of the Goddess Fortuna, and prepare a Table for the Devil, and not
for God. Also Saint August. writing against Maximinus the Arian Bishop, says;
August. in his 1. Book against Maximinus.
If we should make a Temple for an holy Angel, should we not be accursed from
God, and the truth of Christ, and from the Church of God? because we exhibit
that service to a creature, that is due to God alone. By which then who sees
not, but that to worship Saints, yea, though not with Lateria, but with
hyperdulia, is to make our selves the accursed of God: for in Gods divine
worship and service, he will have all, or none: even as our Savior himself
says, Matthew 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve. And yet besides the worship done to all other Saints: in their Rosarie,
they have twelve parts of spiritual worship, of which ten is given to the
Virgin Marie, and but two to God. And notwithstanding the worshipping of Saints
was forbidden, both by the Apostles, and the Angel, and condemned by these
ancient Fathers for deuilish and damnable (long before the Popish Church was)
yet after they had a Church, and that Antichrist the Pope was installed in his
throne, (that he might share with God, herein, as in other parts of his
glorious prerogatives) this was established for one principle of Popish
Religion. And thus much touching praying to Saints, and worshipping of them.

CHAP. XII. Tending to resolve all men, who were the first founders of the
Doctrine of Purgatory, and the first place of Scripture that was brought to
confirm the Doctrine, and to prove a third place of rest for the souls
departed: and how soon it had corrupted the Church, and confounded the
judgments of the ancient Fathers: and what confusion it has bred amongst the
Papists themselves: and how it tends to the overthrow of the power of Christ's
death and passion.
AS touching the original foundation of the Doctrine of Purgatory, Purgatory
had her original from the Heathen Philosophers.
thou shall understand (Christian Reader) that it came first from the Heathen
Philosophers, in whom although there were the sparks of divine knowledge, as
there is naturally in all men, and that by exercising themselves in the
contemplation of the glorious works of Gods creation, they were able to write
some thing of God and divine things; yet for want of the knowledge of his Word,
and the rules of his testimonies; they could not write soundly. For albeit the
Law of Nature (by the wonders of heaven and earth) did teach them, that he that
was the Author of them, was mighty, and to be loved and feared above all: yet
were they ignorant, how to love and fear him aright. Also notwithstanding they
had learned by the Law of Nature, that for those that did love and fear him,
he had prepared a place of eternal joy, and for those that did nor, a place of
perpetual pain; and that the pures could never ascend into his glorious
presence, until they were made purer by some kind of purifying: yet for want
of true knowledge, they conceived of these things but imperfectly, and did but
merely conjecture. For howsoever it be true, that God has prepared a place of
joy, for those that love and fear him, and also a place of punishment for
those that do not: and that the best and purest, can never come into his
presence, until they be made purer by a more perfect purging: yet they being
ignorant of the blood of Christ, by which we should be purified, dreamed of a
third place, in which we should be purged.

2 Now the chief of these Authors (as Tertullian writes Tertullian in his
Book De praescriptionibus aduersus haereses, and in his book De anima.
) were Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Plato. Hence it was (as Irenaeus testifies)
Jrenaeus lib. 1. cap. 24.
that Carpocrates having learned out of Plato his Philosophy, that men's souls
after death must be purified, invented a kind of Purgatory; and out of the
opinion of Pythagoras, sought to prove it by these words of Christ, Matthew. 5.
Thou shall not come forth, till thou have paid the utmost farthing. By which we
see, who were the first founders of Purgatory, and also the first place of
Scripture that was brought to confirm the Doctrine, and to prove a third place
for the purifying of souls from sin. Now let us try out the true sense of
that Scripture, to see if by it such a place can be proved.

3 Our Savior said, Thou shall not come forth, till etc. Matthew. 5.26.
Upon which word (till:) because the Papists also infer, that Christ meant,
that in time, he should pay the utmost farthing, and then come forth: we will
by another like place, show the word, (till) does not always import a time
following, wherein the contrary may be affirmed. As when the Lord said to
Iaakoh, Genesis 28.15.
Genesis 28. I will not forsake thee, till I have performed that I have promised
thee. Now if this word (till) does always intimate a time after, wherein a
contrary may be concluded; then after the Lord had performed his promise to
Iaacob, he forsook him: But, as the Scriptures declare, God did never forsake
him: so Christ's word, (till) does not import a time when the debtor should pay
the utmost farthing, and then come forth; but that because he could never be
able to pay it, he should never come forth. For if Christ had meant, that men
could pay the utmost farthing due for sin, and so release their souls, this
had been against himself, for then what need had any, of his paying any one
farthing for them? Therefore it is clear, that by paying the utmost farthing,
Christ meant the everlasting punishment that should never be paid. And this is
it which Saint Hierome upon the same Scripture says. Hierome in his first
book chap. 1. upon the Lamentation of Jeremy.
Christ's meaning is that he shall never come out, for that he must evermore
pay the utmost farthing, whilst he suffers everlasting punishment. And thus
(Christian Reader) thou see that by the true sense of those words of Christ,
they cannot prove a third place. Howbeit, even after this manner, do they also
wrest diverse other places of Scripture, to prove (if it were possible) a third
place; even to the confounding of the whole harmony of the Scriptures, which by
the express names of heaven and hell, do assign but two places; and by not
any where naming Purgatory, deny any such purging place to be.

4 In the sixteenth Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, Luke 16.22.23.
our Savior Christ speaking of the rich Glutton, and of the poor Beggar,
says, And it was so that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and being in Hell in torments, he
lift up his eyes and saw Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom. By
which words, we see there is but only two places into which the souls do
pass presently after death; namely, either into hell, or into Abraham's Bosom,
which is a resting place in heaven for the souls of the faithful, and not a
place of pleasure in hell, as the Papists dream. Matthew. 8.11.
For as Christ himself says, Matthew. 8. Many shall come, from the East and
West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
heaven. Now if Abraham be in heaven, Abraham's Bosom must needs be in heaven:
Abraham's bosom.
Therefore, there is but only two places, heaven and hell. And this is
manifestly proved also by these words of Solomon the Wise, which says, Eccle.
11. Eccle. 11.3.
If the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place that the
tree falls, there shall it be; To wit, abide for ever. Now as by trees the
learned do agree, is meant people: so do they conclude, that by South and
North, is meant heaven and hell; therefore there is but two places. Wherefore,
howsoever the judgment of some of the ancient Fathers was confounded in this
Heathenish Doctrine of Purgatory, and that Saint Augustine himself had doubted
of a third place, yet by these his own words, he shows to all men, it was
but his error: for (says he) Augustine in his Sermon of time, the 232.
Sermon.
Let no man deceive himself, there are but two places, as for any third, there
is none at all: he that reigns not with Christ, shall perish with the Devil
without any doubt. Again he says, In his 18. Sermon of the words of the
Apostle.
There be two habitations or dwelling-places; the one, in the fire everlasting;
the other, in the Kingdom of heaven that never shall have end. Again, he
says, In his 5. book Hipognostichon.
The first place, the Catholic faith, by Gods authority believes to be the
Kingdom of heaven: The second place, the same Catholic faith believes to
be hell, where all runnagates, and whosoever is without the faith of Christ,
shall taste everlasting punishment, as for any third place, we utterly know
none, neither shall we find in the holy Scriptures, that there is any such. So
then, by this we see the case is very clear, there is no third place, and
consequently no Purgatory.

5 Secondly, to prove yet a third place, Revelation 6.9.
they object those words of Saint John, in his sixth Chapter of the Revelation,
where he says. And when I had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the Alter the
souls of them that were killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintained: And they cried with a loud voice, saying: How long,
Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
dwell on the earth; and long white robes were given to every one: and it was
said unto them that they should rest for a little season until their
fellow-seruants and their brethren, that should be killed even as they were,
were fulfilled. Lo (say they) here is a third place, even a place where the
souls of the faithful do rest until the latter day. To which we answer: The
Alter under which the souls are said to rest, The Altar is Christ.
is Christ: as who so will read the 56. Chapter of Esaias: and seventh verse.
And 60. Chapter, 7. verse of the same Prophet: and 8. Chapter, 3. verse of the
Revelation, shall see: or that will listen to these testimonies of these three
ancient Fathers, shall hear, to wit, Saint Ireneus, Saint Augustine, and
Epyphanius. Ireneus says, Jreneus in his 4. Book and 34. Chap.
Our Alter is not in earth, but in heaven. Saint Augustine says, Augustine in
his 20. Book, 10. Chap. of the City of God.
Our Alter is in heaven, thither our prayers and oblations are directed.
Epyphanius says, Epiphanius in his 2. Book of Melchisadech.
Christ is our Sacrifice, our Priest, and our. Alter. So that we see evidently,
that by the Alter is meant Christ: and therefore the place in which the souls
of the faithful do rest till the day of judgment, is under the foote-stoole
of Christ in Heaven. Wherefore those words of Saint John, does not prove a
third place. Also this is made more manifest by the 15. verse of the 7.
Chapter, where he speaking of the same souls, Revel. 7.15.
says: They are in the presence of the Throne of God. And therefore whereas
the Papists would have this place of rest, Elisius Campus. Abraham's bosom, or
Paradise.
to be their Elisius Campus, a place of pleasure in hell; which they say is
Paradise, or Abraham's Bosom: here they are compelled, either to say that the
Throne of God is in hell, or else to grant that the resting place of those
souls, is in Heaven; and then where is their third place yet proved?

6 But forasmuch as those words in the 6. Chapter, together with the other
words in the 7. Chapter, do show the resting place of the souls of the
faithful to be in heaven, and a place where they do cry for the time of the
perfecting their full joy and glory; it is clear, that under the foote-stoole
of Christ, is the Celestial Paradise, which in the 16. Chapter of Saint Lukes
Gospel, is called, Abraham's Bosom, where Lazarus, the go^d thief, Paradise
is in heaven, not in h^ll.
and all the faithful do rest with Abraham, the Father of the faithful, till
they receive together the full fruition of their faith. So that hereby we see
Paradise to be in Heaven, and not in hell as they fable. And this is yet made
more plain by Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. where he says: I know a man in Christ,
about fourteen years agone, 2 Cor. 12.2.4.
which was taken up into the third Heaven: How that he was taken up into
Paradise. By which it is most manifest, that Paradise is in the highest Heaven:
and that therefore their hellish Paradise, in which they feign their purified
souls of Purgatory do rest till the last day, is fabulous, and does not prove
a third place.

7 But now I do expect, they will answer thus. Be it as you say, that Paradise
is in Heaven, and that therein is the resting place of the souls of the
faithful; yet is there at least a third place, in which they did rest for a
time; to wit, till they were purified, and made fit for Heaven: For to the very
same effect are these words of Cardinal Allen; Allen in Fulks, page 139.
By long amending by fire, at last they come to that reward. Again, speaking
of Purgatory fire, he says: Page 130.
Through which the good must pass, before they come to eternal joy. By which
they would have us to understand, that no soul can come into the presence of
God in Heaven, Souls are in heaven, because they have washed themselves white
in the blood of the Lamb, no^ in the fire of Purgatory.
but only such as are purified by the fire of Purgatory: and that those that
are in Heaven, are there, because first they were so purified. Which how untrue
it is, these words in the 14. and 15. verses of the 7. Chapter of the
Revelation, will make it most evident, which says: They have washed their long
Robes white in the blood of the Lamb, therefore are they in the presence of
the Throne of God, and serve him in his Temple day and night. Now in that the
holy Ghost says: Therefore; it is as clear as the Sun at noone day that all
those that are admitted into the presence of God in Heaven; are so dignified,
because by the hands of their faith, they have washed themselves white in the
blood of Christ, not in the fire of Purgatory. Wherefore as those words before
cited, did utterly overthrow their hellish Paradise, so does these words
utterly overthrow their hellish Purgatory.

8 Thirdly, to prove yet that the souls are made perfect by the fire of
Purgatory, they cite the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 3.13.
3. where he speaking of ignorant Teachers, and their doctrine, says: Every
man's work shall be made manifest for the day shall declare it, because it
shall be revealed by fire. Which words they would make the World to believe,
are meant of the fire of Purgatory, that shall (as they say) purge curious and
vain doctrine, and those that have built it on the foundation Christ; whereas
the very words themselves, do make it plain to the contrary: for in that it
says, the day shall declare it; 2 Pet. 1 Chap. 19 verse. 2 These. 2. chapter 8.
he meant the truth, the light whereof Saint Peter calls, The day star, 2.
Epistle, 1. Chapter. And the power thereof, Saint Paul 2 Thessalonians, 2.
Chapter 8, calls the Spirit of Gods mouth, wherewith he shows, that
Antichrist, and all Antichristian Teachers, and their doctrine, shall be
consumed, even as fire consumes the dross, and fineth the gold and silver.
And therefore in that Chapter, where he speaks of purging by fire, (that no
man should understand him to mean a corporal or material fire) he
concludes of that matter thus: 1 Cor. 3.8.
As it were by the fire. That is, as it were by fire, the vain doctrine shall
be burned and consumed by the fire of Gods truth, and the Teacher thereof being
tried thereby to hold the foundation sound, the Church shall not condemn him
as an heretic, but save his life. For if Saint Paul should have spoken those
words, to have maintained a place of purging sin; then should he have
utterly confounded all his own doctrine, throughout all his Epistles, where he
so labors to prove, that our sins are wholly purged by the blood of Christ
only. For first, in the third Chapter to the Romans, he says thus of Christ:
Whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. Romans
3.25. Romans 5.9.
And in his 5. Chapter thus: Being now justified by his blood, we shall be
saved from wrath through him. And in the first to the Colossians thus: Colos.
1.13.
Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the Kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption through his
blood, that is, the forgiveness of sins. And in the same Chapter: Verse
19.20.
For it pleased the Father that in him all fullness should dwell, and by him to
reconcile all things unto himself, and to set at peace through the blood of
his Cross, both the things in earth and the things in Heaven. And for a full
conclusion of this point, namely, that we are absolutely made perfect by
Christ's death, and blood, he says, verse 22. In the body of his flesh, Verse
22.
through death, he made us unblameable and without fault in the sight of God.
Now then, this being true, to wit, that we are fully and wholly reconciled to
God, by faith in the blood of Christ, and our sins clean washed away
thereby, so as that we are made unblameable and without fault in Gods sight;
how absurd had it been for Saint Paul, to have taught any other kind of
purgation? Therefore it is clear, that those his words in the third Chapter to
the Corinthians, cannot be understood of Purgatory.

9 Furthermore, as touching the truth of this doctrine, namely, that our sins
are washed and cleansed only by the blood of Christ, Saint Paul is not
singular in this point: for as we heard before out of the seventh Chapter of
the Revelation, that it was confirmed to Saint John, by the Angel of God from
Heaven; so likewise whosoever will read the first Chapter of that Book, shall
find these words set down concerning Christ: Unto him that loved us, Revel.
1.5.6.
and washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto
God, even his Father, be glory and dominion for evermore, Amen. And in the 1
Chapter to the Hebrews thus: Heb. 1.3.
Who being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of his person,
and bearing up all things by his mighty Word, has by himself purged our
sins. And in the first Epistle, and the first Chapter of Saint John, thus:
John 1. Epist. 1. chap. 7.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin. Wherefore then, seeing
that of the bond slaves of Satan, we are made Kings and Priests to God by the
blood of Christ: and that Christ of himself, and by himself, has so purged
our sins, as whereby we are made unblameable and without fault in Gods
sight; why should we, nay, rather how dare we believe it is done by Purgatory?
Again, seeing the holy Ghost says: By the blood of Christ, Verse 9.
we are cleansed from all sin; and in the verses following: From all
unrighteousness. And that Saint Paul says; Titus 2. Titus 2.14.
He redeemed us from all iniquity: why should we suffer our selves to be so
deluded, to think that there is any sin, unrighteousness, or iniquity at
all left to be purged by their imagined Purgatory; or that there can be any
use at all thereof, or be any such place?

10 Saint Cyprian speaking of the matter of our purging, says thus: Cyprian of
Christ's passion.
Thy blood O Lord seeks no revenge; thy blood washes our sins, and
pardons our trespasses. Also to show that there can be none other purgation,
nor any place for the purging of sin after this life; he says elsewhere: In
his first Treatise against Demetrian.
After we be once departed out of this life, there is no more place of
repentance, there is no more effect or working of satisfaction; life is here
either lost or won. Also to the very same effect are those words of Saint
Augustine: August. upon the 25. Psalm.
Let only the price of the blood of my Lord avail me to the perfection of my
delivery. And in another place thus: In his 10. Book, 22 Chapter of the City of
God.
The victory is gotten in his name that has taken man upon him, and that has
lived without sin, that in him, and through him, being both the Priest and
the sacrifice, remission and forgiveness of sins should be obtained and
given: that is to say (says he) by the Mediator of God and man, that man
Jesus Christ, by whom the purging of our sins being made, we are reconciled
unto God. Well then, if only the blood of Christ be available to the
perfection of our deliverance from sin, and that the purgation thereof, be so
effectually made thereby, as that our sins are washed away, and all our
trespasses pardoned, and we reconciled unto God in this life; and that here in
this life, everlasting life is either lost or won; and that after this life,
repentance comes too late, and no satisfaction can be made; to what end should
God provide a place after this life, for the better perfecting of our
salvation? But therefore it is which Saint Augustine in another place says; In
his 54. Epistle to Macidonius.
There is no other place to correct our manners and conditions, but only in
this life: every man shall have that which he has purchased unto himself in
this World. And what use then can there be of Purgatory? Saint Ignatius says;
Ignatius in his 6. Epistle.
Always reason requires, that whiles we have space and time, we should amend
and correct our faults, whiles in this life we have occasion given of
repentance: for it is truly said, after death, there is neither time nor place
to confess our sins. And why then should we believe that there is both
place and time? Saint Ambrose says; Ambrose upon good death.
He that here in this life receives not remission of his sins, shall not be
there in the life to come: meaning Heaven. Also Saint Hierome speaking of the
same point, says thus: Hierome in his Book upon the 95. of Esaias.
He that does not obtain remission of his sins whiles he yet lives in the
body, does perish to God, and abides to himself unto everlasting damnation.
And what avails Purgatory after this life then? Saint Chrysostom likewise
speaking of the same point, says; Chrisost. in his 2. Sermon of Lazarus.
Whiles we be yet here, we have a godly hope, but as soon as we are departed
hence, it lies no more in us for to repent, nor to wash away our sins. And
how then after this life, can we help our selves in Purgatory? So that by this
we see how friuilous and vain the doctrine of Purgatory is, and also how
fantastical their Purgatory Proctors are, especially their Cardinal Allen;
Cardinal. Allen in D. Fulkes answer to a false Catholic.
who in so many places of his Book, affirms, that we are purified in that
fire, as gold is in the Furnace. That by suffering the pains of Purgatory, we
are made perfect. That by suffering the torments of Purgatory, we do satisfy
Gods justice for sin: which how true it is, let us consider a little further,
and how it will stand with the truth of the Scriptures.

11 First to beat them with their own rod, Wisdom 3.1.
their own Canonical Scripture, the third of Wisdom, says; The souls of
the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall touch them. Now if
no torment shall touch their souls, how can Purgatory fire purify them, as
fire purifieth gold? or they be made perfect, or satisfy Gods justice, by
suffering those torments, which shall not so much as once touch them? The 16.
Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel declares plainly, Luke 16.23.24, 25, 26.
that those sinners that are not forgiven in this life, cannot after this life,
be discharged by pains and punishments. And hereof it is which Justinius
Martyr, writing upon the same Chapter, says; Justinius 2.60. to Orthodos^^s.
This is a plain and manifest doctrine of Dives and Lazarus, by which is
taught, that after the departing of the soul from the body, men cannot by any
means bring profit or commodity unto them. And as touching those that are
forgiven in this life, Saint Chrysostom says as plainly; Chrysostom. in ^is ^4
Ho^^. upon Genesis.
Where there is forgiveness, there is no punishment. Also forasmuch as Saint
Paul, 2 Cor. 5. speaking of the general resurrection, says; Every man shall
then receive the things which are done in his body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or evil; I would have them to show me but some one
place, either in the Old or New Testament, that does testify, that God has
appointed such a punishment for the souls, (in the mean time) as shall set
the bodies free for the punishment due for that they had done, and forced their
souls to do. If they can show me none, then it is certain, that there is no
such punishment ordained of God, and consequently no such place of punishment.
And therefore all these circumstances duly considered, what reason have we to
believe their old Philosophical doting doctrine of Purgatory? Yea, or why
should we believe that the souls of the righteous, go thither immediately
after death, seeing the Preacher declares plainly, Eccle. 12.7.
Eccle. 12. that they go presently to heaven? For says he; And dust return
to the earth as it was, and the spirit return to God that gave it. Luke 16.22.
And seeing also Saint Luke in the 16. Chapter of his Gospel, says of
Lazarus: And the beggar died, Luke 23.43.
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: which we showed to be the
celestial Paradise in Heaven? And seeing Christ also said to the good thief:
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise? Nay, seeing the Bishop of Rome
himself says, even Gregory the Great; Greg. in his 4. Books of Dialogues,
25. Chap.
It is most certain that the souls of the righteous, being loosed from the
flesh, are received into the heavenly seats? Now then, if that be true, that
the Bishop of Rome cannot err; then the Papists, although they will not
believe Solomon, nor Saint Luke, nor our Savior Christ; yet dare they not
surely but believe the Pope of Rome, that the souls of the righteous,
(presently after death) go straight to heaven: from whence they will not say
they return down into Purgatory; therefore it is clear, there is just no
such place at all.

12 And thus (Christian Reader) thou have seen most manifestly confuted,
Cardinal Allen in Fulke, to a false Catholic.
that fond fable of Cardinal Allen, Page 178. where he basheth not to say,
that all the ancient Fathers agreed in one, for the approbation of the doctrine
of Purgatory; whereas we see, that it was not possible for any of them to
speak more directly and expressly with it, then these their testimonies are
against it; and that howsoever that heresy (mingled with the truth) did
wonderfully confound some of their judgments, so as that the best learned of
them, could scarcely tell how to conclude of the matter; yet these their
testimonies may absolutely resolve us, how we are to conclude thereof.
Nevertheless, let men vary never so much, the truth is consonant and agreeable
to it self; neither need any to differ therein, if they will square their
doctrine by Saint Paul's rule, Romans 12. namely, Romans 12.6.
that it agree with the true proportion and analogy of faith: But how this
doctrine of Purgatory does agree therewith, these three principles, collected
out of the said Book of Doctor Fulkes answer to Master Allen, will make it
plain. First in Page 92. Allen says; Cardinal Allen in Fulke.
Purgatory pains does not only serve Gods justice for the punishment of
sin, but also cleanses and qualifieth the soul of man defiled. Secondly, in
Page 154. he says: The death of Christ does not discharge us of satisfying for
our sins, nor of any other good work, whereby a man may procure his own
salvation. Thirdly, in Page 133. he says; In Purgatory we must be holden from
life and liberty, till we have paid the utmost farthing, the toleration of
which bonds shall recompense the debt. Now how this doctrine can stand with the
true proportion and analogy of faith in Christ, or not altogether withstand it,
The doctrine of Purgatory against the faith.
let the discreet Reader judge. For if Purgatory pains, do serve both for the
satisfying of Gods justice, and also for the purging of our souls from sin;
and that Christ by his death, did not so satisfy for them, but that we our
selves must make a better and more perfect satisfaction, even to the utmost
farthing, or be holden in Purgatory for ever from life and liberty; what has
Christ done for us, and to what purpose at all served his death and
bloud-shedding? or what does faith in him avail at all?

13 But seeing the doctrine of Purgatory is such, as cannot stand with the true
proportion and analogy of faith; it is clear, it is not grounded upon the
truth of Gods Word, but upon the opinions of those faithless Philosophers, who
(as we said) for want of Gods Law and Testaments, and the rule of his truth to
have enlightened their judgments, did but by the rules of the Law of nature
merely guess at this point, as they did of God, and other divine things:
whose fantasies Saint Paul, Colos. 2 8.
Colos. 2.8. forbids us to follow. Beware (says he) left there be any man
that spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, through the traditions
of men, according to the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. And thus
much touching the first Authors of Purgatory, and the first place of Scripture
that the heretics brought (and Montanus and his Adherents afterward) to
confirm the doctrine: as also to show how it tends to the utter confounding
of the virtue of Christ's death and passion, and faith in him, and how it did
corrupt the Church, and confound the judgments of some ancient writers. Now
let us briefly take a view, how it has also confounded the judgments of the
Papists themselves.

14 First, What confusion the doctrine of Purgatory has wrought amongst the
Papists themselves.
for the number of hels, Sillius says; There beten. Aeneas says, but nine.
Gelasius, but seven. Aquines, but four. Diverse of the Papists will have five,
of which Paradise to be one; which their Paullinus says, is Abraham's bosom,
and is in the hell of the damned. Secondly, touching the place where Purgatory
should be; Polidore says: It is in Mount Aethne in Cicilie. Another says;
Saint Patrike placed it in Ireland. The Manachies say; It is in the Globe of
the Sun. Others say: It is in the Globe of the Moon. Some say; It is under
the South Pole. Others say: It is under the North Pole; but some others say: It
is under the City of Romes for there is a deep hole where Christ went down
with his Cross on his back. By which we see, that hell mouth is in Rome.
Thirdly, touching the degrees of Purgatory, Lutzenburge says: Purgatory is the
highest of the four hels. Va^^a says; It is the highest save one. Herolt
says: It is the lowest save one. Smith says; It is the lowest of all: and
Cardinal Allen says; It is in the lower Romes, as the best learned judge.
Fourthly, what Christ did in Purgatory. Smith says; Christ did in his soul
suffer there for the sins of our souls. Allen says; It is blasphemy to
say, that the Devils had power to torment the soul of Christ. Smith says:
Christ preached to the souls, and brought them all out with him. Martion
says; Christ did not deliver all: for Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and others, durst
not come at him, lest he would tempt them, and punish them. Most of the Papists
say; He delivered all. But Hermes says: They came not all forth till the
Apostles descended and preached unto them also. Another says: Christ delivered
the Sodomites, and Kaine that reprobate. Allen says: Purgatory does not belong
to any but to the faithful. The master of the Sentences says; Just men go
not into Purgatory at all. Allen says: The good must pass there-through
before they come to eternal joy. Smith says: After Christ's resurrection, the
souls went no more to Purgatory. Allen affirms, that the Apostles went
thither. Now as touching the element wherewith the souls are purged, some say
it is only fire. Allen holds it to be both fire and water, and that they
shall be tormented as well with extreme cold as heat. Sir Thomas More says:
In Purgatory there is no water. Ruffensis says: In Purgatory there is good
store of water. The last question is, whether Devils or Angels be the
executioners? Ruffensis and Albertus, say; They be holy Angels: but Sir Thomas
More says: They be Devils. Therefore (Christian Reader) I now refer the
matter to be judged by thee, whether the Doctrine of Purgatory be such, as any
in his right wits will think he may build his faith thereon, or believe that
there is any such purging place? And the rather, for that it tends to the
utter overthrow of the power of all that Christ has done for man's salvation;
and whereof that error of prayers for the dead is an appendix.

CHAP. XIII. The conclusion of the former twelve Chapters: Containing an
answer unto two sorts of Papists: the one, affirming that we are justified and
saved by the works of of the Law: the other, that we are saved by faith and
works together. That because no man can fulfill the Law, no man can be
justified by the Law. That God was not unjust in giving such a Law, as he knew
no man was able to fulfill. That to seek to merit salvation, is the high way
to damnation.
1 SO far and wide (Christian Reader) as the Romish jurisdiction and Kingdom
of Antichrist did extend it self, this Doctrine of justification by faith
without the works of the Law, was impugned. Some teaching that men by their
good works are justified, and for their good works saved. Others that we are
justified and saved, by faith and works together: to both which we answer.

2 All good works, are said to be the works of the Law, because God
commanded them in his Law, for diverse good ends and purposes: the
justification by which, confisteth of two parts. First, in not omitting any one
thing, whatsoever the Law has commanded: Secondly, in not committing any one
thing whatsoever the Law has forbidden: which as it is in Leuiticus the
eighteenth Chapter; Leuit. 18.5.
If a man do, he shall live in them. But contrariwise, if he do not observe
and do all, and also do nothing to the contrary; he is so far from being
justified by the Law, that he is accursed and condemned by it.

3 The affirmative part is proved in the seven and twentieth Chapter of
Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Where it is said, Cursed be he that confirms not all the words of this Law
to do them, and all the people shall say: So be it. The negative part is
proved, Ezekiel. 18.11.13
Ezekiel Chap. 18. in these words. If he do any one of these things, though he
do not all, shall he live? seeing he has done all these abominations, he
shall surely die the death. By which it is clear, that whosoever omitteth any
one thing which the Law requires, or commits any one thing whatsoever the
Law prohibiteth, he is culpable of the whole. And this is it which the Apostle
Saint James says, Chapter 2. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, James 2.10.
and yet fails in one point, is guilty of all. Therefore now the question
is, whether any man can thus absolutely fulfill the Law? We say, no man can:
Contrariwise the Papists say, that a regenerate man may. And their Doctor
Master Harding, will prove it both by the words of Christ, and also of the
Apostle Saint John. M. Harding in Apol. chap. 19. Diuis. 1.
The words of Christ, Matthew 11. after their Translation, be these: My yoke is
sweet, and my burden light. And the words of Saint John, 1. Epistle, 5.
Chapter, be these: His Commandments be not heavy. Now the words of Christ,
that go before those his words, be these: Come unto me all ye that are weary
and laden, and I will ease you: And then it follows: Take my yoke upon you,
etc. Showing, that if any were afflicted in his conscience, and found himself
condemned for his sin by the Law, he should not despair; because he
himself had fulfilled the Law for him: and as Saint Paul says, Colossians 2.
Colos. 2.14. Colos. 1.22.
Has put out the handwriting that was against him. And thereby Colos. 1.22.
Has made him unblameable, and without fault in the sight of God. So that he
having made the Law so light a burden unto him, as that, although he cannot but
break it, yet it shall not condemn him, nor press him down to hell; the
spiritual taste whereof must needs be sweet unto him. And this I take to be
the true sense and meaning of Christ. For if Christ had meant, that the Law had
been easy for us to fulfill, then could we have disburdened our selves of our
sins, and needed not at all to go for any ease to him. 1 Epist. 5.3.
And whereas Saint John says (after their Translation) His Commandments be
not heavy. If he did mean that a regenerate man can actually and absolutely
fulfill the Law, then it is clear, he did mean that a regenerate man may be
without sin: but then how does this agree with his own words? Chapter 1.
where he says of himself, and such as himself then was: 1 Epist. 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth it is not
in us. And Chapter 3. Sin is the transgression of the Law. 1 Epist. 3.4.
Therefore he did not mean that a regenerate man can fulfill the whole Law.
And that indeed it may appear yet more plainly, they cannot; let us see what
we can prove by the Scriptures, Romans 7.
Fathers, and their own Writers.

4 The Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 7 Chapter, verses 14.15. describing in his
own person the state of all the regenerate, says: For we know that the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, The state of all the regenerate.
sold under sin; for I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do
I not; but that I hate, that I do. And Verse 18.19. For I know that in me,
that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me;
but I find no means to perform that which is good, For I do not the good
thing that I would; but the evil which I would not, that do I. Again, Verses
21.22.23. I find then by the Law, that when I would do good, evil is present
with me: for I delight in the Law of God concerning the inner man: but I see
another Law in my members, rebelling against the Law of my mind, and leading
me captive unto the Law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? So that in the person of
this regenerate man, the case is made clear, that no regenerate man, is able
so to fulfill the Law, as that he may duly claim to be justified by it. And
hereof have we also most manifest examples of the old Patriarchs, even from
Noah's time: Genesis 7.1.
amongst whom, albeit the Scripture, Genesis 7. report of him, to be the only
regenerate man of the last age of the first World; The Patriarchs guilty of the
breach of the Law.
yet in the 10. Chap. it is plainly declared, he brake the Law of God, by
being drunk. Also notwithstanding Lot be said to be a just man, and the only
regenerate man among the Sodomites; yet it is recorded, Genesis 19.33, 34.
Genesis 19. that he most wickedly brake the Law of God, by committing incest
with his own two Daughters. Abraham, although he be said to be the Father of
the faithful, Romans 4.16.
Romans 4. yet it is reported, Genesis 12. and Chap. 20. Genesis 16.2.
that he brake the Law of God twice by lying, Isaac his son also brake the
Law by lying, Genesis 26. so did Jacob Isaaks son, Genesis 12.13.
Genesis 27. Also albeit the sons of Jacob were the Patriarchs of the 12.
Tribes of the Children of Israel, Genesis 35.2.
yet they committed Idolatry, Genesis 35. And Ruben the eldest of them,
committed adultery with his Fathers Concubine, Genesis 35.22. Genesis 34.25.
Genesis 35. Simeon and Leui committed a great murder, Genesis 34. Judah, of
which Tribe Christ came, committed adultery with Thamar his daughter in Law,
Genesis 38.18. Genesis 37.18. Genesis 42.15. Exodus 4.24.25. Number. 11.10. to the 15.
Genesis 38. and most of them consented to have murdered their brother Joseph,
Genesis 37. Joseph committed idolatry, by swearing by the life of Pharaoh, Genesis
42. Moses brake the Law, by not circumcising his son the eight day, Exodus 4.
He murmured against the Lord, Numbers 11. Aaron consented to Idolatry. Exodus
32. Exodus 32.2. 2 Samuel 11.4.15.
David committed both adultery and murder, 2 Samuel 11. And the whole Nation
of the Jews, amongst whom were many thousand regenerate persons; yet even of
the general, did our Savior say unto certain of them, John 7. John 7.19.
Did not Moses give you a Law, and yet none of you keeps the Law?

5 Wherefore unless the Papists can prove, that the regenerate in these days,
have a greater measure of the spirit of grace, then the Patriarchs and Prophets
had, and all the regenerate Jews had; nay, then he whom they feign to be their
founder, and the chief regenerate man of all the Apostles had, they can never
prove, that any regenerate man can live so without sin, but that if he seek
to be justified by fulfilling the Law, he shall bring himself within the
curse and condemnation of it, for that it says: Cursed be he that fulfilleth
not all. And it is most certain, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
that if a man could live so, as that he deserved to be called righteous Noah,
just Lot, or faithful Abraham; and to be said of him to have walked in all the
Commandments of God without reproof, and in respect of men, to be a just man
before God; as it was said of Zacharias and Elizabeth his wife: Luke 1.6.
yet shall he find in himself to have broken the Law in some one point or
other, for which he had need of a sacrifice, as Zacharias had; who offered
continual sacrifice as well for his own sins, as for the rest of the
peoples, as is proved in Leuiticus 16. Luke 1. and Hebrews 7. Nay, I say
further, Leuit. 16.6. Luke 1.8.9. Heb. 7.27. Job 1.8.
that if God himself should say of him, as he said of that just man Job: None
is like him in the earth, an upright and just man, one that fears God, and
escheweth evil. Yet if he will be accepted of God as Job was, he must
confess with Job, Job 39.37. Job 14 17. Job 9.3.
and say; Behold, I am vile, Chap. 39. Mine iniquities are sealed up as in a
bag, Chap. 14. If I would justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me:
If I would be perfect, he shall judge me wicked, Chapter 9. By which it is
most evident, that all those that will be perfect by the works of the Law, God
will condemn for imperfect, for not fulfilling the whole Law. And for this
cause it was, that Saint Paul concludes hereof thus. By the works of the Law
shall no flesh be justified in the sight of God, Romans 3. And thus much by
proof of Scripture concerning this point: now let us hear the ancient Fathers.

6 Saint Augustine writing against the Pelagian heretics, says: August. in
his first Book against the Pelagians.
Who will grant you that any man can do that thing that no man was ever able
to do? Again, he says; Against that 2. Epistle.
It is impossible that the Law should be fulfilled by flesh. Saint Hierome also
against the same heretics, wrote thus: Hier. to Cresiphontus against the
Pelag.
Ye will say Gods Commandments be easy; yet you are not able to show us any
man, that ever fulfilled them altogether. And these Pelagians, Saint Augustine
called the new heretics; whereby it seems, that they were the first Authors
of this heresy. And notwithstanding their great Doctor Saint Thomas of Aquine
proves it an heresy, by saying; Thomas of Aquin, 3. Galat.
It is impossible for flesh and blood to fulfill the Law: yet comes their
Master Harding, and says; M. Hard. Apolog. chap. 19. Diuis. 1.
We believe that God commands us nothing impossible to us: otherwise how
could he justly punish for not doing that Commandment, which by no means we
are able to fulfill? We are sure that God punishes no man unjustly: for there
is none iniquity in God. To which we answer.

7 God is just and perfect in nature, and therefore he gave a just and perfect
Law; and such a one as man might have kept, had he kept himself in that
perfect estate wherein God created him: but if through his own default, he
has lost the freedom, both of power and will, so as that he cannot now but
break his Law, God is not unjust in punishing him for it. And it is most
certain, that to the intent man might see, what a miserable estate he had
brought himself into, Gal. 3.19. Romans 3.20.
this just Law was given. For as Saint Paul says, Galat. 3. It was added
because of transgression: and Romans 3. By the Law comes the knowledge of
sin. And this is it which Saint Augustine says: August. in his Preface to
the Galathians.
The Lord gave a just Law to unjust men, to make manifest their sins, and not
to take them away. Again, he says, Upon the 118 Psalm.
To this purpose was the Law given, that of great it might make little, that it
might show unto thee that thou have no strength of thy self to fulfill the
Law: And so being needy, unworthy and poor, might flee unto grace, and cry:
Have mercy on me O God, for I am weak. The Pelagians (says he) In his book
of Grace and Free Will, cap. 4.
think themselves cunning men, when they say (as we heard right now Master
Harding said) God would not command the thing that he knows a man is not
able to do. To which Saint Augustine answers thus, In his book of Grace and
Free Will, cap. 4.
God commands us to do some things that we are not able to do, that we
might understand what we ought to crave of him. Also their Saint Bernard,
speaking of that which God in his Law requires of us to be performed, says
Bernard upon the Canticles, the 53. Sermon.
In commanding impossible things, God made not men transgressors, but humble,
that every mouth might be stopped, and all the world in danger unto God because
no flesh shall be justified in his sight. And thus much for the answering that
sort of Papists, which hold that men are justified and saved by their good
works: Now let us see what we can say to the other sort.

8 Another sort there are, which hold that we are justified by faith and
works together. And they ground their opinion upon the words of Saint James.
chap 2. James chap. 2.24.
where he says: Ye see how that of works a man is justified, and not of
faith only. And hereupon they conclude, that in the sight of God, we are
justified by faith and works together: whereas it is evident by the words
doing before, Saint James had no such meaning: and therefore their
misunderstanding him, has caused them to err. For they not considering that
there be two manners of iustifications, the one before God, the other before
men, Mat. 23. Mat. 23.
suppose that Saint James speaks there of justification before God; but how
can this possibly be, seeing (as we heard before) he said in the same chap. He
that fails in one point of the Law, James 2. chap. 10. and 3.2.
is guilty of all. And in the chap. following, in many things we sin all?
Now seeing he says, that in many things we sin all, and he that breaks
one point is guilty of all: it is clear, he did not mean justification before
God, but before men. And this appears also most evidently, from the beginning
of the 2 chap. to the 17. verse of the same: Where he having to deal with the
Atheists of his time (such as of whom there are too many every where) in whom
albeit there appear no fruit of a true and justifying faith, but the
contrary; yet let any well disposed man reprove them for the same, straight
way they break forth into these speeches, and say: I hope I have as good a
faith as you, and I hope to be saved as well as the best of you all: To such
said Saint James, James chap. 2.18.
Thou have the faith, and I have works: show me thy faith out of thy works,
and I will show thee my faith by my works. Now in that he says, show me, and
I will show thee, it is without all contradiction, he speaks of the outward
justification before men, and not that by works, neither by faith and works
together, we are justified before God.

9 Again, whereas against those Athiests, he opposed that outward sign of
Abraham's faith, by offering to sacrifice his son Isaac at the commandment of
God; yet although his faith thereby was manifested to the World, to be a true
faith; he was neither justified before God by that work, neither by it and
faith together, but even by the faith alone. Romans 4.2.3.4.5.6.7.
For as the Apostle Saint Paul says, Romans 4. If Abraham were justified by
works, he has wherein to rejoice, but not with God. For what says the
Scriptures, Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness? Now to him that works, the wages is not counted by favor,
but by debt: but to him that works not, but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteous: Even as David declares the
blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works,
saying: Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered: Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. So that hereby
we see it most manifest, that justification before God, consists in faith
alone without works: even as he also proves as apparently, where he
absolutely, and utterly excludes all kind of works; for being wholly, or any
part of the cause of justification, in that he says, Romans 11. If it be of
grace, it is no more of works: If it be of works, it is no more of grace.
That is to say, it is of the one, but not of both. And therefore in the third
Chapter of the same Book, he closes up the doctrine of justification thus:
Romans 3.28.
We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law.
And thus much by proof of Scripture touching this point also. Now let us hear
the judgment of the Fathers.

10 Saint Augustine says, August. in ^^s 83. q^^stio^s. Quest. 76. Glossa
ordinaria.
Abrahrns was justified by faith without works. Saint Hilary says, Hila. 9.
Can. Ma. 8.
It moved the Scribes that sins was forgiven by man; for they only beheld
man in Christ Jesus; and that to be forgiven of him, which the Law could not
release (fides enim sola iustificat) for faith only justifies. Saint Hierome
says, Hier. 10. cap. Romans
They not knowing that God justifies (sola fide) by faith only, supposed
themselves to be just, by the works of the Law, which they never observed.
Theophilact says, Theop. 3 cap. Gal.
Because no man is justified by the Law, etc. Now he does plainly show, that
(fidem ipsam vel sol^m) faith it self, yea even alone has power to justify.
Saint Chrysostom says, Christost 4. Hom upon the 1. to Tim. chap. 1.
Who could hardly believe, that enemies, that sinners, that such as were not
justified in the Law, nor by works, that they by and by, have (ex sola fide,)
by faith only obtained the chief merit. It seemed to the Jews (said he^) an
incredible thing, that a man that had spent all his former life vainly and
disorderly, having passed the same in wicked works, that afterward he should
be said to be saved (sola fide) by faith only. Again he says thus of them,
In his Hom. upon th. 3. chap. to the Gala.
They said who so stays himself (sola fide) by faith only, is accursed:
Contrariwise, Saint Paul proves, who so stays (sota fide) by faith only is
blessed. Moreover, he says, Upon the 4. chap. to the Romans the 8. Ser.
That a man destitute of works, should be justified by faith, that
peradventure may seem to be well: but that a man beautified with virtue and
good works, should nevertheless by them not be justified (sed sola fide) but
by faith only; truly this is wonderful. And hereof it is that their Doctor
Master Harding, is compelled thus to confess, D. Har. in his book, A
detection of sundry foul errors, li^s, etc. in fol. 357.
We are justified freely without works, that may deserve the grace that God
gives. To conclude, Saint Origin says, Origin 3. B^^^ke 3. chap. Romans Romans 4
5.
If we require an example who was justified (sola fide) by faith only, without
works I suppose that the same thief does suffice. And indeed this i^ that
remedy^ whereby God does save his elect, which he calls at the last hour,
whether on their death bed, or on the gallows-tree. And this it is which
Saint Paul says, Romans Romans 4.5.
4. By faith God does justify the ungodly. And as he shows, that faith is
the only means, whereby God does save the ungodly, Gal. 3.11. Hab. 2.4.
whom he vouchsafes to call, so Galla. 3. aluding to these words of the
Prophet Habakkuk, chapter 2. The just shall live by his faith: he proves that
the most righteous shall be saved by their faith only, or else they shall
never be saved. And thus much for the answering the other sort of Papists also,
which will have men to be saved by faith and works together.

11 But now (Christian Reader) what shall we say? shall we conclude that we are
justified by such a faith as the Papists charge us with, which is general with
all the wicked, which not only is without the fruits of a true and lively
faith, but has the contrary? God forbid. But we say, that we are justified by
faith; that is, by such a faith, as Saint Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. 1 Cor. 13.
chap.
All men have not, 2 Thessalonians. 3. Yea, by that faith which he says works by
love: and which Saint James says, James 3.17.
Is full of mercy and good fruits, chapter 3. Even by the same faith which is
manifested unto men, and approved of God, to be a true faith, which at the day
of judgment shall be tried by the fruits thereof, and all judged thereby: at
which time, every one that is found to have had it, shall as the Apostle Saint
Peter says, 1. Ep. 1. chap. Receive the end of his faith, even the salvation
of his soul: The rest that had not this fruitful faith, shall be damned, as
appears in the 25. Chapter of Saint Matthew.

12 True it is, that the general sort, because they believe Christ to be the
Savior of the world, and have their names derived from him, to be called
Christians, think verily they shall all be saved: Yea though many of them live
worse then the very Infidells. But what reason have they, so to delude
themselves, seeing, that not a few, but many which preach Christ and the
Christian faith, shall be damned: because howsoever they preach well, and teach
the truth, their lives are not correspondent? Our Savior Christ, speaking of
Christians, and the time of trial, who be true Christians indeed, Matthew. 7.
says, Matthew. 7.22.23.
Not every one that says unto me, Lord. Lord shall outer into the Kingdom of
heaven, but he that does my fathers will which is in heaven. Many will say unto
me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name prophesied? and by thy
name cast out Devils? and by thy name done many great works: and then (says
Christ) I will profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from me, ye that
work iniquity. And here we see those miracle-mongers (the Papists) specially
included, who (as we proved in our second Chapter) work their miracles in the
name of Christ, to draw men to Antichrist. And as touching their conversation
of life, their Saint Bridgit brings Christ thus reproaching them for the
vileness thereof, saying, Bridgit in her sixth Book of Revelation, 15. chap.
Their conversation and life stinketh like a Where in my sight. So that as she
says in another place, In her first Book, chap. 50.
The simple sort by their bad example, they hurl down headlongs.

13 But now happily they will object and say, are we singular in this point?
have you no such badde Ministers among your selves? I answer, I hope none so
bad as our former Chapters have demonstrated. God forbid we should; For mine
own part, I know none such: But this I know, that if any amongst us, will
persuade himself, that because he preaches Christ truly, and the true
Christian faith, that therefore he has the true and justifying faith, whereby
he shall be saved, when as he has not the fruits of the true and justifying
faith; let him say what he will, it is certain he has not that faith, and
therefore he cannot be saved. For as Saint James says, chap. 2. James 2.14.
What avails it my brethren, though a man say he has faith, when he has no
works, can that faith save him? It is one thing for a man to say he has
faith, and another thing to have it indeed.

14 Therefore that no man should delude himself, Saint Paul thus admonishes
every man, saying, 2 Cor. 13. 2 Cor. 13.5.
Prove your selves, whether ye are in the faith; examine your selves. But how
shall a Minister know for certain, whether he be in the faith? Shall he know
it by being furnished with sufficient gifts, fit for his calling? no. For as
Saint Paul declares, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 12.8.9.
12. A man may have the gift of knowledge, and not the gift of faith: But may
he know it by well disposing the gift of his knowledge, to the begetting and
increasing of faith in others? no. For albeit the Word which he preaches may
beget faith unto salvation in others, yet as the same Apostle shows, Cor. 11.
2 Cor. 11. he himself may be a castaway. But how then shall he know it?
truly by none other thing, but by this, even by having the fruits of the true
and saving faith, which grow by degrees in him, by the conscionable and
diligent practizing of that which he preaches to others.

15 God, at the first ordination of Priesthood, as appears, Exodus 28.30.
Exodus 28. caused Aaron to set in the breast plate of his garment, Vrim and
Thummim, which signified perfection of knowledge, and holiness of life. So
that notwithstanding many do attain unto a very great measure of perfection
of Vrim, yet we see by our Savior Christ, Matthew. Matthew. 7.
7. that for want of the like measure of Thummim, they shall be damned. Yea the
like measure I say: because our Savior himself says, Luke 12.48.
Luke 12. Unto whom much is committed, of him much is required. If then those
that have not Thummim answerable to their Vrim, shall be damned, they must
needs be damned which have not Thummim in any good measure answerable, much
more they that have the contrary; and truly no marvel. For it is certain,
that one such, with his badde life, does more hurt in the Church of God, then a
great many, do good by their good Doctrine: Luke 12.47.
and therefore as our Savior says, Luke 12. they shall receive the greater
damnation. And not only because they know their Masters will, and do it not,
but also because they live wickedly, and yet will preach. For do they not
know, that the Lord himself has forbidden such to preach, Psalm 50.16.
Psalm the 50. where it is said: But unto the wicked said God, what have thou
to do to declare mine Ordinances, that thou should take my Covenant in thy
mouth, seeing thou h^test to be reformed? Wherefore, for that they will take
upon them to execute the office of Gods Ministers, and live so greatly to the
dishonor of God (as the sons of Eli did) the Lord will surely say unto them,
1 Samuel 2. chap. 30. Romans 3.18.
as he said unto Eli, 1 Samuel 2. Them that honor me, I will honor: and
they that despise me, shall be despised.

16 And now, as we see, that none that preach the Gospel, can by their
diligent preaching only, assure themselves, that they have a true and
justifying faith; no more can we that be their hearers, by our only diligent
hearing; but by practicing that which we hear the Word of God command, Luke
13 26. James 1.22.
And therefore it is that Saint James says, Chap. 1. Be ye doers of the Word,
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. By which we see it evident
and plain, that not preaching, but practicing; not hearing, but doing, is that
that can assure a man, that he has that true and justifying faith. And that
not all in like measure: for it will not be accepted of God, that he which has
received Gods gifts in a great measure, should do no more, and be no more
bountiful then he that received them in a small measure. And therefore it is
that Saint Peter says, 1 Epist. 1. Epistle of Peter 4.10.
4 Chap. Let every man as he has received the gift; minister the same one to
another, as good disposers of the manifold graces of God. If any man speak,
let him talk as the words of God. If any man minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God ministers, that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever, and ever, Amen.
But if he that is worth a thousand pounds, will do no more then he that is
worth but an hundred pounds, or he that is worth an hundred pounds, no more
then he that is worth but an hundred shillings; these are not good disposers of
the manifold graces of God: and therefore when the day of reckoning shall come,
how they will answer it, I leave to God and their own consciences.

17 And now to return to our adversaries: thus I say; that forasmuch as this
being the general doctrine of our Church, that none can be saved by such a
faith as is without good works, they do us manifest wrong, in charging us to
teach against good works, and that we are saved by an idle faith that has no
works: whereas we say, that we are justified and saved by the faith which has
good works, but without the works; because faith only does apprehend the
matter of our justification, which is not possible for works to do. For as
Saint Paul says of Christ, Acts 13. Be it known unto you men and brethren,
that through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and from
all things from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses, by him
enery one that believes, is justified. Many when they hear us speak of
justification, do not consider the point: for they suppose that we speak of
the matter, when indeed we speak only of the means. For to speak properly
of the matter, it is neither faith of it self, nor faith and works together,
that does justify us before GOD: but as we see, it is Christ Jesus only of
himself, and by himself, that does both justify and save.

But as touching the means, we say it is faith alone. And hereof it is which
Saint Ambrose speaking both of the matter and the means, says: Ambrose upon 1
Cor. first Chap.
In Christ Jesus is grace given: for as much as this with GOD is decreed, that
who so believes in Christ, is saved (sola fide) by faith only without works,
receiving freely forgiveness of sins. And thus we see the case to stand
clear, that faith without works, is the only means of justification and
salvation.

18 Now then (Christian Reader) this doctrine of justification by faith in
Christ, without works, being so easy and clearly to be proved the truth; is
it not a Worlds wonder, to see that so many wise and learned men, should
impugn it: And that a Cardinal, one of the Popes Penmen, Master Allen,
should ascribe so much unto good works, as to say: In D. Fulkes answer. Page
239.
They cleanse before hand, stays the soul from death, and lifts it up unto
eternal life. Regard not the iangler, that will say men's works do not purge
sin, and win heaven? Which doctrine being true, what is it, but that we
are justified and saved by the works of the Law, whereby not only all those
testimonies of the ancient Fathers are proved false, but also all those
Scriptures which before we cited, are confounded; and these that follow, which
show that we are justified and saved only by faith in Christ, without works,
are to no purpose.

19 Saint Paul Ephesians 2. says. Ephesians. 2.8.
For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should glory in himself. Also,
Galatians 2. he says; We which are Jews by nature, Galat. 2.15.16
and not sinners of the Gentiles, know that a man is not justified by the
works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we I say, have
believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus
Christ, and not by the works of the Law, Galat. 3.23.24.25.26.
because that by the works of the Law, no flesh shall be justified. And chap.
3. he says. Before faith came, we were kept under the Law, and shut up unto
the faith, which should afterward be revealed; wherefore the Law was our
Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ, that we might be made righteous by
faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolemaister;
for ye are all the sons of God, by faith in Christ Jesus. And therefore as he
says, Romans 4. Roman. 4.
If they which are of the Law, be heirs, faith is made void, and the promise
of God is made of none effect. And yet as he says. Galatians 2. I do not
abrogate the grace of God, for if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ
died without a cause. So that by the doctrine of the Romish Church, we see
plainly, that faith is made void, the promise of God made of none effect, the
death of Christ needless, and the whole matter of our justification and
salvation, to consist only in our own deseruings. And indeed to the very
same effect, are these words of their Cardinal Allen, Allen in Fulke. page 154
The death of Christ does not discharge us of satisfaction for our sins, nor
of any other good work whereby a man may procure his own salvation. Also the
Pope says thus in Bernardine Rosetus, Bernard.
We can demerite eternal life with works: Therefore we ought to presume, and
hold for a certainty, that after this life we shall assuredly have eternal
life, for the reward of good works. And in the Summary de Great. Sanct. Good
works demerite three things; namely, eternal life increase of grace, and
remission of sins.

20 Truly I cannot but admire, to see that men which would feign be saved,
will either be saved by that only means, whereby they shall be damned, or
else they will not be saved. For by the works of the Law, we see they will
procure their own salvation, purge their souls from sin, deliver them from
death, and lift them up into everlasting life. And therefore, as they depend
upon the Law, so they must look to have the reward of the Law, which is the
curse and condemnation of it. For as Saint Paul says, Galat. 3.10.
Galatians 3. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the curse: for
it is written, Cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are
written in the Book of the Law, Galat. 5.4.
to do them. And chapter the fifth he says, Ye are abolished from Christ:
whosoever are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from grace. Romans 9.30.31.
And Romans 9. he shows this to be the cause of the condemnation of the
Jews. For says he; What shall we say then, that the Gentiles which followed
not righteousness, 32.
have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith:
but Israel which followed the Law of righteousness, could not attain to the
Law of righteousness? Wherefore (says he) because they sought it not by
faith, 33.
but as it were by the works of the Law: for they have stumbled at the
stumbling stone, as it is written. Behold, I lay in Sion a stumbling stone, and
a Rock to make men fall: and every one that believes in him, shall not be
ashamed. But therefore the same judgment is fallen upon them, John 9.39.
which Christ shows, John 9. himself came to inflict upon those obstinate
Jews, and Scribes, and Pharisees, who sought salvation by the works of the
Law, and not by faith in him. I am come (said he) unto judgment into this
world, that they which see not, might see, and that they which see, might be
made blind. And this blindness we see to be now in the Papists. For
notwithstanding the Apostle Saint Paul says plainly thus of Christ, 2 Corinthians. 5. God made him to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: they cannot see how this righteousness should
serve the turn. For as their Cardinal Allen says, In the said book, page 154
The death of Christ does not discharge us of satisfaction for our sins, nor
of any other good work whereby a man may procure his own salvation. And
further, for those that cannot attain unto satisfaction, the second part of
our first Chapter does show, that the want that is in them, is made out by the
ouer-plus of the righteousness of others. For as the said Cardinal says, In
the said book, page 239.
The Church of God has instructed thee, that all works whereby man may
procure help to himself or others, be the works of the faithful. And thus
we see, that the same judgment which Christ laid upon the Jews, Scribes, and
Pharisees, he has laid upon them, that they so little accounting of him, should
trust to be made righteous by themselves and others, that so they might be
deprived of his righteousness.

21 Again, the Apostle Saint Paul 1. Corint. 1. 1. Cor. 1.30.
says also thus of Christ: God has made him unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that according as it is
written: He that rejoices, let him rejoice in the Lord. But it seems that
Cardinal Allen likes not of this kind of rejoicing: for as we heard before,
he cheareth up his Chickens, to rejoice in their own righteousness; assuring
them, that that is it, which before hand (in this life) makes sure work for
the purging of sin, and after this life, for the delivering the soul from
death, and for lifting it up into everlasting life. And therefore if their
doctrine be true, they have as great cause to rejoice in their own strength of
salvation, as in all whatsoever Christ has done for the strength of man's
salvation; and in themselves, as in the Lord. Nevertheless, besides this which
we have already alleged, our Savior himself has stricken down their
proud peacockes tail, in saying, Luke 17. Luke 17.10 Matthew. 25.30.
When ye have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants. And Matthew 25. Cast therefore that unprofitable servant
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: Showing
plainly, what is our due by our own deseruings. And thus much by proof of
Scripture concerning this point also. Now let us hear the ancient Fathers.

22 Saint Bernard says, Bernard in his book of Freewill.
Who is he that is ignorant of the righteousness of God? He that justifies
himself. Who is he that justifies himself: He that presumes of merits,
any other where, than of the grace of God. Saint Augustine says, Augustine in
his Book of Predestination of Saints the 1. chapter.
I do confess, that I am grieved, that there is no place given to so many, and
manifest authorities of Gods word, whereby the grace of God is commended (which
is utterly no grace) if it be given for our merits. Saint Bernard again
says, Bernard 67. sermon upon the Canticles.
There is no mean for grace to enter, where merits keeps and occupies
place. Therefore says Saint Augustine, Augustine 31. psalm.
If thou will be a stranger from the grace of God, boast thou of thine own
merits. Again, he says, Upon the 70 psalm.
Thou art nothing of thy self, call upon God, thy sins are thine own,
merits are of God; punishment is due unto thee. Whereby we see all our
iustifiers condemned. First, of ignorance. Secondly, of presumption. Thirdly,
of blasphemy, in making grace no grace, by affirming it to be given unto us for
our merits. Fourthly, of most palpable perverseness, by thrusting in their
corrupt merits, whereby the grace of God is utterly excluded out of the work
of justification. Fifthly, by boasting, and bringing in their merits into the
work of justification, they have thrust themselves out of the favor of God.
Lastly, for that they dare stand out with God, to claim remission of sins and
eternal life by their merits, and to seem unto themselves to be that which
they are not (such as unto whom by desert the kingdom of heaven is due) they
shall receive their due; which as Saint Augustine says, is punishment, to wit,
destruction both of soul and body. And therefore, how true it is, that they
will either be saved by that means whereby they shall be condemned, or else
they will not be saved; let the Reader judge.

23 Saint Augustine reproving such Heretics as would look to be rewarded
with everlasting life, for their merits, said thus unto them, Augustine 70
psalm.
When the reward shall come, he will crown his own gifts, not thy merits.
That is, after we have gotten possession of heaven by the only means of
faith; then according to the measure of grace, which God did give to every man
in this life, to work his will, and to set forth his glory, he will crown
them with degrees of glory. Luke 19. And this is it which Saint Paul says; 2
Cor. 5 We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man
may receive the things that he has done in his body, according to that he
has done, whether it be good or evil. At which time Saint Augustine says:
August. in his Book of the Spirit and the Letter. Cha. 33.
God will crown with favor and mercy that shall be done at the last
judgment: whereas when the just King shall sit in his Throne, to render to
every man according to his works, who shall boast that he is clean from
sin? or who shall boast that his heart is chaste? Therefore (says he) it was
needful to make mention of the mercy of our Lord. Indeed he may well say, God
will then crown with favor and mercy, and not according to our deserts. For
whereas that just man Job, Chapter 9. says thus of man: If God should dispute
with him, he could not answer him one thing for a thousand: yet at the day of
judgment, as plainly appears in Saint Matthew 25. the Lord will repeat the
things which the faithful had well done, not once mentioning any one thing
they had ill done, were the actions never so vile. And there also in that
Chapter is plainly demonstrated unto us what sort of Christians shall be
saved, and what sort damned. Those that shall be saved, do utterly disclaim
their own righteousness, and those that shall be damned, do justify
themselves, by challenging to themselves the performing of all those Christian
duties, which Christ required to be done to his members. Now therefore
Christian Reader, be thou judge, of which of these two sorts the Papists are.
Also in that Chapter is plainly declared, that men are not saved by the bare
name of faith, but by the true faith, that has the true fruits.

24 They will not in any case be saved by that way whereby we seek to be
saved, namely, by endeavoring to the utter most of our powers, to observe and
do all whatsoever we are commanded; and then when we have done our best, to
confess the truth against our selves, that we are unprofitable servants, as
our Savior himself commanded, and to rely wholly upon the mercy of God in
Christ: but they will be saved by fulfilling the Commandments, or else they
will not be saved. Neither will they do their good works, to the end
whereunto God ordained and appointed them to be done, as we do. First, to show
our love to God, in walking as it becomes his children, John 14.15. Secondly,
by them to glorify God, Matthew 5.16. John 15 8. Thirdly, to make our election
certain to our selves, 2 Peter 1.10. Fourthly, to win others to Christ by
our godly conversation, 1 Peter 3.1. Lastly, to assure our selves for certain,
that by having the true fruits of the true faith, we have that faith whereby
we shall be saved, James 2.14. But they will do their good works, first to
purge their own sin. Secondly, by the overplus of good works, to purge the
sins of others. Thirdly, to stay their souls from death. Fourthly, to
purchase Heaven. And lastly, to lift up, and place their souls in Heaven. They
will have all by their own deseruings, or they will have none: all by merits,
or else no bargain: therefore let us see what we can say further unto them
touching this point.

25 Our Savior Christ, Matthew 5. says; Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven. Now this word Poor, is a metaphor, taken
from a man that is so very poor, as that he has not wherewith to sustain
his own life, but is feign to seek to others for succor. And such are they
which find themselves so greatly destitute of souls sustenance, as that they
are glad to seek to others for relief, even to God for his mercy, and to
Christ for his merits.

26 Such a blessed poor man was Saint Basil, as may appear by these his
words: Basil. upon the 32. Psalm.
He that trusts not in his own good deeds; nor hops to be justified by his
works, has the only hope of his salvation in the mercies of God. Also such a
blessed poor man was Saint Augustine, as appears by these his words: Aug.
upon the 142. Psalm.
Lord, for thy name sake shall thou quicken me in thy righteousness: Not in
mine; not because I have deserved it, but because thou have mercy on me. Also
such a blessed poor man was Saint Hierome, as appears by these his words:
Hier. 64. of Esaias.
If we behold our own merits, we shall be driven to desperation. Yea, and
notwithstanding Saint Bernard acknowledges himself also to be one of these
poor Publicans, in that he says of himself: Ber. upon the Psalm. qui habitat.
My merits is the mercy of God: yet they will rather be condemned with the
proud Pharisees, then be iuslified with the poor Publicans. To be brief,
whereas their Master Harding says: D. Harding in his book, A direction of
sundry soul, errors lies, etc. in fol. 357.
We are justified freely without works, that may deserve the grace that God
gives. Here he has condemned their doctrine of justification by works, to be
most false and erroneous: but in that that he includes, that works may
deserve the grace that God gives, he has proved himself a notable heretic.
For as Saint Augustine says, Aug. in his 46. Epistle.
Understand that the forenamed Epistle (to Sixtus an Elder of the Church of
Rome,) is written against the Pelagians, the new heretics, which affirm the
grace of God to be given according to merits: that he that glories should not
glory in the Lord, but in himself: that is, in man, and not in the Lord. And
therefore in another place he says, In the same Epistle.
Let no man say, that for the merits of his works: or for the merits of his
prayers, or for the merit of his faith, the grace of God is given unto him: And
so that which those heretics say, be counted true; namely, that according to
our merits the grace of God is given: then the which, nothing can be more
false. But as he says in another place, In his book of predestination of
Saints, chap. 9.
They that glory, should not glory in their own merits (which they perceive
to be like unto the merits of them that shall be damned) but should glory in
the Lord. Whereupon, says Saint Ambrose, Ambrose in his 1. book and 5.
chapter of the calling of the Gentiles.
Like as there is none so detestable outrageous, as can restrain the free gift
of grace, so can there be no work so excellent, that this (which is freely
given) should be due unto them by action of debt: for then the redemption of
Christ, should in deed be no thing worth, neither should the worthiness of
man's works be inferior to the mercy of God. Whereupon their Writer Waldensis
says, Walden in his book against Wilelesse.
I take him therefore to be the sounder Divine, the faithfuller Catholic, and
more agreeable to the holy Scriptures, that utterly denies all such kind of
merits.

And thus much for the conclusion of the twelve Chapters, referring the whole
matter to be judged by all that shall read them. Whether they can possibly be
true Catholic Christians, which in stead of one God, will have hundreds, (as
appears in our first Chapter;) and in stead of one Savior, to have many
thousands, as appears in the same Chapter. That will have the Pope to be the
very Vicar of Christ, whom in our second Chapter, we proved to be that great
Antichrist, showed by Saint Paul 2 Thessa. 2. to be the Arch-enemie of Christ
and all true Christians. That will have Rome to be the Mother of all Christian
Churches, which in our third Chapter, we proved to be that Babylon which the
Angel in the seventeenth Chapter of the Revelation calls, The mother of
Whordomes and abominations of the earth. That will have his Church (as it is
now Christian) to be the true Church of Christ: Which in our fourth Chapter, we
proved to be the same idolatrous Church, professing Christ, mentioned by the
Angel in the 13. Chapter and 17. Chapter of the Revelation. That will have
their Church to be the most ancient Apostolic and Catholic Church, which
in our fifth Chapter, we proved had no being at all, for the space of six
hundred and six years next after Christ. That will have the succession of
Universal Popes, to descend from Saint Peter; which we proved in our sixth
Chapter, to descend but from Boniface the third Bishop of Rome, of that name,
made Universal Pope, by that Murderer Phocas ^he Emperor, in the year of
Christ, 607. In which year the first Universal Pope being made, the Popish
Church must needs first begin: For, as before Christ was, there could be no
Christian Church; so, before there was an Universal Pope, there could be no
Popish Church: Therefore their Church having her first beginning but six
hundred and seven years after Christ, the antiquity thereof is overthrown,
and our Church proved to be more ancient by six hundred and six years. That
will have the Popes supreme title and dignity, approved of, by general
consent of Counsels and Fathers; which in our seventh Chapter, we proved to
be gain said, and withstood by Counsels and Fathers, till the year of Christ,
607. That will have Peter to be made supreme Head of all the Apostles, by
Christ himself: the contrary whereof, we proved in our eighth Chapter by
Christ's express Commandment; and therefore the Pope cannot claim his
Supremacy from Peter. That will have the true Church known by retaining
seven Sacraments; which in our ninth Chapter we proved, that to Saint
Chrisostomes time, which was about four hundred years after Christ's
Incarnation, it was known by retaining only two Sacraments; and afterward,
no Christian Church known by the just number of seven, till Antichrist was
borne in Rome. That will have the idolatrous Mass to be the ordinance of
Christ; which in the same Chapter, we proved cannot be, because it tends to
the utter overthrow of the power of Christ's death and passion: as also, because
it was not begun to be framed, till about one hundred and nineteen years
after Christ, and not finished of more then six hundred years after. And
confessed by their Johannes Boemos, to be invented by certain Bishops of
Rome, whose names we have produced in the same Chapter, as himself nominated
them. That will have those words in the sixth chapter of Saint John's Cospel
touching the eating his flesh and drinking his blood, to be meant of a
corporal kind of eating; which heresy, we proved in our tenth Chapter,
Christ reproved the carnal Capernaites for. As also, will have those words in
the six and twentieth Chapter of Saint Matthews Gospel, Take, eat, this is my
Body, to be literally understood, that they might worship the bread for Christ,
and make an Idol of it. That will have Saints prayed unto, and worshipped;
which, as we proved in our eleventh Chapter, is to rob God of two special
parts of his glory. Lastly, that will have men to make a better satisfaction
for sin, then Christ has made for them, and be better purged from their
sin in the fire of Purgatory (then Christ has by his blood) or be holden
from life and liberty for ever: which, as we proved in our twelfth Chapter,
tends to the utter overthrow of all that Christ has done for the salvation
of man kind. To conclude, we see in this Chapter of Conclusion, they will have
men to seek justification by the works of the Law, that so they might be
brought under the curse and condemnation of it, for not fulfilling all that the
Law requires. They will have men to purchase heaven by their own deserving,
thereby to prove his death to be needless, and faith in him of none effect.
And notwithstanding that case to stand clear, that these be pa^^ of those
Antichristian lies, wherewith Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. showed the great
Antichrist should deceive those that loved not the truth. But had pleasure in
unrighteousness. They bash not to say, The Pope cannot be holden with any
Religion of a lie.

FINIS.

