FOUR SERMONS.

The two first, OF GODLY FEAR: On Hebrews 4. Verse 1.

By Robert Cleauer.

The two last. Of Christian Love and Life. On Canticles 2. Verse 10.

By Richard Webb.

2 Chronicles 15.2. The Lord is with you while you be with him. LONDON: Printed
by THO. SNODHAM, for ROGER IACKSON, and are to be sold at his shop near to
Fleetstreet Conduit 1613.

THE FIRST SERMON: OF GODLY FEAR.
HEBREWS 4. VERSE 1. Let us fear therefore, least at any time, by forsaking
the promise of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to be deprived.
THese words do depend upon the former Chapter; where the writer of this
Epistle proposes unto the HEBREWS the example of their forefathers, showing
how they rebelled in the wilderness, and hardened their hearts, and refused to
yield obedience unto the word of the Lord, for which cause he swore that they
should not enter into his rest, viz. into the land of Canaan; and therein was
as good as his word; for they all perished in the wilderness. The like he
declares to have fallen out in the time of David, to wit, that they refused to
hearken unto Gods voice, and therefore were excluded from the heavenly rest,
albeit they inhabited the land of CANAAN, which was a Type thereof. Hereupon
the Apostle enforces an exhortation by way of application, wherein we may
observe: 1 First, the duties which they ought to look unto, which are these
two: 1 First, to the intent they may not be like the rebellious Israelites,
they must get an holy fear into their hearts. 2 Secondly, they must lay hold
of the promise, and not forsake or reject the same.
2 Secondly, the reasons to move them thereunto, which are also two: 1 The
first whereof is taken from the miserable success of them that were formerly
disobedient, to wit, that their carcasses fell in the wilderness, Chapter
3.17. Let us fear [therefore,] that is, considering what sins they
committed, and what fearful judgments they incurred, let us look better to
our selves. 2 The second is drawn from the danger that would ensue unto
themselves, if they did not follow his exhortation; they might seem to be
deprived of that rest which God promised unto his people.



Let us, etc.] Here we may note whom he does admonish, in this word [vs] which
imports thus much: let us Hebrews; let me that am the writer of this
Epistle; let all that are in CHRIST JESUS, even every one of us, fear, etc.
Now, in that he ioynes himself with those, to whom he gives this caveat, the
Doctrine is, that

He that does faithfully instruct others, Faithful Teachers will teach
themselves. Romans 1.23.


The neglect of this, is greatly condemned by the Apostle Paul, who speaks
unto the Jews in this manner; Thou that teach another, teach thou not
thy self? and thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal?
etc. In which place he shows that it is a fearful and inexcuseable sin
for a man to take upon him to be an informer of others, and in the mean time
to be utterly untaught himself, in respect of any working and saving
instruction; neither was this holy Apostle more ready to censure the omission
of this duty in others, than he was careful to practice it himself: for 2
Cor. 7.1. he says; Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, and grow up unto full holiness, in the fear of God: where we see
that he makes himself one of the number. So also, Romans 7. when he dilates
at large of the corruption that is inherent in man's nature, he still lays load
upon himself, and speaks as if no body were in such case as he was. What I
would (says he) that do I not, Romans 7.15.
but what I hate, that do I: and Ver. 18. I know that in me, that is, in my
flesh, there dwells no good thing: and Ver. 24. O wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me from the body of this death? And as in the matter of
humiliation, so likewise in the matter of consolation he speaks in his own
person, seeking to apply the comfort to himself, as well as to offer it unto
others; I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord, v. 25. q.d. He it is that
must deliver me, and all his elect from the bondage of sin, and that by Jesus
Christ, for which I render humble and hearty praises unto his Divine Majesty.
And again, Phil. 1.21. he says; Christ is to me both in life and in death
advantage. So that in matters of exhortation and of instruction, of humiliation
and of consolation, he includes himself within the number of those with whom
he has to deal. And it stands with reason that Ministers and Governors, and
all such as are to admonish others, should take this course.

First, because their need requires it:

Secondly,

Thirdly,

Fourthly and lastly, sound exhortations as you do, and yet (God knows) they
come short enough in their practice. You can tell us that we must be
merciful, etc. but surely there are none more ravenous then you Preachers: for
there are many of you that will never be satisfied, but would heap together a
whole world of livings if you could get them. Thus is the name of God
blasphemed through such men's looseness; and therefore does the Lord forbid
them to take his word into their mouths, that cast it behind their backs,
Psalm. 50.
and hate to be reformed thereby. Holy speeches are utterly unbeseeming unholy
persons, neither will the Lord hold them guiltless, that do in such sort take
his glorious Name in vain.

Therefore let us in our exhortations before we speak, Habakkuk was with
those things which were revealed unto him. When I heard (says he) my belly
trembled, my lips shook at thy voice: rottenness entered into my bones, and I
trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble. Hab. 3.16.
We should be so far from denouncing the judgments of God in malice and
distemper against the parties, that we should endeavor thoroughly to affect our
own hearts with fear and grief, before we utter them unto others. And the
like may be said for instructions, or consolations, which we are about to
Minister unto any, we must in the first place make our own use thereof.

Secondly, this is for the condemnation of those that are appointed to be
teachers of others, and yet none more untaught than they: who are set as
shepherds over Christ his sheep, and yet are themselves as sheep without a
shepherd, because they are not shepherds unto themselves, as all good
Ministers ought to be. Thence it comes to pass, that albeit they give others
many good lessons concerning mercy, and humility, and patience, and the like,
yet none are more cruel, none more proud, none more reuengefull then they.

And so in families, many governors are to be rebuked, who are very hot and
violent in dealing against the faults of their servants, and children, without
any consideration of that like in themselves: whereas every reproof which they
give unto their inferiors, should put them in mind of those offenses which
either they have committed, to be humbled for them, or which they may commit,
to take greater heed of them, and to pray more earnestly against them. And as
for rebukes, so for chastisements, they should never correct either child, or
servant, but they should lay sharper strokes upon their own hearts for their
transgressions against the Lord, than they do upon their bodies for their
offenses against them. Thus if they could do, they might reap profit by every
fault which is committed, and by every reproof and correction which they give
for the same.

Let us therefore fear.] This is the first duty which they were to perform
for the preventing of those evils which befell the stiff-necked and rebellious
Israelites, and for the keeping of themselves in a better course than they
took, whence this doctrine may be collected, that,

Whosoever will constantly cleave unto the LORD in a good way, Godly fear very
needful.
must awe his heart with an holy fear.

Therefore is it that we are commanded to serve the Lord in fear, Psalm. 2.11.
and to rejoice before him with trembling. Whence we see that all the services
of God, even our reioycings and thanksgiuings, must be mingled with an holy
fear. The like exhortation is given in another Psalm, Psalm. 4.4.
Tremble, and sin not; thereby implying that except men do so, they cannot
choose but sin.

Now the reasons why those that will stand in uprightness,

First, them from falling; for it shows them the peril of sin, and
breeds in them a detestation thereof; it causes them to discern an hook in
Satan's baytes, when he seems to proffer unto them a good morsel: it makes
them to see that there is a net spread for them, when carnal delights are
presented unto them: and therefore is it that Gods servants do stand in awe of
those punishments that are appointed for the workers of iniquity, Job 31.
even when they are tempted unto any evil, though never so secret; and by that
means are preserved from dangerous falls, when such as are destitute of this
fear of God, do run headlong into grievous sins, and so plunge themselves
over head and ears in vnaduoideable, and yet intolerable woes and miseries.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Ier. 32.40.
according to that of the Prophet Jeremy, who brings in the LORD, speaking
thus; I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from me.
No outward dangers can withdraw them from obedience; neither can any manner of
difficulties hinder them from proceeding in good courses: Gods voice is more
forcible to make them go on, than all the threatenings of men can be to stay
them: and therefore those that do more dread men's words than the Lords, deal
as absurdly, as if they should be more terrrified at the barking of a Curre
that stands in the way against them, than of the voice of a Lion that pursues
them at the heels to tear them in pieces, if they hasten not forward: or as
if they should be more afraid of a child that threatens to strike them, if
they pass by him, than of a man of War that follows close after them to
smite them with a sword, if they go not speedily on their way. The holy men of
God have been otherwise affected; 1 King. 22.
Micaih was more fearful of offending the Lord, than of displeasing Ahab.
When Moses saw that God was angry with him for his carnal reasoning against
the Lords sending of him unto Pharaoh, Exodus 4.14.18.
he left off disputing, and chose rather to adventure upon any peril, than
upon Gods displeasure. When Jeremy was threatened by the Lord, Ierem. 1.
that if he would not deliver his message, he should be destroyed, the Prophet
had done, and durst make no more objections in his own behalf: so effectual
is this blessed and holy fear, wheresouer it is thoroughly rooted and settled in
the heart.

Which makes first for the reproof of those that live in presumption, doings
will at length be found contradictory to his words?

A second use of this point may be to teach us to get this holy fear of God
into our hearts, On the first Commandment.
Whereof elsewhere more largely.

Let us fear therefore; why? because others provoking the Lord were so
grievously plagued by him, let us be made more wary through their example.
Whence we may learn this doctrine, that the falls of others before us, should
make us to look better to our own standing.

Other men's sins and plagues must be so many admonitions and forewarnings
unto us, to take heed of the like. Other men's evils must make us wary.
This the Apostle presses in the Epistle to the Corinthians, where, having
spoken of diverse particular offenses of the Israelites, and of the several
punishments that were inflicted upon them for the same, he makes this
conclusion, Now all these things came unto them for exsamples, 1 Cor. 10.11.12.
and were written to admonish us, upon whom the ends of the world are come:
wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall.

Whence we see it evident, that when the Lord punished the stubborn and
rebellious Israelites in the desert, he did aim at the good of all his Elect
that should live in succeeding ages, and caused that Story to be written that
all that should read it might make their use of it, and become more wary by
their example; that they be not murmurers, idolaters, fornicaters, tempters of
God, etc. as they were, least being found guilty of the same sins, they
partake with them in the like punishments. In this very sort also deals the
Wiseman in the Proverbs; for, having showed how dangerous and pernicious the
entisements and practices of the whorish woman are, he thereupon infers,
Pro. 7.25.26.27.
Let not thy heart decline to her: wander thou not in her paths, for she has
caused many to fall down wounded: and least any should too far presume upon
his own strength, and so imagine that he shall escape better than others have
done; he adds. The strong men are all slain by her. Her house is the way
unto the grave, which goes down to the chambers of death. q. d. It is even
like an house that is exceeding contagious, where few or none did ever escape
if once they adventured to come within the doors; and therefore as in that
case every man will be careful to avoid the place, and will not so much as
pass by the doors, or come under the windows, much less thrust himself in
thither, where all that have ventured to come in before, have perished: so the
holy Ghost advises us with all diligence and due circumspection to shun the
occasions of adultery, and not to come near the house of the adulteress, but
to avoid it, as the very portall unto death, even to eternal death, both of
body and soul: and as Solomon gave this in precept unto others, so he
observed it in practice himself; Pro. 24.30.31.
for seeing the field of the slothful, and the Vineyard of the man destitute
of understanding, to be all grown over with thorns and nettles, etc. he
marked it well, and received instruction. The sight hereof made him more wise:
for he considered that poverty did usually come upon such, Verse. 3 2.
as a Post, and necessity like an armed man, that is, speedily and
vnresistibly, and therefore he took the greater care to shake off idleness
and sluggishnesse, upon which so great misery does attend, and will certainly
ensue.

Now,

First, Adam have drawn an equal portion of original corruption from the
loins of their first Father. If then we be all of us naturally alike
inclinable unto evil, why should not we sear by others falls, least we be
overtaken in the same sort? Let that had carried himself holily and chastely
in Sodom, was a man very unlikely (as we would have thought) to fall into
incest, and to commit filthiness with his own Daughters: yet such was the
vileness of his nature, that by his Daughters means he was drawn first unto
drunkenness, and then unto that other foul and notorious evil before
mentioned. And if such a man as he were so shamefully foiled, who can secure
himself from falling?

Secondly, Satan is the same now,

Thirdly, the Lords threatenings denounced against sin,

Let this therefore be an instruction unto us, Nehem. 13, 17, 18.
thus did Nehemiah when he saw the Sabbath profaned by the Jews, Then (says
he) I reproved the Rulers of Judah, and said unto them, what evil thing is
this that ye do, and break the Sabbath day? Did not your fathers thus, and
our God brought all this plague upon us, and upon our City? Yet ye increase
the wrath upon Israel in breaking the Sabbath. In the same manner should we
reason: has not the Lord smitten sundry particular persons in their estate for
the profaning of his holy rest, besides other strokes that have lighted upon
their bodies and souls? Nay has he not brought upon our whole Nation sundry
judgments even for this heinous sin among many other? Why then should we
persist in provoking him still, and so pull down upon our heads one plague
after another? So for the abusing of the Lords supper, the Apostle says, that
many among the Corinthians were smitten with weakness, 1 Cor. 11.
and sickness, and with death it self: what use should we make thereof?
Surely this: Did not they then escape Gods afflicting hand, that came
vnpreparedly, and unworthily, without examining and iudgeing of themselves,
unto the holy Sacrament: then how can we expect to go unpunished, if we
pollute and defile that holy ordinance of God as they did?

The like may be said of other sins, as namely of those wherewith the old
world is charged, Luke 17.26.27.
viz. That they eat, and drank, and married, and gave in marriage, unto the day
that Noe entered into the Arc, and the flood came, and destroyed them all. That
is, they lived in a profound worldliness, being altogether careless of
heavenly matters, and setting their minds upon nothing, but the things of this
life: they did traffic only for their bodies, not at all for their souls.
And was this so great a fault (will some say) for men to follow after their
commodities and delights! Yes that they should wholly give over themselves unto
the pursuit of these was so offensive unto the Lord, that he swept them all
away by an universal deluge: they had so defiled the whole world, that it
could not be thoroughly cleansed, till they were all washed away that were the
offenders: And if we follow them in those carnal courses, we may justly
fear that the Lord will cut us off, as he did them, though not in the like
manner: if we be men of the world and for the world, making it our whole life
and the very end of our being here, to eat, and drink, and buy, and sell, and
plant, and build: in a word, if we be wholly addicted to our profit, and
pleasure and credit: and in particular for the matter of marriage, if we look
wholly, or for the most part to personage, and portion, when we are to make
choice of yoake-fellowes for our selves and our children, not regarding
whether they be Papists, or Atheists, or any manner of way profane, so that
they can satisfy our fleshly affections for outward things; if (I say) we be
thus disposed, either we shall be cut off by an untimely death, as the old
world, and the Sodomites were, or if our days be prolonged, it shall be to the
increase of our woe and misery, either in the time of our life, or after our
death, or both. And whereas, concerning that former matter of carnal matches,
some may imagine, that albeit they mary recusant Papists, or others that are as
bad, they can so order matters, that they will receive no hurt by them, but
bring them to Church, and so do good unto them, let them not presume too much
upon their vain conceits: Solomon was as wise as they: yet was not he able to
convert his Idolatrous wives, but was himself perverted by them, and so have
many more beside him.

We can be thus provident for our bodily safety, that when we see one to be
swallowed up in some grief, or to perish in a quick-sand, or the like, we
will retire, and not adventure upon the peril: and surely the examples of Gods
word, (though of things that have been acted many years since) should be more
forcible to cause us to shun spiritual dangers, than fearful spectacles
that are present before our eyes should be to make us careful of eschewing
corporal evils.

Therefore, in the second place, the breaking of the Sabbath, it has been an
usual thing time out of mind, (say they) and therefore why should you find
fault with it? This is a bad argument: and if it might stand for a rule that
the antiquity of a thing does ever prove the lawfulness thereof, what gross
evil could be condemned as unlawful?

The Israelites hardening of their hearts in the wilderness: the crying sins
of the Sodomites: the heinous offenses of the old world; and the woeful
disobedience of our first Parents in Paradise, have antiquity for the
maintenance of them, if that would serve the turn: but alas, that is so far
from making any fault alowable, that it causes the committers thereof to be
more in excuseable, in as much as they have not been admonished by the falls
of such as have gone before them. Therefore let us never bear our selves in
hand that we may warrantably take this or that course of life, because others
have done so before us, unless we can evidently prove out of the scriptures
that they have done well in so doing. Otherwise let us rather fear (as in this
text we are exhorted) than presume to walk in their steps. To God the Father,
to Jesus Christ his Son, and to the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory
ascribed both now and for evermore.

Amen.
THE SECOND SERMON: OF GODLY FEAR.
HEBREWS 4. VERSE 1. Least at any time, by forsaking the promise of entering
into his rest, any of you should seem to be deprived.
LEast at any time.] These words do show the continuance of our
watchfulness, that it must be constant, not at some times alone, but at all
times, whence observe this point, that,

Whosoever would attain to everlasting life, Constant vvatchfulnesse required.
must stand constantly and perpetually upon his guard, every Christian must
keep a continual watch over his own soul; as well one day as another, as
well hereafter, as for the present: there is no time of intermission, or of
interruption granted. Therefore is it that this same Apostle exhorts, saying.
Take heed, brethren, Heb. 3.12.
least [at any time] there be in any of you an evil heart, and unfaithful, to
depart away from the living God. Pro. 28.14.
And the wise man says, Blessed is he that fears always: but he that
hardens his heart shall fall into evil. Implying thereby, that where this
godly fear is at any time wanting, there that party is prone to fall into
hardness of heart, and so to proceed from one wickedness unto another. The
like caution is given by our Savior to his Disciples, Take heed to your
selves (says he) least [at any time] your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting,
Luke 21.34.
and drunkenness, and the cares of this life.

Neither is this incessant watchfulness more than needs:

First, [continually] at a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. 1 Pet. 5.
He is as it were a strong and cunning thief, that has often marked every
place in our house where he may break in, and if we have not a continual
eye unto him, he is ready to take us at an advantage, and to spoil our souls
of those good things which the Lord has vouchsafed unto us: and when he is
least suspected, then is he most industrious about his mischievous practices.
Our warfare is different from that which earthly Princes do exercise: for they
are some times altogether without danger, but we go in continual peril; we
know not how soon Satan will be upon us; there is no moment wherein we can
secure our selves from his assaults; and if we be not evermore in a readiness
to award off his blows, we are likely to receive a deadly wound.

Yea, upon every occasion, not to procure us some slight inconvenience, or
small loss, but to bring us under the power and dominion of the Prince of
darkness, who is a vowed adversary unto all Gods elect.

Thirdly in regard of the Lord we had need to keep a perpetual watch over
our hearts:

If we carelessely reject his holy laws, may not his spirit justly forsake
our soul? If we conclude thus in our own thoughts, now will I take liberty
for wantonness and uncleanness; for oppression and hard dealing, and such
like sins, and hereafter I will become more chaste and more merciful, etc.
May not God even at this time deliuerws up as prisoners unto Satan (as he
has dealt with sundry others) and cause him so to manacle our hearts and
affections, that it shall cost us many a bitter tear, ere we recover our
former liberty and freedom of spirit? Nay further, how if God should take us
with the manner, and at that time strip us of life it self? Surely albeit, we
being the servants of the Lord and dying in repentance cannot perish utterly,
yet shall we depart hence very uncomfortably, and not leave so good a report
behind us, as otherwise we might have done.

The doctrine thus confirmed, serves,

First, being employed in the works of their vocation, but on the Sabbath,
which the Lord has set apart as holy unto himself, they run violently unto
all manner of sinful recreations, and base exercises and sports; and so of
Gods day they make that the Devils day: in so much that he then knows
whereabout he shall find them, even busily employed in his work; for they at
sundry seasons openly profess, (and that a twelve months before) Riot, and
Drunkenness, and Carding, and Dicing, and dalliance, and such like horrible
abuses, and make it known that then they mind to keep open house for sin
and Satan, when they should set open the gates of their hearts that the King of
glory might enter in, and dwell there by his holy Word and blessed Spirit.
These are far from that constant watchfulness and holy fear of falling,
which this Text requires, and even as far from having any part and portion
in that rest, which here is promised unto all that faithfully labor to
attain thereunto.

Secondly, Jude requires) least our own Table become a snare unto us, and we
be too much carried away with a carnal delight in the creatures. When we are
exercised in the works of our callings, let us heedfully look unto our
affections, least we be too far led aside after the world, and least we serve
our own turns, rather then seek Gods glory in that which we do. Yea, when
we are busied in the exercises of Religion, let us take heed that our hearts be
upright with God therein, and that we be not grossly tainted and corrupted with
hypocrisy, and pride, and vaineglory; which are ready to intermixe themselves
with our best actions,

And so for our company, albeit it be so good and so holy, that we see no
likelihood of infection so long as we converse with such, yet let us not be
secure; no, not when we associate our selves with the best that are, fo if we
he, either they may hurt us, or we them, by speech, or example, one way or
other: and if it stand us upon to be jealous of our selves when we have to do
with those that are most religious, much more ought we to walk in fear when
we are compelled upon any occasion to deal with profane persons, who are ever
and anon casting forth lewd, and wanton, and wicked speeches, and seeking to
corrupt men with vile and devilish opinions.

Thirdly, Abraham, Moses, Job, Paul, and Noah by name, who is said to have
walked with God, even in that sinful generation wherein he lived. And if we
strive to attain unto this, assuredly we shall have the Lords assistance, and
be enabled at all times and in all things to keep a good conscience both
before God and men.

By [Forsaking the promise of entering into his rest, etc.] Without Faith the
promises are of no force,


The hearing of the promises is not sufficient for the obtaining of salvation,
unless by faith we lay hold on the same.

Those Israelites of whom mention is made in this Text had the glad tidings of
the Gospel preached unto them, but the word that they heard profited them not,
because it was not mixed with faith in those that heard, Chap. 4 2. Those
impious and blasphemous Jews, which railed upon Paul and his Doctrine, and
contraried the things which were spoken by him, Act. 13.38.
had the forgiveness of sins through Christ preached and proffered unto
them, and yet had no benefit thereby. Judas himself was present among the
hearers of our Savior, when he made that heavenly Sermon ( Matthew. 5.6. and 7.
wherein are contained many blessed promises; yet was he never the better for
that, but rather much worse, because he gave not intertainement thereunto: his
sin was thereby increased; and so is theirs, whosoever they be, that make no
better use of the promises than he did. If I had not come and spoken unto them
(says Christ) they had had no sin; John 15.22.
to wit, in comparison, they had been nothing so faulty as they were; when he
had preached the Gospel unto them, and they had rejected the same, that did
exceedingly aggrauate their sin.

Here then are those to be reproved that are ready whenever any occasion is
offered to discourse at large of the blessedness of these times wherein we
live, delivered unto them: both which do always go together; for whosoever
refuses to walk in the ways of Gods commandments, he does withal reject
the promises; and therefore though the Land be happy in regard of the Word, yet
he is miserable, because he reapeth no benefit thereby.

Now that we may more carefully eschew this sin, let us consider how the
promise of entering into that holy rest is forsaken, and that is done sundry
ways.

First, by too much presumption, How the promise is forsaken. Romans 10.3.
upon their own innocence and worthiness, and so think the promise needles,
as the Aposte witnesses that the Jews did, who going about to establish their
own righteousness, did not submit themselves unto the righteousness of faith:
and likewise so do all that are absolute Papists, and think to merit by their
own works. Of this sort also are all ignorant persons, who profess that they
do not expect any great comfort by hearing of Sermons; they hope they have
lived long enough to know how to be saved: and as for serving of God, they have
had a good devotion ever since they were borne, and they trust they have as
good hearts to Godward, and as good a belief in him as the best of them all,
that can talk so much of the Scriptures. Alas poor silly people, their case
is lamentable, whatsoever they imagine: for all the while they intertaine so
good a conceit of themselves, they cannot possibly fly unto God for mercy in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.2.
but are strangers from the covenants of promise; and howsoever they brag of
their hope of eternal life, yet (as the Apostle says) they are without hope,
and without God in the world: and therefore if ever they look to be cured by
the great Physician of our souls, Christ Jesus, let them labor to see their
spiritual maladies; for he came not to heal those that think themselves
whole, but such alone as feel themselves to be sick, and do esteem it a
singular benefit to have a through cure wrought upon their souls.

Secondly, the promise is forsaken through infidelity, the same, and that there
is not therein virtue sufficient to bring them unto heaven: whence it comes to
pass that if they be set upon by fears and terrors, they sink under the
same, as Judas did, notwithstanding all the sweet promises which he hard from
his Master. And as for their souls, so for their estate, if they be poor and
behind hand, or any other way distressed, they imagine it to be a folly for
them to cast their care upon God, and to rest upon his promise, who has said
that he will not fail, nor forsake those that depend upon him: they will
never put him to it, nor try what he will do for them (as wicked Ahaz
professed when he was in danger of the enemy. Isa. 7.12.) but they will rather
shift for themselves, and use falsehood and lying, and whatsoever ill means
they can devise for the releiuing of themselves, this also is to reject the
promise.

Thirdly, Luke 14.26.
He that does not forsake father and mother, wife and children, lands and
goods, and all that he has or might have, for Christ his sake, and the
Gospels, Luke 14.24.
is not worthy of him. And therefore were they rejected as unmeet guests for
the heavenly banquet, who made more account of their farms, their oxen, and
such like outvvard things, than they did of those spiritual comforts which the
Lord offered unto them: And in like sort shall they be judged and condemned as
contemners of the promises of life, who do more greedily seek after gold, and
silver, and perishable substance, than they do after the treasures of a better
life, which are permanent and everlasting. Indeed Gods people are oftentimes
ouercaried with an immoderate affection toward the things of this world, and
lust breaks in upon them, but they give no harbor nor lodging thereunto in
their hearts, neither do they love these lying vanities, more than grace and
godliness, but would willingly give the Master a place above the servants,
though they, as rude and unmannerly guests, do strive for the chief room in
their souls: they would gladly prefer the glory of God and the means of
their salvation before all the kingdoms of the earth, and desire these outward
things only as helps and furtherances thereunto. And thus we see how the
promises may be rejected.

Now a second use of this point shall be for our instruction, Math. 13.
let us hide the same within our hearts, and keep it as our very life, never
making shipwreck of a good conscience, least thereby our says and comfort in
the promises be much weakened and diminished, but holding on a constant course
in the ways of piety, that so our inward joy and assurance of Gods favor may
be still continued and daily increased. And for the same end, let us be often
meditating, and conferring of the promises, and be willing to hearken unto
others that either in public or in private do their best endeavor to add
further strength unto our faith. Thus if we can do, we shall be sure of a
portion in the heavenly promises, when others shall be punished for refusing of
the same.

Of entering into his rest.] That is into eternal blessedness in the heavens,
and the assurance of enjoying the same here upon the earth: according to that
in the 3. Verse, We that believe are entering into rest. Whence we may learn
this doctrine, that,

The state of Christianity is a state of rest.

The land of Canaan, Christianity is a state of rest.
whereinto the children of Israel entered after their long and tedious travel
in the wildernsse, was a tipe thereof, and therefore is it called Gods rest;
but he does not so greatly stand upon that, because reprobates were admitted
into it as well as his chosen people: but he puts us in mind of a better
rest, even the state of grace and of glory, which his elect, and they alone,
shall have the fruition of.

our Savior confirms this point unto us, where he says, Come unto me all
ye that are weary and laden, Matthew. 11.28.
and I will ease you. Take my yoke on you, etc. and you shall find rest unto
your souls. Here we see what an happy case they are in that betake
themselves unto Christ for relief and comfort, submitting themselves unto his
holy government, though they have manisold troubles and adversities without,
yet they have quietness within, so long and so far as they can disburden
their souls of all their sorrows and cares by casting them upon Christ Jesus,
as he would have them: all that while they are even like men that inhabit in
a strong and invincible Castle, who in the mids of blustering storms and
winds that are round about them, and of violent adversaries that do lay
continual seige against them, are merry and cheerful, and fall to their
food, and betake them to their rest, without any fear and distraction at all,
as knowing that they are safe and sure how soever they be assailed and opposed
against: such is the case of all godly men, what outward trials soever they
have, their consciences are at quiet within, as being confidently assured that
nothing can befall them for their hurt: for indeed every sanctified Christian
is as safe from all mischief as the very Angels of God in Heaven. Another
proof of this point we have in the Prophecy of Jeremy, where the Lord
speaks thus, Stand in the ways, and behold, and atke for the old way,
Ierem. 6.16.
which is the good way, and walk therein: and what then? ye shall find rest
for your souls.

And that we may yet more fully see into the truth of this doctrine, that
grace, and peace, true godliness, and sound tranquillity and quietness do
ever accompany one another; let us weigh these reasons following.

First, unto a Ship, which is ready ever and anon to sink it, and to cause it
to be overwhelmed and swallowed up of the Waters: this burden CHRIST JESUS,
does remove as soon as ever he begins to dwell in the heart by his holy
Spirit, freeing us from the terror of a guilty conscience, and from the
accusations, and clamor, and continual complaints of the same.

Secondly, as the guilt of sin is quite taken away, Paul, who, speaking of
regenerate men, says, that the old man is crucified in them, Romans 6.6.
that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth they should not
serve sin: to which purpose he also adds, Sin shall not have dominion
over you, verse. 14.

Thirdly, whosoever is endued with saving grace, which he is subject unto, and
so be perplexed and distracted with fear, that he shall not be able to
maintain his port, and to uphold his dignity in such sort as he desires: and
what a quieting then must it of necessity be unto the heart of a man, to have
this burden taken off his shoulders, under which others do walk so heavily,
and to be freed from a number of carking and vexing thoughts, by relying on
Gods gracious providence for all the means of this temporal life?

Fourthly and lastly, Chap. 2. verse. 15. For albeit unregenerate men put away
from them the thoughts of death as much as possibly they can, yet when any
grievous sickness is upon them or any the like messenger of death approaches
unto them, and does as it were, knock at their doors, they are commonly very
much disquieted, and in very sore distress and anguish; but as every one is
more religious, so his desolution and departure hence is less terrible unto
him, nay, usually, no news can be more welcome unto such than that they must
shortly leave this sinful and wretched world; for then they know they shall
make an happy change, and instead of the Earth enjoy Heaven: Blessed are the
dead that dye in the Lord, for they rest from their labors: Revel. 14.13. Isa.
57.2. Psalm. 16.
their bodies rest in the grave as in their beds; and their souls go to the
full fruition of that rest, which was but begun here upon the earth.

Which serves in the first place for the confutation of their error which
judge a Christian life to be of all other the most tedious and troublesome,
Bridewell, than in those places where they shall be tied to the outward
performance of Christian duties. But what says the Lord concerning this
matter? does not he avouch that the state of a Christian is a state of rest,
and of peace? and which shall we give credit unto, either the wise God or
foolish men?

But (some will say) how can it be that their estate should be so full of
quietness,

Those do not at all break off their quietness so long as they keep their
peace with God; to wit, their minds and consciences, are nothing disquieted
thereby; or if they be, it proceeds not from the having of grace, but from
the want thereof, and as they grow more religious, so their hearts are still
more calm and quiet.

Secondly, here is matter as of encouragement,

Now, because our rest and peace is either more or less, according to the
measure of our holiness: and our sanctification in this life is but in part,
and therefore our rest also imperfect: this should make us long for the day of
our glorification, when we shall be endued with perfect holiness, and so
attain to perfect rest: in this world we enjoy a great deal more than any
natural man can conceive, but in the life to come we shall enjoy infinitely
more than we our selves can now conceive: which should cause us with patience
to pass through the troublesome and tempestuous Sea of this world, in hope
that we shall shortly arrive at the Haven of rest where we long to be, 2 These.
1.6.8.10.
for it is a just thing with God to give rest unto them that are troubled. When
the Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with his mighty Angels, to be
glorified in his Saints, and to be made maruailous in all them that believe in
that day.

[Any of you,]

The care of salvation belongs to every one indifferently. Religious duties
pertain unto all.


He that would not be damned and eternally destroyed, must be heedfull and
watchful over his ways, of what state, condition, or age soever he be, there
is no dispensation for any; Magistrate and Subject, Minister and People, Master
and Servant, Men and Women, young and old, are all bound to be careful for the
happy estate of their souls: God in this regard, is no respecter of persons,
but requires this care of every one as well as of any one.

Hence it is that the Scripture gives such general exhortations unto piety,
Psalm 49.1. Hear this all ye people, give ear all ye that dwell in the
world, as well low as high, both rich and poor. And again in the Gospel
according to Mark, Mar. 13.37.
our Savior says, Those things that I say unto you, I say unto all men: Watch.

And further, the LORD in denouncing and executing his judgments makes no
distinction of persons, but threatens and inflicteth his plagues upon all
sorts, according to their works: and as they have been greater offenders, so
do they meet with sorer punishments: the Lord spares none, as we may note in
the Revelation, where is showed, that when God came to manifest the fierceness
of his wrath against rebellious sinners, The Kings of the Earth, and the great
men, Revel. 6.15.16.
and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondsman, and every freeman hid themselves in dens, and among the Rocks of the
Mountains. And said to the Mountains and Rocks; Fall on us, and hide us from
the presence of him that sits upon the Throne, and from the wrath of the
Lamb. In which place we see that neither the great command of Potentates, nor
the fortitude of Warrtours, nor the riches of the wealthy, nor the base
condition of the meaner sort, can stand them in any stead. when the Lord
enters into judgment with them; but all that have in them raging sins shall
be tormented with hellish fears.

Again Gods mercies and graces and the testimonies of his favor are offered
unto all sorts, Gal. 3.28.
For in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew, nor Grecian, Barbarian, nor
Scithian, bond nor free, male nor female, but in him, all are one: that is, all
are equally respected without any personal difference; for God regards not
one country more than another; one nation more than another: the Master has
no pre-eminence above the servant, unless he be more religious; neither shall
the servant have a less reward than the Master, except he be less gracious:
women are accepted with the Lord as well as men, neither has he any regard of
the one sex more than of the other. Seeing then that he imposes on all men,
without exception an holy care of their salvation, and punishes all those that
neglect it, and rewards all such as observe it, the use hereof is,

1 For the confutation of their error who imagine that this is not a thing
pertaining unto all, they souls as well as others? And have not they sin,
in their souls that needs purging as well as others? And can sin be purged
away by any other means than by those which God has ordained? And if it be
not washed away can there any unclean thing enter into the kingdom of heaven?
If not, what unmercifulness is it in them to deny unto any the careful and
conscionable use of Gods ordinances, whereby they should be made incapable of
that celestial happiness? Away therefore with this hateful and dangerous
error, that some are exempted from that religious vvatchfulnesse and care of
the duties of piety and of righteousness, which is enjoined unto others:
neither let us suffer our minds and our hearts to be corrupted therewith, but
whether we be men or women, young or old, poor or rich, base or honorable,
let us take upon us this burden which the Lord would have all to bear, even
to stand in continual fear of provoking his Majesty, either by rushing upon
those evils which he has forbidden, or by omitting those duties which he has
commanded.

And, to press this point a little further, let not great men be deluded with
this conceit, that they stand not in need of prayer, and of the word in
public and in private; that they are not bound to mourn for their faults, to
seek reconciliation with God, to desire the admonitions of his servants, and
the like; let not great men (I say) deceive themselves with such vain
imaginations: for if any ought to be more careful of Gods services than other,
surely they are the men: for they receive most wages and therefore must they
do most work: they have the strongest enemies, and therefore need most
heedfully to stand upon their guard: they meet with the most dangerous snares,
and therefore must be most wary of their steps, least at any time they be
entangled. Yet so far has Satan bewitched a great number, that they think
it a derogation to their dignity to suffer the words of exhortation or of
admonition; to be put in mind of offenses committed, or of duties omitted,
those things (they think) pertain to men of inferior note: they would seem
to carry away all the preferment, and yet when the question is concerning the
chief preferment of all, which is to be a found Christian, they put every body
before themselves: they are content that others shall be Kings, but they will
be vassalls unto sin and Satan. What folly, or rather madness is this? Do
they imagine that they shall not come to judgment as well as others? Does not
experience manifest unto them, that age creeps upon them, as well as upon
others? That sickness takes hold of them as well as of others? That horrible
vexations and terrors do sease on them, as well as on others? And why then
does it not enter into their hearts, that damnation belongs unto them as well
as unto others, if by speedy repentance they do not prevent the same?

Now as some do fondly and falsely conceive that they shall be boren with in
regard of their greatness, so do others hope in regard of their meandness to
be dispensed with. We are poor day-labourers, and servants (say they) who are
to be employed in worldly affairs, and to spend our whole time that way: I
hope it is not required of us that we should be skild in the scriptures, be
able to conceive prayer, able to admonish offenders, etc. And therefore either
they absent themselves from the Church altogether, or else are careless and
negligent, and sleepie when they are there: and if they be called to an
account, and examined what they remember, they make answer, that they are
wearied out with laboring in the week days, and therefore they must have
rest upon the Sabbath day: That they were hired for their work, and that they
will do and no more: they will not be examined, nor catechized, nor be held to
any such strict orders. But does not the Lord in his holy word require
obedience of poor men, and of servants, as far forth as of any? Does not he
in the fourth commandment enjoin them to observe, not a bodily rest alone (as
beasts do) but an holy rest? And whereas, they say that they are so toyled out
with work that they cannot listen to Gods word, that is but a fleshly and
devilish excuse: for when the Sermon is ended, they are fresh and lively
enough to follow after their sports and sinful recreations, if they may have
liberty so to do, and can take more pains that way than they have done in
their callings all the week before; and therefore these vain shifts shall not
serve their turns: Gods threatenings are denounced against them, and his
judgments have been executed upon such, as they are heretofore, and so shall
they be still; profane servants and sinful poor men were not spared in the
destruction of the old world, and of Sodom and Gomorra: and we read in the
Gospel, that at the coming of Christ those that are laboring in the Field,
Mat. 24.40.41.
and women that are grinding at the Mill, shall be some of them cast off unto
destruction, as well as others are received unto salvation.

But all servants are not of so mean a condition as some, but there are a
second sort, that have another pretense for their casting off of Christ his
yoke, and they are such as are followers of great men; who allege, that it is
not for their Masters honor for them to be religious, or (as they term it)
precise; but to be proud and quarrelsome: to be ruffians and roisters: to be
swearers and blasphemers: to be drunkards, and whore-Maisters: these, they
think, be for the credit of the house unto which they appertain, and by
these practices they hope to be-please their Masters. But when they have spent
their days in these courses, can their Masters save them from perdition, which
by their lewdness they have justly deserved? no surely, the holy Ghost
speaking of the mighty ones of the world says, Psalm. 49.7.8.
that they cannot redeem their brother, nor give his ransom to God: they
cannot procure their natural life to be prolonged one day, nay nor one moment,
much less can they purchase the redemption of their souls, that they should
live for ever, and that in perpetual bliss and happiness.

Others there are that think they may have a tolleration to be vain and
sinful, because they are young; especially, if they have this resolution,
that when their youthful blood is spent, and the vigor of their bodies gone,
they will betake themselves to more sober courses, and repent for that which is
past; but till that time if they take their liberty upon the Lords day, and
live in idleness and profaneness every day, you must pardon them: but will
God pardon them? does not he say, Remember thy creator in the days of thy
youth, Eccles. 12.1.
whiles the evil days come not, nor the years approach, wherein thou shall
say, I have no pleasure in them. And if they will not take his advise, mark
what he says in another place, Rejoice, Eccles. 11.9.
O young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, etc. This they can well like of, and be too ready to put in practice:
but what follows? But know (says the Lord) that for all these things thou
must be brought to judgment. David found that the sins of his youth lay
heavy upon him, and therefore prays God would not remember them: Psalm. 25.7.
and shall we make so light of them? Paul admonishes Timothy, a very
sanctified and mortified young man, to fly the lusts of youth; and shall we let
loose the raines thereunto, as if they were matters of nothing? ah; let us not
be so foole-hardie unto our own ruin and overthrow: but considering how
fearfully the Lord does judge many young men that give up themselves to
fornication, and adultery, and theft, and all manner of vile and sinful
behavior, as namely, that some of them die an untimely death, being either
brought to the gallows, or some other way strangely cut off: and that others
having great revenues left unto them, are notwithstanding cast into extreme
misery and necessity: and that some others being well descended, are for all
that branded with egregious infamy and reproach: considering (I say) these and
the like extraordinary tokens of Gods heavy displeasure against sundry
lisencious young men; let us take warning by their example, and consecrate the
first fruits of our years unto him, by spending our time religiously and
profitablie in some good course or other.

Secondly, portion of spiritual food, which they in the wisdom of the Spirit
judge to be most fit for them: let them not fear to administer an admonition
or reprehension to the greatest and wealthiest: neither let them neglect to
give an exhortation, or consolation to the poorest and meanest, when need does
require. But herein many do lamentably offend, who if some great one of their
charge be present, will afford them a Sermon, but if they be absent, the rest
shall go without. This is wretched partiality; nay, indeed gross carnalitie
and folly, and argues that they are men-pleasers, and seek themselves in
their doctrine, and not Christ Jesus; in that they have most regard of those
that are commonly the most unprofitable hearers, and neglect such as usually
reap most fruit by preaching: for (ordinarily) the poor receive the Gospel.

[Seeme to be deprived.]

The Lord would not only have men to be in the state of salvation, There must
be no appearance of being out of the state of Grace. 2 Cor. 13.6.
but would have it known that they are in that state, that there might be no
suspicion of the contrary.

Therefore is it, that the Apostle says unto the Corinthians, I trust that ye
shall know that we are not reprobates. Where the word [I trust] implies not
any doubtfulnesse, but indeed a certainty of the thing affirmed. And this had
Demetrius attained unto, 3 Job ver. 12.
of whom the Apostle John speaks thus, Demetrius has a good report of all
men, and of the truth it self: yea, and we our selves bear record, and ye
know that our record is true. He carried himself so holily that he had a good
testimony from all Gods people, from the truth which he embraced, and
practiced, and from the Apostle John himself, who does in a sort
ministerially commend him: so that, look what he said of him, the holy Ghost
said the same; in which regard he adds, and ye know that our record is
true, and that we are not deceived. Now, that it is necessary to make known
our goodness by a Christian conversation, that both we our selves and other
may have a well grounded persuasion of our happy estate, may appear by these
reasons.

First, whatsoever we do shall be both accepted and rewarded of the Lord.

Secondly, Physician heal thy self: for all men may clearly see, that we
have healed our selves.

Thirdly, this brings great honor with it,

This should teach us to give all diligence (as the Apostle Peter exhorts) to
make our calling and election sure; 2 Pet. 1.
and that not only unto our own souls, but as far as possibly we can, to
give testimony thereof unto other men's consciences. If ever we will use
diligence in any thing, let it be in this. It is good husbandry to make sure
for our outward estate, and not to build upon vain hopes; much more is it a
point of wisdom carefully to look unto the state of our souls, which should
be a thousand times deerer unto us than our bodies. If we be doubtful that
there is some dangerous disease growing upon us that is likely to take away our
life, who is there among us, but will seek unto the Physician to prevent that
mischief? how much more careful should we be of our souls, when we plainly
perceive that there is not only a deadly sickness upon them, but that they
are already dead in sin, and in danger to be damned eternally if we seek not
unto Christ Jesus for a speedy remedy? Let us not be secure and careless in a
matter of such consequence: 1 These. 1.4.
but labor for a working faith, and a diligent love, that so not only we our
selves, but others also that have the spirit of discerning, may know that we
are the elect of God, by the fruits of godliness, appearing in us, and
proceeding from us.

Secondly, of their salvation, rather than they will be at the pains to have
this assurance sealed unto their souls. As also, those that would feign have a
good opinion among men, and desire much to be reputed heirs of salvation, and
yet show forth so little piety toward God, and love toward their brethren,
that they cause their wisest and best friends to be suspicious of them.

To be deprived.] The word that is used in the original, signifies properly
to come too late, as suitors do that are prevented; and also to be out-runne
in a race, and so to lose the prize: both which senses may well stand, and from
thence this Doctrine may be raised, that,

Many have some likelihood of salvation, Many seem to be religious, who yet
miss of salvation.
and yet fail of the same.

For otherwise the holy Ghost would never have gone about to stir them up to
an holy watchfulness over their hearts and ways, by this reason [Lest any
should seem to be deprived,] for if some did not come short of salvation,
that in appearance sought for it, how should any seem to be deprived?
therefore it is plain out of this text, that some may be in a sort suitors for
eternal life, and yet miss of it, and run (though not as they ought to do)
the race of Christianity, and yet not obtain the crown, which is proposed to
those, that with a faithful and true heart do seek for the same.

This may be seen in the foolish Virgins, Matthew. 25.
who made an external profession and joined with the wise Virgins in the
service of God, and thought to have been received with them, when the
Bridegroom came: but for all this they were excluded, when the rest were
admitted.

The like we may observe in the stony and thorny ground, who received the seed,
and brought forth the one the blade, and the other the ear as well as the
blade; and yet neither of them were good grounds: and therefore the one sort
shrunk when persecution came, and the other were carried away with the
commodities and delights of this present life. So in this Epistle to the
Hebrews it is evident, Hebr. 6.
that some are enlightened by the Word, and have some taste of good things; and
yet being not sound in judgment, nor sincere in affection, they afterward
fall away unto their eternal perdition.

Which should cause us to shake off all security, Phil. 2.12.
not being so presumptuous as many are, who having had some illumination in
heavenly things, and some flashes of good motions in their hearts; presently
conclude that they are in the state of grace, and can never fall away from the
faith: and thereupon take liberty unto themselves to walk in many inordinate
courses, which tend much to the dishonor of God and the discredit of the
Gospel: and let them be admonished, and have the judgments of God denounced
against their sins, they set light thereby, and profess, that they fear not
the threatenings of the Word, as knowing that they cannot but be saved. Let us
beware of this careless disposition, and hearken rather unto the advice of the
Prophet David, who bids us serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him
with trembling: Psalm. 2.
for notwithstanding their carnal confidence and boldness; they may, nay they
shall (except they take better ways) be utterly disappointed of their
expectation: for no profane person has any communion with the holy God, 2.
Cor. 7.
and unless they cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh, and of
the spirit, the promises of life belong not unto them.

Would we then build our assurance upon a firmer foundation, then such kind of
persons do?

It is recorded by the Evangelist Luke, that when our Savior drew near unto
Jerusalem, he wept for it, saying, Luke 19.42.
O if thou had known, at the least, in this thy day, th^se things which
belong unto thy peace! but now are they hid from thine eyes. As if he had
said if thou had wisely considered of the season, when the Lord offered
unto thee favor and mercy, and had made use of the same, thou might
have been happy, notwithstanding all their former rebellions; but now thou
art miserable, because thou wantedst wisdom to discern the opportunity. We
have through the preaching of the Gospel the same offer of mercy that the
Jews had; let us not be slack in taking hold thereof, nor harden our hearts
while it is called to day, but seek the Lord while he may be found, and call
upon him while he is near: and look how watchful and obseruant men will be
of the fittest opportunity for the preserring of their suites (especially in
matters that nearly concern them) unto an earthly Prince; so and much more
vigilant let us be in observing the best and meetest season for the seeking and
obtaining of favor from the Lord of Heaven and Earth.

And whereas many do seem to be fair for the crown of glory, 1 Cor. 9.
and yet miss of the same: Let us so run, that we may obtain; casting off
every thing that presses us down, and hinders our making of speed in this
race; and pressing hard unto the mark that is set before us, until we have
attained unto that happiness which we labor and strive for. Experience
tells men that the things of this life cannot be gotten without great
industry: but for eternal salvation they imagine (so foolish are the common
sort) that it may be obtained without any great ado; nay, that it shall be as
it were cast upon them, whether they seek for it or not. But if any thing be
hard to be come by, it is everlasting life: and therefore our Savior bids
us, Luke 13. Math. 7.
Strive to enter in at the strait gate for many, I say unto you, will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able. As nothing is more sure than eternal
blessedness, if we in a right manner labor for it; so nothing is more
impossible to be gotten, if we use not all diligence for the obtaining of it.

Let us therefore put our selves to it with all our might, resolving to break
through all manner of impediments that we shall meet with all, and making full
account that we shall meet with a great many: for first of all our own
carnal and sinful reason will set upon us, and object very dangerously
against all the points of faith and of mortification: then the lusts of the
flesh will rise up against the good motions of the spirit, and seek to quench,
or corrupt them: so that our reason we shall find to be very unreasonable, and
our affections to affect the things that are most unlawful. Furthermore the
devil will be a sore enemy unto us, in which regard the Apostle says, We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, that is, Ephesians. 6.2.3.
against weak adversaries, such as the mightiest men are in comparison of
Satan, but against principalities, and powers, etc. And what of that, For this
cause (says he) take unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able
to resist in the evil day, etc. Which exhortation we should the rather give
heed unto, because otherwise we shall light upon Satan's snares in every thing
we set our selves about: he has traps for us in our recreations, in our
eating and drinking, in our calings, yea in the very exercises of religion
which we perform, so that if we be not very wary and circumspect, we shall
certainly be ensnared. Lastly we have the world to discourage us from well
doing, and especially our carnal friends, who prove commonly the most deadly
and dangerous foes: for they will be ever and anon thrusting devilish
objections into our heads: why will you be more strict than your neighbors?
(will they say:) Are there not wise men that much dislike your course, and do
you not see that others carry away wealth and credit and preferment from such as
you are? What? do you mean therefore, by your preciseness, not only to
disadvantage your self, but to undo your wife and children, and so to
discredit and greiue all your friends? these and a thousand suchlike obstacles
and lets we shall meet with, when once we enter into a Christian course: and
therefore it stands us upon to look narrowly unto our steps, and to crave
strength from heaven that we may break through all hindrances and
oppositions. That so being faithful unto the death, we may not be deprived of
the heavenly rest, but at length attain unto the crown of life, which God the
righteous judge will be bestow upon us.

TWO SERMONS.

Of Christian Love and Life: On Canticles 2. Verse 10.

PREACHED AT Tedbury in Gloucestershire, upon Christ's Ascention-day last past.
1612.

By Richard Webb.

2 Corinthians. 11.2. I am ielous over you, with a Godly jealousy: for I have
prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure Virgin to Christ.
LONDON: Printed by THO. SNODHAM, for ROGER IACKSON, and are to be sold at his
shop near to Fleetstreet Conduit 1613.

To the right Worshipful, and his very good friends, Mr. Thomas Stephens, and
to his good and virtuous Wife, Mris. Elizabeth Stephens, R. W. wishes all
happiness both in this world, and in the world to come.
IN the Sermon following, there are lapped up (right Worshipful) some twelve
points of divine inspiration, which are most needful in this corrupt age
wherein we live, of all men's due and deep consideration. The first is, that
Christ and his Church are contracted together in a thrice blessed marriage, The
second is, that the Church does bear a tender and hearty love toward Christ
her bridegroom. The third is, that the estate or condition of Gods child is
the best estate or condition in all the world. The fourth is, that Chirst
himself is there teaching of men, where his word is truly taught and delivered
unto men. The fifth is, that the fruit and benefit of Gods word is imparted
only unto the Saints. The sixth is, that the best that are, are to be taught
and schooled in the ways of God. The seventh is, that Christ does love his
Church and people well. The eight is, that the Church of God is fair and
beautiful in the eyes of Christ. The ninth is, that holy Christians need not
the mediation of Angels or Saints departed this life, for the oblation of their
prayers unto the Almighty. The tenth is, that the spouse of Christ is sometimes
too careless of Christ, and falls a sleep in the bed of carnal delights. The
eleventh is, that Christians must not continue in their sins, but arise from
the same and leave them. The twelft and last is, that all that do belong to
Christ, must leave this world and go after Christ. These points are handled,
seven of them more at large, exprofesso, by way of doctrines, but the other
five more succinctly upon certain accidental occasions. At your leisure (I
pray you) consider of them, I doubt not, but that you have your portions in
them. The text from whence they are drawn may well be applied unto you, for
every word therein does fit you well. One part of it you may speak (with the
Church) of Christ: and the other part of it you may hear (with the Church)
from Christ. And as some things in it may comfort you, so other things also in
it may excite you. The Appellations may be your consolations, and the
exhortations may be your excitations.

In the world there are many evils, yea in the congregation of the righteous
there are too many infirmities. Our love to Christ is too cold, it must be
kindled. Our attendance at the gates of wised me is too seldom, it must be
doubled. Ourfailing in our duties is too great, it must be lessened. Our sight
in seeing the love of Christ toward us is too Divine, it must be cleared. Our
beauty in the inner man is too small, it must be increased. Our drowsines in
good things is too heavy, it must be lightened. Our continuance in sin is too
long, it must be shortened. Our cleaving to this world is too strong, it must be
weakened. Finally our following afte Christ is too slow, it must be hastened. To
further this heavenly work this little book may help us, for most of the
things therein are touched, and urged upon us with forcible reasons of
persuasion: In token of my good will, and the unfeigned love which I bear unto
you both, I here present it unto you both, and consecrate it to your Worships.
The God almighty give it a blessing, and and make it effectual unto the souls
of men. I will not trouble you with many words, but draw to an end. As you have
begun well, so proccede, and let your good works be more at the last, then at
the first. Be still for God in all his ways, and God will still be for you in
all your ways. Advance him and he will advance you, protect his Saints, and
shelter them: refresh the dear members of Christ and nourish them; so shall
you hear this sweet sentence pronounced upon yount the last: Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations of
the world. And so I end and commit you and all yours to the gracious protection
of that good God, that does watch over you; beseeching him so to multiply his
graces upon you, that you may see many good and happy days in this wretched
world, and enjoy everlasting blessedness in the blessed world to come.

Your Worships in all holy duties to be commanded. Richard Webb.

THE FIRST SERMON, OF CHRISTIAN LOVE.
Canticles 2. verse 10. My well-beloved spoke, and said unto me, Arise, my love,
my fair one, and come thy way.
AS I was pondering with my self, what text I might best take for this time
and for this place: it pleased the good and gracious hand of our God, to direct
me to this portion of Sacred Writ, as containing in it matters most
correspondent to the day now celebrated, and to this worthy assembly now
congregated. For as the day is now kept for the honor of Christ, in memorial
of his Ascension from the earth to the heavens; and as this assembly is an
assembly of Christians, who must arise after Christ: so this text in hand is a
text of Christ and of his Church. Of Christ, as it were already ascended; yet
in mercy speaking to his Church: of the Church yet below, yet in duty to
ascend after Christ. In regard whereof I doubt not, but that those things,
which shall be now spoken, will be unto you most sweet and profitable, like
apples of gold with pictures of silver, according to Salomons Aphorism, in
Prou. 25.11 where he says, A word spoken in his place is like apples of gold,
with pictures of silver. But not to insist any further upon other matters by
way of Preface, I will descend unto my Text.

In the verses next going before, it is declared, what mercy the Lord Jesus
Christ did show unto his Church, in coming unto her notwithstanding all her
sins. Though her iniquities were like to hills and mountains, which might justly
have stayed him from coming unto her; yet he in the multitudes of his
co^passions toward her, was content, like a Roe, or young Heart, to leap or
skip over them all, and in kindness to draw near unto her, notwithstanding
the same. And howsoever he did not, as it were, come openly into her house,
disclosing himself unto her plainly and fully, as it were face to face: yet
he did stand behind her wall, and there looked in upon her through the grates
and windows of his Gospel, reueiling himself so far unto her, as was
needful and convenient both for her present consolation, and also for her
future salvation.

The which that we might the better conceive, she her self gives testimony
of him, and shows what words he did use unto her: and this she does in this
present verse, which now we have in hand. In which, if we consider of all
matters, well, we shall find two principal points concerning that Gospel
spoken off before, by which our Savior did discover himself unto his Spouse.
The first is concerning the persons, whom it does respect. The second is
concerning the matter whereof it does consist. The persons, whom it does
respect, are of two sorts, namely, the person that teaches, and the person
that is taught. The person that teaches, is Jesus Christ himself, her best
beloved. Howsoever he does use man, as an instrument in this work, yet he
himself is the principal agent therein. It is he chiefly that does instruct
and teach his people. The person that is taught, is the Church her self. Her
well-beloved spoke and directed his words unto her, and not to others. Others
indeed may have the crummes and bones that fall from his table, like dogs,
but the bread and good flesh, that is upon the table it self, is provided only
for her, and her children.

The matter whereof the Gospel does consist, brancheth it self into two
parts. The first notes out, how well Christ is affected toward his Church, in
that he calls her his love, and his fair one. The second sets down what
duty the Church does owe to Christ, in that he wills her to Arise, and come
away; both are brought in by the figure Prosopopeia. For the Church does bring
in Christ himself speaking, and uttering also in effect, as it were these
words unto her. O dear and well-beloved Virgin, whom I have chosen among all the
daughters of men to be my Spouse, and whom I have made fair and amiable, even
white and ruddie, with the water and blood which I shed for thy sake, and with
my Spirit, whom I have bestowed upon thee for thy good: do not now lie
weltring in thy sins, nor continue any longer in the bed of thy carnal
delights, but arise and leave the same: and consider, that I have done so much
for thee, and do make such an account of thee; delay not the time, but make
have and come away: forsake all the base affairs of this life, and the sweet
delights of the flesh, and address thy self unto the consummation of our most
joyful marriage, thou being ever there, where I am, and always endeavoring to
do, as I do.

This Verse then in sum, Sum.
comprehends in it nothing else, but the Churches report, of that which
Christ spoke to her, when he beheld her by his Gospel, through the cagement.
Wherein I pray remember with me these two points: Part.
first, her words to him; then secondly, his words to her. Her words of him
spend themselves in two things: the first is an Appellation, the second is a
Declaration. The Appellation in the first word, My beloved: The Declaration in
the next words, spoke and said to me: containing in it, first, his teaching,
under these words, spoke and said, then secondly, the person whom he taught, in
this word, to me. Now of these, by Gods grace in order.

My well-beloved.] This Appellation, or title, the Church might well give unto
Christ, in a twofold respect. First, actiuely, because she did love him well,
then passiuely, because she was beloved of him well. For there was a singular
love betwixt them, the one toward the other. But yet this does not note out
the full or whole reason of this Appellation, or title, which is often used in
this book, sometimes by the Church to Christ, and sometimes again by Christ
to the Church. Doubtless, the reason of it is twofold. The one is in regard of
their mutual love; the other of their intended marriage. For Christ and his
Church are brought in, in this Canticle, as two Paramours, who are in love one
with the other, and who in time convenient do purpose to marry together. Of
their loves afterward; a word or two of their marriage by the way. As the same
is oftentimes spoken of in the Word, and most lively shadowed out unto us, in
the 45. Psalm, under the type and figure of Salomons marriage with King
Phara^hs daughter of Egypt: so you must know, it is not yet finished, but
deferred till the day of Judgment; as may well be collected out of Reuelat.
19.7. where these words are set down to be spoken in the end of the world:
Let us be glad and resoyce, and give glory to him, for the marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his wife has made her self ready. Here in this world is
the Contract alone; the marriage is kept for the world to come. As here men
and women first have their contracts, or espousals, then afterward their
solemn and real marriages, as Joseph and Mary were first espoused before they
came together, Muth. 1.11. So would the Lord observe the same order of
proceeding in the union of these two great and Princely States; of his Son on
the one side, being the glory and ornament of heaven; and of the Church on the
otherside, being the praise and beauty of the earth. They must first be
contracted, then after they must be married. This Contract of theirs must be
considered two ways. One way, as it is made with the whole Church in general;
another way, as it is made with the particular members thereof. As it is made
with the whole Church in general, it was from the beginning of the world, even
immediately upon Adams fall, when God did promise him that the seed of the
woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15. For then was this marriage in
question, and it was concluded upon between God and Adam, for the holy
posterity to come. But now as it is made with the particular members of the
Church, it is at all times; for there are some daily united unto Christ. And
this their Contract is made two manner of ways. The one is sacramentally, and
that is, when they are baptized into the name of Christ. The other is really,
and that is, when they are regenerated, and do begin to believe in Christ,
and depend upon him solely and wholely for their salvation. Now Christ and the
faithful being thus contracted together, do love each other most entirely (as
contracted persons ought to do) and long still for the day of their marriage,
that so they may enjoy one the other in full perfection. In regard whereof, I
say, they give this title or appellation of Well-beloved one unto the other,
often in this book, which is wholely spent in a manner in describing out such
love tokens as pass betwixt them, to wit, from the day of their espousals,
unto the day of their marriage.

But passing thus their marriage, let us come unto their loves: the first is of
the Church toward Christ, in this word, My well-beloved: the next is of Christ
toward his Church, in the other word, my love, the which I will refer to his
due place, and handle it then when I come unto it.

For the former of these, Peter the Apostle, his love was so great to Christ,
that in the end he died for Christ; so that he might well say to Christ, when
he did ask of him this question. Whether he did love him or no? Ye^, Lord,
thou know that I love thee, Ioh. 21.15. So did Mary the great sinner; her
love was so large to Christ, that she did many things, which did justly honor
Christ: she came to the place where be was, and brought a box of ointment; she
stood at his se^^e behind him weeping; she washed his sect with tears, she
did wipe them with the hairs of her head; she did kiss them with her mouth,
and anoint them with the ointment: so that Christ might well say of her, and
to her praise, that she loved him much, Luke 7.47. So did the scattered Jews,
that were Saints; their love was so upright toward Christ, that though they
did never see Christ with the mortal eves of their bodies, yet they did love
Christ, and so set their affections upon him, that they did rejoice in him with
joy unspeakable and glorious: so that Peter might well commend them in this
respect, for their love to Christ, as indeed he does, 1 Pet. 1.8. So in a
word, did the Church, and still does: her love is so hot, and strong to Christ,
that nothing shall part her from Christ; neither persecutions on the one side,
nor promotions on the other, Cant. 8.6 7. So that she might truly say these
words of her self; Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am
sick of love, Cant. 2.5. Thus then should all the righteous love Christ, as
indeed they do, witness the Spouse her self, Cant. 1.3.

The reasons to draw us on to this love are four. John, in Ioh. 4.19. We love
him, because has loved us first: Inuenimus eum, non praeuenimus, We found him,
not prevented him. Dilexit enim non existentes imo resistentes, For he loved us
when we were not; yea, when we were his enemies, Romans 1.10. The Church does
declare in Cantic. 2.4. that this is a special means to draw the affections
of men after Christ; for there his love is compared to a banner: for as by the
banner or ensign, the soldiers are drawn to their own Captains and
colors; so by the love of Jesus Christ, as by a banner or ensign, are all the
chosen ones drawn to Christ: in which respect the Apostle Saint Paul does
show, that the love of Christ has a certain power or force to constrain, or
to compel men, when he says, for the love of Christ constrasneth us.

The second is, because he is very kind and bountiful to such as do love him,
according to that which is in the Psalm, Psalm. 31.25. where all the Saints of
God, are willed to love the Lord upon this ground, because he does preserve
them that do it, as well as destroy the wicked that are their enemies. Christ
is not a wilderness, nor a land of darkness to such as love him, but a
fountain of all happiness. He is content to come home, as it were, to them,
and to dwell with them in their souls, Ioh. 14.23. Yea, he does provide such
large things, and excellent matters for them, as are altogether
incomprehensible, and past our understanding, as witnesses the Apostle Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 2.9. in these words, The things which the eye has not seen,
neither the ear has heard, neither came into man's heart; are, which God has
prepared for them that love him. Surely upon this consideration, Mary, spoken
of before, was much affected to Christ: because she saw that Christ was kind
to her, and very liberal, in pardoning all her sins, which were many; she
could not but love him much for that cause, Luke 7.47. So the Virgins fell in
love with Christ, upon the view and remembrance of such benefits as do come to
men by Christ, as we are taught in Cantic. 1.2. in these words, Because of the
sauonr of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment powered out, therefore
the Virgins love thee.

The third is, because he is most excellent in himself, and most worthy of all
our loves, as being the chiefest of ten thousands, Cantic. 5.10. And this is
true in many respects: First, for his beauties sake: Secondly, for his riches
sake: Thirdly, for his parentage sake: Fourthly, for his wisdoms sake: Lastly,
for his loves sake. In this world we love some, and marry with them, only
because they are fair and beautiful: some, only because they are rich and
wealthy: some, only because they are of a Noble and Honorable house: some,
only because they are wise and prudent: some, lastly, because they are loving
and kind. Now how Christ is fair and beautiful, you may see by this, because
he is the brightness of the glory of his Father, and the engraven form of
his Person, H^brewes 1.3. How he is rich and wealthy, you may see by this,
because he is the heir of all the world. Heb. 1.2. How he is noble and
honorable, you may see by this, because he is the King of Kings. and Lord of
Lords, Reuelat. 19.16. How he is wise and prudent, you may see by this, because
in him are hid all the treasures of knowledge and understanding, Coless. 2.3.
And lastly, how he is loving and kind, you may see by this, because he died
for us to redeem us, and does still cherish and nourish us, as his own body,
Ephesians. 5.2.29. When the Church had commended her well-beloved, and had set him
out in his orient colors before the eyes of men, those that did before despise
him, fell in some love with him, and offered their service to the Church to
join with her to seek him out, Cantic. 5. and last verse. Thus his
excellency is as an Adamant to draw us, that are irons, unto him.

The fourth and last is, because those that will not love him, shall perish and
be damned: if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ says Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
16, 22. (...), let him be hanged up on high, the Lord does come; or as it is
translated in our English Bible, Let him be had in exceration, yea
excommunicate to death. Hereof is that saying in Luke, Chapter 19.27. uttered
by our Savior himselse, These mine enemies, which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me. When Niniuch heard,
that she must be destroyed within forty days, she repented immediately upon
it in sackcloth and ashes, and did forsake her evil ways, and turned from
the wickedness that was in her hands, Jonah 3.8 So we hearing that we shall
be destroyed, unless we love the Lord Jesus; it must awaken us, like a mighty
thunderclap from heaven, and cause us out of hand to affect him.

Thus you see the reasons, such notorious crimes are sins indeed, and that
they do deserve everlasting punishments: but let them now at the last both see
and confess, that this is indeed a great sin, not to love the Lord Jesus
Christ, and such an one, as will damn them for ever, unless they do repent
for it in time: and therefore let them leave it, and amend it, mourning and
lamenting as bitterly for this fault, as for any other sin whatsoever.

In the second place, they are here comforted, who have made choice of Jesus
Christ to be their husband, and have set their whole heart and soul upon him.
In this they have performed a worthy duty, and such as may bring unto them
consolation at all times. For now will Christ respect them most graciously for
evermore, and always do them good, as who is much delighted in their love,
according to his own words unto the Church in Cant. 4.10. When hesaith: My
sister, my Spouse, how fair is thy love? How much better is thy love, then
wine? And the savor of thine ointments then all spices?

In the third and last place, all of us are here admonished to do that which
the spouse did, namely to love Christ well, we must take him for our only
bridegroom, and accept of none but him. I doubt not, but that you shall have
many suitors to the contrary. For the world, and the flesh, and the devil will
be laboring still to draw you unto them, and send unto you, as it were, many
solicitors for that end and purpose, time after time: but beware, I pray, give
not your consents unto them, neither harken unto their voices, though they sing
as sweetly as the Sirens or Mermaides are reported to do. O stop your ears
against them, as Ulysses, is feigned by some to do: in this point be like to
the deaf adder, who will not hear the charmer, though he charm never
sosweetly. Give entertainment, I beseech you, to the Lord of glory, and let
him be your well-beloved. For this end and purpose remember the reasons before
going. What? Shall he begin to love us, and shall not we love him again?
What? Is he rich and bountiful to all such as do love him, bestowing large
benefits daily upon them? And shall not we our selves love him? What? is he
most worthy of the love of all persons, as being most fair and beautiful, as
being most rich and wealthy, as being most noble, and honorable, as being most
wise and prudent, as being lastly most loving and kind? and yet shall not we
love him? What? in the last place? Will he destroy all those that shall not
love him, and bring them to a perpetuali desolation? and yet for all that,
shall not we love him? Oh my brethren, let us remember our selves, and be wise
at the last for our own good: let us not wilfully cast away our selves, but
save our souls from the evils to come. My suite unto you at this time, is for
your loves for Christ my Master.

If he were (that I may so speak without offense to any) a deformed person,
like to Thersites. I would not wish you to love him: if he were a poor man,
like to Lazarus, I would not wish you to affect him: if he were a base brat,
like to Abimilick, I would not wish you to follow him: if he were a foolish
fellow, like to Nabal, I would not wish you to respect him: finally, if he
were a cruel beast, like to Nero, I would not wish you to embrace him. But now
seeing he is beautiful, rich, honorable, wise, and lovely, above all
comparison with mortal men; I would wish you, yea most humbly entreat you,
that you would love him, affect him, follow him, respect him, and embrace him,
and that for ever and ever. Every wise man in choosing a Master to himself
does refuse three sorts of persons, namely: his enemy, his fellow, and his
servant. He that serves the devil, serves his enemy; he that serves his
flesh, serves his fellow, and he that serves the world, serves his servant.
Because the former of these do argue foolishness and want of wits, and the
latter two baseness and want of courage, I hope, that none of you, who are
wise and courageous, will now serve any of them, but that from henceforth
Jesus Christ shall be your Lord and Master alone.

But here that I may not loose my labor, and so fish in vain, but bring you
all rather within the compass of my ner, and so take many fishes; give me
leave to give an answer to three sorts of persons. The first is of those that
make exceptions against the state of such as love Christ. The second is of
those that boast of their love toward Christ, and yet do want it. The third
is of those that would be informed, what manner of love it is, that is pleasing
to CHRIST. For the first of these, many are unwilling (as daily experience does
teach us) to join themselves in a true knot of marriage love, because they
think, that their estate is most miserable, who are so joined to him in love:
and that first, because the devil does pursue them, Reu. 12.13. Secondly,
because the world does hate them, John 15.19. Thirdly, because Christ himself
does correct them, Reu. 3.19.

But let none of us be deceived. David does say of it. Blessed is that nation,
whose God is the Lord, even the people, says he, that he has chosen for his
inheritance. Psalm. 33.12. For this cause did he make this request unto the
Almighty, saying, Remember me, O Lord, with the favor of thy people, visit me
with thy salvation, that I may see the filicitie of thy chosen, and rejoice in
the joy of thy people, and glory with thine inheritance. Psalm. 106. 4 5. Surely
I dare here pawn my soul and life, that there is no estate in the whole
world so good as the estate of Gods people, and of such, as do love Christ:
the which I will make evident unto you, by Gods good grace, in a few words.

We account, as you know, those to be marvelous happy persons, and their
estates to he the best of all. First, who are out of debt. Secondly, who fare
well. Thirdly, who go fine. Fourthly, who are attended upon by many servants.
Fifthly, who are able to give to others. Sixthly, who are out of law and trouble
having peace within and without. Seventhly, who enjoy their health. Eighthly,
who are in authority of high place to command or rule. Finally, who have great
lands and possessions. He that has all these is a complet blessed man with
us. For he wants nothing, that may tend to the perfection of his happy
estate in the judgment of flesh and blood. Now those that are the Lords
people, and do love Christ well, as they should do, have all these. First,
they are out of debt, for Christ has discharged them from all their sins,
which are their debts, 1 Peter 2.24. 2 Cor. 5.21. Secondly, they fare well:
they have a rich table: for the Lord of hosts does make for all his people a
feast of fat things, even a feast of fined wines, and of fat things, full of
marrow, of wines fined and purified. He also does satisfy them with the
fatness of his house, and give them drink out of the rivers of his pleasures,
Psalm. 36.8. Prou. 9.2. Esaias 25.6. Thirdly, they go fine: for they are clothed
with the golden and silken robes of Jesus Christ and of his Spirit. The woman,
whereunto the Church is compared, is clothed with the Sun, having the Moon
under her feet, and a crown of twelve Stars upon her head, Revel. 12.1. So
the Spouse or Wife of Christ, is said to be arrayed with pure fine linen, and
shining, Revel. 19.8. Fourthly, they are attended upon by many servants: for
the gloricus Angels that are above, do evermore wait upon them, as nurses do
upon children, to keep them still in safety and in peace, and to do such
services unto them, as are needful for them, Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11.12. Hebr.
1.14. So that there is no Noble man in the Land, that has a goodlier train to
attend upon him, then Gods child has. Fifthly, they are able to give to
others: for God has bestowed upon them such a treasure of grace, that they are
able, not only to edify themselves, but others also in the ways of their
salvation, Ephesians. 4.7.16.

This is worthily seen, as in other stories, so in the example of Aquila and
Priscilla, who brought great light and understanding unto Apollos himself, who
was an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, when they took him unto
them, and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly, Act. 18.26. Sixthly,
they are out of Law and trouble, and have peace both within and without: for
God is now reconciled to them, and so they have a peace, not only with God
himself, and his creatures, but also with themselves and in their own souls
and consciences, 2 Cor. 5.19. Ephesians. 2.14.16. Hosea 2.18. Romans 5.1. Phil. 4.7.
Seauenthly, they enjoy their health: for their souls within are sound and
well, as who do not so much live in themselves, as in Christ. Gal. 2.20. nor
yet shrink away from the Commandments of their God, but carefully still
observe the same, Psalm. 44.17.18. Hebr. 10.39. They go as it were, from
strength to strength, till they appear perfect in Sion, Psalm. 84.7. And their
good works are more at the last, then at the first, Reuelat. 2.19. Eighthly,
they are in authority of high place, to command or rule: for Christ has made
them Kings and Priests unto God, even his Father, Reuelat. 1.6. So that they
are great Officers and Commanders in the world, like Priests and Kings, which
have the Chiefest rooms of all. Lastly, they have great lands and possessions:
for all the world is theirs: whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, whether they be things present, or things to come,
even all are yours, says Paul to the godly Corinthians, 1 Cor. 3.22. Peter
tells us, that there is an inheritance immortal, which is undefiled, and fades
not away, reserved in heaven for us, 1 Peter 1.4. And our Savior shows, that
God his Father has prepared for us a Kingdom from the foundations of the
world, Matthew. 25.34. Wherefore by this we may see, unless we will wilfully be
blind, and measure every thing by the narrow span of our own natural reason,
that the condition of Gods child is the best condition in the world, and that
they are most happy persons, who are united unto Christ.

But what then shall we say unto their afflictions, which are many in this
world? have not we just cause to reject Jesus Christ for them, and to accept
of some other before him? No, in no case: First, because they do not impair
our happy estate, but rather better the same; and that in three respects:
First, because they do not take away the fruit and benefit of those outward
goods, which are taken away from us, but rather increase them: for they make us
to enjoy them an hundred fold more, as it is in Mark. 10.30. So that in the
midst of them all, we have great joy and comfort, Act. 5.41. Romans 5.3. Hebr.
10.34. Secondly, because they serve to purge us from our dross and corruption,
that we might be made partakers of Gods holiness, Hebr. 12.10. and not be
damned with the world, 1 Cor. 11.32. Thirdly and lastly, because they are
means to augment our happiness in the heavens above, and to work out for us a
far more excellent and eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Secondly,
because this time, wherein we now live in this world, is not the time of our
marriage, but the time only of our espousalls. As yet we are not with Christ,
but we live, as it were, with our friends, among whom we may be euilly
entreated, and be hardly dealt withal, as Joseph was among his own brethren.
A poor Virgin (you know) that is but only betrothed to a noble person, of
great state and wealth, and not yet married unto him, may live but a simple and
miserable kind of life, until the day of their marriage does come. For as
she may fare and lie hard, and be but meantly attired in her fathers house,
who is but a poor man, and unable to maintain her better; so she may fall
sick of love, and withal enter into many doubtful thoughts, and fears, lest
her beloved should cast her off, and prefer some other noble person before
her: whereby it comes to pass, that her heart is much wounded, and her spirit
even vexed to the death it self. Yet for all this, she had no just cause to
have refused him at the first, neither yet has any to reject him now at the
last; considering especially, that this her trouble will shortly end, and much
continual joy come in the place thereof.

So after the same manner, though here in this world we have some
afflictions, yet we are not for that cause to alienate our selves from the
Savior of the world; especially considering, that he will end them quickly,
and come and marry with us, at what time we shall have joy and happiness for
evermore.

Hitherto of those that make exceptions against the state of such as love
Christ. Now let us come to those that boast of their love toward Christ, and
yet do want it.

We find by experience, that there are too many such, in all places,
wheresoever we come. Though they hate him in their souls, yet they will love
him in their words. They can cry out and say, We love the Lord Jesus Christ,
as well as the best of you all: he is not worthy to live that does not love
him; it were well that the ground would open to sincke him in, etc. Thus can
wicked men give good words, but where are their works. Surely in this corrupt
age of ours we can talk much, but walk but a little; word it much, but work
it but a little: our mouths are bigger then our hands, which is a thing
monstrous in nature: as well said Saint Bernard, Monstrosa res est, seeds
prima, vita ima, lingua magniloqua and manus otissa, sermo multus, fructus
nullus: It is a monstrous thing to have the chiefest room, and to live the
basest life; to speak much with the tongue, and to do nothing with the hand;
to use many words, and to bring forth no fruit. But as James the Apostle said,
Show me thy faith by thy works, Iam. 2.18. So may I say, Show me thy Jove by
thy works. There are four things in all hearty and sound lovers, which must
needs be in thee, if thou do love Christ aright. The first is, that they
long still to be joined together, and to enjoy one the other. The nature of
love is such, that we desire still the enjoying of that which is loved. Ammon
was very sick through love, and his flesh did pine away, because he could not
enjoy his sister Thamar, whom he loved, 2 Samuel 13.2. The second is, that they
are bountiful and liberal one unto the other. Love, says Paul, in 1 Cor.
13.4. is bountiful. So was Booz to Ruth, whom he loved. Ruth 3.15. and so was
the Centurion to the Jews, whom he made much of, for he built them a
Synagogue, Luke 7.5. The third is, that they are obsequious and obedient one
unto the other. Love can hardly deny any work, which the party beloved does
require. Hereof was it, that Delilah said to Sampson, in Judges 16.15. How
can thou say, I love thee, when thine heart is not with me? thou have mocked
me these three times, and have not told me wherein thy great strength lies.
The fourth and last is tollerance, or enduring of troubles one for the other:
for the love, that Jacob did bear to Rahel, seven years of hard servitude
seemed but a short time, Genesis 29.20. And for the love that Sechem did bear to
Dinah, he was content to be circumcised, and to suffer the cutting of his
flesh, though it were very painful unto him, Genesis 34.19.

Now in all these things, examine thy love toward Christ. In the first place,
tell me, do thou long to be with Christ? Art thou willing to die, and to
leave this world, to go unto him? Do thou wish with the Apostle Saint Paul
to be dissolved, to be with him? Philip. 1.25. Art thou desirous to have him
come to Judgment Do thou cry out with the Spouse, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly? Ren. 22.17.20 In the second place, tell me, Do thou bestow any thing
upon Christ? Art thou willing to let go thy goods and riches for the honor of
Christ? Art thou ready to relieve his Saints, according to their need, and thy
ability? Do thou join with others in building up his Church, and in
bestowing some maintenance upon his worship? In the third place, tell me, Do
thou obey him, and do according to his Commandments? Art thou ready with
Abraham, to leave thine own country, and to go vvhither he shall send thee?
Will thou forsake that which he does forbid, and follovv that which he does
command? If ye love me, says Christ, beepe my Commandments, Ioh. 14.15. And
a little after he says again, If any man love me, he will keep my Word,
Verse. 23. So that those love not Christ, who do not keep his Commandments.
In the fourth and last place, tell me, Do thou suffer any trouble or
misery for Christ's sake? Art thou well pleased to take up thy cross to go
after him? Can thou be content to die for his sake, as the Prophets and
Apostles have done? By these marks or tokens we may know whether we love
Christ or no: if we have them, we love him; but if we have them not, we love
him not, howsoever we persuade our solues, or boast before others to the
contrary.

And so much of the second sort, namely of those that vaunt of their love
toward Christ, and yet do want it. Now let us come to the third and last
sort, which is of those that would be informed what manner of love it is that
is pleasing to Christ. In it you must observe four remarkable qualities. The
first is, that it must be great and not small: we must love him more then our
fathers, or mothers, or brothren, or sisters, or husbands, or wives, or lands,
or goods, or life it self, Matthew. 10.37. Lzk. 14.26. The second is, that it
must be singular and not common: we must love only Christ, and none else, we
must not join others with him: Whom have I in heaven (says David, Psalm.
73.25.) but thee? and I have desired none in the earth with thee. Well
therefore said the Church, in Cant. 1.6. Show me, O thou, whom my soul loves,
where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone; for why should I be as she that
turns aside to the flocks of thy companions? Her care was only to go after
Christ. We cannot serve God and Mimmon together, Mat. 6.24. We must not part
our love, Christ must have all: as the woman by Gods law must have but one
husband; so the Church must have but one Congregation. Doubtless, as an honest
man cannot endure that another man should have a portion in his wife: so will
not Christ endure, that any other should have with him a portion in his Church,
for he is a jealous God, Exodus 20.5. The third is, that it must be total, and
not partial: we must love him, not with the love of the soul alone, or with
the love of the body alone, but with the love both of body and soul together.
Ye are bought with a price (says Paul, 1 Cor. 6.20) therefore glorify God in
your body, and in your spirit, for they are Gods.

And whereas the soul and body do consist of many parts, our Savior must
have the love of all those parts. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with thy strength, says Moses to
Israel, in Deuteronomy. 6.5. So that Christ must not have only the love of the eye,
to behold his works; the love of the ear, to listen to his words; the love of
the tongue, to talk of his wonders; the love of the feet, to go to his
Temple; the love of the hands, to do his business; the love of the memory,
to remember him; the love of the mind, to plod upon him; and the love of the
heart to long after him; but he must have all these loves together. The fourth
and last is, that it must be perpetual, and not temporal. We must not love
him for a time alone, as for certain days, weeks, months, or years but we
must love him beyond all time, even for ever and ever. Be thou faithful unto
the death, (says Christ to the Church of the Smirnsans, Reu. 2.10.) and I will
give thee the crown of life. The Spouse does tell us in Cant. 8.6.7. First
that her love is so well grounded toward Christ, that nothing can over come
it, or take it away from her; neither persecutions on the one side, nor worldly
promotions on the other. Surely, as nothing can turn God from loving them,
Romans 8.39. so nothing can turn them from loving God, Revel. 12.11. Act. 21.13.
In this respect they are like the Vine, Olive, and Figtree, that would not
leave their goodness, to go to be advanced above the other trees, Judge. 9.9.
etc. So that in this regard, we must follow Christ's Commandment, when he said
unto his Disciples, Abide in my love, Ioh. 15 9.

Thus you have heard in a few words, what manner of love it is that we must
bear toward Christ, when we do accept of him for our Husband. Examine now in
your own souls, whether you have this love or no: if you have it, bless God
for it; but if you have it not, never be at rest, till you have gotten it. And
so I leave the Appellation, and come to the Declaration, containing in it,
Christ's teaching, then the person whom hetaught.

Spoke and said.] Here are two words used to express his teaching by; they
differ not much in signification. The former of them notes out, as it were,
the opening of his mouth and that he began first. The later shows what he
uttered when he did so open his mouth, and begin to speak. The which to be so,
we may see, not only by the force of the Hebrew word, here used in the first
place, which does signific. in sermonem prorumpere, vel clamare, to break out
into words, or to cry; but also by the use of both the words here used, as they
are joined together elsewhere in the Scriptures: for if we mark them well, we
shall find them so taken, as namely, in Daniel, Chapter 3.14.24.26. and
Chapter 5.13. and Chapter 6.20. So that here is no mystery, as I take it,
included in this, that two words are used, and not one only. It is to show
that Christ began to speak first, and that he himself was content to teach
his Church A man might judge, that it was the part of the Church first to have
spoken to Christ, considering that he had been now absent from her for a
time, and was now come again in kindness to visit her. She should have called
out of the housevnto him, and have willed him to come in. But alas, there was
too great carelessness in her; and therefore he is feign to begin with her
himself. Thus does God prevent us with his graces: he comes home to our
houses, and knockes at our doors, and does call upon us alowde, before we will
hear him, and let him in. Behold, says Christ, in Revel. 3.20. I stand at the
docre, and krocke, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in unto him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. Yea, oftentimes when he
does knock, we will not seem to hear, and so suffer him to lay on, knocking
still, until his head be full of dew, and his locks with the drops of the
night: yea, which is more, after that he has awakened us, and we cannot but
speak to him, we are loath to arise to let him in, making many vain excuses
for that purpose, saying (amongst other things) I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Cant. 5.3.

Thus I might run on, to show how backward the Church is on the one side, and
how forward Christ is on the other, to do her good; but these things I will
leave to your own deeper considerations.

Here a man may demand, and ask,

Amongst all these ways, Church at all times, and in all ages of the world.

Howsoever, Prou. 9.3. When Noth spoke to the old World, and for the space of
sixescore years together did call upon them for repentance and amendment of
life, that so they might not be drowned with the Flood: he is not said to
preach unto them but Christ by his Spirit in him, 1 Pet. 3.19.20. Lastly, when
the Apostles went unto the Gentiles, that were a far off, and sounded out the
words of eternal life unto them, for their salvation: they themselves are not
said to preach to them, but Christ himself, even then, when he was in his own
person ascended up into heau^n, and sat there at the right hand of his Father,
in the high^st places, Ephe^. 2.17. Thus then you see, that it is Christ, that
does teach men in the Preaching of the Word.

And this our Savior does for two causes: Mal. 3.1. the Doctor of his Church,
Matthew. 23.8. The Wisdom of his Father, 1 Cor. 1.24. the word of God, Ioh.
1.1. and in one word, he is sent by God to preach, Ephesians. 61.2. The other is in
respect of his love to man, who came into this world to save him, and not to
damn him: for he knows on the one side, where no vision is, there the people
perish, Prou. 29.18. H^sea 4.6. Matthew. 15.14. And on the other, that none can
know his Fathers will without him, unless he does rouelle the same unto him,
Ioh. 1.18.

This may teach us, These. 2.13. As for the Minister, he is but the voice, or
truncke, whereby Christ does conuev heavenly things unto us: in which regard
they are compared to Stewards, who must administer, not their own goods, but
their masters, and one day must account for them, 1 Cor. 4.1. And therefore
look whatsoever the Minister of Gods word does deliver unto us out of the word
of God, that must we take as proceeding from God; and think that God, even
then, does speak unto us himself from heaven, as indeed he does; according to
that in 2 Cor. 5.20. For this cause must we hearken with reverence, believe
with stedfastnes, and practice with obedience, whatsoever the Lord our G^d
shall make known unto us. But now, alas, many doetake that which is spoken, as
the word of man, and cast it behind their backs, as a matter not much to be
respected: but those that do so, do despise God himself, L^k. 10.16. As this
may teach us what to judge of preaching of the Word, so it may allure our
souls to come unto it. For shall Christ, like a Schoolmasters, come to teach
us; and shall not we, like good scholars, draw near to hear him? If the
Kings Majesty should set up a school, and read Lectures unto men, would not
we flock unto him, and press upon him with great companies? But behold here
is one greater then the King, that does come to teach us: it is the King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, even the very wisdom of God it self. And therefore
let us hasten unto his house, and attend at his gates, to hear what he shall
say unto us. In the last place we have here a caveat and a comfort for the
Minister, in that he is but the voice and mouth of Christ, and the Word, that
he does speak, is not his own. A caveat, that he do utter nothing, but what
he is sure does come from Christ. A comfort, in that he is so highly advanced,
as that Christ is content to speak unto men by him and in him He is no less
honored hereby, then an ambassador is, when he is made the mouth of his King,
Yea much more honored then he.

But to leave Christ teaching, let us come to the person whom he taught. It was
his Church. My well-beloved, spoke, and said unto me. He does direct his words
to her, and not to others But why to her? Was she now at this time ignorant,
and so to be instructed? Or was she in trouble, and so to be comforted? Or was
she in a fault, and so to be corrected? or was she negligent in her duty, and
so to be quickened up? for which of these four causes did he now speak unto
her? for the last, as the words following in the text it self do show, where
she is willed to Arise, and to come away. Here I might take an occasion, in
that Christ does thus direct his words unto her, to show unto you, that the
word of God is a treasure bestowed only upon the Saints. It is proper to Gods
children only, and not common to the wicked. For howsoever the sound thereof
be gone through out the world, and all people have heard the same, according to
the letter; yet the saving fruit and benefit thereof has redounded only to
them, that are of the household of Faith. This I might easily confirm unto
you to be true in three respects. The first is, for the knowledge of it: the
second, for the faith of it: and the third for the practice of it. For
howsoever the wicked have a certain kind of knowledge, and a certain kind
of faith, and a certain kind of practice: yet they have neither the
sanctifying knowledge of it, nor the justifying faith of it, nor the universal
practice of it. The God of heaven has kept these three as proper and peculiar
Jewels for his own alone.

But this point I will pass over. David was a man according to Gods own
heart: yet Mathan must come unto him to school him for his fault, which he
committed with Vriahs wife, as it is in the beginning of the twelfth Chapter
of the second book of Samuel. Asa was a reformed, King ruling with his good,
and remaining faithful with his Saints: yet Azariah the son of Obed must
come unto him, to stir him up to seek the Lord, as it is in the beginning
also of the fifteenth Chapter of the second book of the Chronicles. Zerubbabel
was a valiant Prince, and courageous for the honor of his GOD: yet Haygay the
Prophet and Zachariah the son of Iddo, must come unto him, to set him forward
about the building of Gods house at Jerusalem, as it is also in the beginning
of the fifth Chapter of Ezra. In a word, to pretermit many examples, Timothy
was a rare youth, being more like an Angel descending from heaven, then a man
ascending from the earth (he did so spend himself, like a candle, for the
good of Gods people:) yet Paul must write unto him two Epistles, to admonish
him of his duty, and to teach him how to behave himself in the Church, the
house of God, which is the ground and pillar of truth. 1 Timothy 3.15.

The reasons hereof are three. First, Cor. 13.9 And howsoever Dakid was a deep
scholar, knowing more then all his teachers, Psalm. 119.99. yet he was so
blind in some things, that he was more like a beast therein, then a man, as
he does confess of himself in Psalm. 73.22. when he says, So foolish was I
and ignorant: I was a beast before thee. Secondly because they are delinquents,
and do not perform all that which they know, but fail exceedingly therein.
In many things (says James, Chapter 3.2.) we sin all. And although Saint
Paul were a sanctified man far above many others, yet he bewayleth his own
estate in this regard very much, especially, when he says in Romans 7.9. I do
not the good thing which I would, but the evil, which I would not, that do I.
Thirdly, because they are faint-harted, and are ready oftentimes to give over
their goodness, chiefly in the time of presecution. As for me (says David,
Psalm. 7^.2.) My feet were almost gone, my steps had wel-neere slipped. And
albeit Ehab was a rare man, one of 1000. yet in the anguish of his soul, he
desired, that he might die, and said, It is now enough, O Lord, take my soul,
for I am no better then my fathers. 1 King. 19.4. In all these respects they
are to be taught and schooled, that so they may not err in judgment, but hold
all things, according to the truth; that so they may not wander out of the path
of righteousness, but walk still in the same; that so lastly they may not
faint under any cross or affliction, but be constant therein to their dying
days. So that continual teaching is necessary for them, in regard of
determination in matters of faith, of conversation in matters of works, and of
consolation in matters of trial.

The use hereof is threefold: Tim. 4.2. My brethren, therefore give not ener,
but labor still time after time, so long as you lius; for your congregations
will still stand in need of teaching. The people are here schoolled, that they
must never give over their schoolling; like scholars, they must to it, day
after day, and week after week, during the term of their whole lives. For
do they what they can, yet they will be ignorant still, yet they will be
faulty still, yet they will be faint-hearted still. And therefore continual
preaching is as needful for men, as the air that we breath in, as the clothes
that we walk in, as the food that we receive in, as the houses that we dwell
in, and as the company that we live in. Lastly, here, both Minister and people
are instructed to attend evermore to instruction. The one must employ his
study diligently, that he may be able to instruct other further; and the other
must frequent the Church carefully, that they themselves may be instructed
further.

The fruit whereof unto them both, with their duties, the Apostle does teach,
in 1 Timothy 4.16. when he says, Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning:
continue therein, for in doing this, thou shall bothsaue thy self, and them
that hear thee. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be
praise in the Church by Jesus Christ, throughout all generations, for ever.

Amen.
THE SECOND SERMON, OF CHRISTIAN LOVE.
Canticles 2. verse 10. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come thy way.
OMitting the Paraphrasticall exposition of these words; the sound whereof has
already peirced your ears, you have nothing now to remember in sum
(well-beloved in the Lord) but the words which Christ did use unto his Church, at
what time he spoke unto her, and did behold her through the window of his
Gospel. As to day in the fore-noone you hard her words of him; so now by Gods
grace, you may hear his words to her. In which I commend to your
considerations two points. The first are certain Appellations; the second
certain Exhortations. The appellations are two: the first is, My love: the
second is, My fair one. The Exhortations are also two: the first is, Arise:
the second is, Come away. The Appellations show how well Christ is affected
toward his Church. The Exhortations declare, as it were, how well the Church
ought to be affected toward Christ. The appellations are as arguments to move
her. And the Exhortations are as duties moved unto her.

But let us proceed-in order, beginning first with the Appellations, and then
coming afterward unto the Exhortations. The first appellation is this, My
love. Here you may call to mind, what was observed before upon this word, My
well-beloved, for both of them are equivalent, and of one force. But yet here is
further to be added unto that: for the love of Christ may be considered three
ways. First, it is general toward all his creatures, whereby he loves them
all, approving the same to be good, as they proceed from him, and are his
creatures, or the workmanship of his hands. Secondly, as it is special toward
mankind, in that he was content to become a Redeemer for mankind, after their
fall, and not for any other creature, no not for the Angels that fell as well
as man. Lastly, as it is proper to his Elect or chosen ones, whereby he accepts
of them to life everlasting, and has a purpose to do them good for evermore.

Now in this last sense is the word here to be taken, Paul teach us, when he
faith, And walk in love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself
for us, Ephesians. 5.2. So much does John teach us, when he says. And from Jesus
Christ, which is a faithful witness, and the first begotten of the dead, and
Prince of the Kings of the earth: unto him that loved us, and washed us from
our sins in his blood, Revel. 1.5. So much does Zachary teach us, when he
says, For he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. So
much does Zephanie teach us, when he says, Rejoice O daughter Sion, be ye
joyful, O Israel, be glad and rejoice with all thine heart, O daughter
Jerusalem: The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighti^, he will save, he
will quiet himself in his love, he will rejoice over thee with joy, Zeph.
3.14.17. So much in one word, does Christ himself teach us, when he says, A
new conmandement give I unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved
you, that ye also love one another, Job. 13.34. Then, as he loved John his
Disciple, Ioh. 20.2. and as he loved Paul his Apostle, Gal. 2.20. and as he
loved Lazarus his friend, together with his two sisters Martha and Mary, John
11.5. so does he love all those that do belong unto him.

The reasons to move him hereunto are chiefly four. For no man ever yet hated
his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord does the
Church, for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Ephesians.
5.29 30. The second is, because she is like himself, having the image of his
own Majesty stamped in her. As he is holy, so she is holy. Cant. 4.7. For
Simile simile gaudet: like does rejoice in like, as it is in our proverb. The
third is, because she does love him and has some good care to worship and
serve him. For he cannot but love such again; and that according to his own
word and promise, when he says: He that has my commandments, and keeps
them, is he that loves me: and he that loves me, shall be loved of my father;
and I will love him and will show mine own self unto him. John 14.21. The
fourth is, because she is redeemed by him, and it did cost him much before he
could get her, yea more then silver and gold, even his own heart blood, as
Peter does well note, in 1 Pet. 1.18.19. When he says, Knowing that you were
not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, received by the traditions of your fathers, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot. For the more we
give for things, the greater value and price do we set upon the things.

But to leave the reasons of this doctrine, Romans 8.28. Well therefore might our
savior say of them, as he does in John, Chapter 10.27, 28.29. My sheep here
my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give to them eternal
life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of mine
hand: My father which gave them me is greater then all, and none is able to
take them out of my fathers hand: I and my Father are one.

The second is, to open unto us our dignity above others. As John did say,
behold, what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called the
sons of God. 1 John 3.1. So may I say, behold what love the son has showed
on us, that we should be called the wife of God: for so we are in many places
of the scriptures. Surely there are none in the world advanced to this degree
of honor, but our selves, who are of the Church. Oh my dear brethren, can
we consider enough of this? or can we express it, as it does deserve?
What? is it true indeed, that the son of God, yea the only son of God,
who is the heir apparent of all the world, does love us poor and sinful
vvretches, and that he is well content to marry with us, and to take us home
to himself for his wife? wonderful! Oh wonderful! what a thing is this?
meditate, Oh meditate, I beseech you, upon this point both day and night, and
turn it to your good.

The third is, to comfort us against the hatred of this world. Here we shall
be despised, and be had in great contempt and disgrace. John 15.19. Math.
10.22. But as Elkanah said to Hannah his wife, Why weepest thou? and why eatest
thou not? and why is thine heart troubled? am not I better to thee then ten
sons? 1 Samuel 1.8. So may not Christ say unto us? why are you sad? or why are
you grieved? Is not my love better to you then the love of all the world?
Doubtless, Gods children do find it so to be. Their own life is not so
sweet unto them, as the love of Christ; according to David's words, in Psalm.
63.3. Where, speaking unto God, he does say, for thy loving kindness is better
then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. But that we may indeed receive
full comfort from hence, let us consider in few words, what manner of love it
is that Christ does bear unto us. In it, I commend unto you four considerable
properties. The first is, the greatness of it. The second is, the singularity
of it. The third is, the commodity of it. The fourth and last is, the
perpetuity of it. For the first; it is so great that we cannot by our shallow
reaches comprehend it: if all the land were paper, and all the water were
incke, and all the plants were pens, and all the creatures were writers, yet
they would not, nay, yet they could not express the greatness of it, as it
does deserve. For as the Apostle Saint Paul does teach us, the love of Christ
passes knowledge. Ephos. 3.19. For the second, it is so singular, that all are
not made pertakers of it, but the elect only: only the Church is interessed
in this love. Ephesians. 5.25. In this respect she is compared to a garden, that is
enclosed, to a spring that is shut up, and to a fountain that is sealed fast,
in Cant. 4.12. So then, as Christ did not pray for the world, but for his
Disciples only which were in the world, John 15.9. So he loves not the
world, but those of his own which are in the world For the third, it is so
commodious that to us it is better then all the world, yea more sweet and
pleasant unto us then any costly banquet whatsoever, made of wine, and other
precious things. Let him kiss me (says the spouse) with the kisses of his
mouth, for thy love is better then wine. Cant. 1.1. We need not doubt of this,
because without Christ we are all but damned persons, but having Christ, we
shall be saved. Ioh. 3.16.18. and 1 Ioh. 5.11.12. But yet remember what the
CHVRCH does say: like the apple tree (says she) among the trees of the
forest, so is my well-beloved among the sons of men: under his shadow had I
delight and sat down, and his fruit was sweet unto my mouth. Cant. 2.3. For
the fourth and last, it is so perpetual, that nothing can break it off, but
it does continue for ever: well the mountains may remove, and the hills may
fall down, but Gods mercy shall never depart from us, neither shall the
covenant of his peace fall away, says the Lord that has compassion on us.
Esa. 54.10. Those whom Christ does once love, he will be sure to love to the
end. Ioh. 13.1. So that nothing can separate us from the love of our God. Romans
8.39. Now my brethren, shall not this comfort us against the hatred of the
world? When any does begin to despise us, let us cheer up our hearts with
this, that Christ does love us. For what are they to Christ? Is not his love
better then all their loves? Behold, they are poor, but he is rich: they are
weak, but he is strong: they are foolish, but he is wise: they are base, but he
is honorable: in a word, they are mortal, but he is a God immortal. Therefore
let not the displeasure of this world daunt us, but let his favor evermore
comfort us.

The last is, to inflame our loves toward him, and to blow the coals thereof,
that they may burn out more and more. The love of Christ (says Saint Paul)
constrains us, 2 Cor. 5.14. And the Church does tell us, that Christ's love
was as a banner over her to draw her unto him, Cant. 2.4. Let it then work
upon our souls, and move them to affect him. What? shall he love us, and
shall not we love him again? What? shall he prefer us before all the world:
and shall we prefer the world before him? God forbid, as he does love us, so
let us love him again. Doubtless, if some great man should offer his love to
a poor woman of the country, and be well pleased to take her for his wife, we
might well think her to be distracted of her wits, if she should refuse him,
and not requite him again with the like love toward him. So after the same
sort, may we think our selves bereft of all our senses, if we love not the
Lord Jesus, seeing he has loved us so dearly. Wherefore to end this point,
let his love increase our love, and knit our hearts the faster unto him.
Hitherto has reached the first Appellation, the second does now offer it self
to our examination.

My fair one.] Here seems to be a wonder, that the Church is fair, who said
of her self, that she was black, Cant. 1.4.5. But a greater wonder, that
Christ should say, that she was fair: for man may be deceived, but Christ
cannot. Surely man may praise one to be fair, when it is nothing so; but
Christ cannot do so. Man (we know) may err in his judgment, for want of
skill and knowledge, taking that for fair which is foul, being abused by his
ignorance in discerning forms and complexions; but Christ cannot, because in
him are hid all the treasures of knowledge and understanding, Colos. 2.3. Man
we know may pronounce a false sentence (though he had a true and sound
judgment) for want of sight in beholding the party, either his eyes may be
dim, or else the members of the body may be covered and kept from his sight:
but Christ cannot, because his eyes are as flames of fire to behold all things
most clearly, Revel. 1.14. and all things do stand naked and open before him,
Hebr. 4.13. Man (we know) will lie and flatter, speaking often contrary to his
judgment and sight, to curry-fauour with men and women; but Christ cannot;
because he is truth it self, Ioh. 14.16. He cannot speak dissemblingly to
please any, but as the very truth is, so does he always speak. Man (we know)
through a foolish and besotted love, may take one to befaire, which is foul,
according to our proverb; Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Diam,
Who so does love the frogge in dike,
He thinks the same Diana like.
So strongly does affection lead a man's mind to a false judgment; but Christ
cannot, because he respects no man's person above another, but does teach the
way of the Lord truly, Matthew. 22.16. Finally, man (we know) will extol and
commend a little very highly, and a small beauty in his sight will seem to be
very great: but Christ cannot, because he is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Revel. 19.16. Then seeing that Christ who cannot err in judgment, who
does see all things most plainly, who will flatter no person, but speak
according to the truth, who through love cannot mistake, but take every thing
as it is, who lastly does dwell in glory and Majesty unspeakable, does here
praise his Spouse, and commend her fairenes, we may well see by it, that her
beauty does excel, and that in pulchritude she is most admirable.

From hence then let us gather this Doctrine, be out of the first Chapter, the
other out of the fourth. In the first chapter and fourteenth verse, we find
these words spoken by our Savior unto his Spouse, My love, behold, thou art
fair, behold thou art fair, thine eyes are like the doves. And in the fourth
chapter and seventh verse, he does speak thus unto her, Thou art all fair,
my love, and there is no spot in thee. David also speaking of her in the 45.
Psalm, verse. 13.14. does break out into these words, and say, The Kings
daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of broydred gold, she shall
be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-worke. And whereas the Saints of
God, that stand on Mount Sion with Jesus Christ the Lamb, and have his Fathers
name written in their foreheads, are described out at large unto us in the
fourteenth chapter of the Revelations, and the beginning thereof. Amongst other
things there ascribed unto them, this is one, That in their mouths there is
found no guile, and that they are without spot before the throne of God, verse.
5. In a word, it is said, in Reu. 19.8. that there is granted unto the wife of
Christ, That she should be arrayed with pure fine linen, and shining, and that
this fine linen is the righteousness of Saints. Thus in few words it is
apparent that the Church is fair and beautiful in the eyes of Christ.

Not, Iesse, that had no form in it to be desired, Esaias 53.2. so are his
branches and members burnt and swootie, as if they had lien among the pots,
Psalm. 68.13. but this her beauty is inward, and according to that which is in
the heavens above, Psalm. 45.13. It stands not in a fair white skin, or in
a goodly complexion, and well made body, nor yet in gorgeous garments, or rich
external ornaments, whether the same do respect the body of man, or the
outward worship of the Lord; but it stands in the glorious and glittering
robes of Jesus Christ, and his righteousness, which we call Justification, and
in the precious and most shining ornaments of the holy Spirit, and his graces,
which we term Sanctification. Doubtless our Savior does not look upon the
Church as she is in her self by nature, and as she is polluted by many sins
and transgressions: but he does behold her, as she is justified in himself
(having all her iniqui^^es done away through his death and passion and standing
most just and upright in the sight of God his Father, through the imputation of
his righteousness and obedience) and as she is sanctified already in part, by
the working of the Spirit through the Word and Sacraments, and shall be
hereafter in whole, when she is received up into the heavens, and there really
married unto him in all joy and felicity for evermore. For as a man who does
love his Bride well, does not fix his eyes upon her blemishes, and defaults,
but does ouerlooke them, and behold only her comely parts, her parentage, her
friends, her beauty, her wisdom, her modesty her dowry, her rich ornaments,
and such things alone, as may commend her, and make her to be gracious in his
eyes; so deals here our Savior lesus Christ: though his Spouse have many
imperfections and blemishes about her, yet he does set none of them in the
sight of his countenance, but casting his eyes, as it were, over and besides
them, he does only behold such things in her, as are most comely and
excellent. He does see how she is borne again, and made a new creature by the
working of his holy Spirit. He does see, how she is cleansed from all her sins
by his blood and bitter passion. He does see how she is clothed with his
righteousness, and with that perfect obedience which he yielded unto his Father
in all the points of his law. He does see how she is re-created and made
again, in some part, according to his own Image, in understanding and
holiness, in faith, hope, love, fear, humility, patience, know ledge, and many
other graces abounding in her more and more. Finally, he does see, how she
shall be decked with all graces hereafter, and be beautified with all rich
ornaments whatsoever, even in the end of the world, when all imperfections
shall be taken away from her, and she shall be made perfect in every respect
and consideration. And for this cause does he here commend her beauty, and say,
that she is fair. So that this is in a double regard, the one is of
Justification, which she has from him; and the other is of Sanctification,
which she has from his Spirit: for by him she is justified, and by his Spirit
she is sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. Wherefore then, we are made fair two ways.
The first is by the imputation of Christ's most excellent form unto us. The
second is by a real transfusion of his lovely graces into us: for he does both
cleanse us from our sins, and also cloth us with the silken robes of inherent
holiness.

The knowledge of this Doctrine is profitable unto us many ways: she is
fair. We may rejoice and triumph in this, even so many as unfeignedly do love
him, that we are so comely and pleasing in his eyes. The Devil, as he has in
one hand the glass of Self-love, to set before men, to draw them on to their
sins, that so they thereunto looking, may Narcissus-like, berauished with
their own beauty: so he has in the other hand, the glass of Gods-law, to
present unto them, to terrify them for their sins, that so they beholding
themselves therein, may Iudas-like, go and hang themselves. But against this
his poison, we have here a good Antidote, if he cry out and say, Thou art a
deformed person, thou art foul and filthy, thy sins are many and grievous, the
Lord of glory cannot regard thee, etc. Do thou reply this answer back again
unto him, and say, Avoid Satan, avoid thou liar; it is not true which thou
do say, I am fair and beautiful, and the God of heaven does respect me. I
will believe him, that here speaks, who is truth it self; but I will not
believe thee, who have been a murderer and a layer from the beginning, Ioh.
8.44. Wherefore my brethren, comfort your selves with these things: for look
what Christ does here speak to the whole Church, the same he speaks to
every faithful person in the Church. Is there faith, repentance, love, fear,
zeal, humility, and a care of true godliness within thee? then pass not for
any temptation of Satan: for although there be the remnants of sin abiding
still in thee, and a mixture of diverse infirmities with thy heavenly graces;
yet this is not taken away from thee, My love, my fair one: for Christ does
behold thy virtues, and comely ornaments, wherewith thou art decked, and he
does not stand gazing upon thy sins and deformities, wherewith thou art
polluted: he is content, as it were, to ouer-looke them, and to pass them
over, as if they were not, and that as it may seem for these causes. First,
because they are already done away from thee by his merit and death, when he
died for thee. Secondly, because they are ouer-reached, and out-valued by his
graces and gifts in thee, which do far surmount them all. Thirdly, and lastly,
because he will wholly purge thee from them in the end, when he shall take thee
out of this world, and make thee sit with him in the highest heavens. In regard
whereof, our Savior does judge thee to be never a whit, as it were, the less
beautiful and fair in his eyes, for thy transgressions, then if thou had
none at all: even as a Bridegroom with us, does think his Bride to be
nothing the less comely or handsome for a little dirt that is upon her, which
is not natural and continual, but accidental and vanishing, as who has
contracted the same unto her self by her labor and pains, about some foul
and filthy work, and may easily also wash the same away from her with water
at any time, when she will. Wherefore find out those graces of Sanctification,
which I nominated even now, and though they be not perfect or full within thee,
yet be sure they be in truth and sincerity, and doubt not, but that thou art
most fair and beautiful in the sight of the everliving God, prate the devil,
or the world, never so much to the contrary.

For Exhortation, because we may from hence be stirred up to use all possible
means, to get some holiness and righteousness unto our selves, that as the
Church is fair, so we our selves also may be fair. Surely, unless that we be
pure be innocent, be patient, be loving, be humble, be faithful, be just; in
one word, be devout and religious; we cannot, nay, we may not persuade our
selves, that we are of the Church. In the Church indeed we may be, but of the
Church we cannot be: for that is a company of Saints, or holy ones alone. They
are, as Peter does speak of them, 1 Pet. 2.9. A chosen Generation, a royal
Prtesthood, an holy Nation, and a peculiar people, to show forth the virtues of
him that has called them out of darkness into his marvelous light. If we
read over the holy Scriptures, we shall never find, that any do belong to
Christ, who are not holy and righteous like to Christ. They that are Christ's
(says Saint Paul, Galath. 5.24.) have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and the lusts. Again, If any man be in Christ (says he, 2 Cor. 5.17.) let him
be a new creature. Old things are passed away, behold, all things are become
new. In this (says Says John, 1 Ioh. 3.10.) are the children of God known,
and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not righteousness, is not of God,
neither he that loves not his brother. Likewise, he says, verse. 3. And every
man that has this hope in him, purges himself, even as he is pure. Wherefore,
my brethren, let this awaken us up, that we may be from hence-forward upright
and innocent persons, as we ought to be, having both the righteousness of
Jesus Christ upon us, and the holiness of the spirit within us. For albeit, when
our Savior did first cast a love unto us, we were as loathsome and ugly
creatures, and lay wallowing in our blood, Ez. 16.6. yet now since he is
content to take us for his own, let us not lie any longer in our filthiness,
but wash our selves in his blood, and bathe our souls in the water of his
Spirit. In this regard we must be like Rebecca, when she was brought to Isaak
for a wife: and unto the Virgins at Sushan, when the King Assuerus was to go
in unto them. We must be altered and changed clean from that we were in
former times. We must now have our hands adorned with the bracelets of good and
charitable works unto our brethren. We must now have our ears hanged with
the earings of faith and obedience to Gods word. We must now have our necks
beautified with the golden chain of Christian virtues. In a word, we our
selves must now be wholly perfumed with the sweet ointments, and pleasant odors
of Jesus Christ, and of his Spirit; else how shall we persuade our selves,
that we are of the number of the Church, when we our selves are not fair,
like unto the Church.

For confutation, because we may from hence have sufficient matter, to confute
not only those, who are foul and filthy in their ways, to be no wife at all
unto Christ, but also those that hold us to be so loathsome unto God, that we
may not go unto him immediately our selves in our prayers and supplications,
but must use certain mediators and intercessors, who may pray unto him for us,
and obtain that of him that we sue unto him for. For surely, seeing we are
precious in the sight of Christ, and fair in his eyes, there is no doubt at
all to be made, but that we may with boldness and confidence of heart come
before him in our own persons, with all our prayers and supplications, to
crave of him whatsoever is according to his will, either respecting his glory,
or the salvation of our souls. For this use does he himself make of this
Doctrine, as we may see, by Cant. 2.14. when he does use these words unto his
Church, saying, My done, that art in the holes of the rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, show me thy sight, let me hear thy voice, for thy voice
is sweet, and thy sight comely. He persuades her to come unto him by this
reason or argument, even because she is fair and comely in his sight. So that
our pulchritude or beauty should allure us unto him. But let us hear what
Rome does say to the contrary. As a mean and silly subject (says she) is
unworthy to come in his own person with his suits unto his King or Prince, and
therefore must use some Courtiers or persons of estate to be spokes-men for
him, and to commend his suite unto his King or Prince, that so he may the
sooner obtain it. So man, through his sins and corruptions, is altogether
unworthy, to present himself in his own person, before Jesus Christ the King
of Kings, and the Prince of Princes; and therefore in all submission he must
use the mediation either of Saints or Angels, when he is to commence any suite
unto him, if he purpose to speed therein, and to have the same granted unto
him. For this cause she iumps right with the Heathen people of old, and the
graceless nations of the world. For as they constituted and made several
gods, or goddesses, for several nations, for several times, for several
creatures, and for the several parts of man's body: so does she subordinate and
appoint for all these, several Saints or Angels: as for example they had
Neptune for Troy, Venus for Cyprus, M^nerua for Athens, Juno for Carthage, and
Jupiter for Rome: so she has S. George for England, S. Andrew for Scotland, S.
Patricke for Ireland, S. Dennis for France, S. James for Spain, and S. Paul
and Peter for Rome. They prayed to Mars and Bellona in the time of war, to
Ceres in the time of scarcity, to Aesculapius in the time of sickness, to Liber
in the time of captivity, to Bacchus in the time of hunger, to Neptune in the
time of tempests, and to Juno in the time of childbed. So she prays to S.
George in the time of war, to S. Anne in the time of poverty, to S. Roch in the
time of sickness, to S. Leonard in the time of captivity, to S. Vrbane in the
time of hunger, to S. Nicholas in the time of tempests, and to the Virgin Mary
in the time of childbed. They consecrated the Swan unto Apollo, the Peacock to
Juno, the Dove unto Venus, the Night-crow unto Minerua, the Dog unto Mars,
the Honey unto Mercury, the Wheat unto Ceres, and the rose unto Cupid. So she
has consecrated her Sheep unto Vandolius, her Horses unto Eulogius, her Oxen
to Luke, her Purse to Sithe, and her Pigges to Anthony. Finally, they allotted
to Minerua the head, to Juno the heart, to Mars the breast, to Jupiter the
spirit, to Mercury the tongue, to Bacchus the throat, to Hercules the arms, to
Cupid the liver, to Apollo the palms, and to Venus the secrets. So she has
allotted to Anastatius her head, to Otilia her eyes, to Apollonia her teeth, to
Blaze her neck, and to Erasmus her belly. Of these things we may read a
little in the book of Martyrs, where these verses amongst many others, are
composed and set down for our instruction.

To Saint Sithe for my purse,
Saint Loy, save mine horse,
For my teeth to Saint Apoline,
To Saint Job for the Pox,
Saint Luke save mine Ox,
Saint Anthony save my swine.
To Master John Shorn,
That blessed man borne,
For the ague to him we apply.
Which iugleth with a boot,
I beshrow his heart root.
That will trust him, and it be I.
Such was our trust,
Such was our lust,
Upon creatures to call and cry,
As men did please,
For every disease,
To have a god peculiarly.
But what shall we do with this rabble and unknown reute of Saints? we need
them not. For we our selves may go boldly unto Jesus Christ without their
mediation or others: for he does well accept of us, and we are fair and
beautiful in his eyes, yea, he does take great delight and pleasure in our
presence and company, as it is intimated by the spirit of God in Psalm. 45.8.
where it is said, that the Saints of God do make him glad, while he is in the
Iuory palaces with them. Let us therefore go unto him in our own persons,
and not trust unto the mediation of others, whether they be Saints or Angels.
And as for this similitude, which the Synagogue of Rome does allege, derived
from an earthly King and his manner of dealing with his subjects, viz. posse
nos per istos are ad deum, sicut per comites peruenitur ad regem, that men by
such mediators may go to God, as they go to Kings by those who are honorable
in their courts. I answer with Saint Ambrose, who did obuiate the same
objection in his time, hoc est miseravti excusatione, that this is to pretend a
miserable excuse. For there is no good fitness or agreement betwixt it, and
that, for the which it is produced, neither in regard of Christ himself, nor
of his Saints and Angels.

Not of Christ himself, because there are these differences betwixt him, and
an earthly King. First, he can hear all suites and supplications, which may be
put up unto him: but an earthly King cannot, because his business will not
afford him so much time. Secondly, he can be in no danger of sickness or
destruction, by the admittance of any person into his presence: but an earthly
King may, because his body is subict to diseases and death as well as others,
which diseases and death may easily be brought upon him by contagious and
treacherous persons, if once they may have their free access unto him when
they will. Lastly, he cannot be deceived by the false informations of such
suppliants, as do come unto him, as who does behold all things, and see the
very secrets of the heart within, but an earthly King may, because oftentimes
both the persons themselves, and also their suites are unknown unto him.

Not of his Saints or Angels, because there are these disagreements betwixt
them and worldly courtiers. First, they cannot hear us when we speak unto
them, nor understand what we say in our prayers before them (for that is a
thing proper and peculiar to God alone to hear them that are far absent from
him, and to understand what is in their hearts and souls within:) but worldly
courtiers may hear and understand those supplications, which are brought unto
them, because they are set down in plain terms and words before their eyes.
Secondly, as they have access unto Jesus Christ, so the rest of the Saints
have which are living upon the earth, for the throne of grace is open as well
for these as for them. Heb. 4.16. and Chapter 10.19.20. Ephesians. 2.18. but
vvorldly courtiers may come in boldly unto their King, when others are shut
out, because their faithfulness is known, and they have some service to do
about his Majesty. Finally, as they have grace and favor in the sight of
Christ for the procurement of any benefit or good turn, so all the real
members of his body have also, which are here warring upon the earth: for he
is no accepter of persons. Act. 10.34 35. and Math. 7.7. But worldly courtiers
are so gracious with their Kings, that they have almost what they will ask,
when other silly subjects and base wretches are sent empty away and can obtain
little or nothing at all. So that then this comparison or similitude, is saples
and not worth a rush, and therefore let no wise man be moved by it.

Having thus gone over the Appellations, let us now stand a little upon the
Exhortations. They are in number two, as I told you before. The first is,
Arise, the second is, come away.

Arise.] The Church at this time was in some drowsy security and much
oppressed with a spiritual laziness, that made her unwilling to walk after
Christ her husband, in the waves of eternal life. Howsoever he came so near
her, as to look through his Gospel upon her; yet she sat still, and moved
not so much as one foot, to come unto him; such frailty and imperfection was in
her: Either she lay snorting in the pleasures of this present world; or she
was pressed down and tired with that heavy burden of original corruption
spoken of in Hebr. 12.1. or she was terrified with outward persecution, and so,
after the example of the Apostles, fled as it were, from Christ, and hid her
self in some cabin or hole, not daring to peep out of the same. But
howsoever it came to pass, whether this way or that way, it is certain, that
she was in some fault, and is here called upon to amend it: for to Arise, is
nothing else, but to leave sin, and to walk in righteousness; as we may see by
the Apostles words, in 1 Cor. 15.34. when he says, Awake to live righteously,
and sin not: so that to live righteously, and not to sin any more, is to
Awake, or to Arise. Here in that Christ does thus speak unto his Church, and
will her to arise, I might note unto you, first, that the best of al are most
frail and full of imperfections: then that they are to be stirred up unto
their duties and to be whetted on by the words of Exhortation: for surely they
are like unto green wood, that must be always blown; unto dull horses, that
must be always spurd; unto blunt knives, that must be always whet; and unto
lame beasts, that must be always driven. But these things I will pass over,
and refer the meditation thereof unto your selves.

The principal matter that I now will stand upon, is this: Esaias does teach us,
saying, Wash you, make you clean, take away the evil of your works from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, Esaias 1.16.17. So
Ezechiel does teach us, saying, Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit, for
why will you die, O house of Israel? Ezec. 18.31. So Daniel does teach us,
saying, Wherefore, O King, let my counsel be acceptable unto thee, and break
off thy sin by righteousness, and thine iniquity by mercy toward the poor;
lo, let there be an healing of thine error, Dan. 4.24. So John the Baptist
does teach us, saying, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand: O
generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to ^^ye from the anger to come?
bring forth therefore fruits worthy amendment of life, and think not to say
with your selves, we have Abraham to our father, Mat. 3.2.7.8.9. So Christ does
teach us. saying. Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee, Ioh. 5.14. So Peter does teach us, saying, Amend your li^e^,
and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 2.38. So in a
word, Paul does teach us, saying, Awake thou that steepest, and stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians 5.14.

The reasons why we must leave our sins, Moses and Aaron failed in their
duties, and committed, in man's judgment, but a small fault, at the Waters of
Meribah, when they did not sanctify the Lord in the presence of the children
of Israel, as they should have done; the Lord was so offended with them for it,
that he would not give them leave, and so let them live to bring their people
into the land of Canaan, which he had given unto them, Numb. 2^.12 Secondly,
because they do wound our souls and consciences, troubling them, as gravel
does our feet within our shoes, as we may see by the example of David,
complaining of his miserable estate, in this regard, in the beginning almost of
the 32. Psalm, and making his petition unto the Almighty for the redress
thereof, in Psa. 51.8. when he says, Make me to hear joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. And again, in verse. 12. Restore
to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free Spirit. Thirdly,
because they hinder good things from us, and are as a wall between God and us,
to stop his benefits from coming down upon us, Esaias 59.1.2. Your iniquiti^^
(says Ierem. 5.25.) have turned away these things, and your sins have hindered
good things from you. Lastly, because they will bring destruction to us at the
last, and cast us down into hell; unless, to wit, we do leave them in time:
for so much does Christ teach us in Luke 13.3. when he says, But, except you
amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish: so does the Apostle Saint Paul
in Romans 8.13. in these words, For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die,
but if ye mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit, ye shall live.

This serves first to reprove them, I harkened and heard, but none spoke
aright, no man repented him of his wickedness saying, what have I done? every
man turned to their race, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

This serves secondly to comfort such, as have forsaken their sins and have
cast away their iniquities: though the world does scorn them, because they
will not run to the same excess of riot with them, as they did heretofore:
yet here is a comfort for them; they do but their duty and that which the
scorners themselves ought to do.

This serves thirdly, to stir us and to rouse us up out of the bed of our
security. We must not lie still in the same, like the sluggard, who is
unwilling to arise out of his sleep, saying, yet a little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands together, Prou. 6.10. But we must leave
our sins with speed, and forsake them. And therefore, my brethren, consider
with your selves, in what sins you are asleep; whether it be in the sin of
ignorance, or in the sin of infidelity, or in the sin of pride, or in the sin
of covetousness, or in the sin of drunkenness, or in the sin of whoredom, or in
the sin of swearing, or in the sin of lying, or in the sin of idleness, or in
the sin of malice, or in one word, in the sin of any breach of Gods
Commandments; whatsoever it be forsake it and leave it. I come now, as a
Nathan to David, to request this at your hands, and as a Jonah to Nineveh, to
proclaim war against you, unless you do it. Oh, remember (I beseech you)
the reasons before going and let them sink into your hearts for your good.
Arise first, and leave all your sins, that you may not anger your God any
further, but bring good contentment unto him in all your ways, as the children
of the living God ought to do. But if you care not for Gods displeasure, yet
arise in the second place and leave all your sins, that you may not wound your
own consciences, and be, as it were, hangmen unto your selves, to tear your
own flesh with your own nails, but that you may rejoice and be glad all the
days of your lives. But if your consciences be dead, and as it were seared
with an hot iron to feel nothing, so that no sin does trouble it: yet arise in
the third place, and leave all your sins, that you may not impouerish your own
persons, and bring your selves and your posterity to mere beggary, especially
in regard of the soul and the good estate thereof, but that you may receive
plentiful blessings from the Lord, and be laden with his benefits both
temporal and eternal, appertaining either to soul or body.

But if lastly, you care not much for the blessings and benefits of God, as
having enough already, and thinking your selves sufficiently happy without him,
yet arise and leave all your sins, that you may not be damned in hell for ever,
and there lie tormented in flames of fire that cannot be quenched, but that you
may be saved, and come to life everlasting, where you may rejoice in joys that
are unspeakable. I hope, that these things will awaken you, and bring you home
unto your God: and so I come unto the last branch of my Text, which is, Come
away.

Come away.] Because it is better to lie still, then to arise and go astray:
our Savior showing us how we should move, bids us not only to arise, but
adds further, that we must come away, to wit, after him, leaving this world,
and all the things therein behind us. As the first Exhortation was needful,
so is this latter: For the Church was now unwilling to stir after Christ. In
this case she was like a silly woman, who in the Winter would feign live at
home, and in no case take a journey abroad, as knowing that time of the year
to be unseasonable for her traveling: and that, first, because the days are
short: secondly, because the air is cold: thirdly, because the ways are
foul: fourthly, because the Element is watrie and full of rain: fifthly,
because the prospect of the country is doleful: and lastly, because the danger
for her body and goods is great. The words following do show that this was her
estate, wherein Christ does tell her, that the Winter was now past, and the
Spring come, and therefore she was to Arise and to come away.

Wherefore, from hence let us collect this Doctrine, Draw me, says she, and we
will run after thee, Cant. 1.3. The Apostles in act and deed did perform the
like, They left all, and followed Christ, Matthew. 19.27. The same is reported of
the sheep of Christ: My sheep (says our Savior) hear my voice, and I know
them, and they follow me, Ioh. 10.27. We find also the like in that hundredth
forty and four thousand, that stood with the Lamb on Mount Sion, and had his
Fathers name written in their foreheads: for this commendation is given of
them; These are they, which are not defiled with women, for they are Virgins;
these follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes: these are bought from men, being
the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb, Reu. 14.4. Thus you see how we
should go after Christ, and be well content to leave all the world, to follow
him.

The reasons to move us hereunto are these. First, Ephesians. 5.26. For the wife
must follow her husband, and forsaking all other friends must cleave only unto
him. Genesis 2.25. Secondly, because he will then take a great delight in us, and
satisfy himself in our love, according to that which is in Psalm. 45.11.12.
where it is said, Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear:
forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house. So shall the King have
pleasure in thy beauty: for he is thy Lord, and reverence thou him. Thirdly,
because we are dead to the world, and a live in him. C^l. 3.3.4. Lastly,
because he will liberally reward all such as do come after him. Verily (says
he) I say unto you: that when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his
Majesty, ye which followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon twelve
thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And whosoever shall forsake
houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my names sake, he shall receive an hundredfold more, and shall
inherit everlasting life.

This reproues those, that care not for Christ, high or low, wise or unwise,
bond or free, male or female, certain it is, that they are none of Christ's.
He will disclaim them, and not approve them for his own. If any man (says
he) come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children,
and brethren, and sisters: yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple. And whosoever bears not his cross, and comes after me, cannot
be my Disciple. Luke 14.26.27. wherefore let this work repentance in the hearts
of worldly men, and turn them to the loving Lord.

As this does serve to reprove all such as prefer the world before Christ: so
it may serve also to provoke us all, to prefer Christ before the world.
Surely it should move us, to set him still before us, and prick us forward to
go after him: if a man were in a far country far from his friends and
nearest kinsfolks, though his eyes did behold the fairest pictures, his ears
hear the sweetest music, his mouth taste the daintiest meat, his body lie
upon the softest bed, and all his senses compassed about with the rarest
objects of ten thousand: yet would his heart be at home, unless he were
bewitched, as the poets feign of Ulysses, whom the cups of Circe did make to
forget his native country and faithful wife. So, cuen so, unless we be
enchanted with the witchcraft of the devil, all the trash and pelf of this
world cannot hold us here below, but our hearts will mount upward, and be fixed
upon our Bride-grome, in whose presence is the fullness of joy and at whose
right hand are pleasures for evermore: and all our travel will especially tend
to attain unto our country in the heavens, and to celestial Jerusalem that is
above. For we are here as strangers and pilgrims upon the earth. 1 Pet. 2.11.
and our (...), or corporation, whereof we are members, is in the heaven, Phil.
3.20. Surely our earthly houses are not (...), but (...), that is, rather an
Inn to lodge in, then a permanent mansion to abide in. 2 Cor. 5.1. wherefore,
I pray you, let us evermore set our hearts upon Christ, and follow him. It is
recorded in the greek and Roman stories, that Hypsicrataea did so excedingly
love her busband M^^hridates King of Pontus, that when he was put to flight,
and enforced to wander up and down the woods and deserts to save his life,
she attyred in man's apparel did follow him every way through th^^^e and
thin, reputing her kingdom, her wealth, her country, and her happiness to
be there where her husband was. So after the same manner, if we be so
faithfully affected to our most sweet and loving husband in the heavens, we
must not settle upon our lees, nor set our affections on things that are below,
but follow on hard, though it be through the thorny path of persecution, or the
strait way, that he is gone before us: we must count all things but dunge and
dross in respect of him. Phil. 7.8.

If any man would here know how we must go after Christ, Cor. 4.18 By
desideration, we evermore desiring to be in his presence, and to have a
fellowship with him in joys unspeakable. Col. 7.1. Phil. 1.23. 2 Cor. 5.8. By
determination, we evermore resolving with our selves, to cleave continually to
him, and to repute all things but trash in respect of him. Act. 11.23. Phil.
3.8. Reu. 12.11. By conversation, or imitation, we evermore laboring to do
as he has done, and to walk in such steps, as he is gone before us. Ephesians.
5.2. Ioh. 13.15. Math. 11.29. Oh my brethren, strive and contend to follow
Christ after these waves, if there be any thing, that will hinder you from the
same, cast it away. Heb. 12.1. Be it that the right hand, or the right eye
should cause you to offend herein, yet spare them not cut off the one, and pull
out the other. Math. 18.8.9. There are many Lords, doubtless, striving for us.
The world with her pleasures allures many to follow her, but pretend what she
will, in truth her word is Decipion, I will deceive you. The flesh would have
man a servant to her lusts, she wants not her baits wherewith to beguile him,
but in truth her word is Inficiam, I will infect you. Satan, strongest of the
three, usurps superiority over man, he craves that man should fall down, and
worship him, he want not promises enough, fair in show, but in truth his
word is Interficiam, I will destroy you. Jesus Christ our lawful Lord be also
calls upon us, and exhorts us to serve him, he has life in the one hand,
durable riches and honor in the other, and in truth his word is Reficiam, I
will refresh you.

Now in this strife to whom shall we yield our selves, but unto him, who
cries Reficiam? Let us therefore do as we are here willed for to do; come
away: and then doubtless we shall want nothing. Habent enim omnia, qui
habent Christum habentem omnia: For they have all who do enjoy Christ the
Lord of all. And so I end, and commend you to God, and to the word of his
grace, which is able to build further and to give you an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified. To the which inheritance the Lord bring us all for
his sons sake, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost, one eternal
God, and three distinct persons, be all honor, and glory ascribed both now
and evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

