THE RECANTATION of THOMAS CLARKE (sometime a Seminary Priest of the English
College in Rhemes; and now by the great mercy of God converted unto the
profession of the Gospel of JESUS Christ) made at Paul's Cross, after the
Sermon made by Master BVCKERIDGE Preacher, the first of July, 1593.

Whereunto is annexed a former Recantation made also by him in a public
assembly on Easter day, being the 15. of April, 1593.

1. Reg. 2.6 Dominus mortificat and viuificat, deducit ad inferos and reducit.
The Lord kills and makes alive, brings down to the grave, and fetches up
again.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.

Anno Domini. 1594.

To the right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate
and Metropolitan of all England, and one of her Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel, Thomas Clarke wishes increase of virtue and honor in this
life, and in the world to come, eternal happiness.
IT has always been an ancient, necessary, common, and commendable custom
amongst the most sorts of writers (right Reverend father, and my honorable
good lord) in all their works to seek the patronage of some worthy person to
whom the defense of the matter handled did most especially either in duty or
devotion appertain: And because I am to publish in print, to my countries good
(as I am persuaded by diverse my worshipful friends) my recantation made at
Paul's Cross, considering with my self that in causes Ecclesiastical, the
government is given by God, (next under her Majesty) principally to your
grace, and because the matter here treated of is such, I thought it most
convenient to offer the same to your grace, unto whom both I and my labors do
of duty on our parts (next unto her highness, by whose gracious clemency
and mercy we have that we live) chiefly belong, and under whose protection we
may safely walk without fear of control, and both our wants be more then
sufficiently furnished by your graces countenance and favor, which have
hitherto been always ready to help those that have relied thereupon, the
which undeserved grace (whereof I nothing doubt) if your honorable good
lordship do afford me, I shall be further emboldned without dismay, to put
forth to use my masters talent, which hitherto has lien hidden in a napkin
without any manner of gain: and if the commodity amount to any thing, your
graces portion no doubt, will be therein double; in this world increase of
virtue and honor, things according with your high calling and zealous
profession, and after this life eternal happiness wherewith God will crown
in you all his works, your graces labors, which God grant for his mercies
sake, through his only son Jesus Christ.

Your Graces bounden in the Lord. T. C.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEing minded (Christian Reader) to publish in Print my Recantation made at
Paul's cross, I thought it convenient to make thee privy what occasions
moved me heereunto. First therefore know that the request of a worshipful
friend of mine, and his reason for the same alleged were principal and chief
motives in this matter: his manifold good turns on the one side did so
greatly bind me, that by denying his reasonable and godly demand, I should
have spotted and defiled my self with the ignominious, unnatural, and beastly
stain of ingratitude which I have always in all men discommended and hated,
and in my self (to the uttermost of my power) shunned and avoided: on the
other side, his reason proposed did, as it were, command me for my countries
good, to bring to public view my weak and undeserving labors. His reason was,
that as I had, in alienating the faithful children from the obedience of their
natural mother, bin a public hurt (the scar whereof would long be a blemish
in that fair spouse the Church of Christ) so I might hereby use a public
means, both to heal the wound, and also (if it were possible) to take away
the scarre. His demand seeming every way both reasonable, necessary, and not to
be denied, I co^discended: considering also with my self, that as I had done
great hurt in the church of God, so I was in conscience bound to make her all
the satisfaction for the same that I could. To these motives I added further
certain considerations of mine own, why it was necessary that ye thing should
be printed: which were these. First, that I might show a reason for the
satisfying of every man, why I did omit some things which were thought
necessary by diverse to have been spoken of, as Transubstantiation, Indulgences,
Service in an unknown tongue, and such like: who^ I desire to remain
satisfied with this answer. My purpose and meaning was not at that time to
discourse of controversies, or particularly one by one to confute every error,
for that (as every wise man knows) had been impossible for me as then to have
performed: for every error and controversy does minister sufficient matter for
a whole, yea, for many sermons, but my coming thither was to no other purpose,
but to confess and acknowledge my fault, and generally to renounce and abjure
all those false opinions which I once held. Neither do I think it greatly
necessary to make any supply in this Preface of those supposed wants which
before I mentioned: only I desire thee (gentle Reader) to have this opinion of
me, that, although I have but spoken of a few particulars, yet that (according
to my protestation made) I have a general, and faithful detestation of all
the rest, as my future life and labors (by Gods grace) shall sufficiently
witness. Wherefore rest not discontented or unsatisfied in any thing, but if
happily thou be driven to any doubt through the malicious suggestion of the
Devil, or thine own infirmity and weakness, know that in such cases thou
art bound both in religious charity and Christian duty to reform and
remove such corrupt and uncharitable opinions against thine even Christian, or
at the least suspend thy judgment in what matter soever that is not too openly
manifest and apparent. Carry not a suspicious and doubtful judgment of the
truth and sincerity of my soul, for fear of judging thine own soul. In
quo enim iudicio iudicaueritis, Mat. 7.
iudicabimini: and, In qua mensura mensi fueritis, remetietur vobis. With what
judgment you judge other men, you shall be judged: and with what measure you
mete, the same shall be measured to you again. But think that I am a Christian
as thou art, and have a care to please God, as happily thou have, and have
further knowledge in spiritual matters then every one, to whom the perusing of
these presents may come, and therefore do know in more ample sort, that
hypocrisy and double dealing with God and his Church is a double wickedness,
at whose girdle there hangs a fearful scourge and punishment. Remember that
thou art admonished by the the Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 14.
not to judge another man's servant for he does either stand or fall to his
master; that is, to God, before whose tribunal we shall all stand, and give an
account every one for himself: let us not therefore, says he, any more judge
another, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or an
occasion to fall in his brothers way. My meaning herein thou may easily
gather, and God grant thou may use it to the benefit of thine own soul, and
Christ's small flock.

The second cause that moved me to the publishing hereof, was the good that
might hereby grow to those that be but lightly infected with Papistrie, that by
my example, seeing my conversion, and reading my Recantation, they may be
moved to consider, for the safety of their souls, the great peril and
imminent danger wherein they do continually live, and so they may call to God
for the heavenly unction of his holy spirit, and the precious gift of his
grace, that may cure their wounds, and lead them to the perfect knowledge of
his pure truth. And those that perticularly by my doctrine and example have
erred or do go astray, may by these means (which I heartily ask of God for
his son Jesus Christ his sake) be reduced again into the right way: and for
mine own part I shall for ever hereafter have the testimony of a better
conscience, that I have not been negligent herein to perform the duty of a
good Christian, in putting such in mind of their estates, and showing them the
means (the like whereof, if they ask it as they should, God doubtless will
not deny them) of my conversion. If I had contented my self with the uttered
matter, and not have proceeded any further to publish the same, the world might
have laid some blame on me, and reprehended me for lighting of a candle, and
putting it under a bushel, but being put on a candlestick, and left
indifferently to give light to all, not presently, but for posterity, I shall
be, I hope, in this behalf, free from the calumniation of any.

Consider I pray thee (dear Christian) if thou be a Papist, or any thing
addicted that way, that thou can not imagine any sinister cause for the which
I should (as they say) have turned my coat; the greatest cause of all things
which thou can think of, is worldly wealth, which on that side I never
wa^ted, nor any thing else that was convenient either for my pleasures or
necessities, and therefore I had no cause for that to forsake them, if I had
not been induced thereto by further consideratio^s and means, the^ is the
regard of worldly commodities: but co^trarywise, (as thou shall more largely
understand in my recantation) they were the only things that for a long time
withheld me from embracing the pure waters that spring to everlasting life. But
perchance thou will say, I hoped for better then I had, believe me no, I
neither hoped for better, nor have so good; notwithstanding (if I should be
driven to beg my bread) let all the papists in the world know, that I will not
forsake the kingdom of heaven for this worlds good, neither do I make my
bodily life more precious then my soul: for what would it profit me to win
the whole world, and to lose my soul? or what exchange should I make with God
for my soul? I know they would receive me again, if I would like a dog
return yet to my vomit, but far be that from me: better it were for me
never to have bin borne then once to think on any such matter, and I hope, God
that has done thus mercifully by me, and dealt thus mightily with me, has not,
nor will not bestow his grace in vain upon me, but will perfect his work so
effectually begun. The last cause that moved me to publish these prese^ts, was,
to assure the adversaries (to whose hands I am sure they will come) that I
neither have done, nor hereafter will do any thing against the^ of malice, but
in all my procedings I have, and will deal as charitably as I can, not
betraying the truth of God, which I prefer before the estimation of the
whole world: neither would I have any man to think, that I speak as though I
did any thing at all rely upon their good opinions of me, for that I am
assured they hate me as the devil, and will not stick to employ all the labor
they can to deface and discredit both me and my calling. But let them not
spare, their envious carping will demonstrate in them the lying spirit that
ouerruleth them, and every one that is not as blind as themselves, will soon
perceive their legier de maine: and although their buzzing will obtain place
in the ears of their accomplices and fautors, who are always ready to bandie
the balls which their leaders toss, so far as the slanderous blastes of
their wicked mouths will carry them, yet I hope the force of them (fly they
never so stiffely) shall not be able to make wink the least child in Gods
Church, much less overthrow him.

Moreover I do heartily desire every Christian reader to weigh with good
consideration these presents. If thou be already infected with error and
blindness, pray to God that he will bestow upon thee the clear light of his
truth: persist not wilfully in wickedness, but take occasion hereby to sift and
try the spirit that is as well in thy self as in thy teachers, if thou be
ignorant and unlearned, build not thy faith upon the credit and good opinion
of other men, say not (as I know many have and do say) I am not able to render
an account of this or that thing, but I know it is true, I must believe so,
because this learned man, or these divines, and good men believe so: ask,
them, they are able to give you an answer both for themselves and me: it is a
weak building that has so shallowe, and uncertain a foundation, and a simple
faith is it that is pinned so slenderly to other men's sleaues: the Apostle
Saint Peter bids thee to be able and ready to render an account of thy
faith to every one that shall demand it at thy hands, 1. Pet. 3.
I mean not that thou art so exactly bound as he that teaches both thee and
others, but in some good measure according to thy ability, and the talent that
God has lent thee, thou art bound to know what thou beleeuest, in whom thou
beleeuest, and what thou art bound to believe. Build not therefore thy faith
upon the faith of other men, for that foundation cannot choose but fail thee,
but erect thy building upon the immooueable rock Christ Jesus, of whom the
scriptures do most plentifully bear witness. John 5.
Art thou learned? search the scriptures for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are they that testify of me, etc. Art thou unlearned? go to
thy Pastor, go to him that has charge of thy soul, and receives instruction
from God for thee, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and thou shall
seek the law at his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. Mal.
2.
So thou see whether thou be learned or unlearned, thou art without excuse if
thou be ignorant in thy duty, because God of his great goodness and infinite
mercy has left thee sufficient means to come unto him, for which cause we
were all created, I mean truly and duetifully to serve God. God has created
all things both in heaven and earth for the behoof and benefit of man, but
he has made man only for his own self, for his own service, wherein to be
negligent and ignorant, is a hie contempt of God, and mere ingratitude for his
manifold benefits. If hitherto therefore thou have been negligent and blind,
redeem thy time with thy future diligence. What shall I say (dear Christian)
but only this, leave the muddie and troubled waters, which thou drawest out of
the durtie pits of men's imaginations, and return to pure springs and wells of
life, where thou may freely without money or danger drink thy fill, and so
satiate thy self, that thou shall never thirst again.

Those whom God has called in his fear, I do earnestly wish to be wary how
they walk, and careful that they be not circumuented by any manner of false
prophets: if at any time thou converse with them by chance, desire God to give
thee strength and grace not to be tempted, if thou be tempted, that it be not
above thy strength. Qui stat videat ne cadat, he that stands let him take
heed he fall not: for we carry this treasure that God has given us in
vessels more brittle then glass: for glass is not more subject to breaking,
the^ our bodies (which ought to be the temples of the holy Ghost) be subject to
pollution by sin, and our souls to be infected with false doctrine, which
will seem in the mouth as pleasant as honey, but in the throat it will be
more bitter then wormwood and gall. It is like a canker which creeps
secretly, and having infected is most hardly killed. Wherefore if thou will not
be bitten with the snake, sleep not near the hedge: he that touches pitch,
must needs carry away some stayne, and the Mariner that harkeneth to the Syrene
shall be in danger of shipwreck: so he that will curiously talk and hearken to
the papists sweet persuasions, shall escape very hardly, (such is the outward
face and show thereof) but he shall be intrapped, (expertus dico, I have tried
it) and therefore give credence to me that knows more therein then thy self,
and wish thee so much good as my self.

Lastly, I am to give thee to understand (good Reader) that for sundry causes I
have hereunto joined my first recantation made also in a public assembly,
where I am to admonish thee not to look for any express method of my
speeches therein, as in this other, for I never meant to publish it either in
print or writing, but was only requested to make known to some of my friends,
by way of declaration, what I had done, and now it is thought meet to publish
it in the same form together with this: whereby thou may consider how
willing I am to make such sufficient satisfaction to the Church of God as my
ability may extend unto, and how glad I shall be if any one do take benefit
by my labors. And for that I know it a thing impossible that any one work
should please every man, but that there will be some fault found, and either
the insufficiency of the man, or the manner of his method, or the raggedness
of style, or some such like matter will be reprehended, because it comes to
the scanning of far more sufficient persons then the Author himself commonly
is, (though one man sometimes is as sufficient as another) some also are more
ignorant, and therefore can not judge uprightly, and some are curious, and
seek rather a fine and filed phrase, then the sound substance of the matter,
and because they are sick of the facions, there remains a great corruption
in their taste, so that nothing will please them be it never so convenient and
fit for them: for my part I regard not the slanders of the envious, nor the
scoffs of the curious, nor the blunt bolts of the foolish, but as in humility
I undertook these labors for the causes aforesaid, so in humility I offer
them for the benefit of the good and virtuous, without respect of any other
gain but of their good prayers, which if I obtain, my pains are requited,
and my self satisfied. Vale.

The Recantation of Thomas Clarke, a Seminary Priest, made at Paul's Cross,
after the Sermon, made by Master Buckeridge Preacher, the first day of July.
1593.
ALthough I have once already in a public assembly made open recantation and
abiuration of my former errors (right Honorable, Worshipful, and well-beloved)
yet because the place wherein it was done (notwithstanding public) was more
obscure then I could have wished, as also the audience (consisting for the most
part of young persons) not altogether sufficient witnesses in so weighty a
cause, I was the more willing again at this time in more sufficient manner to
publish my former act in this worthy assembly: choosing rather thereby to
suffer some blemish in my credit (if the renouncing of errors may blemish my
credit) then in any part to seem negligent in discharging the duty of a
truly reformed Christian: whereby the world might justly hold me in
suspense, y^ Church of God remain unsatisfied, and mine own conscience still
retain in it self sufficient matter of accusing and condemning her self. For
I am of this opinion (under correction) that satisfaction in respect of the
world (for to God we are able to yield no equality) ought to be in weight and
measure, according to the offender his ability, every way equal with the
offense made; except the offended be content to remit, either in part or in
all, the duettie growing from the offender. Which grace of remission, I assure
my self to have already obtained at God his hands, and the like (I hope) this
Honorable and Christian assembly will this day afforde me, and consequently all
those (which I humbly and heartily crave) to whom relation of my present deed
shall come.

And for the further manifestation of my cause, may it please you to
understand, first, touching my fault, that I was sometime a Priest, brought up
in the English Seminary at Rhemes in the kingdom of France, a College there
erected and supported by the Pope and his accomplices, for the mainteining or
rather reviving of his deuilish doctrine, and damnable errors in this our
Country, now for a good space raked up in hell, and in this happy Island almost
extinguished.

To this mother of errors and nurse of Idolatry did I repair being from my
childhoode in some sort fostered with hers or the like poisoned milk. I omit
to speak of my unnatural and vnduteifull departing my native Country without
authority or leave obtained from any Magistrate, for as our Savior Christ
said, John 3.
qui mala facit, odit lucem, and non venit ad lucem, vt non arguantur opera
eius, he that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least
his deeds should be reproved. Even so my cause being faulty in it self
could not abide the touch of due examination, and therefore put me in fear to
depart by authority, but by stealth, which with great difficulty I performed.

Having studied sometime in the University aforesaid, I was made Priest, and
after some space was by the President of the College sent into this Realm of
England to win souls (as they term it, and as I then took it) to God: but
had not God, whose mercies are above all his works, plucked me back with his
merciful hand, I had doubtless perished together with many souls of that
profession on whom he shows no mercy: but such is his great goodness and
infinite mercy toward his elect, that even in the depth of their sin he can
and will raise them; the which is most evidently manifested in me, who never in
my life gave any regard to the true doctrine of Christ, though in some part I
knew it, but far otherwise then I ought to have done, and as it is in it
self, because that from my youth I was led astray and blinded with the choking
mist of Papistry, and was now come even into the midst, and as it were
perfection of all error and blindness; insomuch that I did not now walk in
the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, but in the
highest degree of sinning, I sat established in the seat of the pestilent,
whom it is far more hard to raise and remove then either him that walks,
or him that stands: wherefore in me raised, that sat, the great mercy and
wonderful work of Almighty God is more commended and more evidently set
forth then if I had but walked, then if I had but stood: the which (because I
will be as short as I may) I leave to the devout consideration of every good
Christian present, only my self will say with the Prophet David, Psalm 116.
Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? Calicem ^alutis
accipiam and nomen Domini inuocabo, What shall I render to the Lord for all
his graces and benefits bestowed upon me? I will receive the cup of salvation,
and I will call upon the Name of the Lord.

Having with great danger, by reason of a tempest that happened, passed the
seas, and being arrived in England, I fell bustly to work in my profession and
calling, letting pass no opportunity, but using all means that I could to
become a worthy workman, (in deed a wastfull destroyer) in God his vineyarde.
I forbear to speak of the zeal I had, the pains I took, my days labors,
my night watchings, etc. In all which I humbly confess to Almighty God, and
acknowledge before this worthy assembly, that I did nothing else but daily more
and more offend God, impugn his truth, supplant his Church, and pervert his
people, by laboring to seduce them from his true religion into idolatry, and
to bring them from their natural and dutiful obedience toward their Prince,
unto the servile yoke and bondage of the Pope, I mean, in persuading them to
acknowledge his Papal dignity, and usurping supreme authority over all Kings
and Princes of the world. Whereby beside the hatred of God, I incurred ye high
displeasure of my dread Sovereign, and most gracious Queen, as also the
penalties of her godly and most just laws made against such offenders.
Notwithstanding I protest before the dreadful seat of the most Highest, that I
never offended against her royal person, neither was I ever guilty in
platting any thing against the good estate of my dear Country, or consenting
to any lewd practice in that behalf: neither did I any thing touching my
function in matters of Religion of malice, as knowing and would not know, but
wherein so ever I offended, it was of blind zeal masqued and carried away with
ignorance and error. And although I said before that I had some knowledge of
the truth, yet I told you it was but afar off, it was but a superficial
and carnal knowledge. Who more rare or better read in the Scriptures then the
Pharisees? yet our Savior Christ told them, that they erred and knew not the
Scriptures: whereby we are given to understand, that a man knows nothing
(know he never so much) except the Spirit of God do further illuminate and
quicken the understanding with his grace: for it is the spirit that quickens.

Thus have I (though confusedly) confessed unto you my guiltines and offense:
it follows, that I give you to understand the means which God used to
restore me again to life that was dead. But herein I fear to exceed (as they
say) my compass, in promising more then I am able to perform. For how can I
declare and manifest that unto you which I never knew my self, surely I can
assign no means, but must say with our Savior Christ, Mat. 11.
Ita pa^e, requoniam sic fuit placitum ante te. It is so, O father, because thy
good pleasure was such. Wherefore let us all be amassed, and fall into
admiration of God his works, and with the Apostle Saint Paul cry out. O
altitudo diuitiarum sapientiae and scientiae Dei! Romans 11.
quam incomprehensibilia sunt iudicia eius, and inuestigabiles viae eius! O the
deepenes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God, how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? and let us
confess with the prophet David, Psalm. 118.
A domino factum est istud, and est mirabile in oculis nostris. This is the
Lord his doing, and it is marvelous in our sight. Maruailous in deed it might
and would be in our sight, if I wear in any reasonable measure able to
express the secret working of God in my soul by his often holy inspirations,
which I did oftentimes repel, not of malice, but of ignorance, taking gods holy
motions for deuilish temptations: well did our merciful Savior verify, and
more then verify in me his own saying: Ecce sto ad ostium and pulso: Behold I
stand knocking at thy door, but he not only stood knocking, as one ready to
go his way, if he were not let in, but he perseuered knocking, he sat
knocking as one that meant not to be wearied, as one that would not away, as
one that would by force enter. O gracious God, what was I? what am I? nay what
can I be that thy high Majesty should be so mindful of me? that I should
be in such reputation with thee? Psalm. 21.
Vermis sum ego and non homo, opprobrium hominum, and abiectio plebis. I am a
worm O Lord and no man, the reproach of men, and the outcast of the people. I
say not of thy people O Lord but of all people, for in hearing thy voice I
hardened my heart. Long was it or that I did hear, and when I heard, I was
unwilling to hear, I would not hear.

At the length, when God had brought me to hear in some good measure, he
taught me to consider of diverse things, the which for breuities sake I will
omit to speak of in this place: by consideration he bread in me a doubting
of the estate of my soul: by doubting he wrought a desire of the clear
knowledge of his truth, the which as then I had no means to atteine, but by
the secret manuduction of his holy spirit, and the reading of holy scriptures:
by both which, it pleased his heavenly Majesty of his accustomed mercy, to
reform my strayed judgment, and thus by little and little, he taught me as it
were, the first rudiments of his true faith, and at the last he caused me
absolutely to resolve to come forth of Babylon. But such was the malice of the
devil the ancient enemy of mankind, that seeing and envying this my
resolution, he cast such a stumbling block in my way, that for a whole years
space I was not able to move it, much less to remove it. This block in deed
was heavy and very heavy, consisting of two woods, of life and of death. First,
he laid before me the terror of death, the rigor of the laws, and my just
deserts in transgressing the same: against this I opposed my voluntary
submission, presidents that had escaped the like danger, and have before me
occupied this place, and most of all, her Majesty's clemency and most gracious
mercy used toward all, especially, to men of my coat and profession.

This part of his stumbling block being but a little stirred, he assaulted me
presently with a second thing of no less importance then the first, which was
mine own estate in this manner: That admit my life were spared, yet I had not
to look for any living or maintenance, and having of my self none, I should
by recanting, bring my self to poverty and misery, and be of none account.
Whereas now I wanted nothing I could wish for, and was reputed amongst the
best. Against this I had nothing to oppose, but only an uncertain hope (as I
thought) of her Majesty's bounty, and the wisdom, and charitable care of her
honorable counsel, for the providing for of such manner of persons. Briefly
after the devil had thoroughly wrought in me, the fear and uncertainty of
both life and living, therein he left me miserably dejected, and wrestling, in
so much that for a great space after I remained here and there in the country,
for upon this my resolution, I quite forsook the chief place of my usual
stay and abode: but could proceed no further, till at the last in place where
I was, in my secret chamber, word was brought me of the taking of one of my
coat, whom I well knew. These news bread in me such a present fear, that from
thenceforth I could not be in quiet. Wherefore with as much convenient speed
as might be, I provided for my journey toward London, whither being come,
because I was in the place as it were a mere stranger, and being acquainted
with no one to whom I durst impart my mind in a matter so dangerous, I was (by
reason of my fears aforesaid) constrained to defer my submission, until it
would please God, either to offer me fit opportunity thereto by some one or
other, or that he should endue me with sufficient courage and fortitude to
peforme my determinate purpose, the which at the length of his great goodness he
granted me, but making me to know withal, that his honor and glory must
always be sought of me, whether it be for my temporal avail, or
disadvantage. Thus at the last he has delivered me from all mine enemies, for
which great work and mercy of his, what have I, but with the prophet David to
say, Psalm. 123.
Benedictus Deus, qui non dedit nos in captionem dentibus eorum, anima nostra
sicut passer erepta est de laqueo venantium, laqueus contritus est, and nos
liberati sumus. Blessed be God which has not given us over for a pray unto
their teeth. Our soul is escaped even as a bird out of the foulers snare the
snare is broken and we are delivered.

It follows touching the a^iuration of those errors which once I held, but
now detest, that I speak somewhat. To stand upon every particular it is not my
meaning, neither do I purpose to make any long discourse upon those points
which I will touch: also I mean to speak but of a few things, because this
time will not suffer me to handle many, neither these few as I would. If my
order in placing the points handled seem preposterous to the learned, I
prefer their judgments, and desire them to pardon my wants, and accept
herein my dutiful labors.

Furthermore, if at the first I shall attempt to put the axe to the root of
the tree whereon the rest of the branches grow, I shall at once overthrow
both the one and the other, and because I will leave my self more scope
(though otherwise I could find sufficient) I will begin with some particular
branches and so descend to the body and root: but whether I begin at the
top or in the middle it is no great matter, for my meaning is to destroy all,
though not in all, yet in my self.

First therefore to speak of the worshipping of Images, which the adverse part
holds for great piety and religion, I can find no warrant therefore in holy
writ, but contrarily I find it expressly forbidden, with fearful curses
therefore threatened: as in the second commandment of the first table it is
forbidden in these words, Exodus 20.
Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any similitude of things that
are in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or in the waters under the earth:
thou shall not bow down to them nor serve them. Also when ye are come over
Jordan, Numb. 34.
etc. ye shall drive out all the inhabiters of the land before you, and destroy
all their pictures, and break asunder all their images of metal etc. That
worshippers of Images are accursed, Deuteronomy. 27.
we read in Deu. these words, Cursed be the man that shall make any carved or
molten Image, which is an abominatio^ unto the Lord. Wisd. 13.
Also in another place, Miserable, (which may import so much as to say
accursed) are they, and among the dead is their hope, that call them gods which
are the works of men's hands, gold, and silver, and the thing that is invented
by art, etc. Many other places I could allege against the making and
worshipping of images: but I will omit them, only I will rehearse unto you the
words of Tertullian upon this matter, Tert. de Idol.
and so I will pass further. God (says he) has forbidden an Image as well to
be made as to be worshipped etc. And a little after he goes forward in this
sort, Some one or other to maintain idolatry will say, Why then did Moses
make the Image of the brazen serpent in the wilderness? Which objection he
answers in this sort. One and the self same God has by his eternal law
forbidden any Image to be made, and also by his extraordinary and special
commandment the Image of a serpent to be made: If thou be obedient to the same
God, thou have his law, make thou no Image: but if thou have a regard to the
Image of the serpent afterward made by Moses, then do thou as Moses did,
make not any Image against the law, unless God command thee as he did Moses.
What need we to stand upon more proofs herein? these I take for this time
sufficient to confirm the truth of the matter: And herein I assent and
consent to the true doctrine of Christ his universal Church and affirm the
doctrine of the Roman Church herein to be false and erroneous, and therefore I
utterly renounce and abjure it.

Touching prayer for the dead, which adhereth to another absurdity like to it
self which is Purgatory, although out of the decrees of Councels and old
Fathers many profes seem to be deducted for the mainteining thereof, yet in the
whole process of holy Scriptures, (which as the Prophet David says, Psalm. 118.
are lanternes unto our feet, and lights unto our paths) I find no warrant
for either of them, but contrariwise that they are both vain and frivolous. As
for example in the Revelations it is said, Revel. 14.
Beati mortui qui in Domino moriuntur. Blessed are the dead that die in the
Lord, for they rest from their labors, etc. If every soul that dies in the
Lord be blessed, then there are none that die in the Lord in Purgatory,
where there is no blessedness, (but according to their opinion) all misery
and calamity even as in hell it self. Secondly it is said, that they rest
from their labors. If then they rest from their labors, it must needs
follow that they are not in Purgatory, where (as they themselves say) are
extreme labors, though not active yet passive. Whereupon I infer two things.
First, that no saved soul goes to Purgatory, which is meant by those which
die in the Lord, for every one that dies in the Lord by sufficient testimony
of this place is blessed, which cannot be but in possessing the vision and
sight of God in whom only the dead have and enjoy all blessedness, the which
none can have and enjoy, but only those which are saved, as also rest from
all, and all manner of labors which cannot be had nor found in Purgatory,
being as I said before (according to the adversaries opinion) a place of
torment and unrest, and this place of Scripture attributing both blessedness
and rest, and that immediately after their death to all that die in the Lord,
that is the servants of the Lord, it must needs be that every such soul is in
heaven and not in Purgatory. Secondly, I infer that there is no such place
as Purgatory, because there is no use of nor for any such place. For all the
creatures, things and places which God made, he made them for some end, use
and purpose: for he made nothing in vain, and in all the Scriptures we neither
find mention made of Purgatory, nor use for any such place, which no doubt
would have been done if the place had been, and of such necessity as the
adversaries affirm it to be, either by Christ himself, or his Apostles (who
have left us written all things necessary for our salvation) therefore I may
safely conclude that there is no Purgatory.

That prayers avail not the dead (because I have been so tedious before) I will
only allege one example out of Ecclesiastes. Eccle. 9.
The dead (says he) know nothing at all, and they have no more portion for
ever in all that is done under the sun. If it be so, then in prayers they
have no portion. If they have no portion in prayers, then in vain do they
pray for the dead. Thus we see this their doctrine, both of prayer for the
dead and Purgatory, to be false and superstitious, and therefore I renounce
and abjure it.

Prayer to Saints as Mediators between God and us, I find to derogate from
the sole mediation of Christ by these testimonies of holy Scripture: Matthew. 11.
Come unto me (says Christ) all ye that are laden and weary, and I will ease
you. Also in another place, Ioh. 14.
I am the way, the truth and the life: no man comes to the father but by me.
1. Tim. 2.
And S. Paul to Timothy, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and
man: even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ransom for all men,
etc. In all which places we find no mention made of this or that Saint, but
of Christ himself. Therefore this doctrine also as false and erroneous I
abjure and renounce.

Concerning the propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass for the living and the
dead, I affirm that it is injurious and derogatorie to the death and passion
of Christ: for our adversaries will have Christ to be daily offered both for
the living and the dead. But S. Paul says that Christ needed not to be daily
offered, or often times to offer for the peoples sins, as the Priests of the
old law did, Heb. 8.
for now says he, In the end of the world he has appeared once to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself etc. And in another place he says, Heb. 10.
That with one oblation he has consecrated for ever those that are sanctified
etc. And S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.
that Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God. etc. Wherefore this one oblation of Christ I confess to
be solely propitiatory, and sufficient for my sins, and for the sins of
ten thousand worlds, (if there were so many) and I abjure all other
propitiatory sacrifices and oblations whatsoever as blasphemous and injurious
to this.

Moreover I find in the old Testament no mo Sacraments prefigured, and in the
new no mo instituted by our savior Christ (who only had power to institute
them) then two: that is to say, the sacrament of Baptism, and the Lords
supper: and the other five I find to be made sacraments by the presumptious
inventions of men, therefore as their vain institutions and fantasies I abjure
and renounce them as sacraments.

Justification is an other great point, which the adversaries make to consist
of two parts, that is to say, of Faith, and of our own works and merits:
but the Scriptures allow not works as causes, and retain only faith as the
isntrumental cause of our justification: for the Apostle says, Romans 3.
There is no difference, all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God,
and are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus etc. And it follows in the same Chapter, Therefore we conclude that a
man is justified by faith without the works of the law etc. And in another
place he says, By grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your
selves: it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any man should boast
himself: whereby it is evident that men's merits avail not to justification,
and therefore this doctrine of the adversaries, together with the rest, I
renounce and abjure.

As for the authority of princes in matters Ecclesiastical, (for in Temporal
I know no doubt) had not Joshua, David, Solomon, and other Kings and Rulers,
power to command and intermeddle in causes Ecclesiastical? Josh. 3.
Did not Joshua command and appoint the Priests and Levites how and in what
manner they should carry the Ark of God? and by warrant from Gods own mouth,
direct and govern them in the bearing thereof over the waters of Jordan? Did
not God often times manifest the disposing of holy things to the Kings rather
then to the Priests? which in no case he would have done, if his will had been
that they should have had no dealings in such kind of causes. As for the
examples of David and Solomon, because the words of text are too long to
recite, I refer the Christian audience to the perusing of these places of
scripture, viz. 1. Chron. 13. 15. and 16. chap. the 7. 8. and 9. Chap. of the
third book of Kings according to some translations: according to other some,
the first book. By these and diverse other testimonies both of the old and new
Testament, I have sufficient warrant to acknowledge not only the right and
authority of my dread sovereign in causes Ecclesiastical within all her
Majesty's Dominions, but also of all Christian kings and Princes in their
proper lands and Realms, and the contrary doctrine (as full of lurking poison)
I renounce and abjure.

And here I will end with the Pope, as the root and body from whence and
whereon all branches of errors and superstitions do grow: but because I have
already plainly declared unto you his grossness, or rather impudency in
doctrine, I shall have less occasion to stand upon himself, for by the fruit
we are to judge what the tree is. It is impossible, Mat. 7.
says Christ, that a man should gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles:
even so it is impossible that a man should draw virtuous and wholesome doctrine
forth of an infected fountain, such an one as the Pope is, who seeks his
own glory, and mainteineth his glory by his own doctrine, neglecting or
rather contemning both the glory and doctrine of Christ. Whose insolent pride
and usurping authority over all Christian kings and Princes, as also his
deuilish madness in opposing himself against God and his Church, by sowing
the seed of false doctrine in the hearts of people, make me to confess him to
be that abomination of desolation sitting in the holy place, which was
prophesied by Daniel, Dan. 9.
and mentioned of our Savior Christ himself in S. Matthewes Gospel. Mat. 24.
Wherefore, as an infectiue poison, and creeping canker, I loath, detest and
abjure him, renounce his authority, and from henceforth utterly reclayme from
the whole heap and mass of all his confused errors and deuilish opinions
whatsoever, as well those hereafter to be invented and published, as those
already by him and his taught and authorized.

Also I deny that he has any power, authority or jurisdiction over our
sovereign and gracious Queen Elizabeth, or over any of her Highness subjects
and liege people, either in causes Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and in defense
of this doctrine in particular, as also of all the points of true religion
taught in this Realm, and by her gracious Majesty aucthorised, I now my self
and whatsoever from henceforth I shall be able to perform. And I am heartily
sorry that ever I offended (in professing the contrary) my merciful God, my
dread Sovereign, and my dear country.

First therefore with penitent heart and prostrate soul before the tribunal
of the Almighty, I desire his divine Majesty for his mercies sake, and for
his only some Jesus Christ his sake, to regard me at this present with his
merciful eyes, and from henceforth to guide and protect me with his mighty
hand, that I may always rest under the shadow of his wings, and at the
dreadful day of his judgment, that he impute not unto me my grievous sins
and transgressions, but that he will bury them in the sacred and precious
wounds of his dear Son, and cover them with the veil of his holy mercies.

Secondly, I beseech my sovereign and gracious Queen to pardon my ignorances,
presumptions, and whatsoever besides I have offended in, either against her or
her Majesty's godly laws and proceedings: with bended knees beseeching her
Highness to accept of my humble and voluntary submission, and to admit me
again into the number of her Majesty's loyal subjects, and from henceforth I
vow unto her Majesty my true service and duetifull obedience.

Furthermore, I crave pardon of all men in general, whom I have any ways
scandalized, and offended: but most especially those whom by erroneous
doctrine I have mislead, praying heartily to God that they al may be so
sincerely converted as my self am.

Lastly, I humbly beseech this honorable and Christian assembly to pardon my
confessed crime, and to accept me as a member of your mystical body, under our
head Jesus Christ. And for that I doubt not but that your devout minds are
readily moved thereunto, I will omit to use any further instigation therein,
but will leave the matter wholly to the motion and working of Gods holy spirit
in all men.

To conclude, for as much as I have been credibly enfourmed by some, and have
further found it extant in writing, that some in this our Realm and in other
places have promised, sworn, subscribed, and for a time used the holy
Sacraments in the Church deceitfully, against their own conscience, minding
hereby first under the external cloak of religion to corrupt and subvert
secretly Gods true religion within the Church, and afterward when time has
served, became open enemies and persecutors of the same, under vain hope of
the Popes dispensation devised against the word of God, to his great confusion
and their double condemnation at the day of judgment: being willing for mine
own part, so far forth as in me lies, to take away all suspicion of such
hypocrisy, dissimulation and double dealing with God and his Church, I protest
before the dreadful Majesty of Almighty God, who is the searcher of all
hearts, that my heart and mind do fully agree with my uttered speeches.
Moreover that I have not, nor ever had any dispensation, Bull, or any manner of
faculty, for any such purpose. Also that I have not been moved to this present
act by any constraint or rigor used, or for any worldly respect or hope of
gain, or other sinister cause whatsoever, but only by the mere persuasion of
conscience, through the knowledge and love of Gods true religion begun in my
heart by the holy Ghost, the profection and perfection whereof, I leave to the
merciful working of his divine power, to whom with the Father and the Son,
be all honor, praise, power and dominion now and for ever, Amen.

God save the Queen.
THE RECANTATION of THOMAS CLARKE, made in an other public assembly and
congregation after the hearing of Divine service, and a Sermon made by M.
MVNSEY, Preacher, and before the holy Communion, which together with others I
there and then received on Easter day, being the 15. of April, 1593.
I There standing before the dreadful throne of almighty God and the face of
the present congregation humbly confessed my self to have been for the space
of these five years last past a traitor to God, an enemy to his holy Church
and Gospel* a professor of the errors, and deuilish opinions of papistrie, and
consequently a rebellious tratour to my Sovereign prince and dear country.

How that about five years past I departed my native country, and went into
foreign lands beyond the seas, without the leave or authority of any
Magistrate: whereby I incurred the danger of the laws provided and instituted
for the same cause.

How that being beyond the seas I suffered my self to be persuaded by the
counsel of lewd and seditious men to take upon me the gawling yoke, and
ouerswaying burden of popish priest hoode: and for that cause I went into the
kingdom of France to the University of Rhemes, where I studied certain
years, and was then made priest, and shortly after was by the President of the
English Seminary College at Rhemes sent into England to the end and intent
to withdraw the peoples hearts from the true service of God and their
dutiful obedience toward their prince, unto the pernicious and damnable
errors of papistrie, and the tyranical subjection and slavery of the Pope:
Whom together with diverse of his antecessors and successors, I acknowledged to
be that co^tinuate whore of Babylon, and that antichrist whom Saint John has
most lively painted forth and described in his Revelations.

In this danable business aforesaid I confessed yt I had labored for the
space of two years, committing daily more and more high treason against God,
and my Souerainge and most gracious Queen: affirming that without all doubt I
had obstinatly died in that wicked and damnable estate (as many of my coat and
profession had done before) if by Gods will I had been apprehended in any
search or by any other means before the grace of God had lightened the
blindness of my understanding, which by his holy providence and tender mercy was
in due time powered, and that abundantly, into the festered wounds of my
gasping soul. For being forcibly touched with the divine finger of Gods holy
spirit, I began to revive, and manifestly to see my desperate estate and
deuilish madness.

Then was I taught by Gods holy spirit and the reading of holy Scriptures,
that I ought to be subject and obedient to my sovereign prince.

That man's justification and righteousness comes not of himself by his own
merits, but that it is the free gift of God through faith in Jesus Christ.

That praying to Images is flat Idolatry.

That praying to Saints, Purgatory, men's traditions and such like, are
damnable errors, and derogatorie to the honor of God.

That in Christ's holy supper we do eat his flesh and drink his blood
spiritually through faith, not grossly and carnally as before I held.

That the daily offering up of Christ in the mass is damnable, and derogatorie
to the death and passion of Christ.

Lastly, I confessed my self to be heartily sorry for having herein so highly
offended God, my Sovereign, and the world, humbly craving pardon for the same.

And there I did from the bottom of my heart and soul abjure and renounce the
Pope and al his tyrannical power and jurisdiction, abhor and detest the
mass, and all the heap of his wicked errors and damnable opinions whatsoever,
as well those which I have not here mentioned, as those which I have here
touched, and by testimonies of holy scriptures briefly confuted. And with all
reverence of soul and sincerity of conscience, I then did, now do, and for
ever (by Gods grace) will embrace the true faith and wholesome doctrine of Jesus
Christ.

This done, I desired the people to say for me the Lords prayer (which they
did) to the end I might easily obtain of God truly to be inserted into his
mystical body, and made a lively member of his holy Church, that I might be a
worthy partaker of his heavenly table, and that I might hereafter faithfully
walk all the days of my life in the true light of his holy Gospel.

Moreover I then certified the assembly, and do now by these presents verify,
y^ I undertook not this present matter either constrained, or for fear of
torture, (the Magistrates well knowing yt man's faith is not to be wrested by
violence) or for the avoiding of any displeasure, or for hope of favor, or for
any sinister cause whatsoever, but simply and sincerly for y^ honor of God (who
has wroght in me this wonderful work) for the edifying of his Church, and
satisfying of the world.

This clause I openly protested to ye people after my speech, being demanded by
the preacher aforesaid in the pulpit thereof, as also of this, viz. that I had
received neither from ye pope, nor from any of his agents nor any man, no
dispensatio^, license, bull, or faculty to dissemble my conversion, neither
that I ever (as yet) heard of any such thing to have bin granted, and if there
were, I acknowledged my simplicity to be such, that I was not accounted a man
sufficient to have so prodigious a matter committed to my trust and charge.

This is the su^me and effect of my speeches to the people. And whatsoever I
then said, I do presently confirm in and under mine own hand writing: And if
this my present act, and that which I have already performed seem not
sufficient to the eyes and judgments of the wise to testify the sincerity and
true meaning of my inward repentant soul, I am further ready dutifully to
perform whatsoever (within my power) shall be demanded at my hands, and am
willing to spend my life for my Sovereigns safety and my countries good,
against whom I have so vnduetifully and unnaturally rebelled.

Imprinted at London by the Deputies of CHRISTOPHER BARKER, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty.


