ANTIDOTON: OR A SOVEREIGN REMEDY AGAINST SCHISM AND HERESY: Gathered to
Analogy and proportion of Faith, from that Parable of Tares. MATTHEW. 13.

Aug. ep. 3. Nullorum disput. etc. We ought to have no men their disputations
(although men Catholic and praise worthy) in that count as we have the
Canonical Scriptures: so that it should be unlawful for us to improve and
refuse some things in their writings, if happily we find that they thought
otherwise then the truth has. Such a one am I in other men's writings, and so
would I have others to understand of my writings.

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1600.

Principal positions proved in the discourse of the Parable.
1 That the kingdom of heaven (Math. 13.24.) it is not used for the state of
the world, but of the new Testaments Church. 2 That the Church is Catholic,
and in some measure ever visible in this life. 3 That the Church of Christ was
planted here in England, in the Apostles times: and continued notably
uncorrupted till about, Anno Domini. 600. 4 That Anti-christianitie (or the
mark of the beast) it is not considered in separable accidental corruption in
faith or manners: but in that is essential and fundamental. 5 That the Tares
in this Parable are wicked within the Church, and visible to the gouerners
thereof. 6 That the Tares are only such wicked as cannot with Churches peace
and safety be pulled up. 7 That such Tares are of holy policy to be
permitted: and yet no defilement to spiritual communion. 8 Brounistes outward
ordination, proved more against Christ's rule, then ever any was before. 9 That
difference of torment and measure of glory, abides the damned and saved.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HIS VERY GOOD LORD, SIR EDMUND ANDERSON KNIGHT, Lord
Chief Justice of her Majesty's court of the common Pleaes.
THree mighty men, bringing of 2. Sam. 2^.16.17.
Bethlehems waters unto David, he powers it forth before the Lord (not
quenching bodies thirst therewith) because it was purchased with lives hazard.
Unto your Lordship I humbly present a moitie of waters drawn from mystical
Beth-lehem (the house of Bread, the Church of Christ Jesus) and they not
purchased with less then the hazard of my body and souls salvation. If your
Lordship shall deem it good they be powered forth before the Lord for erudition
to the soul, it is that I covet, and which some thirsty souls desire with
great appetite. Duty calls me to offer it, and the experience I have of your
Lordship, tendering my good, it emboldens my presentation.

Pythag. in his golden Epiks: the very exordium.
Pythagoras having instituted his Puple in the first place to worship ((...))
the immortal God; he in the second place inioyneth that he reverence ((...))
preexcelling Heroiks. Which Heroical Personages are of ancient Hesiode
couched in his fourth age ( Hesiod in his opera and Die.
after them of Gold, Silver, Brass: but before that of iron obdured) and
determined for such, as had care of executing judgment and Justice by Land and
Sea: maintaining and vpweilding the same by magnanimious and martial valor:
for the which they are termed there, Semi-Dijsts: but in sacred writ, Psalm.
82.1.6.7.
Gods: because his word is John. 10.34.35.
committed to such in his Church.

When I remember the union of your Lordships house with that of the right Woo.
Moon-suns (a family to whom I have owed much from my young years) I then
methinks see Wisdom and War conjoined: without either of which, no common
wealth can endure: and by the continuance of both which, my simplicity has
been sheltred, and my innocence shielded. So that I (if any) have cause to
auow allegiance (not Tam Marti quam Mercurio, but) to the Christian subjects of
Wisdom and Valor. The schedule I present, it is an exposition of that Mat. 13
24. etc.
Parable of Tares, propounded by our Lord and Master Christ Jesus. Wherein is
considered, first, the glorious estate of the New-testaments Church, first
planted throughout the world by the Ministry of the Apostles: then secondly,
the corruption thereof through Ministers sleepie negligence: yea, the
corruption so deeply settled therein, as well it might be in these latter times
Reformed, but never quite purged of visible evil (nor Replanted) until the
Son of man in his great day of harvest, do that by the ministry of his
Angels. A doctrine so necessary, as without the knowledge thereof, a man shall
either rush on the error of the right hand (through desperate vn-bridled Zeal)
or on that on the left hand, through a frozen cold security.

Such being my duty, and such my presentation, I humbly so remain

Your Lordships dutiful Suppliant, HENOCH CLAPHAM.

TO ALL SVCH SPECIALLY, AS whose souls distressed with our ages controversies,
do desire resolution drawn from reason and experience.
IF he be accursed by the law, A notable Motive to the publication hereof.
that sets the blind out of his way, what better is his state that hears the
word of an oath, and (though he can) will not give in testimony of the truth?
Sure, he shall bear his iniquity. These two laws have enforced me, first
publicly to preach; then secondly to publish the sequel in print. And so much
the more, as the former two decrees of mount Sion, they concern nearer then
many.

In my first looking after religion, A ground of the Authors aberration.
my lot was to associate such only, as only tasted and affected another kind
of ministry, which (as they said) yet we had not in England. And that they
termed the ministry of Pastor, Doctor, Elders, Deacons, Widows, due to
every particular Church. Those words I soon learned: as also, that the Pastor
was to exhort, the Doctor to teach or deliver doctrine, the Elders to govern
and exercise the disciplinall cens^res in common with Pastor and Doctor, the
Deacons only to attend poor and loue-feastes, the widows to wait on the
sick.

That platform once swallowed, I then was easily persuaded that our Bishops,
their Ordinations and all ministry standing under them, it was Antichristian,
and an Image of the beast. And look how many corruptions, so many marks of
the beast, which whosoever received in forehead or hand, even all such should
drink of the cup of the wine of God his wrath.

The authors voyages, yet he could be resolved.
All this so hanging together, except I would practice contrary to my
persuasion, (as many deceitfully have done) out of the land I must, as I loved
my liberty. I did so. First into the Low Countries I went, Afterward into
Scotland. After that again into the Low Countries. Then again into Scotland:
And once again into Netherland, etc. Sometimes haled by this faction,
sometimes pulled by that faction. But (the Lord being merciful unto me)
howsoever I was notably distract about external Church-gouernment, yet (as
all my printed books will testify) I kept me ever fast unto the maine point,
that is, The time when, and Bishop by whom he was ordained to Presbyteral
function.
unto the foundation of the Gospel, I had before here received: and had in
Lancashire for some two years publicly ministered, being before (now some nine
years since) ordained fully thereto by Bishop Wicham then Bishop of Lincoln.

About some five years since, it pleased God to give me an earnest desire to
search antiquity, A means for his settling and reducement.
if happily that way I might find any assured footing of scriptures sense,
touching external Church orders. Together with this desire, the Lord afforded
me plenty of books, first in Scotland, after in Netherland. The more I read
those writers that lived in the first 400 years, the more I perceived the
former scales to fall from mine eyes. And as the light of the faithful
increases till it be perfect day; so, together with my last return for
England, the foggie mist was risen and fled, the Sun of righteousness shined
upon me: and that (to the praise of God be it spoken) in such evidence of
scripture, as I hope my self enabled to draw (as on a table) an evident Idea
and shape of that miscarying way, if so men will weigh it in simplicity of
spirit. Yet this must here be done but briefly according to the nature of an
epistle.

Pastors and Doctors, their late description of offices, too to fantastical and
new.
Pastor and Doctor are distinguished by them (from Romans 12.7.8.) by exhortation
and doctrine. The Doctor is to be first exercised in doctrine, the Pastor in
the second place is to exhort from that doctrine. From hence then must needs
follow: first, that the Doctor is above the Pastor; seeing the Pastor but
builds upon the doctrine of his Doctor: Even as the Apostles laying the
foundation, then were in an higher office then the Evangelists or Pastors that
but builded on the Apostles ground. And for this consideration, the Apostle
Paul would not work upon others building. The order then must be thus; Doctor,
Pastor. And in Romans 12.7. Doctrine indeed is put before exhortation. Secondly,
if doctrine and exhortation distinguish them, then it shall be as verily sin
for the Doctor in his exercise to meddle with exhortation, or for the Pastor to
meddle with doctrine, as it was for Vzzah an inferior Leuit to touch the Ark of God (though in a danger to fall) which meddling with the Arc distinguished
Aarons family, from the other two Leuits. Thirdly, then it skilleth not though
the Pastor be a man of no learning (for all the learning to speak of, lies in
a delivery of the scriptures natural sense, with a drawing out of his proper
doct^ines) and to exhort, is so far inferior to doctrine, as the application
of the medicine (to a seen sore) does utter no such knowledge, as the provision
and composition of the medicine. If they say, the Pastor is to exhort, but not
only, he may also teach: the like (say I) with as good reason may be spoken of
the Doctor, not only to teach, but principally. Which toyish order of teaching
and exhorting, as no reformed Church abroad is acquainted with it (for they
acknowledge no sole Doctor, but of the schools) so their distinction of Not
only, but principally, as it may be used likewise in the following offices, so
let us see how much it makes for them.

The Elders they distinguish by Ruling (from 1. Tim. 5.17.) as the Pastor and
Doctor, Their Lay Elders as fond.
by the word and doctrine. Here say they, are both sorts of Elders: Rulers in
the first place, teachers in the second. First, touching the term^s ( word and
doctrine) doctrine being only that which is drawn from the word, here so is
no speech of the Pastor and his exhortation: and so no double honor for the
Pastor. Secondly, if by Ruling in the first place, be meant only a governing
of the Church without doctrine, then the deliverer of the word and doctrine
last mentioned, he must be debarred Rule* rule appertaining to the first;
doctrine, to the second. If it be replied, that the Pastor and Doctor also are
to rule though not principally: so others may as well reply, the Elders are not
only (though principally) to be exercised in Ruledome, for they also may
teach. That the Elders might only rule, not teach; though they make him a
Bishop (in english Ouerseer) yet they will understand him under the word
Deacon: for thus it is in the demonstration of discipline.

An inartificiall division in the Demonstration of Di^^.
Offices simple are Bishops Pastors Doctors
Deacons or Church-seruants Overseers Distributors.



Mark well, how first he makes two sorts of Bishops (Pastors and Doctors)
then two sorts of Deatons; Overseers and distributors. First, a right plain
man may observe, that to make an Ouerseer (or governing Elder) to be a
Church-seruant, it is very ridiculous. Secondly, to make Bishops one in the
first division, and Overseers another in the second division: it is to make a
difference between I and I: that is, a difference where none is. For Bishops
and Overseers are all one: Bishops being the Greek word, and Overseers the
English. The division so of the offices, not only void of divinity and art,
but also of very common sense. Yet a correction due to the sons of God, when
they seek to bring in their own inventions. But to what purpose have they
thrust the word Ouerseer under the word Deacon? Because forsooth in 1. Tim. 3.
they would not understand the office of Elders in the word Bishop: because it
is there required, that every Bishop (or Church ouerseer) he should be Apt to
teach: and they would have Elders of another stamp. Whereas that in 1. Tim.
3.1.2. (together with Act. 20.17. where Elders are by verse. 28. expounded
Overseers or Bishops, on all which the Apostle enioyneth teaching as he before
had) it plainly euinceth, that all Overseers are to be exercised in teaching.
By both which plain places, that more obscure place in 1. Tim. 5.17. ( They
that rule well are worthy double honor, specially they that tire themselves
in the word and doctrine) it must be understood, either of one and the same
sort of Elders in the Church; whereof all deserving well, some (by reason of
more travail) deserve better: or else (whereto I rather condescend) the first
is spoken of Overseers to a particular Church: the latter (for Kopiontes
imports we ari^omenes by traveling to and fro, as in John, Chapter 4. verse. 6.)
it implies such Elders as Paul, John, Peter, and others that traveled from
place to place, having care over many churches.

Touching the Deacons (who are to be employed only in and about the poor and
tables) I take that only were better (as before) turned into principally:
Their Deac^^ mutilation.
and that by reason of more sufficient teachers present, as also such occasion
about the tables and poor, as was in Jerusalem at the time of their first
institution. But that there is no time nor place for the Deacon to preach and
baptize, the scripture affords not that. The contrary appears in Philip,
preaching and baptizing in Samaria, before the Apostles came thither to promoue
him into an Evangelists place: or yet the Angel had called him to any business
with the Eunuch. Besides, seeing the scripture requires such a one to hold the
mystery of faith, to be full of the holy ghost, and of wisdom, it plainly
argues, it is, because he may assist in that business. And seeing (by all
probability) those seven Deacons were of the 70 disciples (for then they were
in that Church; and be sure that the people would choose the best) it cannot be
avoided, but Deacons must be fitted that way: that so ministering well, they may
be preferred in time to a greater degree.

For the Widows in 1. Tim. 5. Widows too childishly c^ncluded from Romans 12.8.
there is no controversy: but that they should be concluded from Romans 12.8. (
he that is merciful) that is, worse then childish. For every child knows that
He is not a She. The Brownists to cover this foppery, they say not Widows, but
Relieuers: that so under this new word they may steal into y^ Church,
Widowers: so well as Widows. Yet, where it is said, they should attend on
sick, as scripture speaks of no such matter; so, if we remember that she
must not be under 60. years aged, as also one that has no help from her
kindred, it should seem to me, that she is rather received to be ministered
unto, then to minister.

Under excellent terms, thus odd inventions of men have been broached. How
the former affected, do carry themselves toward the Author reclaimed.
First, condemning things at home which they soberly understand not: How the
former affected do carry themselves toward the Author reclaimed.
secondly, applauding things abroad, which scripture and antiquity neither
understand. Yet because first abroad, and now at home I resist those novelties
according to knowledge: the Brownists abroad sparse notable untruths against
me (witness those, to whom my treatise of the sin against the holy ghost is
dedicate) and the seditious at home quickly sup up the euomitings of the
Brownist, that so thereby they may defile me and my ministry. The Pharisee an
enemy to the Sadducee; the Sadducee to the Pharisee: but both will join in
one confederacy against the truth. An equal petition for reading the sequel.
Further then I have sound reason, I desire not to be accepted: but if my
reasons be equivalent to the waights of the sanctuary, cast not the precious
pearl away because of the propounders baseness. The Apostle would know no one
of the Lords people (no not Christ) according to the flesh: what art thou then
to hold the faith in respect of persons?

Nine sermons I publicly and largely delivered in Southwarke by London, upon
the Parable of tares. That I have drawn into the compass of one sermon for thy
good. Common doctrines of ordinary course I here have omitted, holding me (for
the most part) unto certain grounds of controversy, by the which disquieted
souls may be settled. I choose this Parable before other scriptures, because it
is a ground of grounds for direction unto Churches state and condition: the
very scripture which many pervert to their own ruin: and yet ( ni male
memini) the first scripture whereby I recovered my standing. Pray in humility
yet thou read. Read without preiudicate affection. Ponder what thou read:
But give no definitive sentence, before thou have read the whole. What here may
be delivered too succinctly, that (if God will) may once be delivered more
largely. Mean time, be thankful unto God for this, and help me with thy
prayers.

The Lords most unworthy, Henoch Clapham.

Math. 13.24. Another Parable put he forth unto them, etc.
SEeing speech is here of a Parable, it would be considered, first, whether the
word carry with it mo senses then one in Canonical writ: and then, in what
sense it is peculiarly uttered.

For variety of sense, I rest well resolved in that ancient collection of the
Greek father Chrysostom: who upon the 48. Psalm according to the Septuagints
or Greeks account (for they join the 9. and 10. Psalms in one; with us and the
Hebrew distinctly two: and then for keeping the number of 150. psalms, they
cut the 147. psalm into two: beginning their 148. with the 12. verse, Laud the
Lord O Jerusalem, etc. which account the old Latin also observes) on the same
48. psalm, he collecteth two senses from the old Testament, according to the
Septuagints version: and other two senses in the new Testaments Greek: that
is, four senses in the whole.

In the old Testament, he first observes it for a Rebuke or opprobrie: as
where in psalm 44. we read, Thou have set us for a Parable, that is, for a
byword or mark of rebuke. And in Judges 14.14. it is taken for a Riddle:
where of Samson Be-dan (sprung of Dan) it is written, Out of the eater came
sweet, etc. which in verse. 12. is termed well a Riddle, but in the Greek, a
Parable. In the new Testament lies other two senses, which Hysteron proteron
(for method sake) I rehearse thus. In Hebr. 11.19. (speech having passed of
Abraham his offering Isaac) it is said, That from the dead he received him (En
parabole) in a Parable or type; or (as we have it well) after a sort. The
fourth sense is that which here in Matthew is used, and that is for a
Similitude: as if he should have said, Another similitude Jesus he put forth
unto them. Wherein if we observe, first the party which propounds the parable;
then secondly, the parties to whom it is propounded, it shall carry with it
his propriety of edification.

The propounder is Jesus, in plain English, Math. 8.21.
He that was appointed to save his people from their sin: appointed by God the
father to save the whole Israel of God. The heroicke condition of his person
(essentially God, essentially man, by true distinction of natures, constituting
but one person, Mediator Christ) it may cause us with more reverent attention
to listen his similitude. For sentences delivered by persons of state, they
ordinarily stand for Maxims of mighty consequent. And if we consider his
inestimable love toward his people, that may move us more: for who will not be
urged by a sweet and trusty friend? But if it be remembered, that he is not
only our mighty friend, but also He, whom the Prophets call Isa. 9.6.
Counsailor, and the Pro. 8. and 9. Psa. 104.24.
Wisdom of God in whom the whole work of Creation restes, surely, this may
be a furtherance, (not only to attention, but also) to persuasion for a ready
receipt of those words of wisdom.

Touching the parties to whom this Savior of ours speaks, it is the
multitude, his disciples not exempted. The Parable vnexpounded, is principally
because of the people; concerning whom the scripture had foretold Verse. 14. etc.
That in hearing they should not understand, and seeing they should not
perceive, because of the fatnes of their hearts, etc. So that our Savior uses
not Parables so, but when he has warrant of scripture: nor fat hearted and
insensible souls are not so spoken unto, but when scripture will be so
verified upon them. Our Saviors enigmaticall speeches may teach us to observe
the times (and so Origin and others do read, Romans 12.11. Serving (Kairo) Time,
not (Kurio) the Lord) considering, Prou. 25.11.
A word spoken in his place, is like Apples of Gold and pictures of Silver.
Unto some, holy mysteries are to be sealed: but unto lean hearted disciples,
and such as will not play the hogs and dogs with pearls, the written mysteries
of God are to be revealed. His truths are not like Isis and Osyris mysteries
in Egypt, who are to be locked up in the bosoms of their sacred priests.
Indeed, the priests of spiritual Egypt do lock up all from the people in an
unknown tongue, saying: that Hosius de expresso verbo Dei.
The people are swine and dogs, and holy things are not to be given unto them.
But no people are we to term so, who minister an outward hope (though mixed
with infirmity) of being truly desirous to hear and understand, not for
cauillation but for edification.

And seeing a Parable or similitude expounded, it is the plainest doctrine or
form of teaching of all others (seeing it has allusion to common natural
things, where with man is well acquainted) as also, considering with the
plainnes there is an eloquence natural joined for beautification thereof unto
the eye of nature; it should teach all ministers herein sometimes to be
exercised, as was Solomon that great preacher of Israel: for of him (carrying a
representation of our Jesus) it is thus written: Eccle. 12.9.10.
The wiser the preacher, the more he taught the people knowledge, and caused
them to hear, and searched forth and prepared many Parables. The preacher
sought to find out pleasant words and an upright writing, even the words of
truth. Yet, seeing Parables of themselves do not naturally conclude or prove,
but only explain and illustrate doctrine already proved (even as in all
schools the axiom runs: Similia illustrant non probant: Similies do
beautify, but prove not) therefore Parables must be no further pressed then
may be found consonant to the analogy or proportion of faith. And for this
cause, they may be termed as one well termed Aliegories, namely, Zuingl. on his
52 art.
Sawces which none eat alone, but for seasoning of meat. So much briefly for
the term Parable, now to the matter so termed. It follows in the text.

Verse. 24. The kingdom of heaven is like, etc.] Every comparison consists
(as Greeks speak) of his Protasis and Apodosis: that is, of his proposition
and reddition. The proposition is the thing propounded, the reddition is the
application thereof. Here we have to resolve the Parable thus: Look how it
befalls a field first sown with wheat, where into afterward steps the
enemy and scatters his tares, etc. Even so it befalls with the kingdom of
heaven. In the 12. Mat. 12.43.44.45.
Chapter of this present Euangell, our Savior propounds a person out of whom
the unclean spirit goes, but afterward returns to a stronger possession of
that soul: he then applies it to that generation saying: Even so shall it be
with this wicked generation. But his method here contrariwise, even so it
shall befall the kingdom of heaven, As unto a field sown, etc. Placing that
in the first place, which by the former president should naturally come in the
second place. And this to teach us, to use and not to use a natural method:
that is, to our Christian liberty herein; not to make our selves slaves to one
form, when Christ has made us free. And yet this no cloak for ignorant
bablers, who often speak despitefully of method; not because they know what it
is (for it may be they are void of all Art and learning) but because literature
has no such enemy as ignorance. But let us come unto the thing compared.

The kingdom of heaven is like, etc.] To the sense of these words, first
severally, then jointly. The word Kingdom (as is also the Hebrew and Greek)
it is derived of the word King, as being the thing where abouts a King is
exercised. And which more is, I take it to be compounded of King and Doom,
(and so by contraction Kingdom) because hereabouts a King does exercise his
doom or judgment. Unto which kingdoms Constitution is required, first a
King; secondly a People; thirdly Doom, judgments or laws; fourthly, an
Execution thereof according to equity. Which I pass by, as ordinary common
places.

Touching the word Heaven (or rather as it is in the original So the Hebrew
(Shammajim) plural.
( Ouranon) Heavens in the plural number) it is sometimes taken for the air
(as when we say, Frigidum Coelum, a cold heaven, that is, a cold air: or as
the birds are said of Genesis 1.20.
Moses to fly in the open stretching forth of the heavens) sometimes it is
taken only for stretched out spheres, globes or several circles wherein the
stars be. Of which, some be termed in the Greek, Jude. 13.
Planets, in english, Wanderers, because of their swift and speedy motion: and
those be seven in number, whereof the Moon (the lowest) and the Sun (the
middlemost) are principal to us ward for operation. But the one and the other
restrained from Psalm. 121.6.
Smiting those that put their confidence in Isreal's God: not (as Ier. 10.2.
the heathen do) fearing the heavens face as a God. The other heavens are
either the firmament wherein all the common stars be (commonly termed fixed)
whereto Jehovah wills Genesis 15.^.
Abraham to cast his eye, telling him, so infinite should his seed be. In
which firmament are the stars, whereof the Lord speaks to Job, namely,
Plejades, Orion, Matzaroch, Arcturus. Or else they be heavens invisible, beyond
the reach of our sight, whereof to dispute it is not fitting this place. Yet so
far as God reuealeth his works unto us, so far we may search, and with
humility enquire for our comforts: yea, that so thereby we may so much the
more be pricked to praise him in his works: so much for the words severally,
now jointly.

The Kingdom of heaven, it being a phrase not fully found in those syllables,
in any one place of the old Testament, we are to seek the original use
thereof in the new. The first Preacher of this phrase, it is John Baptist in
this present gospel, and Chap. 3.2. where he cries, Repent, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand. In which speech he has relation unto that kingdom
whereof Daniel speaks, Chap. 7.14. given by the ancient of days unto One
like the son of Man: which in verse. 22. and 27. he communicates with the
Saints of the most high, a kingdom after the receipt and possession thereof,
appointed to endure for ever. Whereunto if we add that to the Hebrews,
touching the remouall of the old heavens and earth (that is, Heb. 12.27.28.
of the Jewish Church and policy) that so a new kingdom might be received of
the faithful that should never be shaken, it shall so appear evidently, that
the kingdom of heaven here spoken of, it is no other thing then the state of
the new Testaments Church, whereto John Baptist prepared the way, and
baptized. Yea, that this conclusion is Catholic and subscribed unto of all,
every one that is read, can well enough testify.

The state of new Testaments Church it being so called, we thereby may collect
the gross darkened judgment of the world, who takes it rather for a kingdom
of hell, then of heaven: and the rather because the appendices of this kingdom
or Commonwealth are like to Jesus incarnate: that is, Isa. 53.2.3.
Out of a dry ground, void of for me and beauty* according to natural
insight; and therefore a Kingdom like to the King, not of this world: but
rather allotted to hang on the Cross by the hands of the world. And for this
cause, the Psalmist says that, Psalm. 45.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within. And so our king h^mselfe says
^uke. 17.^0.21.
that this kingdom is within, and not to be seen of the world, or heretics by
Lo here, Lo there, as it were by outward appearances: on which external show
the Pre^^sian Pharisee then rested.

Secondly, seeing the old Testaments kingdom once shaken, it gave place to
this new kingdom and that for ever and ever: we first ought to observe the
former kingdoms baseness in comparison of this. Even as we know the
firmamentall stars to be inferior for light unto the Sun, by reason their
shine is darkness, when once her beams irradiates our Hemi-^phere. 2. Co. 3.11.
For if that which should be abolished was glorious, much more that which
rema^neth is glorious. Nor can this be remembered without compassionating our
elder brother the Jew: w^o (poor soul) not perceiving the abolishment of the
first (by reason of the laws letter, hanging as a veil before his eyes) he
therefore abhors communion with the second.

Luke. 15.25. etc.
Standing with the elder brother without, grumbling and grudging at his younger
brother, feeding of the slaughtered Bullock within Shems tent. Nor marvel I
much at them, for many come within in part, they do in some part stand without,
saying: They dare not touch, they dare not taste, they dare not handle, they
dare not pray in a Synagogue, Col. 2.22.23.
Which al perish with the using, according to (the destiny of) commandments
and doctrines of men. Which things indeed have a show of wisdom in a voluntary
religion and humblenes of mind, and in not sparing the body; but they are (in
troth) of no value, save for satisfying the flesh. For if we be risen with
Christ, nothing to the pure can be unclean (if not of meat, Mark. ^.15.
going with in us, though under the law it was otherwise, much less of stones
and timber without us) for all the creatures of God are sanctified unto them by
the word and prayer: and it is lawful 1. Tim. 2.
In all places to hold up hands, provided it be without wrath and doubting.

Besides, this kingdom being of an euer-enduring nature and no more to be
removed, it not only ^utteth off these heretics that from Revel. 14.6. d^^
^eare themselves in hand, that this word of the kingdom s^all be utterly
abolished, and another new Gospel preached. For as Gal. 1.^. c.
Paul commands us to hold that Angel accursed that brings another Gospel, so
that is nothing else but a renual of our Gospels preaching more universally:
by the which a way is prepared to Babylons downfall. Which might well begin
with our Wicliffe, and be continued through the midst of the Church by Luther
and others. As, I say, the perpetuity of this kingdom it cutteth off such new
gospellers, so besides that, it c^n^inceth many of ignorance: who contrary to
scripture, all antiquity and experience do affirm, that there has been no
visibilitie of the Church for former hundreds of years. Besides that, such a
position is opposite to all those scriptures, Psalm. 72.5.17. Isa. 59.21. Math.
16.11. 1. Tim. 3.18. Revel. 11.2.3. (for as the Centurists well reason, if it
continue under Antichrists tyranny and exaltation, much more after) but also,
it is an embasing of this kingdom before the kingdom of Moses. For, was not
the ancient Church (the figure and type hereof) was it not always visible? No,
say our ignorant Reformists and Schismatikes. The Church was invisible in the
time of Elias. But the Lord says no: Romans 11.3*4.5.
First, by rebuking the Prophet, pronouncing unto him that there were 7000. in
Israel that did no outward homage unto Baal. Nor let a man judge otherwise it
could be, seeing not only there were plenty of Prophets when Obadiah hid them
by 50. and 50. in a cave; but also, 2. King. 2.^.5.7. etc.
there were schools of Prophets what time Elias was ready to be rapt up.
Secondly, the holy Ghost records Elijah to have spoken against Israel, not
against Judah. For as he knew that good Iosaphat at that time reigned in Judah,
so he well knew, that there was not only the church visible, but also mightily
reformed. Nor can I but wonder that man can read the third Chapter of Luke 3
23. etc.
Luke, where the principal stars of the Church from the first Adam to the
second are genealogically numbered, and yet after the reading thereof, not to
see that even in them the Church was ay visible.

But those peruerters unable to answer those scriptures, they will now press
me with men (although at no hand we may press them with men) and that thus: To
teach the Church ay visible, is to teach Popery, and all our learned men have
alleged this of Elijah against that doctrine, etc. I answer, it is false: not
only all ancients ever hold the Churches Euer-visibilitie, but also, all
learned men of our age, (amongst the rest read Calvin his Institutions, book
4. Chap. 2. Section. 12. and Chap. 7. Sect. 25. Peter Martyr in his common
places, Classis. 4. Sect. 41. place 6. the four Centurists in Centurie 1.
book 2. Chap. 4. Also our Nowell on the Article, Communion of Saints, etc.) to
which purpose our me^ against the Romanists have commonly urged that of
Tertullian ( Tertul. exhort. ad castitat.
Vbitres, Ecclesia est, etiamsi Laici) A Church is where but three be, although
they be Lay People. They have not alleged Elijahs complaint against Israel for
proving al nullity of Churches visibility (for that is not the question
between us and Papists) but it is alleged against visible Constitution of
Church in Israel. The Romanists urging their Church for universal, and ay
constituted according to the first pattern of external policy, we affirm
that the new Testaments Church sometimes loses such visibilitie of
universality and external constitution: even as the ancient Church her figure
did. If we consider typical Israel, first we see her great and glorious going
out with army of banners. Anon ten parts fall away, though midst these ten God
ay stirred up Prophets and provoked some to an essential obedience at home,
destitute of Iudahs sacrifices, and Church policy. Anon the two tribes go
into Babel, and Jerusalem is trampled under foot for many sabaoths. Yet the
Church visible (true Jews and true Prophets) though Priest and Teraphim
ceased. Anon they return back by Cyrus, but still trampled under foot by
Persians, Grecians, Seleucians. And all out of order when Messiah came: yea,
highpriests made by Herod, that were not of Aarons line, as Josephus Alleged
also by Eusebius in his ecclesiast hist. b. 1. chap. 7.
records: and we may well credit a Ie^e when he testifies their own shame.
So say we unto the Romanistes, it has fared with Christ his Church Catholic
trod under foot for 1260. years, (as Jacob Brocard, Fr. du^lan, Iunius, Napeir
have well observed) during which time our Church was in the midst of Babel: and
the man of sin exalted in the midst of it. Which point observed, it not only
stops the Romanists mouth demanding of us, what are become of Grandfathers
and Grandmothers? but also it dammeth up a foul stream that carries many
headlong into Schism, expecting every sect a new form of Churches
beginning. Whereas alas, it may be reformed and purged, but no more is to be
planted as at first it was by the Apostles* For as the beginning of plantation
was ever practiced by miraculous ministers (witness Moses and Aaron to Israel,
and the Apostles to the new Testaments kingdom) so besides that, it was to
incommend unto such Churches new laws for the substance thereof, which before
they had not. As for us Christians, we received such a kingdom, as for the
substance thereof, it has evermore prevailed against infernal powers.

And gladly I would know of our Schismatikes, if so the Being under Romes
government, it simply or essentially caused all such to be limbs of
Antichrist; and that to be the beasts mark for the which all such should
drink of the wine of God his wrath, I would then demand of them: First, where
the Church then for 1000. years has been visible; and so consequently, what
assurance they have that their present faith for the substance thereof has
prevailed? They can make no answer but against all scripture. Secondly, I would
know of them why the corrupt government of Rome should make all under it
Antichristian; and then the Revel. ^.
Nicolaitans, Balaamits, Iesabels disciples, and all Anabaptists they should
not be to us as well true visible Christians? Seeing these were and are (in the
Brownistes judgment) under the true external Church-gouernment of Christ? Is
Romes government stronger for evil, then Christ's for good? Either here they
must answer blasphemously, or else they must grant truly, That the essence or
Being of true Christianity and Antichristianitie, it res^eth not in outward
Church-gouernment, but in an obedience and subjection to a foundation of faith
truly Christian or Antichristian. And for this cause, as Antichrist is 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. termed ( Gra^^ed by Master Greenwood pr^^ace to (...).
Anti-k^im^nos) a a layer of an opposite foundation, so it is his false
fundamental doctrine which is his mark: even as it is not outward
Church-gouernment which marketh therefore out a true Christian (for heretics
often have that skin of the sheep) but a firm biding by the foundation, as the
Apostle notes to the 1. Cor 3. see ^aluin there^n.
Corinths. And this ground is it whereon Master Calvin stands, when he
believes the salvation of diverse Ancients living in too to corrupted ages.

But here the Romanists will say, Then you Protestants are gone out of the
Church, inasmuch as you are departed from us. I answer, we departed but from a
notable foundation of faith opposite to the very grounds of the gospel. Which
opposite ground as it was long in laying, so it was fully settled by the^ in
that infamous Held in Anno Dom. 1545
Council of Trident. Besides, we doubt not but we have left some true
Christians in that Church (witness such as amongst themselves, they daily
persecute) even as the many thousands of Jews left Daniel and some others
behind in Babell, what time they returned unto Jerusalem. But as those of the
return could not be called schismatikes from Daniel (first because the time of
captivity was expired: secondly, because Daniel should have done better to
have followed them, then they to have returned unto him) even such is our case.
First, it was As the ancient Prophets had a certain term of ye^rs ^o the
ancient Church her (...) so John has in (...) 11. those days (as their days)
so many (...). So well understood of ^a. Broc^r^. ^. Iunius, (...) Ian, Napeir.
decreed (and experience will manifest that) how we should be for 1260. years
captiued: then that the beast should begin to kill faster then before (the
reason was, because now the Prophets were more zealous then before) whereupon a
tenth part of the Beasts City or congregation should fall away from him: their
kings and rulers now having in their heart to be avenged by fire on that purple
whore, which before had made them drunken as swine. Our King Henry began that
worthy work: his princely son Edward continued it happily: but our soueraign
Queen Elizabeth, has not only brought her own people under the banner of
Jesus; but has lent her princely hand unto Church's all abroad;
countenauncing and assisting them with mon^e, men and sacred counsel. So that
it was well said of M. Penry in Scotland, that the Gospel was more beholden
unto Queen Elizabeth, then unto all the Princes in Europe. Against which
Elizabeth who so shall arise, let their forehead with Miriam be smitten with
leprosy; and not for seven days but seven years (yea for ever) let them be
abandoned the Commonweal of England. This briefly for the Churches
perpetuity, and for essential Christianity touching faith and manners, even
through the midst of Antichrists pride and tyranny. Other things will be
necessarily met withal in the comparison following. So much for the thing
compared.

Like to a man which sowed good seed in his field, etc. Not to urge here the
care good householders should have to see their fields, vineyards, gardens
sown and planted with that which is good; that so they may not only return
pieces of silver to themselves, as the Canti^. 8.11.
vineyard of Baal-H^man did unto Solomon: but also propound hereby good unto
the country, as resemblances of God his care to create all good and very
good: passing by that, let me directly come unto the precise sense of the
Parable. For the understanding whereof, let us hear what exposition our
Savior himself gives hereon. In verse 37. he says, He that sows the good
seed is the son of man. And in the next verse, And the field is the world,
and the good seed they are the children of the kingdom. A certain poor soul
once ignorant how any open wicked might upon any occasion be suffered once to
grow in the Church, he makes such an exposition here, as whereby he may shut
Tares quite out of the Church, for thus he writes, M. Bar. in his Disc. page 19.
Did not God at first make the world, and all things in the same good? was it
not corrupted, etc. to this question I answer, it is true, he did so: but this
is not consonant to this place: for the Son of man is not God the Creator,
but God the Redeemer, never called Son of man until he was incarnate. So
that here is no speech of worlds Creation, but of Christ Jesus incarnate: who
by his own ministry and the ministry of his Apostles did plant the
children of the kingdom or new Testaments Church in the face of the whole
world: and this by preaching the word of the kingdom, termed also the
immortal seed of God. For here is no comparison framed to the world, but to
the kingdom of heaven, the state of the new Testaments Church.

Where he adds (and all our Schismatikes from him) that here is no speech of
the Church, because our Savior says, And the field is the world, I would
first demand what they mean by the world? By the world, they can not
understand the wicked, seeing before they say, God made the world, etc. But God
made not man wicked (except to Brounisme they add Manichisme) therefore by the
world, they must mean the circuit of the earth, wherein Christ planted his
Kingdom Psalm. 2.8. and a 16, ^7, and 72, 8, ^6, and ^9 25 which was never
ve^ified in ^aui^, ^^lomon or any but christ.
from one corner and sea unto another. Touching the tares, that in his own
place.

The Father having from mount Sion proclaimed his Son Regent from the Suns
rising to his going down, the Son labors the plantation of this his
possession, by sowing the same Gospel, which of yore was preached to David, to
Abraham, and first of all to Genesis ^.15. whereto Paul relates Gal. 4 4. and John
Revel. 12.
Adam in Paradise. For the which, as Matthew produces the Gospel from David
and Abraham (because it was written in Hebrew, and specially for the Jews, who
altogether bragged of Abraham and David) so, Luke (respecting Jew and Gentile
and all) he joins the Church of peculiar faithful on the one hand with God,
and on the other hand with Jesus: because without respect of person, the Jesus
was in Paradise first preached by God to Adam. This Gospel (not yea and nay
but Amen, Christ yesterday, to day and the same for ever) by it the Son of
man begets sons for his Kingdom, a Kingdom unable to be shaken and
removed: except that Christ her foundation can be removed.

To omit common places here (touching the Seed of God, state of
Unregeneration, Regeneration, etc.) observe we here the fullness of time for
Iaphets people (the nations or Gentiles) their coming unto Shems tent (whereof
Noah arising as a Giant from wine, by the abundance of spirit did
fore-prophecie) but this receipt of the Gentiles a graffing in of the wild
Olive, is done (oh the wisdom of God) with a cutting off of the natural
Olive ( Shems people) who after the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, are
again universally to be received into the open state of salvation. That the
Jew should first be exalted by reason of faith in Messiah, and the Gentile
glorified that way in the second place, Iren. aduers. haeres. l. 4. chapter 42.
Irenaeus understood it typically by Thamars twynnes. The ancient Tert. l. 1.
cont. Iud.
Tertullian understood the case to be figured under Rebeccaes twins. The same
does Aug. ciuit. dei. l. 16.
Augustine. As for Theod. qu. 89
Theodoret, he conceiues also Lea and Rahel to be types of Jews and Gentiles,
the latter to be more acceptable to our Iaakob Israel, preuailer with God: and
in qu. 95.
another place, under Zara and Phares, Thamars twins. And usually under
^ierom ad Pauli^^^ d^ ins^^. monachi.
Gedeons fleece and floor (the one de^ed from heaven, when the other stood
dry) the ancients understood the same mystery: and thereunto does Chrysostom
apply the 6. verse of Psalm. 72. And touching the recalling of the Jews (after
fulness of Gentiles come in) as they Origin understands it under Baruc^ triumph,
in Judge. 5.2.
were not ignorant, so Gregorius Papa (after whose time presently, even fully
in the Lords year 666. Machomed in the East and universal Pope in the West,
that two horned power was exalted) he is plentiful in this Greg. moral. l 9
and supcant. 7.3. etc.
testimony.

The Church being at first shut up amongst the Jews (elder brethren by grace
from Shem, but Gentiles ( Origin on Joshua, (...)*
Iaphets people by nature) now the Church was to enlarge her tents and to
stretch her coardes universally through the earth: for which cause it is called
Catholic and Universal; so it cutteth the throat of heretical Donatists,
that would shut it up in a corner of Affricke, or in some chamber in London, or
in some city of the Low Countries. Nay, let the Pope of Donatisme say, that he
has some of his sheep in the Low Countries, some in diverse holes in England,
some in Ireland (no Pastor or Bi^^op in England has so large Jurisdiction) yet
for all this, so long as we remember that article of faith, I believe there is
an holy catholic Church (an article grounded on Scriptures enough) we dare not
say but his Church is a faction gone out of the catholic Arc (though our
Savior Mat. 24.^3.24.^6. ^uke 17.23.
forbids going out unto such desert and corner Gospels and Christ's) and by
reason of such schism (although with such arguments as were able almost to
^educe the elect, covering their thorn and thutle schism with shee^ish skin
or conversation) by reason (I say) of such schism, and universal condemning
all they depart from for only visible limbs of Satan and Antichrist, we must
believe they in such estate are exposed to the ouerflowing wrath of God.

This Gospel of the kingdom, as the Apostles had commission granted and given
for sowing throughout the earth, so the sound thereof went quickly through the
earth. And no marvel, for now Dan. 2.
Daniels stone was to roll all abroad: first, for battering down opposite
power, secondly, for setting up a kingdom which should never be destroyed, the
little stone so becoming a great mountain. And though we Britains (termed
of their word Ca^bden in Brit.
Brith, painted: because our people painted and dyed their bodies monster-like,
as indeed we were a most savage Nation) though we were couched here in an
uttermost coast, yet it is registered to God his praise and our comfort, that
Chemnitius out of Sabellicus.
this Province was first of Provinces in receiving the Gospel openly, as
Sabellicus testifies. Polyd l. 2. hist. Angl.
Polydore Virgil makes Coyl the king here a receiver of the faith in our Lo.
y. 182. But the holy faith planted in our land before by Joseph of Arimathaea,
who with some others came hither, obtained a mile of ground near Wels,
afterward called Glascon. And this by ancient Gildas testimony should be in
the year of Christ, 60. Gildas sapiens de excidio Britanniae.
Who also says that they suffered a notable persecution here by Diocletian
Romes Emperor. The excellent Theodoret writes, Theod. l. 9. de cur. Graec.
affect.
that the Apostle Paul (presently after deliverance out of his first captivity
at Rome) he came then hither. This Apostle in his second Epistle to Timothy
and last Chapter, he remembers one Claudia an excellent christian woman then
at Rome, whom Martial the Poet affirms to be of Britain, thus:

Claudia Hence it also seems that Britains dyed their bodies with woad.
caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet etc.

In a word, the ancient Registers have so uniformly consented in this point
(namely, that Britannia in the Apostles times it received the holy faith: as
also that the Ministers were married, nor after 600. y. (what time Austin the
Monk came hither from Rome) could or would give any hope of yielding therein
to Romes persuasion, whose Cities Ministry then was much gone out of the way)
this point I say, is so uniformly witnessed, as our Schismatikes may so well
ask me what assurance I have that here was a king Henry, as demand what
assurance I have of the other. And this comfortable point I have the rather
urged, because some too ignorantly seek the beginning of a Church here within
these hundred years* and the Schismatikes impudently affirm, that they
themselves are the first visible Church sprung up in England. The founder
whereof was Brown. Which man, if so he had been stirred up by God to such a
miraculous work, not only he should have been vpheld in that work (as Moses
and Aaron to the old Church, and the Apostles to the new Church: for God never
forsook his principal Church-planters) but also, he should have begun that
work with a better miracle, then by alluring servants from their masters,
children from their parents, wives from their husbands, Psa. 15.^ 1. Pet. 3.^.
1. Tim. 6.1.^. 1. Pet. ^.18.
with whom they had smitten covenant, although to their bodies hurt and
affliction.

Thus the seed of the kingdom universally prevailed, maugre the malignitie of
the Gentiles. Eusebius. eccl. hist b. 2. c. ^
Eusebius records that Tiberius Caesar hearing of the excellent things of
Jesus, he motioned unto Romes Senate, that Jesus might be enrolled in the
number of their gods. The Senate replied, that now they could not consent to
that, because the people already had begun such a blaze, They having not first
approved the same. Which no doubt (says Eusebius) was done for this end, that
the wholesome doctrine of divine preaching it should not need the allowance and
commendation of men. And surely (were it not that with God every thing is
possible, as also that the event makes the thing manifest) how hard a thing
should it be to think, that the field of the world ouergrowen with Idols and
devils, it should by so weak an instrument as preaching (and that of a Jesus
crucified, and that by so mean persons as he sent out) it should (I say) be
subdued universally in so small time, unto the obedience of the Gospel? But
this was, that so the word of ancient prophecy it might be fulfilled. So much
for the Churches universality. It follows.

Verse. 25. But while men slept, there came his enemy and sowed Tares The
Gre^^^ is: (...)
in the midst of the wheat, and went his way. The enemy that sows those
Tares (says our Savior, verse. 39.) is the devil: and in the verse before,
the Tares are the children of the kingdom or Church. As the son of man did not
sow his children but by begetting them through the doctrine of truth; so the
devil does not create or sow these his children, but by causing them to be
such through the doctrine of untruth. And this his fact of unhappiness is said
to be done of him while men slept, that is, while the Church (and specially the
Ministers thereof) they were secure and watched not. The Apostle Act. 20.28.29.
etc.
Paul knowing by faith in this doctrine, that after his departure Wolves would
enter into his Church (yea, that of their own selves some should arise,
speaking perverse things for drawing disciples after them) he tells them the way
of preventing this evil, namely, that they should watch over themselves, and
over the flock (for God never exacteth our seeking his glory (nor can we) by
the neglect of our own souls: though some would closely teach the contrary,
namely, that they might do evil to themselves that so good might come
thereof, whose damnation is due) for drowsy sleepines (which after came to
pass) it would cause confusion enter and arise to the disturbance of all good.

That it is said, the devil sows this tarish doctrine (though he does it
only by his ministers) we must marvel thereat nothing at all. When the wicked
were to cast some of the Smyrnians in prison, the holy Ghost says, Revel. 2.10.
The devil shall cast some of you in prison. A King is said to do that he
does by his Ambassador; nor must the factors of Satan think much to be
called Satan, Math. 16.
when as to Peter for an excellent dehortation our Savior says unto him, Come
behind me Satan: as for Iscariot, he was plainly termed Devil. But this and
some other common places I pass by, and come (for that I specially profess
herein) unto the points in controversy.

It is ever accorded upon, that the Tares are wicked-ones, but what kind of
wicked-ones, as also whether within the Church or without, therein is much
dissonancie. Libertines say, that they are the whole body of wicked people in
the Church: and so from our Saviors speech ( Let them grow) they would have
all excommunication overthrown, and all wicked that will, be admitted unto the
holy supper. Others, that they be heretics, who are to be permitted of the
Magistrate, if so happily they may become wheat by repentance. Others, (whereof
hereafter) they understand them to be such wicked only as are permitted of
godly policy: that is, not for love to them, but to the wheat or children of
the kingdom. Touching their place, the Browniste affirms them to be without
the Church; because our Savior says, Let them alone: applying the Apostles
speech thereto, 1. Cor. 5.1^.
What have I to do, to judge them that are without? Others amongst our selves
hold them to be hypocrites, or such wicked in the Church as are not of us
seen. Amongst which, T. C. his reply to Doct. W page 241. of part. 2.
One great scholar writes thus: I grant it no shame to the Churches to have
hypocrites, for as much as the judgment of man cannot discern them: and of
them and no other is the Parable of Tares, which forbids weeding until the
day of harvest. And in 1. Part. p^g. 34.
another place, he takes up a great Doctor for saying they are visible wicked
in the Church, accounting it in him A bewrayall of great ignerance: but the
good man too zealously uttered his own ignorance herein, as will appear.

When it is said, that the Tares are in the midst of the wheat (and the wheat
is in the Church) it presently conuinceth those that say, they are without. And
when as it follows.

Verse. 26. And when the blade was sprung up and brought forth fruit, the Tares
APPEARED also. It hereby plainly enough appears, that so verily as the wheat
appeared, so verily the Tares appeared. The children of the kingdom appearing
such by their fruit, the children of Satan that way appearing also. Nor
appears this less in this, that the Ministers after are grieved at the Sight
of them: and for that do interrogate, if so they may pull them up? If they had
been without, it would not so have troubled the minds of those that were
within: and if they had been hypocrites or invisible wicked, it could not have
troubled them at all. Those errors are by the Parable it self plainly
ouerturned. But more plainly (if God permit) it shall appear by conference of
other scriptures. when as I come to examine our Saviors words, Let both grow
together, etc. Mean time observe, that two sundry seeds are sown, and
thereof arises two sundry sort of people within the Church. The first not
only within the Church, but of it also: and therefore termed children of the
kingdom. The other within the Church, but not of it, and therefore termed
children of the wicked. Contrary seeds, so have contrary effects. The house
of Cloe in Corinth, by the fruit showed themselves to be true members; others
by unbelieving the resurrection did show themselves to be troublous members: or
rather a corrupt humor in the body that deserved to be purged. And surely, as
we would be deemed followers of the son of man in a care of planting good, so
we must endeavor our selves to sow only good seed. If we come into pulpit with
unresolved opinions, we must leave behind us an unresolved people, staggring,
reeling and carried away with every wind of doctrine. But if we sow tarish
doctrine in the pulpit, let us know that the devil will water it blade and
fruit. If we will watch over the flock, we must first watch over our selves:
yea, take heed to our tongue, least it be set on fire from hell, and so convert
the Churches peace into a flame.

Who would have thought that Sadduces (deniers of the resurrection) should have
appeared in the Church of Judah? But the Levites (some of them) leaving the
altar, and betaking them For this do read the state of Maccabees in Ben-Gorion.
to Iudahs crown and scepter, the Lord therefore did punish them with
unbelief, who should have taught others the true belief. Who would have
thought that in the Asian Christian Churches such notable heresies could have
risen? who would have thought that in our Britain Churches so many horrors
should have risen? But it is not to be wondered at: first because our Savior
foresaw and forespake hereof, when as he thus assimilated his kingdom of
heaven. Not saying it should be so in the world, but it should be so in the
Church. Secondly, as through other Churches, so through ours this sleepie
ministry has passed, whereby an entrance has been made, and a way paued unto
an Ocean of evils. And that which worse is (of those that would be deemed
Reformers) many prove Deformers: and if in zeal they have once stepped over
shoes, they count it credit rather for Constancy sake to slosh in over boots,
then with Augustine to write a book of Retractations; or with 2. Sam 7.
Nathan to return unto David and confess that the speech of Temples building,
it was a speech without book. These kind of Constantines I have met with
abroad, and now find no such enemies at home. Let the secret Pharisaicall
practices of some witness that, even what time I was publicly (to the comfort
of distressed souls) exercised in Southwarke upon this present parable. But
the Lord rebuke Satan. If I being once ouer-caried with their tarish doctrine,
do now go before them in pointing out, and removing such scandales (and all
this without Magistrates constraint, or worlds allurement, witness my writings
abroad published before in foreign parts) then let them not think scorn or
take it for a discredit to follow: least every faithful Minister that comes
after, do both by word and writing cast the doung of their solemn assemblies
in their faces. If they look to be saved by holding the foundation, they must
not be unwilling to suffer the loss of their timber, hay, and stubble, when
the fire of God in his spirit and word do offer to burn it. By the practice of
the law, our own hand should first be upon the beast, and this done
voluntarily: but if men upon a good meaning will cover those cattle of Agag,
yet they shall bleat, cry out and pursue them unto destruction. It follows
in the text.

Verse. 27. Then came the servants of the householder and said unto him, Master,
sowedst thou not good seed En so so agro.
in that thy field, from whence then has it Tares? 28. And be said, the
envious man has done this.

Two questions are propounded by the servants unto the householder, whereof
this is the first, together with the answer. For the householder or master of
the field, it is plain before to be the son of man. Touching the servants,
some take them to be Magistrates in the Commonwealth: some take them to be
Ministers in the Church: I understand it to be spoken of both, and so both will
well enough fit, first the Analogy and proportion of faith; secondly, it
accords aptly unto the experienced state of Church and Commonwealth, though
principally of Ministers.

Then, when? After the field (through Ministers and Magistrates sleepie
security) was ouergrowen with Tares or (...) wicked ones: Then (as out of a
sleep) Magistrates and M^^^sters do arise: they ouersee the Catholic Church:
they spy not only offensive things in the world (whereof no marvel) but also
in the kingdom or new Testaments Church. They grieve at the sight, and
troubled they are in their soul about the present Confusion. All this notably
and comfortably laying down, that in those last days God would not only
stir up zealous Ministers for Church reformation, but also excellent
Magistrates (as were Zerubbabel, Nehemiah and others) for the reformation of
Judah.

Nor was this unseen of John in Patmos, Reuela. 17.12 13 14 15 16 17 18.
what time the Angel of God tells John (in the solitarines of his spirit)
that the ten horns (or civil powers) which once had subjected themselves unto
the whorish City (Metropolitan then of the earth) what time they lay asleep
by drinking her spiritual fornications, they finally should awake, And hate
the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and
burn her with fire. For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will and
to do with one consent, for giving their kingdom unto the Beast, until the
words of God be fulfilled. But those words of God (for the time of their
sleep) once fulfilled, they arise (as did Henry, Edward and Elizabeth in
England) setting fire on the whore for burning up her abominations. And
therefore thrice abominable those spirits, that by word or writing proclaim
them Schismatikes (as do the Papists) or Suborners of the beasts kingdom (as
do blind Reformists, Brownists, Anabaptists and Arrians).

Touching the Ministers, seeing unto them the more excellent charge of the
Church is given, by how much more those evils creep in through their
predecessors negligence, by so much the more those their successors are
stirred up in an holy fiery zeal for removing of present evils. Such a one
was He flourished Anno. Dom. 1260.


For this purpose let the young Student read the succession of Doctors, written
by Simon de Voyon. William of S. Amor a doctor of Paris. After him Laurence an
English man and doctor also there. Then John Wicliffe here in England: and with
him, Sautre a Priest. John Hus a Bohemian, first student in Oxford. Ierom of
Prage also a Bohemian: with multitudes not only of Ministers, but also of
inferior callings, whom God stirred up in all parts for recovery of a better
Jerusalem, then that in Judea of Benjamin.

But mark that those servants of Christ, they trust not to their own
judgments herein: and therefore, they run unto Christ to be informed, by
what means all this evil is come. Who, as they seek to him, so from him they
receive a ready and faithful answer. Who having understood by the word of the
Lord, that all this was the work of Satan in his ministers, what time men lay
asleep in security (even as a Garden sown and planted with good, it brings
forth readily weeds of all sorts, after a little time of rest) upon this
assurance;

Then the Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them
up? 29. But he said, No: least while ye go about to gather the Tares, ye
pluck up the wheat with them also.

The second Interrogatorie and his answer follows. The question propounded
by the same servants (Magistrates, Ministers, zealous people) the answer is
returned by the same Householder and Master of the Church Christ Jesus. By those
holy hearted servants their second demand ( Will thou that we go and gather
them up?) it plainly appears, that they not only were grieved to see the
Church pestred with such tarish companions, but also that they had a zeal
burning in them, for rooting them up: and yet discretion joined with zeal, in
that they will not walk herein by any conceit of their own, but only by the
rule of their Master Christ. Grief at such tares (I doubt not) there is in
many: zeal also for tearing up such tares, I doubt not also there is in many:
but a true contentment to pass by their own conceit, and to search out their
Masters meaning for reformation, it rests in ouer-few. He will walk by this
rule, another by that rule for reformation of faith and manners. As for the
Brownist, Anabaptist and Arian, they will walk by no rule for reformation of
this wheat field, and purging it from weeds: but at one choppe, they hew down
all for Antichristian, and will have no visible Christian to be found in this
confusion of the field. Tut say they, labor we for curing Babel (misapplying
Ierem. 51.9.
Ieremies speech thereto) we would have cured her, but could not, therefore my
people Go out. And so, when they have separated from all, condemned all (good
and bad, Church and Babel: condemning the substance of faith and manners in
all, because of some disputable accidents, or at most, because of some
accidental evils) they must every head begin a new field, a new Church, and
all new. And because all are not of one mind, therefore every one begins a
Church (spicke and span new) of a sundry fashion.

The Brownist keeps the Baptism he has in our Church, but denies the
Ministerial ordination; appointing their lay people to lay hands on Ministers
heads, and so bless them to their ministerial office: alleging the practice
of Isreal's people, laying their hands on the Leuits heads Nomb. 8. Whereas
alas, that was but their form of Approbation, not of Ordination. For when the
people (or Elders of the people) had laid on hands, the Leuits thereupon might
not administer before the Lord: for their Ordination and blessing rests to
the high Priest: and thereupon came the holy Canon, Hebr. 7.7.
Without all contradiction, the lesser is blessed of the greater. For in
Nombers 8. it follows, that Aaron took the Levites, filled their hands with
oblation, with his hands did shake them before the Lord: and so (after
benediction) did set them to the Altars work. And this has Pet. Mar. on 1.
Sam. 7.
Peter Martyr well observed and distinguished. And indeed, the ancients made
This (not Teaching) to be a cause of distinction between Episcop and Presbyter
(or Bishop and Priest: for these words are of the former Greek corrupted)
namely, That the Bishop might ordain, the Elder not) for so Chrysostom
(having said that So do all Ancients.
Elders are understood under the word Bishop 1. Tim. 3.1. he after says:
Inter episcopum and presbyt. etc. Betw^ene a Bishop and Elder there is almost
no difference. For by Ordination alone, they are their superiors: and this
(power) only they are thought more to have, then have the Presbyters, or
Elders or Priests. Therefore (passing by Priests, as all of them figures of
Christ) they casting eye unto Church Order, they ordinarily cause resemblance
alike to be had between Bishop and Presbyter, as was of old time between the
high Priest and the ordinary Priests: and the resemblance of common Presbyter
and Deacon, to lie in such difference as was between the ordinary Priest and
common Leuits. And indeed, the truth is such: though such as despise ancient
record and reading do (as some do at home) make sacred Ordination a frivolous
ceremony. Whereby the Brownists of common inferior lotte, they have learned
to bid their father (he that begot them to that faction) to kneel down, and
they t^^ begotten children will lay hands on and bless their father: an
Ordination more opposite to Christ for outward form (and that is it they
speak of) the if the Pope should bless a man inferior. For they ( ek
drametr^u) ful-but to Christ's Canon, do appoint the lesser to bless the
Greater: whereas in the other, the Greater blesses the lesser. But hereof I
have spoken in another Treatise.

Touching the Anabaptists, they stand not partaking in the matter (as does the
Brownist) but they exusflate or blow off our Baptism, so well as Ordination,
saying: All that flows from Antichrists ministers, it must be Antichristian.
And so, one baptizeth I knew one such, and sundry can witness it.
himself (as Abraham first circumcis^d himself: mary, Abraham had a
commandment; they have none, nor like cause) and then he baptizeth other. But
largely did Augustine confute this Rebaptization and Reordination in dealing
against the Donatists, saying of the one and the other Aug. cont. Parm. l 2.
cap. ^2.
The Catholic Church held it unlawful to repeat them. As for Cyprians
r^baptizing such as had been baptized by heretics, See for this, Hierom
aduers. Lucifer.
as he left such practice free unto others their judgment, imposing no law on
any (as appears in his epistles to Iubaian and Stephen Romes Bishop) so the
same opinion after was retracted by the Bishops. And in a detestation of such
rebaptization it was which caused Chrysostom. on hebr. 6.
Chrysostom thus to write: Qui secundo etc. He that the second ^ime baptizeth
himself, he the second time crucifieth Christ.

Touching our English Arrians, they deny all Baptism and Ordination, till new
Apostles be sent to execute those parts to the Gentiles, and Elias the Thisbite
do come for that end unto the Jews. Thus (not to speak of other their
doctrines) every sectarie and schismatike has his sundry Church and fashion of
constitution: all of them (in truth) notable schismatikes from the
Commonwealth of Israel: as Moab, Ammon, Edom, and others made brea^h from the
orderly seed of Abraham. But let them go, the servants of Christ's field,
they consult with their Master, and from him they receive this answer: Do not
tear up the tares, let both grow together until the last harvest etc. so
far is he from bidding them to go out, or yet pull them up.

Two notable questions do arise from hence: first, Whether perm^ssion of open
wicked in the Churches fellowship (for such be those tares) it do not overthrow
the Rule of excommunication taught in Matthew. 18.17. and 1. Cor. 5. Or if it do
not, how then those places can be reconciled? Secondly, How the permission of
these shall not pollute, seeing some open wicked do pollute in 1. Cor. 5.6. and
Galat. 5.9. Touching the first, I answer: Permit unto Doomesday, and
Excommunicate before Doomesday, they are as easily reconciled, as David's word
and practice is found good. When for his word it is written, Psalm. 101.
That he would not suffer a wicked man in his family: and yet for his practice,
1. King. 2.
he suffered Ioab in his family, leaving the slaughtering of him to Solomon his
son succeeding. And in a word it is thus: Those that can be excommunicate
without harming the wheat (that is, without rending Churches peace and unity)
those are to be excommunicate: but such are to be permitted (not for love to
them, but to the Lords wheat) as the excommunicating of whom would rend the
Church in pieces. The contrary practice is, to be peniwise, pound-foolish. Nor
is this resolution new, but ancient: for Augustine to the Aug. cont. Parm. l.
3. whom Johannes Wolphius follows in his answer to certain questions
touching the Church.
Donatist hereof writes thus: Ipse Dominus etc. To the servants willing to
gather the tares, the Lord himself says: Suffer ye both to grow until the
harvest: The cause he premiseth saying: Least peradventure while ye would
collect the tares, together with the same ye pull up the wheat. Wherein he
sufficiently shows, when such cause of fear is not (but a certain safety
altogether of the grain with certain stabilitie, abides: that is, when as
every such one his crime is known to all, and to all appeaereth execrable,
insomuch as it has no one, or not such defenders through whom a Schism may
fall out) then (Non dormiat seueritas disciplinae) Let not disciplines
severity sleep. Then this may well be done without spot of peace and unity;
as also, without detriment to the wheat, etc. Wherein he concludes, a
practice of disciplines severity, when Churches peace and unity may be
preserved, but otherwise not. Nor is this permission a stranger in scripture,
no more then the practice of excommunication. For as in 1. Cor. 5. the Apostle
Paul urges a putting out: so the Apostle John ^. John 9.
Diotrephes the affector of preeminence, a pratler, a busy body, and one that
would neither himself harbor such as came from the Apostle, nor yet suffer
others. The Apostle promises ( if he come) to lay him out in his colors,
intending thereby no doubt to prepare a way for his casting out: but mean time
he permits him, inasmuch as he bids them not deliver him to Satan. Such tares
were the factious teachers in Galatia Churches (joining Circumcision and
Baptism together etc.) whom the Apostle in those words ( Would to God they
were cut off) does secretly permit, in that he dare not (as in another 1. Cor.
5.
case) give it in command. And when to the Corinthes he writes, I fear when I
come again, my God abase me among you, and I shall bewail many: of them which
have sinned ALREADY, and have not repented of their uncleanness and fornication
and wanto^nes which they have committed: here the Apostle not wishing the
Corinthes to deliver such to Satan (as in 1. Cor. 5. he wills the incestuous
to be given up, for whose behoof no one with face could stand) but plainly
seeing (yet after a sort half winking at) those notable evils, he gives
notice (as Augustine also hence urges) that it was because of their tarish
clasping condition. And for no love to the tares, but for love of Church and
Commonwealths peace it was, that David permitted Shimei of Beniamins
quarrelling tribe favorite to Saul: as also suffered bloody Ioab to live all
his days, for that otherwise he might have brought all the soldiers on his
neck, for auenging the death of their worthy General.

Now (if a Tares condition be considered) can any other conclusion be urged?
for it is not, as many weeds who may be severed without danger: but as it
grows under the leaves of wheat unseen, like an hypocrite at first, so it
(...) after bewraies it self by the fruit: but then so clasping the w^eat by
running about it, as it cannot be pulled up th^n, but (...) ^resent danger to
the wheat. And such variety of ^aladies ^^^etimes fall in man's body, whereof
some may be purged ^^d some limbs cut off without the lives destruction: but
some of such nature and in such p^rts, as they cannot be removed, but with
depri^ation of life. And for this cause (namely for preservation of life, and
avoiding some great evil ensuing) we oftentimes permit that we like not. Nor is
he fit to govern a family (much less a Church) that walks not by this rule
and consideration. If any now demand what if Diotrephes repent, or for want of
repentance he be by John in after time cast out, is such a one yet a Tare? Two
answers are hereto framed. The first is, yea: as Simon was surnamed Leper
(because once a Leper) so may such a one be called a Tare, because once a Tare.
The second answer I give thus: if either of the former things fall out, he may
be said to have stood (for the former clasping season) as a tare, but now he
bewraies himself not to, be such: Eue^ as, the 1. Cor. 5.
incestuous person was delivered up to Satan for leaven and a servant to Satan,
who 2. Cor. 2.
after proved a man of true spirit and holiness. The Parable (as other Parables)
it must not be stretched beyond the purpose of our Savior made manifest by
other consent of scripture: and so I have proved Augustines collection to be
found and irrefragable. If any reply, only those open wicked ones are Tares as
die Tares (because it is after said, they shall by the Angels in the great
harvest be gathered up) ^so could add, because Tares are bid to grow until the
last harvest, therefore none are Tares that live not until the last harvest. As
also, by that reason we should never know who are Tares until death: and so to
no purpose commanded to let them grow together, seeing after death they can no
more grow together. To avoid such foolish consequents, the propriety of a
Parable must therefore ay be heeded.

The former conclusion remembered, down falls the Libertines collection, who
would have all public wicked permitted: seeing here is not speech of all evil
ones, but of a kind of euill-ones which cannot with kingdoms children their
good be pulled up, or cut off, by Magistrate or Minister. Even as in the
Parable of the Math. 25.
five foolish virgins, he declares not open wicked, but hypocrites (seeing
they had their lamps and lights and went to meet the bridgroome so well as the
other five. Nor was their foolishnes discovered to the Church, until they had
slep the sleep of all flesh (good and bad) and were raised again by the shout
of the Archangell) so every Parable has his own propriety. Here also falls
to ground all such as have with Chrysostom and Erasmus understood them to be
heretics, whom the Magistrates should permit to grow, until happily they
might become wheat. Yet Chrysostom adds: Chrysostom. hom. 47. on. Math.
Non prohibet, etc. Our Savior forbids not to dissipate the conuenticles of
heretics, the stopping of their mouths, to cut off all liberty of speaking:
only he forbids the killing of them. But as he has no warrant hence of
preserving heretics lives, so he has warrant enough from many places, for
scattering the assemblies, stopping their mouths, etc. And surely, the
Magistrate can never be thought to be zealous for the Lord, when he bears (as
the ordinary States of Germany do) a sword for their civil matters, but
none for the Lords religion. To ground also here falls the Anabaptists
doctrine of Christians unlawfulness for bearing and exercising the sword
against trangressors: seeing (say they foolishly from hence) they may live to
become true Christians. In a word, diverse fantasies here fall down (as Dagon
before the Arc) nor meruell, seeing timber, hay and stubble is in the Lords
day appointed to burn; that so, gold, silver, and precious stone it may be
discovered for only suitable to the foundation of this heavens kingdom.

Now to the second question, How the permission of such Tares (or tarish
persons) they shall not pollute the fellowship? That such permission is not
sin or pollution to the permitters, it appears if but in this, that Christ
not only advises, but also commands such permission for the peace and good
of his wheat, or true sons of the Church. If first such open wicked upon due
sight and search be found (not thistles, da^ke or such separable weeds: for it
is presumed that such the servants here had and would pull up, but) Tares, or
to us ward in a tarish estate: and if in the second place we permit those
Bastards for the childrens sake only, then such permission is no pollution to
us that have so seen, sought and permitted. First, because our Savior
enioineth such sufferance, and who dare make him a counsailour to evil, a
maintainer of sin? Secondly, if the Romans 7.15.16 etc. That the Apostle
speaks in the person of the Regenerate, those so understand: August in 2.
Lib. contra (...) l. Pelag. and Tho. Aqu^nas in Romans 7. alleging this of Aug.
(for before he alleged another ^ense from Aug. l. 3. quaest.) saying that
Me^ior ista expositio sit. Ierom (ad Cresiphont. ad^ers. Luci^.) so understands
it: accounting the opinion of perfection to the Manechists: and ordinarily all
our late writers so take it.
Apostle touching sin in his own flesh resisting his will (or law of the
mind) having will present with him, but wanting means to perform that is
good: if notwithstanding this unruliness of the flesh, he proclaims himself
delivered from this sin (or body of death) by Christ ruling in him by his
spirit, etc. If I say, sin dwelling in him, he is not therefore servant to
sin but to Christ, because a better spirit or law rules in him: much less
can another man's sin pollute me or my new man created in Christ, who is so
far from being led captive by his sin, as I hate it; and as means by God
are given unto me in my place, do labor the slaughter of his sin and
expulsion thereof: and when such means of removing him is lacking to me, yet
the good will of removing such a scandale is never lacking. Keeping thus my
heart and conscience clean, all things that are without, are to me clean and
pure. But if the conscience be privy to a liking of the scandale, and
negligent in using the fit means God has granted for removing such a
scandale, then he is pollution unto me, and my soul is attainted with his
sin. The one and the other of those conclusions, have their ground also from
that to Titus 1.15. and in Mark 7.18.19.20, 21.22.23. But it will be objected,
in those two scriptures speech is only of indifferent things: I answer, the
doctrine is general, and therefore appliable not only to those indifferencies
there mentioned: for nothing (whatsoever) is without can be pollution to us,
provided there arise not in our heart a liking or consent to such evil, nor
yet of us be permitted, when apt means are granted for remoual, at least for
bridling such evil. Touching this point, it is thus written in Origin on Exodus
20. and ^. comm.
Origin (whether by him or another I contend not) Illud tacendum non est, etc.
That neither is to be concealed, (namely) that the known wicked hurt the
Church, if so be that, either power of prohibiting them the Communion be
lacking, or some reason of conseruing peace do hinder. It is plain that this is
not hurtful to a man (namely) That there is some wicked man (yea, a known
wicked) present with thee at Christ his Altar: though he be not prohibited,
provided by a good conscience discontented with him, he be separated from him.
Manifest therefore it is, that to run with a thief, it is no other thing then
either to steal with him, or with a pleasing heart to accept of his stealth.
And that the Church has ever been so minded, consider not only her records
for judgment, but also for her continual practice. Whatsoever therefore in
any of my writings may seem to conclude oppositiuely, I desire it may be
reduced hither, where so fully and plainly I have discussed the q^estion. Nor
let any distinguish here (against the stream of the whole Church) between
common communion, and the communion in the Lord his supper: for, besides the
Ancients their meaning is plain, we are to consider; first, that the Church is
commanded by suppers administration to set forth Chri^tes death till he come:
secondly, if no Tare may be permitted thereto, and there will be Tares unto the
worlds end; then it follows that the supper must never be administered. If it
be replied; though they be not excommunicate, yet they may be debarred the
supper; I answer, if Churches peace can be so preserved, they ought so to be
restrained. Even as in a family, a wise householder or faithful steward Math.
^4.4^.
He will give the meat in due season: and not only that, but also grant unto
some leave to feast, when (for correction sake) he appoints some others to
fast. A figure whereof under the law was this, and that uncleanness, for the
which they were severed for a season: Aug. b. 5. chapter ^9. of quest. on Deuteronomy. So
has Hierom to H^liodore.
even as the Magistrates s^ord a figure of our exco^municating sword; killing
them in the flesh, that so they may rise and live again in the spirit. But if
they cannot with peace and Churches union be restrained, they must be rather
suffered to Grow in their evil, then (by hindering the Lords rain and
sacramental showers) the wheat should be hindered in their grouth. Let them
grow together (says our Savior) until the harvest: though to the one sort,
word, sacraments, fellowship shall be a savor of life unto life, but to the
other a savor of death unto death: even a sit was unto such as brought
oblations unto the tabernacle, whereof some by the faithful Priest were freely
admitted: others against his will (as Ioab and Shimei) but admitted, because
otherwise by the sword they could not be peaceably cut off. So much for this
point: it follows.

Verse. 30. Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of
harvest I will say to the Reapers, gather ye first Tares, and bind them in
sheaues to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn.

As our Savior will have the tares to grow together with his children in the
Church (and this until the great harvest of God: that is, as is expounded
verse. 40. until the end (namely of all things) what time he will send forth
his Angels for gathering all those offensive ones forth of the kingdom, verse.
41.) As I say, our Savior wills so long sufferance of the tares, so hence we
are to observe the form of speech ( Let them grow together until the harvest)
whence some conclude every tare his particular harvest at the time of his
death, as also a general harvest of all in the end of the world. Touching such
particular harvest here is no speech (although it be true from other scripture,
that the tree falling into the cold nipping Eccles. 11.3.
North it shall there lie) the speech here is only of the great universal
harvest, wherein final doom is given to all. If any say, but all the tares
which have been some 100. years since are dead, etc. I answer, our Savior
promises to his Apostles, that in executing their commission, he would be with
them unto the end of the world, and lo they died and ceased preaching and
baptizing 1500. years since. The Apostle charged Timothy to keep the
commandment unspotted till the appearance of Christ Jesus, and Timothy fell
on sleep about 1500. years since also. As in the Apostles and Timothy, the
whole body of ministry succeeding in that work, it is understood, so in the
tares first considered amidst the wheat, there is understood the whole
corporation of such wicked in succession unto the worlds end. A body of sin
or corporation of wicked, Christ Jesus speaks unto, when he thus says to the
Pharisees: Fulfill the measure of your sins, etc. that upon you may come all
the righteous blood of Abel the righteous, Math. ^. 3.
unto the blood of Zecharias ( the son of Barachias) whom ye slew between the
Temple and the Altar. From whence is apparent, as all the righteous do make
but one mystical body whereof Christ is the blessed h^ad; so, all the
unrighteous make their mystical body of sin, whereto Satan is an accursed
head.

Let them grow together until the end? If they could be withdrawn from, as
Moses, Aaron, and the other faithful of the congregation did withdraw their
tents from Nomb. (...)
Korah, Dathan and Abiram (whose sin lay not as B^ownists would have it, in a
form of outward calling diverse from the rule prescribed: but first, their sin
lay in murmuring against the chief Magistrate Moses, and the high Priest
Aaron: secondly, in making a mock of Sanctification and holiness: thirdly, in
rising up rebelliously, for lifting up themselves into place above the holy
chosen of God: whereas, other supreme Magistrate then Moses might not be, nor
any other high Priest then Aaron, during their lives, notwithstanding the whole
people would have given unto them the best form of outward calling they could
devise.) If I say, the open wicked could be called departed from (as that
rebellious ^rue upon the Lords direction was departed from) then we are so to
do: but if the case be tarish, then we are to suffer such children of Belial to
grow together with the children of the kingdom, unto the very end of all
things. For separation in such case, it is (as Cyprian. l. 3. epist. 4.
Cyprian well says) first a vendicating of that authority to our selves, which
the Father has given to his Son alone: and secondly, it is but a proud
obstinacy and sacrilegious presumption ( quam sibi furor prauus assumit) which
a wicked frenzy assumeth to it self. Which speech of Cyprian, old Augustine
borrows and often applies against Donatus.

Let them grow together till harvest, etc. If tarish wicked ones shall grow
until the universal harvest of all the world, held and kept in the end and
vp-shot of this world, it is for those causes: first, for the humiliation of
the wheat or children of the kingdom, by having such Canaanitish pricks in
their eyes and sides, able to vex the very soul of Lot; and also able to
torment their souls with like sorrow, as were Ezekiels people that mourned
continually for the wi^kednesses committed in the midst of Zion. Secondly, they
are permitted Revel. 22.^^.
being filthy, to become more filthy: and being unrighteous, to become more
unrighteous (for John must herein be understood to speak of the wicked in the
Church, such as Iudes spotted-ones in the feasts of Love: and those in Corinths
Church, whereof Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.38.
And if any be ignorant, let him be ignorant) that so fulfilling and vpheaping
the measure of sin, they may afterward have the more notable fall, and
breake-necke downe-fall. Were it not for this harvest, as the faithful of all
others were most miserable, so those grapling tares triumphing over the Lords
people, they were of all men most blessed. But, yea I say again But there is a
day coming, a black day, a gloomie day, a day of terror and horror to all
the children of Belial.

A harvest must have reapers, and the reapers here be Angels. The greatness of
the Reapers, it argues the greatness of the harvest. Nor marvel that both
Harvest and Reapers be great, when as the great GOD is the sender forth of
those Angels, and people are the matter that must be reaped. This Harvest is
represented unto Revel. 15.18. etc.
John in Patmos, under the reaping of Grapes with a sharp sickle; and there by
the ministry of an Angel commanded so to by another Angel which had
authority over fire. As it is very true, that Christ has all absolute power
given him over fire, water and every creature, so I well like the judgment of
such as teach that the elements are committed by the Lord unto the Angels, for
using the same against the wicked, and in the behoof of his children. Touching
whose ministration Peter Martyr has this: Pet. Mart. on 1. King. 5.
Redeo itaque ad ipsos Angelos etc. I return unto the Angels themselves, by
whose ministry also I affirm, that God governs physical or natural
things. For by their means undoubtedly the celestial Spheres or heavens.
Orbs are turned about: and admirable things be produced in Nature. For which
cause it is elegantly written, That God himself is carried by the Cherubims.
Here says our Savior, the Son of man shall send forth his Angels, how does
this agree with that of Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16.
The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a showte, with the voice of
the Archangell, and with the trumpet of God? By which showte our Savior
afterward in the Gospel says, Matthew 25.
all the wise and foolish Virgins shall awake and be gathered to judgment.
Touching the sending forth of Angels (or as John has in his Revelation, an
Angel) as also touching those terms, a Showte, the voice of a Trumpe, I take
them to be borrowed phrases adapted to harvest and sleep. For a harvest,
there must be Gatherers: for raising people out of sleep, there must be some
showte or loud voice: even so, for gathering this spiritual harvest, and for
awaking the spiritual sleepers in the earths bowels, there must be a Gathering
and a Noise: but touching the form of all this in propriety, I take it, we
now are incapable. Yet (as in another place) Lazarus his soul is by Angels
ministry conuayed into Abraham's bosom: and well enough also may be judged on
the other side, that the Gluttons soul was conuayed into hell (according to
that speech unto another Miser, Thou fool, this night They shall take away thy
soul) so it may well be, that by the ministry of Angels, the souls united
to their bodies for full doom, they shall be presented unto judgment. But yet
this ministry a power in mediatly derived from the Archangell ( Iombard l. 4.
did. 43. B.
Christ Jesus) according to that in John's Gospel chap. 5.28. The hour shall
come, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, that is
(as before) the voice of the Son of man: that is, of Christ Jesus in our
nature appearing.

Cerinthus.
Now must Cerinthus (if before death he repented not) now must he come forth
and make his answer, for teaching that Jesus was not borne of Marie, otherwise
then by knowing Joseph her husband carnally. That he was not Christ; but that
Christ came upon him in the form of a Dove. And that Jesus suffered, but
Christ fled away etc. Against whose abominable opinion touching Jesus his only
being man, John is said to have written his Euangell: which indeed affords
arguments, specially for proof of his Divinity.

Now must the Nicolaitans Carpocratians.
Nicolaitans that died such, come forth and answer for their community of
women. As also the Carpocratians for denying salvation to the flesh: with
others their followers, holding it of the devil: giving it up to all
filthiness, as it were thereby to be aue^ged on the body, their souls prison.

Now the Ophita^
Ophitai (who taught the Serpent which deceived Eve, was Christ: who by that
means made a way for revealing himself after to mankind. And for this cause
worshipped the serpent for Christ etc. upon which the Church gave them that
name Ophitai or Serpentinists.) Now must they come forth and know to their
shame, that they worshipped the devil of hell in stead of Christ.

The Montanists
Montanists, who held Montanus for the holy Ghost, condemned marriage for
filthiness etc. now those blasphemous filthy tongues must come out and be
tormented with Dives tongue in hell fire.

The Arians.
Arians (who taught that there was a time wherein God was not a Father, nor the
Son a Son: that the Son was not of one substance with the Father, but of
another nature; a creature and mere man: termed God only in regard of
office, as Magistrates be, etc. Now must they stand forth before that God who
will to them indeed prove no Father, but a consuming fire.

The Macedonians.
Macedonians, who taught the holy Ghost not to be God, but a servant trudging
about the business of the Father and the Son; those now must to judgment. And
well shall they know, that so they taught because they had not the holy Ghost.

The Anthropomorphits.
Anthropo-morphits (so called, for attributing to God in propriety, the very
shape and proportion of Man) they shall in this great day well understand that
they spoke and conceived of spiritual things, but carnally as bare natural
men.

Now the Apollinarists
followers of Apollinaris, they must answer for teaching Christ to ass^me
only a living body without a reasonable soul, substituting the Divinity in
place of a soul: making a confusion of Divinity and humanity (as if Christ
were neither God nor man, but a third thing mingled) even as wine and water
mingled, is no more wine nor water, but a mixture or mingle mangle.

Pelagians.
Pelagius faction (holding man naturally to have in his power to will and do
well:) they now shall find, that they both are supernatural and divine gifts.

Eutychians.
Now the sect of Eutyches (who held that Christ assumed no nature of ours: the
Anabaptists doctrine in these days) they shall in this day learn, that that
body and soul shall be damned, the first fruits whereof were not first
assumed by Christ Jesus.

The Monothelite.
Mono-thelites (so termed for teaching that Christ Jesus had only one will)
they in this day shall be taught to their shame, that Christ had two wills
unconfounded: the one peculiar unto his Godhead, which was (as the nature was)
Infinite: the other peculiar to his manhood, and (as it was) finit. The first
Will strong as God, the second infirm as man, but infirmity without sin. In
a word, all the wicked (tares or other weeds) they must now be severed from the
Lord his wheat: and that which more is, they must be collected and bound up in
sheaues. Not in one sheaue but sundry, according to the measure of their
evils. One faction in one sheafe, another faction in another sheafe: but all
prepared for one hell, for one fire, everlastingly burning.

Yet (though but one hell, one fire of wrath) scripture seems to imply (by
universal consent of the Church) that the measure of torment shall be Reave.
18.6.
diversely proportioned, according to the proportion and quality of sin in
the subject. Nor dislike I a certain Ancient his judgment touching this,
namely, that as in creatures all apt to burn, yet some feed the fire more
then the other (as for example: oily and gummie timber, more then fuel of a
diverse nature) even so, of sinners damned, all capable to burn: but the same
fire and torment more enlarged by the subject it works upon, as his sin
shall be more large and notable. Sin (be it more or less) is so considered as
the subject whereon the burning wrath of God shall have matter to feed upon for
ever. And this is the way, whereby the justice of God against sin, it shall
be declared a Justice for ever. In this day, the Originists (who have taught
that devil and all shall once come out of that fire and be saved) they shall
find that sin in the damned never dies (nay, I rather think that it is
increased: if so sin can be enlarged in hell: seeing sin unmortified, is
budding and bringing forth more evil in thought word, work) and so
consequently, the Isa. 66.24. Revel. 14.11.
gnawing worm never to die, that fire never to be put out.

And as the tares (the most political wicked) together with the whole
corporation of Satan, they thus shall find in the end, their glory turned into
shame, and their temporary heaven into an eternal hell. So the Lord his wheat
or children of the kingdom (for though the other were in it, yet they were not
of it) they are in this great day gathered into the Lords barn. Though they
grew together here, they must be severed there. The wicked shall not stand in
the assembly of the righteous: nor after that day, shall the soul of any
righteous Lot, be combred and galled with Sodom. The Iebusits gall us here,
but they drink gall and wormwood for it there. We contentedly suffer here,
but it is appointed that we shall be glorified there. Into the Lords barn,
Abraham's bosom, Paradise, heavens glory we shall all be received: and there
for eternity placed.

But as there is more or less measure of torment for the wicked; so, shall
there not be a diversity of glorification in Christ Jesus his members? The
universal stream of antiquity concluding affirmatively, I dare not join with
them that conclude negatiuely. Besides, the scriptures they urge to this
purpose, I cannot see them otherwise applied then aptly and fitly. For our
Saviors words in John, John. 14.2.3.
In my fathers house are many dwelling Mansions (if it were not so I would have
told ye) I go to prepare a place for you. Where they reply that these several
mansions are to be understood here in the Church: I answer, that cannot be: for
the sundry mansions must be considered in the place whither Jesus was
repairing (namely, in heavens glory) and not in the earth whence he was
departing. Which better appears in that after he preoccupates this question
of the Apostles ( What shall become of us mean time?) whereto he answers
their thought, saying: Though I go to prepare a place for you, I will come
again. And where the ancients do allege that of Paul: There is another
glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the
Stars, (for one Star differs from another in glory) This clause in propriety
is the end of the verse.
So also in the resurrection of the dead. If any here reply, that this is to be
understood of the first resurrection (which is here) from sin, he speaks
openly against the general and scope of the Chapter: which was to teach the
resurrection of our bodies (not souls) against some that in the Church denied
it. Again, if they say that the comparison is between earthly and heavenly
bodies, in this place it is apparently false: for here he concludes: Look what
difference in the glory of Stars, (though all glorious) even such difference
in the resurrection of bodies, though all glorious: for before the
resurrection, no body is glorious. And surely, were it we considered but the
state of a body (where we see all the members excellent, yet a difference of
excellency: and yet the difference no cause of emulation in the body, because
each member has that which is fitting his own place) as also, if we consider
that all the beauteous order of God it lies in distinctions, it must help to
persuade, that in his mystical body there be an Identitie (or One-nes)
touching the general, Eternal life: yet there must be distinction or
difference touching the measure of glorification.

Where the adverse minded do allege that Ma^^. 28.1. etc.
Parable of the workmen, brought into the vineyard, some at the third hour,
some at the sixth, some at the ninth, some at the eleventh, agreeing, and so
giving to every man a penie: and so hence affirm that no one differs in the
measure of glory; all obtaining but one and the same price, a penny: I answer: a
Parable being a figurative doctrine, it must be expounded by that which is
less figurative, or plainly proper. The Apostle having taught the Corinths so
plainly of a difference (not between corruptible and incorruptible bodies, but)
between glory and glory of bodies risen; it shall be preposterous after so
plain assertion, to conclude the contrary from a dark phrase. Secondly, Aug.
ho^. 67. on John. Chrysostom. or^ Math. 20.
Augustine, Chrysostom and a thousands besides them have delivered a better
sense of the penny, that is, how it imports only Eternal life. Which
eternal life though one, yet uttering it self in more or less glory,
according to the place each member then enjoys in this mystical glorious
body. Some here bring forth fruit an hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty.
Unto those of fruits an hundred fold, Amb. on 1. Cor. ^^.
Ambrose refers the glory of the Sun; unto those of 60 the glory of the
Moon; and unto those that bring forth fruits thirty fold, he sweetly
refers the glory as of common stars. And surely, as the contrary persuasion
does effect in men a remisnes and slouthfulnes in the Lords work; so, the
belief of this doctrine is (as a goad) in our sides for stirring us forward in
the works of the vineyard: for out of the vineyard or Churches fellowship, no
promise of penny or eternal life.

Which point remembered, as it will cause his people to maintain Churches
unity; so, the tares also remembered (having place in the Church, yet finally
damned) it may force us to make our election sure by good works. Not to make it
sure unto God by good works, but unto our selves, as a certain Io. Vigueriu in
Instit. The olog.
Romanist well grants. These be his words, Per illa verba 2. Pet. 1.10.
haberi non potest, etc. By those words of Peter (2. Ep. 1.10.) it cannot be
understood that election should be, because of works following: but that by
perseverance in good works, Praedestinatio ^uae immobili^ ^st, quadam
ceritudine conie^ Iurali nobis erta ostendatur.
Predestination which is immovable, it may be showen certain to us, by a
coniecturall certainty. As for all time spent out of the Church, or euilly
spent within the Church, what shall we count it but time lost? A certain
heathen could well say: Seneca in ib. de vit. c ^reu. cap. 8.
There is no cause why thou should think any old, because of his gray
hairs or wrinckles. He has not for that loved long, but been long. For I pray
thee: think thou that he has sailed much, who (after his putting forth of
the haven) is by a sore tempest driven here and there, and by force of winds
diversely rushing, is all that while but come round about? Such a one has not
sailed much, but has been tossed much. Nor let us think such unfruitful and
time only lost, but (which more is) a building up of fagots for our own
burning: the breeding of a viper in our bosom: the laying of sundry stepping
stones to eternal damnation. Whereas, in holy expense of time, we gain more and
more assurance by those fruits of faith, that our life is laid up and hid in
Christ, until his appearance. With whose appearance, as our glory shall begin,
so never shall it end (though wicked Chiliasts have pronounced it to be but of
a thousand years durance) but as verily as we are by the holy Ghost joined to
the Son, and the Son to the Father: so verily we cannot be any more pulled
from the possessed glory, then the spirit can be rent from the Son, and the
Son from the Father, and the father from himself. To which glorious Trinity
in Unity, all kingdom, power, and glory be given for ever. Amen.

Theodoret on Ezekiel. chap. last. Thus I speak with ^he holy Greek Father.
An end being put here unto my speech, we desire such as shall read this
book, if so they find any thing herein interpreted by us, worthy the tra^ell,
they therefore would praise the Lord of All. But if the gain answer not the
Expectation, or that they find not fruit answereable to the labor, that then
they would pardon the imbecillitie of Nature: but yet would embrace the minds
alacrity; recompensing our labors with their prayers: begging (of the Savior
of All) remission of our sins: with whom, together with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be glory for ever and infinitely ever, Amen.

