ERROVR On the Right hand, through a preposterous Zeal. Acted by way of
Dialogue.

1 Between Mal-content and Flyer. 2 Between Flyer and Anabaptist. 3 Between
Anabaptist, and Legatine-arrian. 4 Between Flyer and Legatine-arrian. 5
Between Flier, Legatine-arria^ and Familist. 6 Between Flyer and Familist. 7
Between Flyer and Mediocritie.
Whereto is also added, certain Positions touching Church and Antichrist: as
without the true holding thereof, it is impossible for a zealous soul, to
avoid either Schism or Faction.

By Henoch Clapham.

Eccles. 7. 18 Be not thou just overmuch, neither make thy self ouer-wise:
wherefore should thou be desolate?

19. Be not thou wicked overmuch, nor be thou foolish: wherefore should thou
perish, not in thy time?

Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane. 1608.

TO EVERY SOVLE that seeks after Truth in humility: for God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble.
OUR Savior foreseeing, that many (under the cloak of, Math. 24^23 etc.
Going out of Babel) would go out of the Church, saying, Here is Christ, there
is Christ; he charge his Folowers, not to believe them: much less to go
out. This wickedness is grown now so excellent, as if the true Christ could
not be found otherwhere, then without in Woods, Mikes, by-Stables, Barnes, and
Hay-loftes; whereupon, all the speech now, is, Go out, go out of Babel, come
into the secret places.

Math. 7.15.16. etc
Our Savior foreseeing, that Woluish-teachers should come to the people in
Sheepes-skinnes (that is, in Sheepelike conversation,) and by such sheepish
outward morality, labor to cover their Woluish, pricking, Schismatic
Doctrine, (for Doctrine is the fruit there spoken of, their outward carriage
being otherwise Sheepish,) he says to his true Folowers, Ye shall know them
by their fruits: that is, you only, that be endued with the true spirit of
meekenes and lowlines, shall know them by the This phrase is used in Proverbs
10.21.31. and 18.20.21. etc.
Fruit of their lips, their schismatic Doctrine. They shall have the name
of Prophets (a very good name) and their outward carriage shall be like to
Christ's sheep (a very commendable thing, and able to draw many) but examine
once the fruit of their lips, issuing from them as Prophets, Tunc Lupus est
in fabula, t hen he is a deuowring Wolf; howsoever he say (as some did in
Esaias time) Stand apart, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou.
Isai. 65.5.
And of such sort (says the Apostle unto Timothy) are these, 2. Tim. 3.6.
which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women laden with sins, and
led with diverse lusts; which women are ever learning, and are never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth.

The Spirit of Prophecy, having so plainly fore-prophesied of our times, and
false-spirites, what are we, that we should be negligent in trying the spirits,
whether they be of God? And seeing that these spiritual Wolves, shall for
their outward carriage and life, seem to be Christ's Sheep and poor innocent
Lambs (and for that, many times be more worthy reverence, then some of the
truest Teachers) it stands people therefore upon, not to be carried with a few
painted flimflams, but by the spear of Discretion, to gage the side of the
Grecians wooden Horse, for trying out, whether the inwardes be not planted with
engines of death. Latet anguis in herba; the fairest face has not always the
truest heart. Satan in policy, would have his Seminaries, in th'outwarde
appearance, to excel Christ's Ministers; that so, as them selves be deceived,
they may likewise deceive others. As for the true Ministers of Christ, Satan
must needs labor to spot them outwardly, seeing he cannot keep back the
doctrinall sap of Gods spirit; which distilling from the lips of the
Teacher, is to beget and feed many.

Hereupon it is, that true Doctrine is often rejected, because of some
external want in the Teacher. And again, because of some excellent
commendable outward things (in a Duckfrier, or a smooth Pharise,) any doctrine
is easily swallowed, be it schismaricall, heretical, or traiterous: A plain
sign, that such people are yet destitute of that spirit, whereby they should
be able to try Doctrine, and discern Spirits. And not only that, but also
full of giddy passions, and headstrong affections; as will appear in the
ensuing Dialogues: where the very natural character of such spirits, is by me
set down; not without sundry years experience had of them all: as also with
no small expenses.

If thine heart be vn-hardned, it will easily join with me: If otherwise, yet
herein I shall be comforted, that in this work I have served God and his
Church truly, though weakly. If something in the Conferrours seem too light,
consider first, it is but the natural character of that spirit: and secondly,
that it is but as a feeling of that spirits pulse, without any commoration or
dwelling upon it.

As I could, I have done. If it please, it is that I pray for: if it displease
any, I shall (through Gods grace) not only peaceably pass by it; but also,
with patience awayte the change of their judgment and affection. Farewell.

Thine as he may, He. Clapham.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE, Between Mal-content and Flyer.
Mal-content. Mal-content. WEll overtaken Sir, how far do you travail this
way?


Flyer. Flyer. So far as Grauesend.


Mal-con. So do I Sir: God bless us in our iornaie.


Flyer. I cannot say Amen, to your Prayer.


Mal-con. Why sir: Would you not be blessed in your iornaie?


Flyer. Yes: but in saying Amen, to your Prayer, I should testify my self to
be one in spiritual communion with you. Whereas, if you be that Mal-content,
which I sometimes have seen at the Royal Exchange, you are a notable lim of
Antichrist, and of all the Protestants, the most hipocriticall: for you say,
and do not. You say that the Church-gouernement in England is Antichristian;
that is, opposite unto the true Christ; and yet with Isachar you bear the
burden of the Son of perdition, and say that rest is good, whereas you ought,
for redemption of your soul, to Fly out of Babel.


Mal-con. Pardon sir; I think I should know you: Is not your name M. Flyer?


Flyer. It is: and I charge you in pain of damnation, to fly out of Babel.


Mal-con. First, it is a question (sir) if so the Church of England may be
truly called Babel. Secondly, if so it should be proved a Babel; the question
is, whether I may go out of Babel without the Kings leave. First, for that
Israel came not out of Aegipt, before Pharaoh gave them leave. And secondly,
for that the jews came not out of Babel, till Cyrus gave them leave. I pray
you (sir) therefore, let me hear what you can say: first, for the proouing it
Babel: secondly, for our lawful flight from it*


Flyer. O sir Mal-content, have not you your self taught in word and writing,
specially in your suites to Parliament, that the true government of Christ
Jesus (consisting in Pastors, Doctors, Elders, Deacons and Wydowes) is lacking;
and that Antichrist in the room thereof, has foysted in the government of
Archbishops, Lord Bishops. etc. who with their long-swords do keep out the
Ordinances of Christ Jesus? Have you not so taught and written:


Mal. content. Indeed, I think I so writ once in a Sermon upon Romans 12.6, 7,
8. and in some of my Petitions to the Parliament. etc.


Flyer. In your. etc. you may understand many other Books, the most of your
public Sermons; and specially your Conuenticles in secret, where your private
Disciples might privately applaud you. And if you remember, I was one of your
Classis, when in Cambridge you (in secret) chattred out that Sermon upon Romans
12. which afterward was published without name; because (it seems) you were
not minded, for it publicly to take up Christ's cross, and so to follow him.


Mal-con. You Flyers, be exceeding harsh in your censures.


Flyer. And you sir Mal-content, exceeding doble in your dealinges. But to come
to the point: do you not stand a member of that Church, whose government is
Antichristian?


Mal-con. What if I do?


Flyer. Then you are a member of Antichrist, and all your Prayers and
Preachinges but so many badges of the Beast: and all accursed.


Mal-con. But it may be, I stand no ordinary member of that Church.


Flyer. Are you a member of the Church of England, yea or no*


Mal-con. A member I am, but no Ordinary member. For though I sometimes hear
some man preach that is but occasionally, as a man passing by some Scolds,
might occasionally give them a while the hearing. And as for the sacrament of
Communion, I never meddle with it; because Righteousness can have no fellowship
with unrighteousness: and so I am no ordinary member.


Flyer. O monstrous hypocrisy, with your two-peny-ordinary. Was it ever heard
of in the Bible, that a man should be a member and not a member of a Church;
which you call a member not-ordinary. So I may be a member of the Church of
Rome, a member of Mahomets Sinagogue, and of whom not. It this be not a Babel,
a Confusion of men and manners, what then can be? But answer to this
question: Under whose government are you, whiles you are in a parish Church,
hearing a Preacher of the Bishops ordination?


Mal-con. To speak the truth, under the regiment of Antichrist.


Flyer. Are you not there held for a Subject to the said Antichristian regiment?


Mal-cont The most (it may be) do: but (it may be) that some there know that
my heart is against their doings.


Flyer. So, the good testimony which you should seek for of men, does rest
upon, It may be, it may be. It may be you may leave this halting; but I know
not when. The Prophet Daniel had not this subtlety, when (though he did well)
he would not be thought of any, to do evil, as omitting duty of prayer to
God. Hananiah, Azariah, and Mishael, could (by your Religion) have bowed before
the Idol, and notwithstanding have said, that their hearts were against it:
and one of them could have borne witness of another good meaning. But they
had learned, that both body and soul were bought with a price (even with the
blood of the immaculate Lamb) and therefore they must glorify God in both.
Truth is naked, and seeks none of these corners. But tell me, I pray you: If
the King should give all his Subjects leave, to forsake all communion with the
Confused people, leitourgie and government of the Church of England, would you
not for sake them all, and betake you presently to that Church whereof I am a
member?


Mal-cont Indeed, I should. And that is the maine point in truth, the King not
giving leave to come out of this Egypt, this spiritual house of bondage.


Flyer. Mal-content, You term your Church uery fitly, A spiritual house of
bondage. And because Spiritual, therefore not to be fraied in till ye King
give leave to go out. Do more then the Thief, Adulterer, or Durtherer, is to
stay in his sin, till the King bid him go out. And yet these evils against
the second Table only; whereas the other is hypocrisy in Religion, and flat
Idolatry against the first Table of the ^orall law, which commands
Holiness toward God, as the second inioyneth Righteousness toward man.
Though Daniel, Hananiah, Azariah, Mishael, and their brethren, might not depart
Babel and them coasts, till ye King gave leave; yet they might, ought, and did
depart from their Idolatry and false worship, howsoever their Godyes (for
testifying against it) were ^ardly entreated, and still kept in corpo^all
bondage.


Mal-con. Me thinks (M. Flyer) you now ^uch your self, who departes the
Kings territories, and your own native land, which is more, for planting a
Church amonst a people of Ezekiel. 3.6.
hard language. For which respect, a principal Norwich-man of your sect, has
held you for a true Church, while ye were in your own Nation. But departing
once the limits of your own language, he has taught, that so ye apostate from
Faith and Charity, and to be no true Church. I think you cannot answer him.


Flyer. If I could not, yet that is no excuse for your standing in spiritual
evil. But I pray you, did not Elias fly in time of persecution? Did not our
Savior so, and teach his Apostles to do so:


Mal-con True, but no flight to continue with any people, whose language they
understood not: much less, there to plant a Church.


Flyer. Well, for that point I am not yet studied: I will ask council about
it: Mean time, look you to your winding and doubling, even against the light
of your mind, and confession of your mouth.


Mal-con. Nay, we have (some of us) more exceptions against you. For you cannot
be contented only to depart from us, but you condemn every soul of our
Church, for a lim of the son of Perdition, and so to stand visibly in the
state of damnation: Whereas you know well enough, that many of us groan under
the burden of sin, and do strive after that is good.


Flyer. Mal-content, Mal-content, you must not only groan under sin, but
grieve at it, and fly from it, as I, and others have: who as Hee-goates before
the Flock, have gone forth, with our faces toward Sion.


Mal-con. Besides (M. Flyer,) in the writings you publish, you fill all the
Margines with allegations from Scripture, and the most to none, or to a lying
purpose. As to give one instance. It is held of you and us, that the new
Testament has his peculiar form of Church-gouernment, given by Christ; and
that the old Testament has his peculiar government, given by Moses. And yet
for proof of Christ's Discipline and Institutions, you quote Scriptures from
the old Testament, which planely establish the Mosaicall orders. A second
instance may be this: Such Scriptures as speak of the invisible Church (known
to God, for holy and unspotted) you quote for probatio^ of the visible Church
her state and constitution, which you intend must be Visibly all holy and
unspotted in this life. If such allegation of Scripture, be not a notable
taking of Gods name in vain, I then understand nothing.


Flyer. First, let it be so: It shall be but as some of you have done before
us. Let the Records be searched. Secondly, when the particulars shall be by you,
or any your side produced, we shall give in, a reasonable answer.


Mal-con. Nay sir, which is more. M. Henry Barrow drawing a Description of the
true Church* when he comes to deliver the Canons of discipline* he in that
sheet of Paper, does after the Excommunication, place that Canon of the
Apostle, in 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as
a brother, because he believed, that excommunication was a power to
edification, not to destruction. Your Congregation then, some years after his
death, do reprint it, putting to it the old date, corrupting his method,
falsifying his Will, by placing the said Canon before Excommunication; because
after the casting out, you would rid your hands of all tenderness and
compassion, as delighting in nothing more, then in bitterness against the
soul distressed. The Apostle can say, Gala. 3.1^
Though it be but a man's Covenant (or Will) when it is confirmed, no man does
abrogate it, or adds any thing thereto. But you have done that which No man
(that is, no honest man) would do, in so causing his Will to speak contrary
to his meaning.


Flyer. Mal-content, I cannot believe that thou say.


Mal-con. But I believe it, and the Copies will prove it. Besides that, I know
him which reproved that evil, at the coming forth of the second Aedition at
A. at the charges of Arthur B^llet. Whereas the first was printed at D. where
other Writings also of the same man, were then printed. But in a word (M.
Flyer) there be diverse of us are minded ear long, to leave the Church of
England; but with these prouisoes: First, to join with your congregation we
dare not, and that because of the many bloody unrepentant censures lying upon
the neck of your Church, as M. G. Io. has laid down plainly in his Book
against your Society: Secondly, in departing the Church of England* We are
minded notwithstanding, to hold many of them, Disciples to the true Christ; and
so doubtless, we shall find some succor from them.


Flyer. I thought (Mal-content) thou would discover thine hypocrisy. Thy
flying from Babel, shall be yet with applauding some in Babel, that so out of
Babel thou may have some maintenance. I see that thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the band of iniquity. Either hold the Church of England
(as the said Protestant does) for a true Church, with some wantes; for which
notwithstanding, the Church is not to be forsaken: or, hold with us. A true
Church it was never: or if some time it were, it now is no more a true Church,
then ye Church of Rome. Halt not therefore between two opinions. If Jehovah be
ye Lord, follow him* but if Baal be the Lord, then follow him.


Mal-con. Master Flyer, I neither hold your side for Jehovah, nor the Church
of England for Baal. But for your side, I hold it as an Error on the right
hand; and the other side, as an Error on the left hand: In m^dio quorum
consist^^ virtus, In midst whereof I stand, and between which I mean to walk.


Flyer. Mal-content, thou would feign ^alke between the bark and tree, and
^ot be pincht. Thou would be one ^ith us (as before) if the King would ^iue
thee leave; and now we are, as an ^rrour on the right hand. Again, thou (...)
one of these days, without the ^inges leave, take leave of the Popish
Antichristian government, and yet justify many bearing that mark of the
Beast in hand and forehead, for Disciples of the true Christ. Iwis, thou holds
thou knows not what; and they be seduced that swallow thy doctrine. But be
thou, and some, as ye shall, I have no small hope, that thousands in England
(that now stand on the tiptoe) will ere long, fall flatly on our side. Hear
you not of Teachers and people, in the farthest parts of Lincolne-shire and
Nottingham-shire, etc. who are flatly already separated.


Mal-con. I heard of it the other day, by a London-Preacher; who sorroweth much
for a Gentlewoman of place, who is said, to be absolutely gone from the Church.
But as I know some of them Teachers, and specially him that is said there to
have baptized one of their Children in a Barn: so, my hope is, that their
Separation is not so far as yours, but one with that which I purpose.


Flyer. You purpose you know not what. Besides that, more, and new ^indes of
Separation, will cause the (...)-Protestant to be more stiff in his standing:
and the Time-seruer will thereby take occasion to stout at us all.


Mal-con. Then come back unto us.


Flyer. Nay, come you forward unto us, and so become more perfect. But stay,
is not this Grauesend hard by?


Mal-con. It is.


Flyer. Then be we hushed, for fear some ouer-heare us, that may give
intelligence to the crabbed Searchers. For the truth is, I am with the next
wind, to go to Sea, and I fear none beer, so much as that kind of cattle and
busybody, prying into this, and peering into that: that a man can hardly have a
Swords scabberd lined with Frenchcrownes bowed, as D. Arthur Billet had; or an
old clumperton pair of Shoes, whose soles be lyned with Angels, as my
brother George Clayton the Brick-layer had, but they will either by a privy
search find them; or the fear a man shall be put unto (while they be about
these) will be so terrible, as a sickness worse then the Sea-sicknesse) will
suddenly surprise him.


Mal-con. Were it not at the first, you denied communion with me in Prayer
(which makes me suspect you disdain all fellowship with me at Table) I would
willingly inuit you to a joint of Meat and a pint of Wine, before our parting.


Flyer. For that sir, it is but fellowship Civil; whereas the other is
Spiritual. We may eat and drink with a Turk, but not pray with a Turk.


Mal-con. Will it please you then (sir) to take a Dinner with me?


Flyer. I will, and I thank God for it; who will have Elias fed, if but by the
ministry of an unclean Raven.


Mal-con. Do you then hold me unclean? and yet the Raven (I take it) was not
unclean till he was dead.


Flyer. In your present standing, you are dead in sin; and you, and all your
actions unclean.


Mal-con. Are we so? Then doubtless the Cook is unclean, and the Victuals
unclean; and you by eating them, should be unclean: and therefore, go shake
your ears for your Dinner. And if you do further provoke me, it is like I
shall make the Searchers acquainted with you and your clean Nobles: And yet
they, being coined by men unclean, they shall be unclean also.. Pack and be
quiet, for fear I provoke some to shave you of all your uncleanness.


THE SECOND DIALOGVE Between Flyer and Anabaptist.
Anabapt. HOW far do you travail, sir?


Flyer. No further then Middleburghe, to night.


Anabapt. You come newly from Sea, do you not?


Flyer. Uerily I do. And happy it was for the Ship (as a Merchants factour
could lately say) that I was in it: for had not I longed earnestly after Zion;
and according to Gods decree, were predestined before all worlds, to come
safely unto the true Church planted in these parts, as the Factor could say,
all the Ship had been cast away.


Anabapt. What true Church is it (sir) which you mean is planted in these
parts?


Flyer. Certain Englishmen, separated from the Whore of Babylon: I mean the
Church in England.


Anabapt. From the Protestants Church, mean you?


Flyer. The very same. My heart leapes to think how far I am got from the
skirtes of that proud bloody Fornicatrix. Are you a Duch-man, that you can
parlie so in English?


Anabap. I am; and sometimes was a member of the Dutch-church that is in
Norwich: But God opening mine eyes, to see the falsehoode of that Church, I
forsook it, and came so into these parts, to live with a Congregation purely
christian.


Flyer. What, with our people I pray you?


Anabapt. There be certain English people of us, that came out from the
Brownistes.


Flyer. From the Brownistes? Whya, they be the people that I come to. But I
pray you, let me admonish you of one thing: Leave that term of Brownist, for
they despise Brownes standing, I tell you.


Anabapt. Yea, they despise his present standing, for that he is returned to
the Church of England; but mean time, they have slapt up his Vomit, and
maintain the blind Schism he made from that Church.


Flyer. Call you it a blind Schism? Blind they be not, that see the Holy
things they see. Nor Schism is it; but a faithful departure from Babel.


Anabapt Babel? You know not what ^abel means; for they be a people over head
and ears in Babel: so far from being fled from it.


Flyer. Prove that, and I Will leave my Religion.


Anabapt. You leave it? You may say, if God will give you the Grace to leave
it: For it is a peculiar Grace to leave Sodom and Aegipt, spiritually so
called.


Flyer. It is truth you say. But I pray you, Of what Religion may you be?


Anabapt. Of the true Christian Religion; commonly termed Anabaptisme, Tro^
our baptizing of people again, coming from the false Church; whereof your
Congregation is a maine arrogant member.


Flyer. I tremble to think, that you should dare so to blaspheme the
Tabernacle pight of God, and not of man.


Anabapt. Pight of the Devil and the Antichristian Man. Let me spur you one
question; Are you Baptized?


Flyer. That I am, I thank God.


Anabapt. Who Baptized you?


Flyer. A Minister of the English Church. And (I thank God) it was done with a
Sermon, and without the Cross in the forehead.


Anabap. Are the Ministers of England, true Ministers?


Flyer. No; they be slaves to Antichrist, in all his inventions.


Anabapt. Mark what a fool you be; neither call I you fool Unadvisedly. You
separate from Babel, and yet iustifies the ministerial action; of the
Ministers of Babel. Can they be Antichristian Ministers, and their essential
ministerial actions Christian? Has Christ appointed any limme of the Beast to
keep his Signet, and to seal his people with Baptism? Has Christ given
power unto any to Baptize, to whom he says not first, Go and teach? Will the
Ministers of Antichrist, seal unto the true Christ?


Flyer. Though they and their places be Antichristian, yet the Baptism may be
Christian.


Anabap. Once again, if happily God may bring you out of that mystery of
iniquity: Was the Minister him self, first a true Christian before he entered
into that function?


Flyer. No* for he was a lim of that Beasts body.


Anabap. Did his ministry then make him a true Christian?


Flyer. At no hand, being a Minister in the body of the same Beast.


Anabap. He being neither a true Minister, nor so much as a true Christian; and
your self also, a member of the same Antichrist, How could you by his Baptism
become a true Christian? Out of a bitter Fountain, can there come any sweet
Water? As the first fruits are, are not also the branches?


Flyer. I was no true Christian then, nor it any true Baptism: but now being
separated from them (as these of the Ten Tribes which came unto Judah.) My
Baptism is good, as their Circumcision then became good.


Anabapt. Englishman, the Comparison is not alike. They of Israel were
commanded to circumcise; but no Minister of Antichrist is commanded to
Baptize. The Israelites were a people, that had been a true constituted Church;
but as your selves say, England was never constituted of, or to the Lord.
Thirdly, any Israelite might circumcise his Child: but in your opinion, a
Preacher of the word may only do that. Till therefore, you can prove, that
the English Minister, did but the commandment of God in Baptising, as the
Israelite did it in Circumcising, you may go with the Beasts mark in your
forehead, as old and young in your Church carry it. But come we to another
point. ^^e you hold that Christ, which your ^^iptian Priests did teach you?


Flyer. Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will.


Anabap. And yet you are come out of Babel. Can they that teach people daily
the true Christ be Ministers of Antichrist* Are they not true ministers that
teach and seal to the true Christ* Or if they (...) false Ministers (which you
grant) must not their principal felsehood ^^en lie, first in teaching a false
Christ; and secondly, in sealing to the false Christ? That is, the Ministers
can not be Antichristian, but they must direct ^^d sign the people unto
Antichrist, under a color of Christ,) and that only can be the mystery of
iniquity. But another question: By what ^eanes seek ye to be one with your
Christ?


Flyer^ By Faith only; which is wrought (...) my heart, by the outward
ministry (...) the word, and the inward operation (...) Gods spirit.


Anabap. Silly, silly: Can you call these Ministers of Antichrist, whom you
defend for such, as have not only (a^ you say) taught you the true Christ but
also, lead you by the true means unto that true Christ. Thus the blind has
led the blind, and both tumble in the ditch. Either make the Tre^ good, and
his fruit good; or make it bad, and his fruit bad. O friend! I muse not,
though you stand amazed* I my self was sometimes in such (...) strait; but he
that gave me simpliciti^ of heart, gave me to wind out of tha^ Laborinth. John
could not see the mystery of that Beast in the Apocalips, till he went out
into the Desert. God might (for your lynsi-wolsie Faith) have cast you away in
the Sea; but in mercy he has reserved you unto a better hour. He did not
cast me into your way for nothing; I hope for a blessing, though otherwise in
your perishing, I should become a good favor unto God. Thou in the Heavens,
take the Scales away from his eyes, that he may see into the end of things
that are to be abolished.


Flyer. Me thinks it should be true, that the ^^ues of Satan, should only
serve ^atan in their ministry, as the Gally^aues with Ores, do serve the
Turks Lieftenant.


Anabapt. A very good comparison: whose Servant one is, his works they do.
For no one can serve two Masters, specially, so cross as Christ and
Antichrist.


Flyer. I pray you sir, then what be the Ar^^cles of your faith?


Anabap. For that friend, remember what is written in Ezekiel. 43.11. When they be
ashamed of all that they have done, show ^^em the form of the house, and the
pat^^rne thereof, and the going out thereof, and ^he coming in thereof, and
all the fashion thereof, and all the ordinances thereof. etc. ^^ploying thus
much, that the Holy mysteries are not to be revealed, but ^nely to such a soul
as is first asha^ed of all by-pathes of false worship. ^or the Childrens Bread
is not to be ^st unto Dogs, that will ball against ^^e truth; nor Pearls unto
Hogs, ^^at wallow in their own shame.


Flyer. I am ashamed of my standing; not only with the Protestant, but also
with the Separist and Private: and I firmly betake my self to your Faith,
till death us depart.


Anabapt. The Deaw of heaven come upon you. To morrow I will bring you into our
sacred Congregation, that so you may come to be informed in the Faith, and
after that, to be purely Baptized.


Flyer. Thanks reverend man of God. I think sir, you are some Minister your
self?


Anabapt. That word Minister, fitteth not. I am a Prophet of the Lord, spoken
of in the eleventh of the Revelation, which in homely apparaile (as Sackcloth)
do bewail the peoples sins, protesting against the Beast, that come out of
the bottomless Pit. And (as I had in vision this night) the Beast in time,
shall put me to death, for the Holy testimony: But an Angel has comforted
me, and says, that before that time, I shall turn the hearts of many Fathers
to the Children; and the hearts of Children to the Fathers; least otherwise
the great power should smite the Earth with cursing.


Flyer. O sir, me thinks the spirit of life is entered ho^te into me. Me
thinks I could leap into that passage-Cart, and prophecy Fire upon England
and all English Sectaries.


Anabapt. Stay holy Proselite, thou must first be Baptized* and have some
divine Vision from above. And so being made a perfect Em^usiast, thou* shall be
able to turn back the Floodes of Iordane. But stay, one is at our heels. If
we fall into any talk of Religion, lay you your hand of your mouth, and be
silent.


Flyer. I will, O miraculous Prophet.


THE THIRD DIALOGVE Between Anabaptist and the Legatine-Arrian.
Legatine-Arrian. WEll ouer-taken Father; go you unto Midleburghe?


Anabap. I do sir.


Legate. ar. I would be glad of your company: and so much the rather, for that
you are gray headed; and Moses commands such Youth as I am, to rise up
before t^^ gray headed.


Anabap. Thou say well son; and I am glad thou read Moses with some
observance.


Legate. ar. Without such divine reading and observation, Man is worse then a
Dog. What religion are you of, Father?


Anabapt. Of the true Christian religion.


Legate. ar. Professed according to what, what form, Father? For the Papists
profess him according to one form, the Protestants after another form: and
so the Puritaines, Brownistes, Anabaptists, and others.


Anabapt I profess him (son) after that manner, which is reviled by the name
of Anabaptists; though Ana-baptisme or R^-baptization, is a thing we be not
ashamed of, but rather glory in; as having only power from the Lord, to
deliver that seal of Baptism.


Legate. ar. Are you Baptized then?


Anabapt. I am son.


Legate. ar. And I am of mind, that there is no true Baptism upon the earth.


Anabapt. Not in the earth? I pray thee son say not so. The co^^^egation I am
of, can, and does administer true Baptism.


Legate. arr. Say you so Father? Your congregation (as appears in Sleydan) is
but, as of the last day. Was not the true Church (according to S. John's. Uision
in the Revelation) to be for many years invisible, and not to be seen in the
earth?


Anabapt. That is certainly true. And so I think, my Brother that here
walks with us, (your countryman, forsooth) is accordingly minded.


Flyer. I am.


Legate. ar. I am of the same mind; and therefore conclude thereupon thus: The
Church being to be latent and invisible for many years, so that her place was
no more to be found; it must accordingly follow, that there could be no more a
visible Church, till some notable men were surred up of God, to raise it again
out of the dust.


Anabapt. I grant that: And notable men have we had.


Legate. ar. The men that began the frame of the Church of Israel, were Moses
and Aaron. The men that began the Newtestaments Church, were the Apostles. All
these were furnished with the gift of Miracles, for the persuading of their
hearers: For without Miracle, they could not be believed to come from God, for
establishing a new Church-pollicie. Now Father, who were the first layers of
your Churches foundation? They must bring Miracles with them, or who (but
madmen) will take them for new Founders?


Anabapt. My son, we have had sundry men, that have been myraculous.


Legate. arr. Indeed, Sleidan records your Snapper-doling, and some others,
that were marvelous for their Dreams; whereupon they practiced all filthiness
and intolerable bloodshed. But to pass by that, and the like: Of whom had the
first of your people his Baptism? The first had it (doubtless) in the Church
of Rome, and so consequently from Antichrist: and Adam the first, being impure,
we that follow, can be no better. As is the first fruit, so be the branches.
New Baptism there can not be, till there come new Apostles. New Apostles there
can not be, who are not endued (from above) with miracles. Miracles we hear of
none, (only of idle Dreams) and so consequently, no true Baptism in the
earth, nor any one true visible Christian.


Anabapt. Do you not believe your self to be one?


Legate. arr. Not: for alter an utter ceassing of visible Christianity, there
can be no raising up of that work to visible appearance, till Ministers have
begun it, who may by Miracle confirm their calling. For not our Savior
Christ, would so much as abolish the Shadow and establish the Substance, but
he would first unto the people, clear his calling, by an effectual
declaration of Miracles. And what are you, that you should be believed of your
bare words?


Anabap. I perceive son, that thou art against all Churches, and all Churches
against thee, as was the hand of flouting Israel, turned out of Abraham's house,
the father of believers.


Legate. ar. You are au old Dunse, to liken me unto Ismael, a figure of
Reprobates. For you and others once granting, that ye Church (according to
that in the Revelation, chap. 6.14. represented by the Heavens) departing once
away, as a Scrowle when it is rolled; must needs thereupon conclude, that
there could be no more a true A being.
Esse of the Church, till (from God) some myraculous Ministry, should breath
new life into the people; as of Stones raising up Children unto Abraham.


Anabapt. A true Esse, What is that? I hold my life, it is somewhat of the
Roman beasts language.


Legate. arr. I despise the seven headed Monster more then you. Neither care I
a straw for Hebrew, Greek, or Latin: for (thanks to his divine Majesty) I
never was an Uniuersity-man, much less an Academicall Divine, or Theologue;
nor have I troubled my self about the Beasts tongue. Only, as in reasoning I
have bin pressed with such a word, I have observed it, for slaying (another
time) the Medianite with his own sword.


Anabapt. Foul Heretic; I would thou knew it, I hate this profane learning
and language, so well as thou. I am a Prophet of the true Church, and yet get
my living by making of Swords, the first calling I was trained in.


Legate. ar. Whia, sir fool, you hold the Magistrate, to be only an Ordinance
(since Christ's time) without the Church; and that the use of the Sword is
unlawful. You therefore in making Swords, do uphold Bloodshed and Wars,
which otherwise you hold unlawful: And so a raucke hypocrite.


Anabap. Saucy princocks, the Apostle has charged us, to walk in the same
calling, wherein we were called to be Christians: but when I was called to be a
Christian, I was a Sword-maker; therefore in that called I ought to continue.


Legate. ar. Gray head, and green mind; by like proportion I reason thus. The
Ap^stle commaundes a man to walk in the same calling a man was of, when he was
called to Christianity: But when I was called unto Christianity, my calling
was to keep an Whorehouse; therefore, being now called to be a Christian, I
ought yet to keep an Whore-house. Countryman, take heed of him: for, under
his p^aine habit, void of Silk, Ueluet, and Pearse, (and yet, I warrant
thee, of as softly English cloth, as his Purse could purchase) there lurketh
all counterfaite dealing. He would be thought most adverse to the Romanistes,
and yet in the doctrines of Predestination, Freewill, and Justification, (main
fundamental points) he iumpeth one with them: besides that execrable Heresy,
that Christ had a Corporal nature from Heaven, not from us; whereupon must
necessarily follow, that then he could never satisfy Gods justice for us.


Anabapt. Heauens-power, how great is thy lenity, in bearing with such
blasphemy! Faithful Proselite, hanke in thine ear, -- come to me there to
night, or tomorrow morning, and thou shall be inspired from above, with power
to resist all the devises of such Charmers, charm they never so wittily.
Farewell dear Proselite, for I will trudge before, least my ears become
receptacles of his unhallowed breathinges.


THE FOVRTH DIALOGVE, between the Flyer and Legatine-arrian.
Legatine-arrian. Dear Countryman, may I be so bold, as to inquire, wherefore
you came into these parts?


Flyer. Good sir, to speak the truth, I came from the Separistes in London,
with full purpose to join with that Church of them, which is in these parts:
But meeting with this man, as I came from Flushen where I landed, and
discoursing with him about Religion, I verily resolved to join with him and
his Congregation. But perceiving by your Dialoguizing with him, that all is
mere foolerie, to believe, that either He, or Brownist, or Mal-content, is of
any true Church; yea, that there can be no Christian communion, till a
myraculous Ministry be stirred up of God, for baptising people, and calling
them into Christian communion; I hereupon, have given him the bag. Fish where
he shall, he shall have no Fish of me. And therefore (good sir) seeing it
pleased the Almighty to save me myraculously from seas (and I perceive it
was, for keeping me to be instructed of you,) my humble desire is, to
understand of you, what a soul is to do in this case, there being not only,
no true visible Church on the earth, but also, no true visible Christian? I
beseech you pray for me, or else I know not what shall become of me.


Legate. ar. Pray for you I may; but pray with you I may not. Prayer with one,
is an action of communion, (as for example, if I should say, Our Father, Give
Us this day our bread; Forgive Us our sins, Lead not Us into temptation:)
this should imply, that you and I were in communion or christian fellowship.
But before that myraculous Ministry (as before) shall come and gather the
Gentiles into such communion, and Elias come for calling the Jews, there can
be no such fellowship; and therefore no such prayer. When I come at my Chamber,
I will pray for you.


Flyer. I pray you sir, let me next Sabbath day, have access unto your
Congregation: for, I doubt not, but you have some Congregation here in Zeland.


Legate. ar. How sillily you speak. I have all this while taught you, that
there is no Church, nor visible Christian in the world as yet; seeing no
myraculous Apostles have yet been sent to Baptize people, and call them into
communion, and you talk of a Church. Besides, it is a notable badge of
Antichrist, for any christian Congregation, upon the Sabaoths conuention, (or
any other time of the Churches meeting) to admit of any unbeliever or stranger
to the faith, unto the Pastoral exercise: For, is it not written in 1. Cor.
14.22. Prophecy serves not for them that believe not, but for them which
believe.


Flyer. Then I perceive, that all such, as I have left behind me, have served
Antichrist in hypocrisy; for they suffer any Infidel to come unto their
exercise of Prophecy, or Preaching. But my Countrymen the Flyers, have herein
sinned above all: for they permit infidelious Marchantes and others, to come on
the Thurseday unto their exercise of Prophecy, when (ten to one) by reason of
some brabling canse then to be pleaded, the Congregation meets, ^ayeth, and
departs, without any Prayer at all, or exercise of their prophetical gui^tes.


Legate. arr. Prophetical guiftes; Prophetical fooleries. Tom Lace-seller, and
Abraham Pin-seller (so I think M. Henry Barrow spoke in the Fleet) must come
out and spatter their meaninges; and this must be called the exercise of
Prophecy.


Flyer. O excellent man of God, I am sorry that we be come not^ into the tail
of Midleburghe: for that will brake off our Discourse.


Legate. arr. O profane speech: you should have said, into the Suburbs of
Midleburghe.


Flyer. The word Suburbs, I took to be ^ word of Latin, and so, of the
Beasts language; which made me to avoid it.


Legate. ar. Therein I commend your zeal. For in their Translations, they
cannot be contented to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? but
before it, they must put down their profane Latin, Elj, Elj, lamasab^thenj.
Nor can be contented to say; God has sent the spirit of his Son to cry,
Father; but they must turn it, Abba father. At Amsterdam I once checked a
Preacher that is now in England, for such fooleries; and he said, that it was
so in the Origenall: but I will never believe it.


Flyer. No sir: these limbs of Antichrist are not to be believed.


Legate. ar. Hold you there; and I will assure you to become an excellent Divine
in short time. But we are come unto the City: Where mean you to lodge?


Flyer. I have Letters to deliver unto some English-factors, and they be to
supply me with necessaries. But tell me where I may find you to morrow
morning, and I will be early with you?:


Legate. ar. Harken then -- come thither early, and there you shall have me: But
by eight of the clock, I purpose to set toward Camphere (a league of; that
is, some three English miles) and so I will teach you a Mystery touching
Christ, which you never learned.


Flyer. I thank you sir: and I will willingly attend.


THE FIFTH DIALOGVE; First, between the Flyer and the Legatine-arrian:
secondly, between the Legatine-arrian and the Familist.
Flyer. GOod morrow sir, are you setting on your journey?


Legate. ar. I am: But I want means yet, for conueying a Bundle of Listes.


Flyer. Do you then deal in Cloth-listes? I have heard, that it is a very
good Merchandise. Well sir, if they be no more then these, I can easily carry
them under my Cloak.


Legate. ar. I thank you for it: you shall so save me a few Styphers.


Flyer. I have coucht them under my arm very well. Let us now set on our way.
And I pray you sir, now discourse of the Christ, as you last night promised.


Legate. ar. I will. If you mark all the limbs of Antichrist (whether Papist,
or Protestant, or Anabaptist) you shall find them ignorant (every of them) of
the true Christ. The Papist and Protestant, do hold him God and Man: So does
the Anabaptist; but with a difference. The first hold, that he is very God
essentially; and very Man of man essentially. Yet seeing the word (
Essentially) seems to be derived of the Beasts language, I will rather use
the word, Substantially.


Flyer. And I think sir, that that word savors somewhat of Romulus; for I
remember, that in their Latin Grammar, there is, Substantinum hic h^^c hoc.


Legate. ar. O, you begin to abound with the true Spirit, that will lead you
into all truth. But Countryman, as the Apostle could not sail through the
Seas, but in the Ship whose badge was the prophaine Castor and Pollux; so,
neither can we sail through these Discourses, but in words stamped with the
Image of the Beast.


Flyer. O most excellent Theologue, I never observed that comparison.


Legate. ar. You shall hear more excellent things then these. How the
Protestant and Papist do hold Christ, we have learned at home. Now for the
Dowper, that is, the Anabaptist, he holds him very God, passing through the
Virgins womb (as Wind through a pipe) taking nothing of our nature, (because
then he should be a sinner) but bringing a bodily substance with him from
Heaven: whether fetched out of the Fathers divine substance, or out of the
Angels spiritual substance, or out of the Heavens substance, they know not.
But the very truth is, He is to be held a mere Man, as was Peter, Paul, or
I: Only, whereas we have the Spirit in measure, and were borne in sin; he
had the Spirit beyond measure, and was borne free from sin. As for the
Scriptures t^arming him sometimes, GOD, it intends not his Essence, but his
office; and you know, that in such respect, the Magistrate is called God. And
herewith all let me tell you, how lately in England, I gave a Magistrate the
bag. I being conuented before him, he begins to puff, he strokes up his
forehead, and then sotted out this question. Syrrha, do you hold, that Jesus
Christ is but mere man as I, or an other man is? To whom I answered: They
abuse me, and have abused your ears, that have reported any such thing of
me. Then (quoth he again) do you deny Christ to be God? To whom I answered,
No sir; I do verily believe that he is God* Do you so? That do I, (quoth I.)
Then (quoth he) thou art of mine own Religion: Fare-fall, thy heart, for so
satisfying me, and my learned Brother here: Go thy ways, thou art an
honest-man I warrant thee. And so was I quickly dispatched. The foolish
Flat-cap thought, that by my granting Christ to be God, I had meant as he
meant; namely, God by Nature: whereas I meant, God by Office.


Flyer. O notable learning: rare learning.


Legate. ar. Now sir* it being mere Man that sinned, it must be mere Man that
must satisfy Gods justice: and therefore at first preached, That the Woman's
seed should break the Serpents head. As also, that He should be a Seed
derived from Abram, from Daui^, from the Fathers: which accordingly in his time
came to pass, and accordingly by suffering the ignominious death of the Cross,
he satisfied for man; the righteous dying for the unrighteous. Bu^ stay, is he
not some Englishman that runs after us?


Flyer. I think (sir) it is one of the Hydutch, that passed in our Ship. An
odd fellow I ween, if so one could found out his Religion.


Legate. ar. Lay your Fardle down, and that shall seem cause of our staying.
But what causes you to think he is of some odd Religion?


Flyer. For that in some discourse between him and another, he seemed to
conclude, that the Serpent which tempted Eve, was but some creeping
crookedness of mind, wynding from God. As also, that Christ and Antichrists,
were no real persons, but fashions of mind.


Legate. ar. Au, au; I know then what he is: he is a plain Familist. They teach
all their rudiments to their Children, by a familiar kind of Play, which they
term, The Interlude of Minds. It was penned by one H. N. an Hy-dutchman; who
also has left in writing very many Books of that abstruse kind of learning.
Some of our late Brownistes are entered into that Family. I know a Io. L. a
Weauer.
Weauer in L^ndon (he was sometimes a Clothier of Somersetshire, and after
that, first a Brownist, then an Anabaptist, now a Familist,) he will say, that
now in one quarter of an hour whilst he is in his Loome, he can comprehend
far greater Revelations of the spirit, then (whilst he was out of that
Family) he could in his whole life. But say you nothing, I will seem ignorant
what he is.


Familist. Sacrament a Godt; how weary I am, in running after you M. Flyer.


Flyer. I thought it was you, Hans.


Legate. ar. And you be not out of breath sir, I would we might talk of
Religion.


Familist. Marry best of all; and the spirit of Love be our direction.


Legate. arr. What Religion (I pray you) be you of?


Familist. Seeing you manifest your selves to be religiously affected: and
secondly, seeing we are out of the shot of the Magistrate, I shall freely tell
you what I am. I am of the Holy family of Love; a Family in God, and in whom
God is: for God is Love. And out of this Love, there is no being in life.


Legate. arr. Au; the Author of your Religion is H. N. or Henry Nicolaite the
German.


Familist. The Characters H. N. be Characters in the divine being, and not for
flesh and blood to attain to. They be Characters of the Prophet of Love, as a
and o (the Greek Alpha and Omega) be Characters in the Revelation of the
prophet of Grace; or rather, of the Louely-beeing; whom only the spirit of
Wisdom can attain to.


Legate. ar. You are all in your Louely-beeinges; specially, when you are all
gathered into your Church called Paradis^; and there being naked* and not
ashamed.


Familist. Floute not Brother, at the Louelybe^ing; nor at the power exhibited
of the divine influence, unto such as are Deified, and God in them Hominified.
Such perfection is in the Family of love, as nothing moves in them but
Christ, and the anointed Lou^.


Legate. ar. What make you then of this flesh, or earthly body?


Familist. That (dear brother) is nothing but the Beasts skin wherewith God
clothed Adam; which is in the end, to turn back into the mother-earth, the
spirit being then clothed with a garment that is from heaven, all beautified
with the Louely-beeing.


Flyer. Surely, this man speaks deep matter. It half astonisheth me.


Legate. ar. Your H. N. has given you a Testament, far beyond the Bibles
Testament.


Familist. Flout not Brother; for the Louely-beeing teaches all love and
meekenes with all simplicity. Did not John (a man full of the Louely-beeing)
did he not in Revel. 14.6. see an Everlasting Go^pell carried through the
midst of Heaven, to be preached to this last age; for the former Gospel
perished by the power of the Beast. The two Prophets ( Faith and Love) were
stain by him, and their carcases only remained in the streets of the Harlots
City: that is, the spirit and life of Faith and Love were gone, and only a
little outward profession of them left in the Beasts congregation. Leave your
Scripture-lea^nednesse, and submit your self to the spirit of Lo^^* and you
shall not need to be taught any thing, but as that spirit shall teach you.


Legate. ar. You are a paltry Heretic, for calling the Bibles faith, by the
name of Scripture-learnednes.


Familist Dear Brother, rail not: but submit your self to the Louely-beeing.


Legate. arr. You are a louely-Asse: and there is a lovely box on the ear for
you.


Famalist. Will you provoke me? Will you provoke me?


Legate. ar. Why a sir fool; your opinion of Love is against fighting.


Famalist. Do not provoke me brother: for though I am of that opinion, I am
yet clothed with the old flesh.


Flyer. Arrian, take up there your fardle of Lystes, and be your own Porter: I
perceive the Devil raging in thee, and the spirit of Love in him. And were it
not, that the Louely-beeing forbids me, I would conjure the Devil in you with
this Cudgel. Muffe not, speak not; take up your lowsy-Lystes, and pack about
your business, or I protest by the verity of my Faith, I will teach you to
abuse the Louely-beeing. No Church? No Christian? Then vaunt Dog, damned of
thine own conscience.


Familist Lovely Brother, feed your enemy, but beat him not. Come Brother, and
we will turn upon the right hand, and so walk together in peace, according to
the instinct of the Louely-beeing. The Port-bell ringes, it is now about the
eleventh hour: The Gates will quickly shut up for dinner time: And therefore
we will leave off talk till we come ^o some Taphuis, sparing our tongues, and
taking more of our legs.


Flyer. With heart and good will, O reverend father of Love.


THE SIXTH DIALOGVE, between Flyer and Familist.
Familist NOw M. Flyer, you are welcome to my Slaep-huis. I am glad we be to
freed of the proud brabling Arrian. He^ holds that the Son of God was the
beginning of creatures; that is in his sense, the first creature that the
Father created; as his companion the Lemurist, does also hold him to be that
created Light, which Moses says, was called out of darkness: and this because
S. John does call the Word, by the term Light. All these heretical conceits
do flow, from their literal senses of Scripture, being far from
understanding the hid things of the Law. Thereupon also insueth the
dissentions and fyerie contentions of all ^eretiques, every one maintayning ^is
own sense, with Fire and Faggot: ^hereas the spirit of Love teaches ^is
people, to be peaceaple with all, and in all outward ceremonies and ^eruices,
to be plyant to all men and their laws; becoming all unto all, ^or winning of
some: at least for their own peaceable being, in the service of the Love.


Flyer. To say the truth, I can see neither Papist, nor Protestant, Brownist
nor other, but they be void of that Love, that should abound toward all; as
Gods love is toward all. And that is a plain sign, that God is not amongst
them.


Famalist. Sure your self so. But it will not be amiss Brother now we be a
little cooled, to drink a draught of Beer. Tannikin, Tannakin, tap de kan,
Tannikin. See you (brother) that cherry-cheeked Damsel that took up there the
Stoop-kan?


Flyer. Yes; and a very proper Maiden as I have seen.


Famalist. Could you behold her naked, and not lust?


Flyer. No man were able to do that.


Familist. O, you are deceived: There is no one Goddifyed amongst us, but can
behold many of them naked, without any carnal lusting. And were no^ that
perfection here to he had, then the second Adam should be inferior to the
first Adam: and so consequently, no true recovery of Apostacy, nor entrance
into Paradise.


Flyer. Is it possible, that I should ever come unto that perfection?


Familist. Yea, submitting your self to the Louely-beeing. You must first
walk through the first days work which God creates: then through the
second: after through the third, fourth, and fifth. Coming afterward to the
sixth day, you shall become an Adam made in the likeness of God, and shall
behold Euah naked, and never be ashamed.


Flyer. This sounds somewhat which you speak: but I understand it not.


Familist Come Tannikin; how do thou Wench: let us kiss; and tell me how thy
pretty body does? --


Flyer. Why, how now sir? Are you a man that is Goddifyed, and hanges at a
Wenches lips so wantonly?


Familist. O sir, she is of the seed of the Louely-beeing. We but Love, we lust
not, as you and others would, that be out of the Louely-beeing.


Flyer. Louely-beeing call you it? Keep your Loves and your Lusts to your
self; and God give me to see mine own home again. There is money for the
Beer, and adue leaud leacherous Familist.


Familist. I pray thee sweet Brother stay, and take knowledge of the Being
that is in Love.


Flyer. That Is enough for Tannikin to take knowledge of. For my part, I can
neither look, nor think of you, but I shall be truly ashamed: and therefore
adue you shameless companions. O Lord, pardon my great sin committed against
thy Church in England: and for thy Sons sake, bring me to be truly
reconciled to that Church again. -- I return, I return; sweet Father of
Heaven, keep me in my return.


The Seventh Dialogue, between Flyer and Mediocritie.
Flyer. WHO is that which goes before? mine old friend Mediocritie?


Medocri. What M. Flyer; I heard you were gone beyond sea.


Flyer. I have been beyond sea a few days: This foreroone I but landed, and so
am setting homewardes as fast as I can.


Mediocri. I pray you what a Land is it, you hane been in?


Flyer. Surely, I can not tell. All the time was there taken up with the matter
(...) the Tongue, as I had no leisure to suruay the subject of my Feet. Bu^
this I am sure, that a man can not pass there by the by-way, but he shall be
assaulted with one transformed spirit or another. Never in my life did I meet
with such Heretics, and deceitful Hypocrites. Had I not seen, and heard,
and felt, I should never have believed.


Mediocri. I am glad, that you have learned by Experience, what you would never
learn by my tender Information. But I pray you, How stand you now affected for
Religion?


Flyer. Stand quoth ye; I have been so much acquainted with falling, as I know
not well what to say unto standing. Meeting with an Anabaptist, and
understanding the grounds of my Separation; he, by strength of the same
grounds, did beat me from that hold, and spite my heart, made me to grant a
separation from Doctrine, so well as from Discipline: so that I was ready, to
turn Anabaptist.

Then I met with a Legatine-arrian, (a perilous fellow,) he upon the grant,
of no visible-Church for the time of Antichrists reign, did unavoidably
conclude, that neither any visible Church could yet be, till God raised up new
Apostles, who might with Doctrine and Miracles, gather people to the true
Faith, and so incommend unto them the Sacraments and other Ordinances. To
him, ouernight I consented: but hark what fell out the next day in the morning.

Next day I met with a Familist. He by his talk of Love, Love, and the being
in Love, and nothing but Love, so prevailed; together with his running glozing
on Scripture, as I left all, to follow him, till I see his being in love and
lu^t, with Tannikin the Tapu^er: which shameful sight, made me to bid, Fie on
them all. And turning my face homewardes again, I plucked up my feet, to
Flushing I came, stayde the wind a while, had shipping ready, and to
Grauesend I came in a few hours. God have the praise for all his mercies.


Me^ioc^. Then I hope, that you will return again to unity with our Church.


Flyer. If I do not so, I must turn Turk, for any thing I yet see. I am
^omwhat ashamed to return; First, for that I should be thought to be
vncon^^ant: and yet constancy in a Schism, ^s but obduration in ill.
Secondly, I ^^care to become a ^^ast unto many, for ^auing so foolishly
consumed my Pa^trimonie: and yet better be flouted at ^f a few me^ for a time,
then to be perpetually iea^ed at of Devils.


Mediocri. Brother, brother, be contented to bear your shame, for passed
folly. Know, and reverence your Mother, not withstanding her wantes. Her wantes
be of the By, not of the Main. She has the Ioh. 6 68
Word of eternal life then whither will you go? Antichristianisme (as I often
told you), consistes not in every ill; for then every soul under heaven should
be Antichristian: but it consistes in such an evil as is fundamentally
opposite to the Gospel, that is, to the Doctrine of Faith. For which cause
the Apostle ^earmeth Antichrist such an Adversary, as is 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Antikeimenos, the layer of an opposite foundation. And such a one indeed, were
he an Angel from Heaven, is to be held Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
Anathematized* The very Math. 13.24.etc.
Wheate-fielde it self, (Christ's possession) has Tares not only in it, but
also in Communion with the Wheat. Yea, in so strict communion with the Children
of the Kingdom, as such euil-ones cannot be excommunicate with the good of the
Church; and therefore permitted to grow, till GOD weed them out. The Tare is
not every evil, for then every evil should grow, and the Churches censures
were idle: but they be such euil-ones, as can be no more removed with the
Churches good, then Tares from Wheat, with which it first grows up
hypocritically as Wheat: but in time, discloseth it self for a close winder
about, not an upright grower.

Wantes are to be lamented, and the good not fled from: much less condemned
for no Wheat, because it stands in some communion with Tares. Other Weeds
that grow loose from the Wheat, are timelily to be removed; and yet if the
Husbandman sometimes neglect that duty, God forbid, that we should therevppon
conclude, that all the Wheat is no more Wheat; and so no visible Christian in
the Lords possession.

Nor do the Holy things of God, cease to be Holy, because they be sometimes
conueyde to euil-ones, so well as to them be good, (even as the Rain is the
same, which God sends upon the Wheat and Tare, Herb and Weed:) but the
Holy things profaned, become 1. Cor. 11.29. etc.
Judgment to the prophaners, and yet cease not to be Holy (be it Word or
Sacrament) to the Reverend receivers.

O brother, the Sacrifices were seasoned with Salt, before they flamed on the
Alter: and so should our Souls be seasoned with Discretion, before they flamed
in our Churches. Some have Knowledge, and no Zeal; a cold house must-there be
kept: and some have much Zeal, and small Skill; no marvel if he set the
house on fire.

No man (says the Apostle) 2. Tim. 2.5
striving for a maisterie, is crowned, except he strive as he ought. This is
far from being as it ought.

1 To call our Mother (the Church) an Whore, because she has some wantes; or
in somewhat crosses our humor.

2 To spit in her face, and to run away from her, so soon as we think we
can shift for our selves.

3 To go and band our selves with other M^l-contents, for murdring our Mother,
as having no life of God in her.

4 Yea, to proclaim all her Children Bastardes. For if she were never a true
Church, never married to Christ; then could she never bring forth a lawful,
but a bastardly-seed. And so, all our holy Martyrs (dying in, and for the same
Faith) should also with us, be Aliens from the life of Christ Jesus. Fearful
actions, and blaspemous conclusions. But better it can not be with such as
withdraw unto perdition. O my soul! have no pleasure in them.


Flyer. Sweet Mediocritie, I now see the soundnes of al these conclusions,
which before Experience, I but held as pleas for corruption. God lay not that
sin to my charge; and he, for his Sons sake, reduce other wandering souls,
to peaceable unity with our Church; that so we may be as one flock, under
that one great Archbishop of our souls, Christ Jesus. Amen.


Mediocri. Amen. Now we be come to the City; and it is hy-time for him to
eat, that did not eat any thing to day. I would pray you to walk home with
me, and to take part thankfully, of such as God shall send for the present.


Flyer. I thank you sir. Having gotten the City again on my back, methinks
I am as the Prodigal, that having left a company of filthy Swine behind him,
has got his Fathers house on his bead, where he may feed comfortably, and
sleep safely.


CERTAIN POSITIONS, NECESSARILY to be held, for avoiding error: first,
touching the Church; secondly, Antichrist.
Touching the Church.

1 THE Church of God, had a visible being upon Earth, from Adam unto Christ,
or else S. Luke. 3.23. etc.
Lukes draught of the Genealogy, were to small or no purpose.

2 The Church of God, from Christ's time hitherto has, Math. 16.18. and chapter
28.20. Reu. 12 17. and chapter 21.2-3 Gal, 4.26.
and to the worlds end shall have, as true a visibilitie as the former; Christ
having no less care over his Church in her Ful-age, then he had before in her
Nonage.

3 But as the Church of the old Testament, was not always alike visible: so
neither this of the new Testament.

4 For as the Church is compared to the Moon; so in the Moon we see much
change; inowe more, and inowe less seeable and less glorious. And howsoever
sometimes she be quite latent and hid to some part of the Earth, yet to some
otherpart of the Earth, she is ever patent and visible. And even so it is with
the Church in this life.

5 And as she is compared to a Math. 13. 24. See for this, my Antidoton.
Wheat-field, in the midst whereof some enemy does secretly sow Tares: So,
she consisting of the Children of the Kingdom, shall have to her grief,
Children of the wicked, in midst of her bosom. Howsoever at the first
plantation by the Apostles through all Nati^ns, she was excellently visible;
yet afterward her Field is ouergrowne with evil, to the vexation of waking
Ministers: And so she is to continue with grieuance of spirit, till the great
Harvest time, that there can be a separation made, without violence v^^o her
body.

6 As she was represented by 1 Cor. 3 16. and 2. Cor. 6.16.
Salomons Temple, which is inowe all beauteous and rich; Inow robbed and
spoiled, anon consumed to the Earth; but afterward (as Ezekiel saw) raised
up with greater glory: Even so, the Church in her beginning was glorious; by
Kinkes bringing their Crowns to it, she became Rich. Afterward, sacrilegious
persons fleeced her of her Plate, carrying it into the house of their God
Belly, not Bell. And in the end, she shall be laid flat with the Earth, and
pass as refyned through Fire. But an happy Resurrection shall be made, to the
augmentation of her glory-eternall. And that, and no other is her Re-plantation.

7 Idolatry set up in the Hy-places of Israel, from the time of their 1. King.
12. 18.
Schism from Judah, till their deportation, it never caused a Nullitie of the
Church, howsoever a Diminution. And therefore it was, that the Lord not only
called Israel his people, but also, raised up As Elias. Eli^^a, Hoseih, Amos,
Jonah, with others.
Prophets unto them continually; having also amongst them, whole schools of
Prophets, and Prophets children, even in the corruptest times. The same may be
said of Judah, when Idols were reared up in the Temple. The like also may be
remembered of Israel in Aegipt, Ezekiel. 20. 5. etc. The reason is rendered:
sometimes for the sakes of a few, he spares many. Sometimes again, he will
not take the advantage against her, for his own names sake.

8 Sometimes the Church restes in orderly constitution, as in Iude^: sometimes
shaken out of order, as was the Apostolical Church at Jerusalem; and carried
away captive, as the Jews were for seauentie years. And yet, whether in
Constitution or out of Constitution, ordered or disordred, she was true^y
visible; Secundum Maius and Minus. A less privilege, the Church of the New
Testament, cannot have.

9 That Commandment in Math. 18. Tell the Church, is an affirmative
iniunction, as is that, Three times a year every male shall come to Jerusalem.
As these three times a year could not be observed, when they were in
Captivity: so neither the Church could be told, but when she was vnscattered,
and in some tolerable constitution. Commandments Affirmative do not always
bind; but Negatiues do. No evil forbidden, may be done at any time; but many
Affirmatiues enjoined, may sometimes be lawfully undone, because the occasion
or means of doing them, is lacking. The Romanistes therefore press that Dic
Ecclesiae to no purpose.

10 The Church so always, having some visible face, it must ineuitably follow,
that Hel-gates never prevailed against her. And so by consequent, that that
doctrine of Faith in Christ which Peter peached in Math. 16. it never failed in
the Church, but of some of her members, have been held and preached truly and
effectually; and so, that is, the In Revel. 14.6. it would be turned, The
everlasting Ghospel; rather then, An eue^lasting Gh^spel.
Everlasting Gospel spoken of in the Revelation, which in the last times
(maugre the Beast) is preached as far as the Heavens extend.

Touching Antichrist and Antichristianisme.
1 ANtichrist, implies either one that is opposite unto Christ; or one that
takes falsely upon him, the place of Christ. If he take upon him the place of
Christ, it is (as the counterfaite Lamb in Reu. 13.) to dispense salvation by
a contrary means; as is the doctrine of Justification (before God) by Works;
the Gospel saying the contrary, Gal. 2.16.
Not by Works, but by Faith.

2 As he is opposite unto Christ, so specially (and in Scripture-sense, in a
manner, only) for that he teaches a contrary Gospel; that is, A glad
tydinges contrary to that of Christ: and so it comes to the former, according
to his title Antike^menos, observed from the 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. given also in 1.
Cor. 16.9. to such as opposed to the foundation of Faith, preached by the
Apostle. Sottish therefore be such Schismatiques, as have taught, that every
evil is Antichristianisme. They may as well say, that every one of Gods
Children has Antichristianisme in him; and in sinning whatsoever sin, he is
an Antichrist. And as foolish have they been, who conclude all (under any
Apostaticall Pope) to be damned as lymmes of Antichrist, when as under the most
corrupt regiment, many (howsoever ignorantly stained with sundry evils) have
held the Ghospels 1. Cor. 3. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
foundation, even the doctrine of Justification, most truly and soundly: Sed
vno m^lo concesso, sequuntur Infinita.

3 Antichristianisme so properly understood, is a matter of Doctrine, not of
Discipline: a matter of Faith, not of external Policy. And not of any
Doctrine, or any Faith: but a Doctrine opposite to that Faith which is to be
had in Christ Ies^ only, for perfect justification. An^ that adverse Doctrine,
is as that stin^ of the Locust-scorpion in Revel. 9^ which exceedingly payneth
the se^duced soul, bringing it to plain des^peration. For howsoever the
doctrine of Justification by Works, does look^ amiably at the first blush; yet
when that soul shall lay her Works to the balance of the Law, it shall be so
farr^ from finding comfort in it, as it shall despair, and seek by untimely
death^ to strangle the Remembrance of it.

4 The Antichrist, or Antikeimenis^ considered then as one Man, is the whole
corporation of such people, a^ teach an opposite ground, to the ground of the
Gospel; whereupon unhappily, they may build much other evil: but all that is
of the By, no^ of the Main; and yet condemnable also: With which By, or evil
accidents, the truest Church and Christian, in this life, has, is, and shall be
more or less cumbred; and yet no^ ^^erefore Antichristian, seeing she and ^ey
be sound in the foundation of ^^e Gospel. For the Foundation ^eld, there may
be Straw, and other ^ooleries (through ignorance or ^eaknes) builded upon it,
nothing ^utable to the ground, and yet the ^uilder saved, though (as the
Apostle teaches) 1. Cor. 3.15.
it be as by the Fire. But a contrary foundation laid and held till the end, it
avails nothing what Gold and Silver was builded upon it; for the foundation
sinketh, and man and all (standing upon it) perishes.

5 This 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
Man of sin then, must be considered, not only in the whole, as one
Corporation; but also in the parts or members, which concur to the being of
that Body: and both of them according to their Place or situation. The
principal members of that body, are registered of S. lo^n in his Apocalips, to
have the Seven hilled City (Rome) for their place. The members in
subordination to the former, are of him compared to Waters, for their multitude
and variable noy^^ of language, because that Rome w^^ to have, people of many
Language^ subject to the Doctrine, that should flow from that Sea. What soul
the^ soever (whether in the Church of England, or other true Church) shall
submit it self to Antikeimenisme, it longs to the Romish-head. And
whatsoever soul, within the territories of Rome, shall submit it self to the
contrary foundation which is in Christ Jesus, such a one appertains to that
body, whereof Christ is the head: and indeed, is a fellow member with us. For
every one that walks, eats, and sleeps in a Kings Court, is not
therefore of that Court: no^ every one that dwells, and has ordinary
communion with a Kingdom, is therefore one with that King in the foundation of
subjection. None therefore, can ius^ifie all within a true vsible Church, nor
condemn all that be within the Beasts visible Kingdom; seeing all Within it,
are not essencially Of it. Being one in the foundation, one is so Essencially
of it: but ^f severed in the fundamental point of obedience, then such a one
is but a member Accidental^y. And Accidents, specially proceeding of weakness,
may burn and be consumed, without detriment to the foundation, or him that in
humility rests upon it.

6 Which ground held, the Romanist is easily answered: He asks Where our
Church was 200. years since? I answer; As there might be some part of the
Church, in some part of the earth, though to us unknown, even as we are
unknown to some parts of the earth: so, our Church has been where their
Synagogue has been, and many of the members of it, still persecuted by them.
Besides, they were to come into the Church, 2 Thessalonians* 2.4
as Tares came into the Wheat-field, by way of usurpation, not right. And this
the Apostle foretold, when he says, that the Antikeimenist should sit in the
Temple of God. God reared a spiritual Temple at Rome, (as appears in the
Apostles Epistle to that Church) but afterward, the Man o^ sin entered into
the Lords House, and there not only labored, to ouerturne the foundation laid
in Christs-blood, but also laid a contrary ground as fast, as he could pull up
the other. Upon which, that Church became for constitution, like unto the ten
Tribes of Isra^l, when their Calves were reared up: Which Calfe since, in the
time of the Romanistes, is turned to a Bull; howsoever we (with Judah) cannot
meet with the Popes Bull, but we bait him. The verity of all this will better
appear, when having read the Epistle to the Romans, it shall be examined,
whether we or they, be furthest departed from the verity of that Doctrine,
which that Church first held: And then I am sure, that their part of the Cake,
is like to prove dough: Amen. But as for the Romanist, he falls into the error
of the left hand: and that kind of error, may come to be touched in his season.

Thus briefly, touching the Church, and that her adversary, Antichrist*

THE SHEPHERDS Elegiaque Epilogue.
YOu Shepherds of our Lawnes, leave off your lays,
Alack (for woe) these be no ioying days.
While many of our Sheep do peake aside,
Staring for Daintrels, in their height of pride,
(O welladay) then prowling Reinard tears,
And learing Wolves do take them by the ears;
And from their iowles do squeaze the crimsen die*
Wherewith life ends. Accursed Phlebot^mie.
Or if you needs must strain an Oten-pipe,
O let' be green, so shall it cry and shrike;
And bubble forth some iucy fainting tears,
Which may procure some mones of all it hears.
A need of Iakobs Staff (if e're) to beat
Back these blood-suckers, which make Lambs their mea^
Poor Lambs their meat, alack and welladay;
Wring hand in hand, in room of Roundelay.
Aminta'^ Crown (f^^ she was worth a Crown)
Her Head I found (last day) aback the Down.
There little Lucrece with her specked powle,
Was fleest of all her Wool, poor pretty soul:
But as she ready was to gasp last breath,
I came (goodha^) and rescued her from death*
Black Will that time was joorring of the Fox,
And so escapt, with loss alone of locks.
Great Megge was tangled in a cursed Bryer,
Bald-pa^ed all, like to an holy Friar,
That lately had been in the Pollers hands:
I troe (she will no more come in these bands.
But ayes me man, aback the Poplar tree,
Where Shepherds eat their shaled Pease with glee,
And in the Trench (about that Table square,
Compact of Dazy soddes, but now all bare)
There, there (woes me) three Tups have left their lives,
With sundry seores of their poor Lambs and Wives.
Here lies a lock, and there a scrap of skin,
The botthom of the Trench, the bloods lies in:
And then (vile sacrilege) the upper seat
Where Vmpire of the Shepherds sits at meat:
There, there the Wolves have trampeled and trod,
And cast their Gorge upon the Royal sodde.
Ye Shepherds of our Lawnes, it rests, All
Join heart and hand, for keeping of our Stall.
We negligent have been (indeed) too long,
While cruel Cattle are become too strong.
We sing of matters far beyond the Sun,
While all this mischief, here at home is don.
I fear, I fear, that some in Shepherds pay,
Be one in night with Wolves, with us ^ the day.
Iwis, our Master can but take it evil,
His Sheep through lack of food, run to the Deuell.
Not every Sonet is for selfsame turn,
(For some c^use joy, and some enforce to moorne)
Strew, strew that fodder, fore your Charges faces.
Which may them keep, from foraigne vncou^h places.
And with your eye so lead them in the way,
As (sylly-soules) they may no longer stray.
They may no longer stray, but able be,
Through all their flattring stratagems to see.
Mean time I moorne, I moorne Maryahs stray,
Return that Sheep o Lord; o Lord I pray.
Return I humbly pray, Return them all,
That truly long unto our Masters stall.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 25. line 20. read implying.

Page 33. line 17. read Midianite.

Page 34. line 12. read calling.

Page 46. line 11, read Antichri^t.

Page 53. line 4, read peaceable.


