DAVID'S CATECHISM.

By E. A.

MICAH 7.8. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, though I fall I shall rise
again.

PSALM. 94.17. If the Lord had not helped me, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

LONDON, Printed by G. ELD. 1623.

TO The right Honorable, right Reverend, right Worshipful, Worshipful; and
all his religious, worthy, faithful Friends: with the Oblation of his Mite, E.
A. wishes the increase of honor and happiness here; and everlasting joy and
felicity hereafter.
YOU, who are the Center of my divided distracted affections, in whose retained
favor they meet and are united: the knowledge of your devotion unto GOD, and
affection unto my self, whilst I lived and exercised my Ministry amongst
you, and the experience thereof in my extremity, when my pains in Catechizing
and Preaching was rewarded with no little damage to my function, state, and
person, presses me out of press, to send this little Tractate, with the
grateful acknowledgement of what I owe unto you: For those that know me well,
well know, that I owe you more then I am, besides that debt, which though I
daily pay can never satisfy. Accept this then, I beseech you, such as it is
(for unto you it is due) with the best interpretation, Sorrow being the Scribe,
and Distraction the Inventor. I bring you here in a plain dish, not curiously
dressed, such a service as I well know your soul loves; which, I suppose, some
Dogs will be snarling or snatching at, till vengeance, that dogs them at the
heels, Iesabel like, devours or excludes them aedibus sedibus. Holy things then
be wholly theirs that be holy: matters divine for persons devout are most fit
for use and employment. I have therefore unto you dedicated this little
Catechism of DAVID's because you are loyal, of the fear of GOD, because you
are religious. It is little that you may read it, plain that yours also may
understand it. It has Antiquity, and necessity; profit, and pleasure to plead
for it: entertain it then, if you please; it will pleasure you for
Confirmation, and yours for Information: And the LORD multiply upon you both,
his best blessings, for CHRIST JESUS his dear Son's sake. AMEN.

Yours in all humble observance, obliged and devoted, EDWARD ALPORT.

The Author being absent at the impression, the Printer prays you to correct
these faults.
IN the second page of the Epistle place a parenthesis before (sorrow, and
after Author). p. 1. l. 11 for this read the. p. 8. l. 27. for ever r. even.
p. 10. l. 4. for perior r. pronior. p. 10. l. 11. for tread r. lead. p. 12. l.
13. place the comma at well after then. p. 22. l. 19. for of r. hereof. p. 23.
l. 27. for ACAE r. ACHAB. p. 27. l. 13. for hands r. hand.

TO THE READER.
Christian READER,
I Conceive how difficult an adventure it is, to put my poor Talent unto
public view, seeing greater graces kept in silence: But, I know how hard it is
to hide, and therefore deem it better to hazard it then my self.

View then the matter which may pleasure thee, and favor the Author with the
furtherance of thy prayers; and the Author of every good gift, give thee faith
and fear here, and the end of both hereafter: In suite for which, I remain
pressed ever ready unto any Christian Office.

Thine in all Christian duty, E. A.

DAVID 's Catechism.
SInce the ancient and laudable constitution of our Church, and profitable
practice therein of Catechizing Children is so much slighted and neglected in
this declining age of the world, that many, not caring for GOD, fall out with
the Man and means which should make them good and godly. It has pleased this
King's sacred Majesty, in his princely care of his people, and zeal unto Gods
glory, (by especial Command) to revive the same.

I, though the meanest of my brethren, yet a Minister of the Gospel of Christ,
thought it my duty, not only to perform the same in my particular charge; but
also (according unto my ability) to publish unto the view of others, the
Antiquity and necessity thereof, in the exposition of these words of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 34.11.

Come ye Children, Text, Psalm. 34.11
hearken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

In handling of which words, I will speak;

First, Division.
of the Parties who are invited to Hearken; Children: Come ye Children,
hearken unto me.

Secondly, of him that will teach them, DAVID; a Prince, and a Prophet: I will
teach you.

Thirdly, and lastly, the Lesson which he will learn them, The fear of God:
I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

First, concerning the Parties who are invited to hearken,

I observe these three things: 1, their Name. 2, their Invitation. 3, their
Direction.


First, their Name: Children.

Secondly, their Invitation: Come.

Thirdly, their Direction: Hearken. Come ye Children, hearken.

By name they are called children, Varro.
Pueri, quasi puri; as Iuvenis from Iuvans: a child is called puer, because he
is Pure.

I know that Children in this place, may be taken for all Inferiors, and
subordinate estates of men: yea, an old man too, Isai. 65.20. Puer contum
annerum.
whose age has snowne down winter upon his head; whose hayres be heralds of
prudence, centum annorum, may be a child, for his puerisenes. How be it, the
ancient Fathers use the word more strictly, either for them who had newly
received the faith; or else for Children, who learned the rudiments of
Religion, whom they elsewhere termed, Catechumenoi; Tertul. de poenit.
for Tertullian has these words, Nemo sibi aduletur, quia inter auditorum
tyrocinia deputatur, etc. where he understands by Auditors, hearers; those
only who are named altogether by Origin, Catechumenoi, who are taught the
principal doctrines of Christian Religion: And S. Cyprian says: that, Cypr.
epist. lib. 32. epist. 22. Optarus.
With consent of Ministers, Teachers and Readers, he ordained Optatus,
doctorem audientium: A teacher or instructor of hearers, id est, of young men
who were catechized. Pantaenus.
Such a Teacher of such Hearers was Pantaenus, immediately after the Apostles
time, Clemens
in the Church of Alexandria, whom Clemens succeeded in the same Office: and
after him followed Origin, Origin.
Clemen's Scholar, being chosen and ordained by Demetrius, then Bishop of
Alexandria: Hercules. Greg. Nyss. Orat. 1.
and Hercules succeeded Origin.

Again, Gregory Nissen, in his first Oration, gives us to understand; that,
The Pastors of the Church, in the beginning, auditoribus proponerent, did
deliver unto their Auditors, or hearers, certain easy lessons of Religion, as
it were their A, B, C; and then by degrees they explained and opened unto them
more hard and hidden mysteries of Divinity. All which serve for proof of what
I have alleged already, to wit; that, by Children, the ancient Fathers
understand their Catechumenoi, young men trained up in the rudiments of
Christian Religion. They therefore, who are to learn the doctrine of the
beginning of Christ, Heb. 6.11. Mat. 18.3.
as the Apostle speaks, they I say are styled Children. And CHRIST says:
Nisi conversi ac facti ut pueruli, nequaquam ingrediemini in regnum Coelorum,
which Christ himself has demonstrat in his own person, becoming a Child for
us, and leading us the way. These, I say, are in many things like unto those
Catechumenoi I spoke of before; for, they were taught a Catechism, id est, A
Christian form of Religion; and so must these: they gave an account of their
faith; and so must these: they learned plain and easy doctrine: at the first,
but afterward increased in all knowledge in heavenly things; and so must these.

Now, as in some things the condition of these much resembles theirs; so, in
others (through the favor and grace of GOD) they far excel them: for, these
are descended of christian parents; those were born, some of Infidels, some of
Heretics, some of mere strangers from the covenant of grace.

With these, Baptism goes before instruction, and Catechizing: with those,
Catechizing went before Baptism. This I prove by the seventh decree of the
first Council of Constantinople, 1. Conc. Constantinop. Can. 7.
where the right or custom in the western Churches of receiving Heretics,
after hearty sorrow and repentance for their sin, is described. The Decree
speaks thus: The first day we admit them to be Christians, the next day
Catechumenoi, id est, young Scholars in the faith: Elementarios ac quasi fidei
tyrones: they are the words of the Council: The third day we receive them,
Ter insufflando, by breathing three times into their faces and ears; and then
we baptize them for men borne of unbeleeving parents, or Heretics, or
Infidels.

The Council did well to provide, that they should make confession of their
faith before they received that Sacrament, which is the seal of our adoption.
But for us, who are descended of the faithful, we are baptized in our
infancy; because, that as the Covenant of Circumcision, made unto Abraham, did
belong unto all the Children of Abraham; so does Baptism, which succeeds in
the place of Circumcision, belong unto all the Children of the faithful.

What then? must they therefore refuse instruction who are baptized already? No
verily; for, they are baptized, that, as soon as they are able to comprehend,
with all Saints, the good will of GOD; so soon they should begin to learn to
know GOD, and to set forth his glory, according to the charge at Baptism: and
therefore this custom of Catechizing, and teaching Children the rudiments of
Religion, is so ancient as DAVID himself; and so much in use in the Apostles
time, that the Apostle Saint Paul, Gal. Gal. 6.6.
uses the words (...), him that is taught, and him that has taught him; as
our English has in most translations: We might as well translate him that is
catechized, and him that has catechized him: for, (...) being derived of (...)
and (...) notes as much as Personare, or Circumsonare, To have our ears sound
again with wholesome precepts taught or catechized. Tull. Offic. lib. 1.
Tully does express this word to the life, saying: Vtile est aures tuas
talibus vocibus undique circumsonare.

As this custom of Catechizing has been ancient: so, how needful it is,
Necess.
experience can witness; for, Catechize and instruct Young men and Children in
the fear of the Lord, and the knowledge of his Commandments, they will take
delight therein while they live: as otherwise, and much rather, teach them
fables, lies, and vanities, and they will never forget them; like to the Caske,
Quo semel est i^buta recens serv^^^ odorem Testa diu Horat. epist.
which ever savoreth of the first liquor which is powered into it, whether it
be good or bad, that pleads prescription to all that shall succeed after;
therefore DAVID bids Children, Come to hearken unto him: and Solomon, his Son,
says: Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not
depart from it: who, being about 12 years of age, gave that profound Sentence
concerning the true mother of the child: Luke 2.42.
and our Savior, at that age, disputed with the Doctors. And therefore that
old ill Proverb, hatched in Hell, Angelicos in Satanam verti, ubi
consenuerint: Young Saints, old Devils, is here confuted, and sent back to the
place from whence it came.

Should we not begin betimes? Circumcision was commanded on the eighth day,
and Baptism any day sooner; that, as Hercules in his Cradle, Monstra superavit
prius quam nosce possit: so we might, in Baptism, ever vanquish the Devil
before we know him. Samuel, so soon as he was weaned, 1. Sam. 1.24.
was consecrated to the Lord. But many will be Mammothrepti, rather then
Ablacta^j; rather never weaned, then consecrated to the Lord.

And, lest any should deem the female Sex exempted from such exercise, I will
propose 2 only Hieron. ad Laet. de Instit. filiae. And Hieron. ad Gaudent. de
Infant. educ. First the Psalms, then the Proverbs, then Eccles. then Job, then
the Gospels, then the Acts, then the Epist. then the books of Moses, of the
Kings, of Chron. of Esd. of Hester, and last of all the Canticles, Horat. are
poetic.
examples, the one of Paula; the other of Pacatula: the one, the daughter of
Laeta; the other of Gaudentium: both young, both Virgins; unto whose Mothers,
Jerome gives direction, what books of the Scripturs in order, when, and how
they should read them; and what use they should make of them. And the
Israelites were charged to teach their Children the things that GOD had done
for them; because commonly, men never forget that which they have learned in
their younger years: for example, A Young man hears a lewd tale, or beholds
an unchaste spectacle; he remembers the same a great deal better then if he
had heard a grave Sermon, or godly exhortation; because he takes more delight
in vain things, then in godliness. And no marvel; for, a Young man is Cereus
in vitium flecti. And, one better learned in Divinity then he, even S.
Augustine himself makes it good, saying: Adolescens is ponior ad peccandum.

Who sees not how prone the cogitation of a young man's heart is unto that
which is evil? And yet, who will not confess, that good and wholesome counsel
and instruction will sanctify his thoughts, and make him tread a godly life?
Wherefore, the counsel of Virgil, Virg. georg. lib. 2. Quintil. li. 1. cap. 3.
Adeo a teneris consuescere multum est, is fit for all youth; because, as
Quintilian says: Frangas citius, quam corrigas quae in pravum induruerunt:
Evil customs are hardly broken off; if a man accustom himself to any
notorious vice, while he is a young man, verily, he does seldom or never
leave the same all his life long. I will go no further then the profane
swearer, who will witness what I say to be true: I seldom heard of any young
swearer, that in elder years could wholly leave his swearing: If there be any
amongst them, better natured, or better nurtured then others, they will
ingenuously confess, being admonished of their fault, that, they knew not
whether they did swear, or no: Thus, with their oaths, their fearful oaths,
as with so many spears, they wound the sides of CHRIST at unawares; and yet,
like drunken men, they know not what they do.

Is it then so dangerous for a young man to accustom himself unto evil
ways? Is it so hard for any, that takes delight in sinning, to be reclaimed?
Then, let every young man give heed unto instruction; let him be willing to
be Catechized: let him be an auditor and hearer of those lessons which shall
be taught him: Prove. 2.3.
let him call for knowledge, and cry for understanding, and seek for her as
gold, and search for her as for treasures: let him attend unto the Invitation,
and follow the Direction, and he shall understand The fear of the Lord, the
total of my Text. Thus much for the name, Children.

Invitation, in this word, Come; which is but a word, The Invitation.
and therefore but a word of it. And, though it be but a word, yet it bids us,
Come, that CHRIST at the last may say, Come. And so, like a Scholars, or
Saints Bell, it rings and rouses us from the bed of carnal security, and
invites us unto the Church and School of CHRIST, to listen willingly. How
little any excuse will prevail, that in S. Lukes Gospel will satisfy; Luke
14.18
where, though all their excuses were made, Vnanimiter, jointly; yet were they
all, Inaniter, vainly: unless to incense the Master of the Feast the more
against them. Come then, well and welcome, unto

The Direction, The direction.
Hearken. It is not then sufficient to Come; for, so do some, whose desire is,
soon to be gone, or, fairly to fall asleep: so that, if at all, they must
be taken napping, Ecclus. 22.10.
Who so tells a fool of wisdom, is as a man which speaks to one that is
asleep, when he has told his tale, he says: What is the matter?

Some come as to the waters of Marah, Exodus 4.15.
to be made bitter, rather then better.

Some, Act. 19.32.
like those in the 19 Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, The more part knew
not wherefore they were come together. Yea, many may come like the Sodomits unto
Lots door, with open eyes, yet see no better then Bats. I will therefore tell
you as my Text tells me, wherefore you must Come: To hearken.

Come ye Children and hearken.

Before we can possibly attain unto the knowledge of any thing whatsoever,
we must first hear the same expounded unto us: and therefore it is not (I
suppose) without great reason said: that, Hearing is the sense of learning;
because, men can never learn that which they never heard. I confess, some
question hereof may be made, because Aristotle seems to say as much of the
sight, Arist. motaph. lib. 1 cap. 1.
in the first Chapter of the Metaphis. where he calls the sight, Sensum
cognitionis: The sense of Learning.

Although we confess indeed, that the sight is a most excellent Sense: yet,
in this case, Philosophy must give place unto Divinity; and the Eye to the
Ear. Listen then unto Lactantius, Lactant. inflit. lib. 3. ca. 9.
better read in Gods book then Aristotle, who says: Plus est in auribus quam
in oculis situm, quoniam and doctrina et sapientia percipi auribus solis
potest, oculis solis non potest: There is more in man's ears then eyes, for
that learning and wisdom may be obtained by the ears only, but not by the
eyes: and we see many blind men excel in wisdom and learning: but deaf men,
not any. The Apostle S. Paul Romans 10.14
makes it plain in the tenth to the Romans, saying: How shall they call on
him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Whence, in a
word, it appears, that, Without special revelation, or extraordinary
calling, no man ever knew GOD at any time, or believed in him whom he has
sent, JESUS CHRIST, but by hearing the Word preached, 1. Cor. 4.1.
and being Catechized by them who are the Ministers of CHRIST, and the
disposers of the secrets of GOD.

So then, they that are desirous to know how good and gracious the Lord is:
They that will know, what the will of GOD, and fear of the LORD is: They that
long after the news of their salvation, let them bring their attentive ears
with them to the Churches and congregation of the faithful, and there let them
hear what the spirit says unto the^ by the Ministers, that thereby they may
believe and be saved.

If then these things be so? Who will deny, that there is a great necessity of
this charge of the Prophet DAVID in this place?

Now, as it is necessary to hear with their bodily ears, so is it much more
needful to hear with the ears of their understanding: whence, S. Augustine
has observed, A two-fould hearing: 1, Auditus Corporis. AND, 2, Auditus Cordis.


Acts. 26.24
Festus heard Paul preach of the death and resurrection of CHRIST, but he
wanted the ear of understanding, and therefore he cried out with a loud
voice: Paul, Thou art besides thy self, much learning has made thee mad. at
JESUS feet, and heard him preach, did hear with both ears; as well of the
understanding, as of the body: And therefore CHRIST pronounces of her: Luke
10.24
that, She had chosen the good part, which should not be taken from her. And
S. Hiero has these words on the 1 Chapter of Joel: Hieron. in 1. Cap. Joel.
Auditus in sacris Scripturis non est iste sonus qui in aure resonat, sed qui
in cord percipitur, iuxta illud, Qui habet aures audiendi audiat: The good
Father is of opinion; that, As often as mention is made of hearing in the holy
Scriptures, we are to understand the hearing of the heart, and not that which
sounds in the ear only; according unto that, He that has ears to hear,
let him hear. Without all doubt, the Holy Ghost, where he speaks of hearing,
labors, by all means, to persuade us unto a due understanding of those
things which we hear; for, all cannot understand at the first: What better
means then Catechizing can there be to strengthen the understanding? They
must therefore hear, and be catechized, that so they may understand. Act.
2.41.
Happy were those 3000 souls, even 3000 at once, who understandingly heard
that one Sermon of Peter's. Act. 8.3^.
And the Eunuch of Aethiopia did well to be Catechized by Philip, and hear
him expound the Prophet Isai unto him. And it was the best hour that ever S.
Augustine spent in his whole life, when he went to hear the eloquence of S.
Ambrose; for so, of a Manachie, he became a true Christian: and the rest of
Infidels became faithful; and, by coming to hear, obtained mercy at the hands
of GOD, to understand that which was taught them, and to believe in the name of
CHRIST JESUS. Wherefore, I exhort all, in the name of Jesus Christ, that, so
often as they come or repair to any divine exercise, they come to hear, and
hear to understand what the Spirit of GOD says unto them: for, when they come
and not hear, they despise the ordinance of GOD: when they hear, and not
understand, or believe, the Word becomes unfruitful unto them, and all their
hearing is in vain; which Catechizing will help. Quid est audi? Ambros.
(...). 25. in Psalm. 119.
(says S. Ambrose) non otiose dicitur, quod commune est omnibus, and suppetit
umversis ipso jure naturae, etc. What is meant by Hear, says he? It is not an
idle charge, when we are commanded to hear, since it is common unto all men
to hear, and it agrees with every man naturally. Therefore, it is not without
great cause that this charg is here given, because, many times, men hear
against their wills, and when they are otherwise occupied; yet are they wont to
hear a sound, and the voice of him that speaks: Therefore, it behooves those
that are present in body, to be present in mind, and mind to understand;
that, hearing, they may hear; and, seeing, they may see the wondrous things of
the Law; the power of the Gospel; the fear of the Lord; the efficacy of the
Spirit; and the strange and admirable operation of the fear and word of the
LORD.

It is written of the Jews, that they heard the mysteries of the Law, but they
did not understand the same: wherefore the Lord says: Hear O my people, and I
will speak unto you. Now, the word of GOD is spiritual, therefore hear
spiritually. When the Voice spoke from heaven, what did it say? Surely, nothing
else, but, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; Mat. 17.3
hear him: to show, That we are sooner drawn to believe in the Son of GOD,
by hearing, then by any sense besides. Provided, Mat. 4.24. Luke 8.18.
that we take heed what we hear; how we hear; and whom we hear: for,
many are night walkers, but light talkers; Philip. 3.18
being enemies of CHRIST's Cross: have the show of godliness, but deny the
power thereof in their heart: whose meat is their maker, and belly their god;
whose body being given to ease, and mind to content, shun labor, be it
never so wholesome: fly affliction, be it never so holy. Tell them of
catechizing, they will say: It is novelty: inform them of right hearing, they
will answer; It is foolishness, though, indeed, it be the same which makes us
wise unto salvation.

Theophrastus in Plutarch, could say: Plutarch de Auditione.
that, Hearing, of all other Senses, especially, engenders greatest motions
and perturbations of the mind: and I may say: that, It brings greatest joys
and delights unto the Inner man, and unto the spirit; for, hereby our faith in,
and fear of the LORD is bred in us: our hope is increased: our patience
confirmed: our godly meditations enlarged: our affiance strengthened: sin
abated: Satan foiled: and the powers of Hell and Darkness vanquished and
overcome. Wherefore, I say no more then the Spirit has said in the Revelation:
Rev. 2.29
Let him that has an ear, hear. And thus much be spoken of the parties who
are to hear: and consequently, of their name, Invitation and Direction.

Now, of the person whom they are to hear, in this word ME: or, the party who
will teach them, in these: I will teach you: which, because they belong both unto
one person, I will not sever them, but for unity and peace sake, conioyne them:
and as M. Curious says: Duos parietes de eadem fidelia dealbare: where you may
see the blessed Prince of peace and lover of unity, proposing unto his people a
rule in Divinity.

Those then who desire to know this was whom they were to hear; here my Text
tells them, DAVID himself: Come ye children and hearken unto me; ME, your
Prince; ME, your Prophet: And I, your Preacher; I, your Father (for so he was
unto them) will be your Teacher: I will teach you. He, having as it were, the
Sword in one hand, and the word in the other: one, teaching; the other
terrifying them: for, terrifying, and not teaching, may savor of tyranny: and,
to teach, and not to terryfie, may make them lazy. Therefore, he uses his
Princely power in his Prophetical Office: I will teach you, etc. Here is
teaching with authority.

This perfect pattern of a complete Prince, not pictured in Plato, nor feigned
in Xenophon, but formed according to GOD's own heart, is here really, and
royally paralleled by his sacred Majesty, our Gracious SOVEREIGN: informed,
by Gods Spirit, in all holy knowledge; and conformed unto DAVID himself in all
godly practice.

His sanctified wisdom and knowledge, my heart does rather joyfully conceive,
then my pen can sufficiently express: his holy Commands, divine Expositions,
and sacred Directions, in his several Books, do best express.

What zeal he has ever had, and still has unto Gods House, and to set forth
his Glory; what dangers he has escaped, and thankfulness unto GOD, the
Author thereof, ordained: what a blessing He has been unto this Kingdom
disioynted, when it was, in danger of inundation, and innovation, after the
late Queens death of blessed memory, in his peaceable entrance; comfortable
union; continuance of peace, and prevention of war; preserving the truth, and
confuting error: If any be ignorant of the translated BIBLE, his own Works,
and wholesome Laws, to the joy of all loyal hearts, will ever testify him,
Wife, Learned, Good, and Godly.

And, how in this particular his most Excellent Majesty, de jure, has
resembled this princely Prophet, all Jurisdictions within his Majesty's
Dominions, de facto, can witness.

Since then, this notable authority is not built upon the notable foundation of
hearesay, but of the known truth, not denied by her adversaries; it ought much
to move all loyal hearts, to remove all lets that may hinder this godly
Exercise; and with all alacrity to stir them uppe with an earnest desire for
Gods glory, and their own good, to be instructed thereby.

I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

First, I will speak of the Quality; then of the Object.

Fear, in holy Scripture is diversely taken: but especially, two ways. First,
1. Reg. 17.
And the good Theefe's words unto the bad, upon the Cross, were these: Fear
thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? (as if he had said)
Art thou so destitute of grace, as not to consider the place and case wherein
thou art? Have thou no fear or awe of him who now takes vengeance, and
executes judgment upon thee for thy former sins and iniquities? How dare
thou still persist to revile and rail upon this innocent and just Man? Fear
thou not GOD? And by this Fear, DAVID directs all men, erring in this veil
of misery; saying, Stand in awe and sin not. Psalm. 4.4.
PSALM. 4.4.

Secondly, Fear is taken for the whole worship and service of GOD: And so it
is to be understood in this place: as if he should say, Listen unto me and I
will teach you the true worship of GOD according unto that of the Prophet
Isaiah 29, Isai. 29.13.
where God says: Their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men: (id
est) Their Religion, and manner of worship was taught by man's traditions, and
not by my word. Mat. 15.
Which our Savior Christ himself interprets after the same manner: saying,
In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine the precepts of men. And
the oath that JACOB took, Genesis 31.42
Genesis 31. was by the fear of his father ISAAC (i.) by the fear of GOD which
was in his father ISAAC: as if he should say; I swear by that GOD whom my
Father adores: for God is sometimes called by names effective; Our health,
wealth, strength, and salvation: because all these come from him from whom
proceeds every good and perfect gift: sometimes obiective; Our Joy; our Hope;
our Love; our fear: because he is the object of all these, and therefore
should be the scope and end of all our worship and service of GOD affective.

Secondly, Tertull. Apol. cap. 34.
consider we then the Object of this Fear: The LORD; which Tertullian says:
Is the very Surname of GOD, and is most commonly in Scripture applied unto
CHRIST, the Second person, and that by consent of the whole Trinity: Ioh. 13.13.
by CHRIST himself, Ioh. 13. Ye call me Lord and master, and ye say well,
for so am I: by his Father, Act. 2.36.
who has made him both Lord and Christ: and by the holy Ghost, in the mouth of
men: Hic est omnium dominus: Act. 10.36. Psalm. 1 10.
This Jesus Christ is Lord of all men. And DAVID himself says: The Lord said
unto my Lord, etc. Yet because the doctrine here is general; and also in the
Epistle unto the Ephesians. 4. Ephesians. 4.4.
the Apostle applies the word unto the whole Trinity, Vnus Dominus: it will
not be amiss here so to do. ^^.
Take then the Lord, either as he is absolute and entire of himself, his most
lively and perfect essence: Ens ille; ille qui essentiam suam a seipso habet:
or take him in his attributes and properties, wherein he is the same with
himself: for, Quicquid est in Deo Deus est. Or view him in his Justice, a
dreadful GOD, a God of vengeance: Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the
Lord. MOSES could not endure his sight, nor the people his voice: O let not God
speak unto us; that is, immediately, by himself, lest we dye. Or take notice
of GOD in the sweetest property of his nature, his infinite mercy and loving
kindness, not diminishing our accounts, as the Steward in the Gospel, who for
a 100, sets down 50: but utterly can celling our bills, and blotting all our
wickedness our of his remembrance.

Consider the LORD (I say) either in his Majesty, or Mercy: as he is a God of
vengeance or patience, he is to be feared. This Fear of the Lord, Psalm.
111.10. Eccles. 12.13 Psalm. 145.15 Psalm. 115.13
is the beginning of wisdom, and the end of all. Those which fear him shall be
his scholars, Psalm 145. And he will fulfill their desire and bless them all
great and small his hands is over them to defend them: and his eye is upon them
like a pitiful Father, to extend mercy: Psalm. 33.17. Psalm. 103.13 Psalm. 103.9
and the merciful goodness of this Lord unto these endures for ever and ever.
And therefore they lack nothing (i.) nothing that is good for them. View this
by experience; Was there ever any that feared the Lord disappointed? How fared
it with Jacob, Job, and others his saints and servants? Psalm. 12^.^.
He has given meat unto them that fear him: yea, they are all blessed: for
the Lord's delight is in them that fear him. You have seen the benefit:
behold the beauty of this fear: The beauty of God's fear.
The fear of the Lord is a pleasant garden of blessing, and there is nothing
so beautiful as it is, the fruit of this garden is bliss, Heclus, 40.27
and nothing so beautiful as it is.

You have heard of the parties invited by Name and Direction, if you did
hearken to the word, Hearken: and of him that taught them, DAVID, a Prince and
a Prophet: and of the benefit and beauty of God's fear, the lesson for our
learning, by me; though neither Prophet, Amos 7.14
nor Son of a Prophet: yet by the grace of GOD, I am that I am, a Servant of
GOD and Preacher and prisoner of Jesus Christ: Paul to Philem. August. Fam. 10.
ser. 16. p. 49.
and say with S. August. Domino iubente loquor, quo terrente non taceo: The
Lord commands me, wherefore I speak; he threatens if I forbear, and
therefore I dare not keep silence.

Learn this Lesson then, Application.
for the worthiness of the Author, and worth of the matter; both giving life
unto our learning. But what, can every man learn? will some say. I answer:
Has God given unto every one, an ear to hear; a tongue to speak; a heart to
understand; and a memory to bear away, let him pray unto GOD, who made the
deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the simple, to understand; the sick and
the diseased to remember the great works of the LORD: he will much rather
open his ears, that he may hear; untye his tongue, that he may speak;
mollify his heart, that he may understand; and strengthen his memory to
retain the same: provided, that herewithall he join his own industry and
pains; which is, obediently and reverently to frequent the Congregation; to be
catechized and instructed. Repetition is practiced in other Arts and Sciences,
although in none as it ought more then catechizing in Divinity. If we cannot
repeat what we have learned in other Arts, it is a plain proof, we have not
learned them as we should. And shall we be thought to have learned many
things, nay indeed, any thing in Religion, when we cannot render an account of
the Articles of our Creed, or the ten Commandments.

Give me leave to propose the 400 Catechizing houses which were in Jerusalem*
as also, our English traiterous Seminaries, for an example of pains and
industry unto you: learn of those Scholars of Antichrist, who are so studious
in their generations, to be likewise studious, painful, and desirous to be
catechized and instructed in the ways of godliness. If you use the same
diligence that they bear the world in hand they do, you may prove as learned
as they are accounted: As they be learned in the language of the Caldeans, so
may you be learned in the language of Canaan: as they are taught to maintain
the pride of that Romish Strumpet, so may you be furnished with all good
knowledge to maintain the simplicity of the Gospel, and true Religion: they,
Antichrist; you, our Lord and only CHRIST: they, the Pope you, the true and
ever living GOD.

Wherefore, in a word, use all diligence, and with diligence, join meditation
and prayer, that you may profit hereby in the fear of the Lord, and therein
provoke others to do the like; and win our adversaries, the Papists, to the
truth; who, seeing your increase in sound learning, and fear of GOD, may follow
you in both: That the idle may leave his sloth, seeing your labors: that the
ignorant may be ashamed, beholding your knowledge: the wicked liver reclaimed,
seeing your care to walk in the fear of the LORD: that you your selves may be
edified, and presented blameless at that great and fearful day of the Lord
JESUS: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost; three Persons, and one GOD
be ascribed all power, majesty, might, and dominion, both now and ever.

AMEN.

