TWO ROYAL Entertainments, LATELY GIVEN TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE
CHARLES, Prince of Great Britain, by the High and Mighty PHILIP the fourth
King of Spain, etc.

At the Feasts of Easter and Pentecost.

Translated out of the Spanish originals Printed at MADRID.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at the Pide Bull
near Saint Austins Gate, 1623.

TO THE LADY VICTORIA COLONNA, DVCHESSE OF MEDINA RIOSECO, my Honorable Lady,
whom God preserve.
THe retired life which your Excellency observes, beseeming your Widow-hood,
the Mirror and President of this Court, permitted you not to view the Mask of
my Lord Admiral: the solemnity thereof will not suffer me to pass it over in
oblivion, nor the many favors I have received from your Excellency, allow me,
to forbear the offering of it in writing unto you by way of description.

Your Servant, Andres de Mendoza.

INtellect, or understanding participating so nearly with the Deity, it
cannot be shut up under lock and key, especially in capacious minds and
Judgments, for as a fit object occurs, men beat against that iron with the
flint, and then of necessity it must needs sparkle, and yield fire. I have
always been of this opinion, that the reputation of a wise man, ties him to
more demerit, than an other ordinary man of repute, for the better satisfaction
herein of general expectation. And so in like manner one that writes of all
actions in general, he has need of the greater sufficiency, to obtain
applause and liking; because as men are different in their apprehensions, so
are they in their humors and approbations, as also besides, it is somewhat too
curious to present them every day with new inventions. There is now both a
conueniency and necessity to present to public the Mask, with which the Lord
Admiral of Castile and Leon honored their Majesty's, in celebrating the
arrival of the most renowned Prince of England in these kingdoms, whom their
Majesty's, for as many principal causes, as most important reasons, do honor
and festiuate. A royal festiuity no doubt, both to them to whom it was
dedicated, and to those who celebrated the same, he being more deeply tied
and bound unto this, than if other Lords should festiuate and entertain their
own Prince, because they are extracted of his blood (being the Basis and
foundation of all Nobility) in that both the same reason concurs with the
Admiral, besides the greatest confluence in this, of all the principal States
and Princes of Europe, a reason that may some ways excuse my rude pen, in
that the Admiral has made good in real action, the mere fictions of
Turpine, and Ariosto; if it be undervalued for the breuity, it may be exalted
in the acceptance, because as the Prince of Philosophers affirmed, History is
the true touchstone of men, and forgetfulness of a benefit is the last and
black censure of ungrateful men. The many benefits wherein (besides my
natural affection) I stand bound to this great Prince, may excuse me, let all
rare spirits admit of this so good a reason, raised from such an heroical
foundation.

On Sunday being Easter day, a solemn day in all respects, which the Admiral
made very good choice of, because as much time must be allowed for sacred, as
for profane exercises: The Queens Majesty, clothed in white, a color of
exhilaration and gladness, which the Church observes for the Annuali
remembrance of the resurrection of her dear Spouse, set out with rare jewels,
and precious stones, (whereof she has store, and the present occasion, gave
her cause to make show of them) dined in public. The Gallants of the Court
took their place with the Ladies, and the dinner drew out somewhat late,
because their Majesty's went before to the Chapel to solemnize the Feast. For
neither their festiuities, nor their years apt to take delight in them, can
draw them to omit their religious zeal; it being the principal respect of
this Monarchy, as it also has been of all other ages; for the zeal of Numa
wrought greater effects in the Roman Monarchy, than the valor of Romulus.

The Prince in like manner dined in public, attended with the assistance and
care of the Conde de Puebla, as Master of the feast, a valiant understanding
Gentleman, and Mayor domo, or Lord Steward of the Court.

The Gentlemen tasters attended, and the Earl of Bristow ministered unto him
the towell.

The King came out to evening prayer, and then there went for his Highness,
the resplendent and noble troop of all the honorable of these kingdoms, and
other strange Nobility, which are now here in great number: then followed the
Mayor domos, with their Official staves, and all the Grandes, the train
finishing in the Duke of Infantado: whose hoarie hairs, when the Sun of his
youth had passed the Zenith of his more flourishing age, entered into the silver
Sphere of Cynthia, to illustrate the world with his countenance. The King was
placed, and the Prince on his right hand, his Majesty clothed in Ash color:
with a great golden fleece, and a chain baudrick wise, which might have bard
in the Colossian Port of Rhodes, (I took this chain to be of many Crowns
linked, by four in a knot, cemented together with green and black Emerald)
and if the French say true in this, that every action of a King is Royal,
these four Crowns linked together, and hanging at his Majesty's breast, shall
be so many kingdoms. In his hat, his girdle, and for other Jewels of Diamonds,
he diminished the glory of Phoebus beams; wearing in his hat a large wauing
and aerie Plume. The Prince was in black, richly guarded after the Spanish
fashion, with the George about his neck, hanging by a watchet riban. The
enameld garter, exceeded that color in brightness, and his Majesty might as
clearly be discernd, as a Sun a midst the Stars, this not being the meanest
action and remonstrance of his prudence, that being a traveling guest who came
by Post, not being able at the instant, to shine with equal luster, he came to
participate of the Spanish Sun.

Immediately after came the English Admiral, and Oliuares, both Masters of the
horse, The Counsel of Estate, the Ambassadors of Princes, and the Chamber of
the City, great in number, but greater in blood and descent.

Being come to the Queens quarter, which was all hung with Tapistrie of Tunys,
and Petrarckes triumphs, set forth in embroyderie, well known both for riches,
and variety of invention: The Prince urged by all means, that his Majesty
would be pleased first to enter, but at last he yielded to the Kings pleasure.

The Queen accompanied with the Infanta, who was then in her Quarter, to wish
her an happy Easter, went out to receive them, apparrelled in black, and gold,
of wonderful rich and stately, whether with natural, or supernatural beauty,
for a modest passion, is a virtue supernatural. After many complements past,
they went to sit down under a cloth of Estate, which was of cloth of Gold,
three several degrees in height, of Mylan Carnation, and chaires of the same.
The Prince took place on the right hand of the Queen, and the King on the
right hand of the Infanta, they two remaining in the midst. The English
Ambassador in ordinary, dischargd the office of Interpreter, by whose relation
he saluted the Queen with a good Easter; he was answered with the like
ceremony: and having performed these courtesies and complements before the
Queen, he came to discharge them to the Infanta, who entertained him with
that modesty and gravity, as might have befitted greater years and more
experience of time. Their Majesty's manifested their alacrity, by smiling
twice, or thrice, and there arose such beautiful blushes in the Sun of the
Lady Infantaes countenance, which beheld without natural affection, could
cause no less than admiration and wonder. They returned to sit down, and while
the ladies, who were courting it among the gallants, spent the time in
expressing their several conceits; their Majesty's departed, and returned in
the same manner and form as they came, and then showed themselves at the
windows of the south Gallery Cierzo, accompanied by the Highnesses, of the
Illustrious Infants, to view the trial of arms, wherein the youth of this
great Court, showed both dexterity, and valor. In the mean while Apollo
fearing two Suns retired his light, and gave way to a Mask, which was in
this manner: There were diverse races for Careers made, rayld in with board, and
timber work breast high, within the Courts of the Palace, that of Descalzas,
and the great Court. The trembling and watrish beams of Diana, would fame have
supplied the defect of Apolloes Rays, and one might perceive that no borrowed
light (though in the absence, and obscurity of the principal) can be
comparable to light natural, though indeed those artificial did much eclipse
it, wherewith all the whole place, and the corners did shine, the progeny and
effect, of the especial care of Iuan de Castilia Corrigidor, executed in the
service and honor of his Princes, except it proceeded from the beams of that
Spanish beauty, which expected to behold the Festiuitie, who did imitate herein
the celestial Spheres, the Queen and the Infanta stood in the great gallery,
and the Prince, and the Infant Cardinal, on the left hand, accompanied with
the English and Spanish Nobility, that had no part in the Mask, and were
appointed their places. There attended on the Queen, and the Infanta, besides
the chief Ladies of the Chamber, the Countess of Oliuares, who can give a
life to all actions of greatness, and courtship, as one who (besides her own
noble disposition and nature) has for her Instructor the Count, and the
Honorable Lady of the house of Mendoza my good Lady, and the Lady of
Infantado, whose venerable gray hairs gave great respect, if the hereditary
splendour of her glorious progenitors had failed, with many other Ladies of
these Kingdoms. There stood hard by her Majesty, as her chief Mayor domo, or
Lord Steward, the glory of the Illustrious Family Pimentell, the true heir of
his Fathers house, as also of his virtues and perfections. The rest of the out
ietties, or galleries, were set with stars more relucent, (though less erring,
the glorious emulation of those in the firmament) in the other Ladies, and
Menimas, or noble youth of the Court, whose rich ornaments darted forth beams,
sent forth from their beauties, dissembling both frosts and flames, the just
revenge of some haughty souls.

The quantity of fire which was exhaled, contending to reach to their proper
sphere, dissolved the clouds of the middle region of the air, which powered
down in showers upon the earth, (the Admirals happy fortune) as it seemed she
commanded them at such a time, when she most desird to receive them: Which
being sprinkled upon the ground like deawes, as from the hand of a gardner,
the Show began from his house, by the royal Hospital of Misericordia, the
street of the Streual, that of S. Philip, and the great street, even to the
Palace, with fifty drums, trumpets, and flutes, clothd in liueries of Orange
color and white, the colors of the Lady Maria Courtino, who deriues her glory
and descent from the family of Marialua, the supreamest honor of the
Lusitanian Spain, after whom followed Diego Lopes de Zuniga, General of the
coast of Granada, as Marshall of the field, with a staff of silver in his
hand, and after him a good number of Pages and lack queies with axes, in the
livery of the Admiral, formerly seen and set down in our relation of the
Prince his entry, and Don Carlos de Zaualza Page to his Excellency, in a livery
of cloth of Orange color and silver, laid with lace, and set with black
glasses or bugles all armed, and Don Ieronimo de Esquiuel Page to the Marquess
de Alcanizas, apparelled in black, plated with silver, and in like manner
armed, mounted upon excellent horses, armed sadles, and furniture embroidered
with gold, with bucklers steele-plated, who brought along with them the cartels
of challenge, which were set upon the gates of the Palace, by the defendants,
Admiral and the Marquess, the form or tenor whereof ensues.

Don Iuan Alfonso Eurigues, Admiral of Castile, in the honor of the Lady
Maria Curtinio, will within the Court of this great Palace maintain, That love
has no need of the nourishment of hopes, for by them it is rather defamed than
encouraged, being the reward of it self, and to love again the only end of
its glory. And for a demonstration, that the noblenes of her affection will
avouch it, if any doubt thereof be made, he will maintain a course at the
Ring, from this day forward for threescore days, before or after as his
Majesty shall appoint.

And the Conditions shall be these.

With three Lances according to the law of Arms, of sufficient proof and
trial, any neglect wherein loses prize. As also, he that shall loose a piece,
or fasten it together again with any binding, incurreth the same penalty. He
that takes off the Ring, it shall answer for two Lances, that had not the like
fortune. He that hits the Ring shall enjoy the same benefit.

The same laws shall take place at the Combat, Barriers, or Tilt, for him that
breaks upon the Vizier, the Gorget, or the Target. Whose prizes shall not be
lower than thirty Crowns, nor above an hundred. Leaving the prize of greatest
worth, and best value to the election of the Ladies.

The best Lance of the man of Arms, the best invention, and the best Lance
at Tilt, to be referd to the censure of the Judges.

Who shall be, The Duke of Buckingham Admiral of England.

Don Gaspar de Gusman, Conde de Oliuares, chief Cupbearer to the Kings
Majesty's person, great Master of his horse, and one of his Counsel of Estate.

Don Iuan Hurtado de Mendoza, Duke of Infantado, high Steward of his Majesty's
house, and of his Counsel of Estate.

Don Pedro de Toledo Osorio, Marquess of Villa Franca, of the Counsel of
Estate unto his Majesty.

Don Augustine Mexia, a Gentleman of his Majesty's Chamber, and of his Counsel
of Estate.

Don Fernando Giron, of the Counsel of Estate to his Majesty.

Another Cartell.
THe Knight of the Forests who is tied by the order of his Knighthood, to
travel over mountains, and trace wild beasts, serving the great Prince of
both the Spaines to make known, that in the rusticity of the Country, there is
found the Courtly vrbanity of Love; he affirms, that they who make profession
of his exercises and Knighthood, are the Gallants that attain to highest
perfection in loving, because not knowing what hopes or delays are, they
ratify their fidelity by a silence taught them by the woods and mountains:
and this he will maintain and defend being no ways borne out by Magic
spells, but out of true valor and courage of mind, which he means to approve
and make good in the market place of Mantua Carpentana, at the day appointed by
the Caesar of both Spaines, where they shall find him within the Lists, from
the stolen beams of Dianaes light, while the sight of true resplendency, her
brother the god of Delos, combating any such as shall deny this verity: with
three pushes at the Pike, five fendants, or right down blows with the sword,
the great Prince of Selua Calidonia being present at this combat, of whom wise
men spoke by way of figure and shadow, in the famous actions of Amadis de
Gaul, and Lisuare of great Britany: and referring their trial to the
arbitrament of the Judges, which shall be the Admiral of England, Don Pedro de
Toledo, Marquess of Villafranca, and Don Ferdinando Giron, presupposing
always the conditions ensuing: That he who yields a foot back shall lose his
prize, fighting with the sword: That he who gives one blow more or less then
ordained, shall lose prize: That whosoeuers sword does break he shall return
no more to the tournament, but the prize shall be given him who thitherto has
best deserved it. Whosoever breaks, or gives a push with his Pike, or a blow
with his sword beneath the girdle, he shall lose prize: Whosoever encounters
with the sword, or the Pike, at the half length, he shall lose prize:
Whosoever lets his sword fall out of his hand, or lifts up the vizier of his
helm, or lets any piece of his arms fall, he shall lose prize. To the most
forward and gallant, to the most skillful, to the best effects with the sword,
to the pike of shocke, to the sword pell mell, to the best invention, and to
the Ladies Pike, be the honor given.

The whole Mask made their round, accompanying the troop while they stayed,
whose livery cost the Admiral a great number of crowns, who clothed them all
in nippons, and hoods of Orange tawny, and stryxt silver cloth, set with
flowers, and Roman devices of black cloth, edged about with silver in
purles, with Talbants of Marroco of the same, and white plumes; only Monterrey
and Veragnas wore black. The Marquess of Alcanizes wore one different from
these two extremes. The beauty of horses, and the riches of borders and
furniture, showed evidently the affection of those that made this Festiuity.
They ran two careirs in the Palace, besides their round, and so went out in
Maskes: and I willset them down jointly to excuse more worthy and famous
Elegies then my shallow brains can invent.

The names of the MASKERS.
THE Admiral. Conde de Monterrey. Duke de Tursi. Conde de Portalegre. Conde de
Annouer. Don Juan Claros de Guzman. Conde de Villa franqueza. Conde de
Villamor. Conde del Risco. Conde de Ricla. Don Fernando de la Cerda. Don
Francisco de Eraso. Marquis de Fromista. Duke de Hijar. Duke de Cea. Could de
Villalua. Don Manuel Manrrique. Don Gaspar Bonifaz. Conde de la Puebla del
Maestre. Marquis de Castelrodrigo. Don Diego Sarmiento. Marquis de Velada.
Marquis de Xaualquinto. Don Luys de Cordoua Zuheros. Conde de Saluatierra.
Morques de Almacan. Don Lorenzo de Castro. Marquis de Alcan^icas. Duke de
Veraguas. Marquis de Camarasa. Don Rodrigo Enrriquez. Don Fernando de Guzman.
Conde de Cantillana. Conde de Corun^a. Don Luys de Guzman. Don Antonio de
Toledo Horcajada. Don Fernando de Toledo Higares. Don Pompeo de Tarsis. Don
Juan de Vera. Don Iuan de Eraso. Conde de Tendilla. Don Luys de Haro. Conde de
Pun^oenrostro. Marquis de Valle. Don Christoual de Gauiria. Conde de Villafior.
Marquis de Belmonte. Don Gaspar de Teues. Marquis de Toral. Conde de
Fuensalida. Don Bernardo de Benauides. Marquis de Orani. Don Antonio de
Moscoso. Conde de Mejorada.
Four Maskes, their Lacqueyes apparelled after the Turkish fashion in masking
suits, and if my presumption herein should not be too arrogant, I would
attempt to discover the Sun, amidst the darkness of the Mask: The Andaluz
calls that same doubtful light, by reason of the interposition of darkness;
Calinas, and the Poet Zelajes: the vulgar opinion will needs have it to be the
King; for the radiant beams of his hair, and the stateliness of his running,
did make him known: Let it vanish away in vulgar report, if his Majesty like
not to be discovered, it was enough to make so great a guest as the Prince to
rejoice, to see him in this, honor so great a Subject, as the Admiral. There
accompanied him his brother, the illustrious Infant, Don Carlos, who ran with
the Marquis of Carpio, and with the King the Conde de Oliuares, by office
chief Master of his horse, his most trusty and confident, and his most eminent
servant. And although their running caused much joy, yet fear, which ever
accompanies true love, made us in the night say in our hearts, God preserve
the King (who ever loves them that serve him) as the firm and inviolable
foundation of his Church, and whose attempts are the proper offspring of the
heroycall virtue of his Progenitors, out of the general wishes and desires of
his subjects.

The Marquess of Rentyn, Captain of the Almaine guard (a gallant and lovely
Gentleman) who conducted it, was himself guarded by Fernand Verdugo Lieutenant
of the Spanish, one as discreet and circumspect, as honored and well beloved.

From the Palace they went to the Descalzas, A place so called because it
belongs to the bare legd Friars.
followed by more then four hundred persons on horse back, a triumphant and
goodly company, because even in these trials of mere solemnity, for martial
exercises, the Nobility of this Kingdom have ever been affected to chiualry,
as may be testified by multiplied experience. To festiuate his Majesty, there
repaired to those sacred walls, for many special reasons, and as it was the
house of the Admiral, Master of this festiuitie, where they were to participate
of it, the greatest number of the Ladies, of that same great Court: And by the
streets of the Arenall, the Carreras and the market place of Atocha, which
ways they made their return, they did the like to the Palace, whither they
returned to accompany and dismide the maskes, the rest conducted the Admiral
home to his house: And now the Sun beginning to reflect upon the Mountain
tops, which being masked, did desire to see the end of this festiuity, and
envying the Admirals glory, he prosecuted the same in causing it to rain the
greatest part of it. This is such a narration as my ignorance could decypher in
so rude a style; I hope your Excellency will pardon it, seeing good will is a
sufficient supply of any defect in this behalf, for so many important reasons,
I wholly remain yours, April ^9. stylo nouo, 1623.

Andres de Mendoqa.

DElius had scarce shaken off the mantell of the Night, nor had Taurus of the
(...) fourth Sphere, who feeds on Lillies, scarce gilded his hair with the
moderate hea^e of the Spanish Hemispheare, with greater commodity to
participate of the Festiuity, his beams not having fully bea^en off the Deaw
of Diana, which watered that place, Eolus blowing upon it, when, not on the
Scaffolds of the East, but in the golden concurrence of so many Suns, which
disperced their beams in the Spanish beauties: the morning sprouted forth, and
the Nobility of the Court in numerous Assemblies being in the evening to come
forth to the City Solemnities, for the enjoying of the rural Delights of the
morning, with long staves in their hands, clothed after the Pastoral manner,
in armors of haughty mind and hot courage, more properly indeed her Children
then those swift Horses which flowery Betis feeds on her sweet banks, who
possessed the Fields encompassing the Bulls, more fierce then that Celestial,
being more capable of rare impressions, wherein passed noble attempts of Valor
and Chivalry, being proper effects of the Spanish courage, observed and seen
in so many reiterated Experiences and trials.

The Corrigidor very carefully prevented, that none besides the selected
Gentlemen might come forth to this Enclosure, with long Rods or Staves in their
hands, that they might not assail the Bulls. They were enclosed, and the first
Bull was set upon by the Gentlemen: and the second by those of an inferior
rank, and so the morning was joyful and triumphant, though Don Diego de
Ramirez, and Don Pedro de Toledo fell, and the Horses bare them down, this man
through incircumspection, and the other by unmeasurable courage and
forwardness. Their falls were not of any dangerous consequence. The Marquis of
Velada succored them, hewing the Bull in pieces with their swords, and the
place was disposed of in this manner and form:

The Panaderia, or Bullengerie, has in the midst of the office of Saddles, or
Furniture, Within the twelve Arches of unpolished stone, a gilded Scaffold,
more eminent then the rest, in that on the left hand of this, was another of
equal proportion built, on which were spread on the lower part, Clothes of
Gold and Silver, in three degrees one higher then another, Crimosin and Gold,
which were made for the coming of the Duke de Maine, to the affiance of the
Nuptials of the most Christian Queen. I observed out of this, that having
hitherto been put to no use for the service of their Majesty's, it might
happily be hand selled to their honor, in the Festivitie we expect, from the
Espowsalls of her Sister. There were divided from it in the midst, with a
partition of Crimosin Damask, spotted all over with Gold, two other partitions
on the out-partes of the same, and that on the left hand, with a portaile or
gate, to go out at to the main Scaffold, traversed with another partition,
which served for those uses, which shall herevnder appear. On the two sides,
were hung up, those hangings of Needleworke, wrought with wire of Gold, so many
times formerly seen, and on the top two Canopyes of cloth of Florence, of
carnation color, raised in the weaving two several higthes of gold, with a
most rich Cover over head, and curtains on both sides, with the former part of
plain cloth of Gold, of Mylan, Crimosin, spanne new, with Chayres of cloth of
Gold, and Tissue, Stools, and Cushions of the same, with Turkey pieces,
hangings of most rich Tapistrie; and the places of the Counsel appointed, in
manner and form, so often heretofore seen. The Windows were replenished with
the Nobility of this Court: the standings and flore, with those of inferior
Fortunes, and blood. The most Illustrious Nuncio, to whom the first standing
was allotted, and next to the Royal seat, between his Majesty and the
Queen, had for his Associates, the most excellent Ambassadors, of the
Emperor, of France, Poland, and Venice, stars of great and rare Magnitude,
the rest were dispersed all over the breadth of the place, the Queen was
placed next unto them, and of the right side in Royal partitions, the Ladies,
Dames, and noble Pages of the Court: While you come to the Counsel of Royal
Excellency; for the Corrigidor and his Lieutenants being entered, with their
usual Train of Officers; he went out to enterteine them, that high Senate
entering with such a wonderful Majesty, that it may only be an example, and
president to it self. The Corrigidor gave a glorious Liverie to eight Pages,
and four Laqueyes, of plain black Velvet, furniture, and skirts embroydered
with Snayles, and Gandurados, Cloakes of cloth, with bases of feet, and
Doublets of black Satin, guarded with black Lace, and Feathers of a color,
which all the place admired, and wondered at.

The other Counsels and Lords being placed in their several rooms, the
Majesty of the Queen, and of the Infanta made entry in their Carroches,
clothed in a dark kind of gray, wrought with embroydery, and Lentills of Gold,
with Jewels, and Plumes, (a thing very needless to relate) seeing all
Rhetorical colors of the tongue, cannot express the truth of their
incomparable value, and estimation. Their Highnesses, Don Carlos, and
Ferdinando, one in Purple, and the other in Black, contended in Beauty, and
yet prevented one another in affection. The Coches of the Ladies, and Minnies
of the Court, the very Envy of Phoebus rays, were Retraytes of the Month,
which then raygned for Beauty, and variety of colors, solemnized with the
greatest concourse of Nobility, that ever the Empire of glory, and gallantrie
beheld. And then first lighting on foot, the Marquess of Reutine of Almaine
made entry for their Majesty's, between the Gardes, conducted by their
Captain; excellently set forth himself, wearing a Plume, Preparations, and a
brave Liverie of a dark yellow, and yellow furniture, and Don Ferdinando
Verdugo, Lieutenant of Hispaniola, in white, and black, in a Liverie of dark
green, white furniture, both contesting one with another, for greatest riches
and pomp.

The whole Troop being conducted by the Alcaldes on Horseback, and by a great
number of English, and Spanish Knights, Officers, and Grandes. The Prince of
Wales was relucent, in white and black Plumes, mounted on a mingle-colloured
Horse, and the King apparelled in a dark colored Suit, with a Plume of the
same, mounted on a dapple Gray; in their legeritie, implying the effects of the
Stormy Boreas, and in their fair and quiet managing, showing themselves
almost reasonable, as if they had known the burdens, that they bare: And in
that their mouths were curbed with no Bitts, in this they signified, that in
an high Degree, they laid down, all their natural, and brutish fierceness.

Behind came the Admiral of England, and the Conde de Oliuares, the Masters
of the Horse, Ambassadors, and English Gentry, with the Counsels of Estate,
and Chamber of Spain, enclosing Within the Guard of Archers, the Burgundian
Nobility, having procured admiration and love, not with fear, or tyranny,
but with sweet, and affable government, which in men's hearts purchases love,
and good will. They light on foot, and having forsaken their Stools and
Chayres, the Queen our Lady, and the Lady Infanta remained in the Scaffold
on the right hand, the Infant Charles, and the Prince being divided by one
partition, and the King, and the Infant Ferdinando by the other, and in that
which remained ensuing, the Conde de Oliuares, the English Ambassadors, the
Counsels of Estate, the Chamber of Spain and England, the other Knights and
Gentlemen of this Nation, on Scaffolds erected up into the air, in a corner of
the street of the Amargura, and they made entry for these Lords.

Fifty Laqueyes in high Dutch habit, of thynne cloth of Silver, white, and
tawney, with tawney-doubletts, caps of wrought Silver, and Swords Silvered in
every part, accompanied the Duke of Cea, who entered in, mounted on a large
dapple Gray, with black habit, edged round about with silver of
Goldsmiths-worke, with as great gallantry as wisdom, and as much wisdom, as
reason to win men's hearts after him, two valiant Combatants at the Bull, with
Cassockes and Hose of tawney cloth, laid along with Silver lace, and great
tawney Plumes, mingled Turquye and White. He had scarcely gone his round about
the place, presented himself to their Majesty's, and been received of the
Prince, with the honor of discovering himself to him, when there entered into
the place (being clearly voyded, so as their entries were more easy and
apparent) an hundred Lacqueyes clothed in dark colored Serge, guarded all over
with Lace, with Belts shining like Silver, Doubletts and Hose, Lynings and Caps
of Tawney color, like furniture to their Swords, and white Garters: And after
them came in Don Iuan de Ozeta, Don Ieronimo de Medinilla, Don Euan de
Menesses, Don Antonio Guino, Don Iasepe de Samano, Don Iuan Ieldre, the Conde
de Cantillana, Don Diego de Zarate, Don Antonio de Moscoso, Don Pedro de
Motezuma, the Conde de Tendilla, accompanied with the Duke of Maqueda, whose
entry, both in respect of his quality, as also for the Valor and aspect of
his person, might well have stirred up envy in the Roman Triumphs, for the
Duke looked like one of the Caesar's, or rather in deed, he might more properly
have been their pattern, and example. They went along their Round, and the
Prince himself did him honor, when by different gates, these herevnder
specified, made their entire: The Marquess of Vela, in whom valor,
dexterity, and gallantrie contended for superiority, accompanied with four
and twenty Lacqueyes, in white cloth, all laced down, with black Caps,
Plumes, and other furniture for their Swords of white. He drew upon himself
the eyes of the whole multitude, for indeed he drew generally unto him all
their affections; the Prince did him honor, as he likewise did the other two
Lords Grandes: When he had seen their Majesty's, he went to offer himself
unto the Ladies, from thence to the Counsel Royal, and so in his going about,
to all the rest of the Company, and all of them desired, and affected him.

Presently entered fifty Lacqueyes in white Printed Satin, guarded with a
brancht Stuff of Azur'd Silk, and Gold, and Breeches of the same, set out
with tuffes of gold, and silver lace, with furniture and Plumes of white, that
accompanied the Conde de Villamor, mounted on a dark Chestnut-colourd Horse,
with his main, and tail, drawn out with silver twist, disgracing those
Horses of Phoebus Chariot, which seemed to come out of them, as the some or
sweat of their bodies, eiecting that which was not natural in them, retayning
naturally the valor of their Master, communicated to them, and when I saw so
many Feathers in the place, and such a flittering and waving of them, I took
them to be a moovible garden, or an Army of Indians; as also the Conde his
generous Grandfather, who also manifested amongst them, the valor, and luster,
incident to his race and blood: And because the report is festival, it is but
like to that which was to be seen with the eye. You would have said as much,
if you had but seen them fight with those furious Beasts, showing themselves
the more valiant, in that they were undaunted, and resolved Spaniards. There
entered presently Don Cristoual de Gauiria, and Don Gasper Bonifaz, whom they
term kill Bulls, I know not which of them may envy the other, seeing they
are the best Combatants known in all Spain for this place, and fight; and
both of them so well beloved, that their attempts being high and great, yet
they are always wished to be greater, and we think them worthy of greater,
and higher Fortunes. Bonifaz clad six Lacqueyes in excellent cloth in grane,
exceeding that of Tire, guarded, with other furniture, and white Feathers, what
they were, might be seen all the place over: and Gauiria had eight, and two
little Lacqueyes in dark green Suits, cut, embroydered with Snailes of
silver, and lyned with Tawney, and white furniture otherwise, it being a
sightly and brave Livery.

There entered Don Ferrando de Yuiciedo, otherwise, the Cavallier de la
Morzilla, who during these Trials, was that same Master Burquillos of the
Combats, of Lope de Vega, who came in to try his Fortunes, with Lawnce and
Target.

Though the Marshalling of the place belonged to the Conde de Oliuares, as to
the grand Master of the Horse; His Majesty yielding precedencie to the Prince,
the Admiral of England Marshaled it, standing behind the Lord Infant Carlos,
that he might be near to the Conde de Oliuares, who was to him both an
Interpretor, and Informer, for this great Lord, and circumspect Courtier, has
omitted no rightes of complement, wherein he might express, either unto the
Prince, or Admiral, the love, proceeding from his own Noble disposition and
nature, and conformable to the honor, done him by the King of great Britain,
in his Letters full of wisdom and gravitie.

The Combat began with the Bulls, when the Lacqueyes by Proclamation leaving
their Lords, they resembled Harvest in June, crowned with blew and redd
flowers, which Zephirus waves, and flitters up and down. The first encounter
belonged to the Conde de Villamor, as the envy of all the rest, which they
revenged with such a number of Darts, as the poor Bulls remayn'd like
Quivers, or like the Thorne-bushes, in the woods of Helvetia. To speak more
properly, seeing to the poor Beasts wonderful pain, they took them out with
as great velocitie, as peril and danger. De Maqueda made many brave a tempts:
de Tendilla, as many, but de Cea made excellent assaults, and Cantillana too,
one of which might be the proper envy, of chivalrous attempts, and in the
other he killed a Bull. Bonifaz, and Cauiria laid on so thick upon the Bull,
that we could not number the assaults for their quantity, and Don Christovall
with a Lawnce, overthrew one. De Velada showed how agile, and nymble he was in
this Art, for he overthrew two or three Bulls, with dynt of Sword, and gore of
Lawnce, and one he wounded on his foretopp, between the horns, while he
turned his head, he stroke his horn into a supporting board at his back, a
wound that struck more fear into the Assembly, then it brought danger to the
Marquess, for this back board, was splinted all to shivers in the place: And
his Majesty would not suffer him to enter the second time within the Lists:
And Don Antonio de Moscoso, gave such a number, and so deep Cuchilladaes, that
he might be rather said to revenge, then provoke or incite with his assaults,
Cea turned one round with a Cuchillada, and so most of the Beasts were slain,
being hewn into mammockes by the hands of all men. Motezuna showed, what
belongd to his royal blood, and to the valor of his arm, for he put a Bull
to flight, being afraid of him, and reached him such a cleaving blow with his
sword, that he left him in the place for dead. Guino, Zarate, Ozeta, and
Idchel, took revenge of the last Bulls living, because the first had made them
turn face. Don Gieronimo de Medinilla had good Fortune, both with his Lawnce,
and Sword. This Cavallier being herein so meritorious, as the most copious
Elegies would come short of his due commendation, and praise. The Duke of
Maqueda, made such a thrust, that the Beast being batterd, and sore goared with
it, he revenged himself in such a strange fashion upon his Horse, that he
ran him quite through, from one side to the other, and the Duke beheld the
Assault given on the one side of his Horse, and the horn of the Bull, as it
came out at the other, and the poor brute Beast gave so many twitches and
wrenches, enforced with pain, and grief, that the Duke was feign to use all
valor, and dexterity to prevent his own falling, whereat we were all much
afraid. Don Antonio Guino, second to the Duke of Cea, made one of the bravest
Assaults, that ever the place beheld, upon a most violent and furicus Bull,
whose lively force, and that of his valiant arm, ran him in quite through
the shoulders, leaving half his Lawnce within him, and his Horse remaining
with as much stilnes and lenity, as his Master with valor and magnanimity:
and so the Bull fell down hard by him. He received wonderful applause, and
general grace, and so went out of the place, and though the Bulls overthrew
many, yet there fell out no great danger at all. When this Festivitie was
ended, the Prince, the King, and their Highnesses, returned to the Court in
Carroches; and it rayn'd very strangely. After that went the Queen, the
Infanta, and the Coaches of Ladies, where amongst the Clouds of water, there
fell one of the Pages of Arms, these Clouds by day light innudating the
dominion and access of the shaddows of the night, and banishing them for a
great while. Thus a great part of the night being spent, they went to repose
themselves, after the repast and pleasure of this Festivitie, and so my Pen
shall do no less, till further and fitter occasion be offered. etc.

FINIS.

