THE DESCRIPTION OF A TRVE VISIBLE CHRISTIAN: RIGHT CONFORTABLE and profitable
for all such as are distressed in Soul about present controversies in the
Church.

DRAWN BY He. C^. but published by occasion (as will appear in the Epistle)
by Io. I.

Luke, 17. 22. And he said unto the disciples, the days vvil come, when ye
shall desire to se one of the days of the Son of 23. man, and ye shall not se
it. Then they shall say to you* Behold here, or behold there: but go not
thither, neither follow them. Math. 24. 25. Behold, I have told you
before, In the Year from Christ his incarnation, 1599.

To the Christian Reader.
OUr beloved Brother Mr. He. Cl. after no small travel, he finished a book
containing fully all points of Church-co^troversie specially now turmoylinge
our English people. Which book lying in mine house for a season, I procured
the third chapter of the Book (the whole contaynes about 26. ch.) to be copied
out for mine own use, what time both Man and Book was presently (by reason of
business in England) to be sundred from me. In whose absence, as I took no
small delight in the same chapter, so I demed it my duty (not knowing when the
whole might be published) to put it in print for public vtility. If courteous
Read thou find it comely and profitable in it self when thou have read it, the^
easily judge of the whole, when all the members knit together should present it
self unto the, as a reasonable body. Meanetyme my desire is of all such
faithful people as to whom the whole or any part of the said book shall com,
that (if it be in their pouwre) they will for the edificatio^ of me and others
procure the printinge thereof. The miserable distractions of the Catholic
confused and scatred Church it requires such a salve: nor knoe I any who of
experience is better able to guide distressed sowles in this fore-prophecied
time of disorder, whereyn if it were possible the very Elect should be
deceived. An age wherein more heed is to be had of re^dinge Wolves clad in
sheepish conversation, as in skynnes: rather then of open Bears, Lions, and
Leopards sittinge in the midst of the temple and Catholic wheatfeilde I mean
the Church. And thus, desiring the prayers of the faithful for my happy
progress in the ways of holiness, I leave the to the gracious government of
Christ his Spirit.

Amsterdam, 1599. Amongst Christians, the least of a thousand, Io. Ioope.

Uvho is a true visible Christian.
IT being once known, who of us may be adjudged a true visible Christian, an
easy entrance and firm ground is given to the substance off Church
disputation. And because no factious Spirit may have an hole to creep out at,
such a christian must be considered, Baptized or Unbaptised. In the state of
Unbaptisme some true christian may be, and such a one I Describe thus: The
definition of a true visible Christian, as yet in an unbaptized estate: whose
particulars are aftervvard^ proved.
1. Unto us such a soul confesses it beleiueth, that Jesus Christ is com in
our nature, by the holy Ghost his ouershadowinge the blessed Virgin Mary: and
that for the absolute salvation of his people: Of which number, this Soul
confesses it to be. And 2. professes it self willinge to stand subject to all
the Saviors Laws (as by the ministry of his word shall be revealed unto it)
and this only, for bringing Glory to our Father in heaven. More then this (for
substance) cold not be in any to whom our Savior his ymmediate disciples
preached: as any (reading their sermons of Conversion) may easily perceive.
Nor upon such bare confession of Faith and Obedience, was any soul debarred
Baptism, for it self and the subject family, as may also appeared by John
Baptists procedinge, and the Apostles Arts. Now, Baptism being (as will
appear in his own Chapter) not the exhibiton of Christianity, but the seal
of Christianity presumed first to exist, it so is evident, that a true visible
Christian may be before Baptism (and that by the former Confession) feinge
such a one to usward has by Faith apprehended Christ: Romans 8.
and with Christ, how shall he not have all things also? But let me labor
briefly to explain the particulars.

Unto us.] The manifestation of a Christian lies not in the worlds
approbation: 1, John. 3 1.
for the world knoes neither God nor his Sons. The reason is: 1, Cor. 2 10. 14.
we have the spirit that searches all things, even the deep things of God: but
the Natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishnes to him, neither can he knoe them, because they are spiritually
discerned. Yea, though those Naturalls be crep into the Church, they shall be so
far from acknowledging them in truth, as oftentimes John, 16. 2.
They shall put them out of their Synagogues, yea, kill the^ and think they
therein do God good service. Mark, that persecutors shall somtymes reign
within the Church, as did Diotrephes.
And in saying, To us, rather the^ To me, it is because the faithful their
approbation it must not depend upon any one, no, not on Elijah: for even in
Israel there were true visible people to Obadiah (who hid them by 50. and 50.
in a cave) when it may be Elijah demed all slain by Iesabel. 1 King. 18 4. 13.
So we se the blyndman in John's Gospel John, 9.
To be cast out of the Iuish church for an heretic, who by and by was found
out of Jesus for a Patron of Christianity.

Such a soul confesses it beleiueth.] Belief and Confession is joined
together of S. Paul: Romans 10 10.
with the heart man beleiueth unto righteousness, and with the mouth man
conf^sseth unto salvation. Psa. 116. 10
So the psalmist, I believed and therefore have spoken. Nor without confession
of faith, can any of the church take particular knowledge of such, that so they
may proclaim them visible Christians. Nay, how is it possible that any now
s^old have true faith in God, and the same be hid from the whole Church? Some
must have intelligence thereof, except it should be begotten without the
ministry of mankind. But this the Apostle denies thus: Romans 10 15. 17.
How shall they believe without a Preacher, and how shall they preach except
they be sent? This scripture not heded, people ron into lewd factions, and
speak evil of things they understand not: yea, do curse their own spiritual
father, mother, brethren and Systers.
then Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word off GOD: concluding hereby,
1. that there cannot be faith without hearing: 2. that such hearing is tied to
preaching: 3, and it must be the word of God preached, that only begets true
faith: 4. that such begetters of true apprehending faith (for calling upon God
as a father in Christ Jesus, whereof before he spoke) they are sent of God: and
therefore their feet (or governing affections) to be proclaimed Beauteous, not
Antichristian: for Ministers sent of Satan, or else of God in his wrath unto
Sowles, they beget not such true applyinge faith in their hearers. Now, if a
Soul cannot be possessed with faith, but it must be by the minister of faith
(no more then there now can be a child without a father, or an apple without a
tree) so, the spiritual father (at least) must have intelligence of such
fruit: nor can they hide it from the Teacher. Consider this in the Eunuch,
Lidia, the Iaylour, yea, in all those that were pricked in the heart at Peter's
sermon, at John Baptists sermon, Though the Church before the law, under the
law, and under the gospel cold easily loose her orderly establishme^t, yet
she cold never loose her Being at all, visible.
or at the preachinge of any who have begotten faith by the blessed word. By
the way therefore to say, that the Church (which consistes of many beleiuers)
it has been somtymes wholly invisible, it is passing false. For as none can be
members of Christ without faith, and there cannot be such apprehendinge
justifying faith without preaching of the Evangell, and that cannot so be
preached of any except they be sent of God: so, all this cannot be without
external Confession of the same faith, according to that of Peter and John:
Act. 4. 20.
we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. Now, what is it
that such do confess they believe?

That Jesus Christ, son of the living God is com] As before his coming it was
required man should believe He should com (for so was he darkly preached to Adam,
more plainly to Abram, but far more openly by the Prophets to ancient mother
Zion) so since his manifestation, it is required mankind confess they believe
He is com. The not belief whereof is cawse the Jews stand rejected. Nor can
they be regraffed into the body of the Church, Zech. 12 12. etc. with chap 13.
until they se and confess lamenting-wise, that already He is com and
pierced. But upon such sight and confession, they shall have the fountain
opened unto them for syn and uncleanness, to the expellinge of the false
prophet. 2 Cor. 3 15. 16.
The literal veil of Moses so removed, the Catholic body of Israel shall so
be saved. Romans II. 25. 26. 27 Revel. 22 2.
And whereas the Gentiles labor (and are like still to labor of spiritual
error) by the Romans 11 12. 15.
leaves then of that natural tree, the faithful of the nations shall be healed.
Who therefore wishes an end to contention arising from such error, let them
pray that the kingdom may quicly be restored to that natural Israel. Which
Jesus (in english, Savior) must be confessed the Christ (in english,
Anointed: in hebrew, Messiah) that is, that blessed One which from Adams fall
was freely promised of God to be sent in time Ge. 3. 15.
for sauinge his people from their sins. Math. l. 21
Which work of salvation he accomplished by prophecy, sacrifice and invisible
power: weakly fore-figured by the anointed Prophets, Priests and Rulers, given
to Ancient Israel. For how can any be said to have faith in him, that
confess not they believe him to be that One which saves his people, as the
Lord had appointed. Nor can this be without beleyuing him to be the Math. 16
16. 17.
Son of the living GOD, the belief whereof is said, not to com by the
Revelation off flesh and Blood, but by our father which is in heaven. And upon
the confession of this, Act. 8. 37.
Philip baptized the Eunuch. Nor is this to be marvayled at, seeing the epithet
Livinge, it distinguishes the true GOD from all false Gods: and the beleiving
Jesus to be his Son sent for saving such as com unto God by him, it is to flesh
and blood unreasonable. And that we se in the Iues, who held it blasphemy (or
an evil speech) in him, to make himself the Son of God. To have made himself
the Son of God but only in regard of this obedience to God, that they would not
term an evil speech (for they thought so of themselves and their princes but
teaching himself so to be Son, as he is and ever was one with the father (that
is, the same Micah. 5 2.
for essence and eternity of essence) that they held blasphemy. Pro. 8. 23.
The impossibility of beleiving this Sonship is to be considered in the
following words. John, 1. l. etc.


Com in our Nature] This nature of Man (body and soul) assumed of him, this
the Iues saw: but that nature whereby he was the only begotten of the father
(figured in Isaac, thonly begotten of Abram hy-father) that the naturallcy saw
not, and therefore believed not. The human nature was not in question amongst
the Iues (for that they verily saw and felt without any guiste of faith) but
to acknowledge this visible nature assumed of the former invisible nature, that
required the fathers revelation: as the human nature the mothers declaration.
And this nature was figured by the Ram that was sacrificed for Isaac. And
both of them foretyped Levit. 16 the Lot-gat represented his manhood, body and
soul: the scapegoate, his Godhead, withdrawing (as it were) till the
resurrection.
by the two Hegoates, whereof the One died (Body in his kind, and the soul in
his kind, both being but Man, and death otherwise reigning over both: which a
late writer should have observed, before herein he had so easily contradicted
the Auntients) that One died for satisfying Jehovah for Isreal's sins
(although with Jonah it came out of the earths womb not feeling corruption)
the other escaped (but the Soul, which some would have only to be typed hereyn, it
by lot was with the body caught and thrown into the Seas off God his boiling
indignation, so far was it from scapinge) the other escaped carrying Syn (as
Captivity captive) into the place cut of from the habitation of Sinners. And
yet in this same human nature, touching the manner of generation, the reason
of faith is also required. For that cawse I add:

By the holy Ghost his ouershadowing, etc.] As by the spirit of God his mouth
each treature first had existence: Psa. 33. 6.
so, for causing this glorious manhood in the first fruits of our nature (that
was to be united with the Godhead for ever) the same Heb. 9. 4
eternal spirit (called also the spirit of Christ, because he proceeds both
from Father and Son) he ouershadowes the Virgin, and is Agent to her seed
patient, for the Manhoods existence. Ge. 3. 15
That woman's seed should conquer the Head of the serpent: Gal. 3. 16
that in Abrams seed (not seeds) all Nation^s should be blessed: Isa. 7. 14
and 8. 6. 7.
that a virgin should conceive and bring forth a Son, whose name should be
Gnimmanuel. etc. God with us, wonderful, Counsailour, the might God, the
everlasting Father, Prince of peace etc. all this was preached of old: but the
mystery touching the manner of his Conception, that was concealed till his
coming. And yet this mystery was before preached under covert shadows. For
as our Savior him self was foretyped in Isaac, Samson and Samuel: so we se
their mothers (Satah, Monahs wife. and Hannah) to bring forth, not by natural
course (though Nature not rejected) but by promise and Grace. Touching the end
of whose coming, this must be confessed:

That it was for the absolute salvation of his people.] That he came to save,
it was noted. from his name, Jesus: but it must be confessed that his work is
absolute, that this, that to the beginning, continuance and endinge thereof, he
has no One to help or uphold that, according to that his speech in Isaiah:
Isa. 63 ^. 3. 5.
I am mighty to save, I have trod the vvynepresse alone and of all the people
(hearken Meritmonger) there was none with me. And I looked and there was
none to help: and I vvondred that there was none to uphold, therefore mine
own arm helped me, and my wrath it self sustained me. And this is the same
which Peter teaches thus: Act. 4. 12
Nor is there salvation in any other: for amongst me^ there is given no other
Name under heaven, vvherby we must be saved. And therefore, not unto us O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name we give praise. As he came thus to save
his people (even all the father had given him according to election, not
works) so.

Of that number this Soul beleiveth it to be.] The former belief and
Confession is only General (and so far, together with many particulars
flowing from thence, the devels and many of reprobate mankind do comprehend)
to the effecting and making up of a true visible Christian therefore is
required, To lay every thing down in his proper matter an^ form, it is the
very substance of all wisdom: and therefore people should learn to Define,
before they dare^ to dispute.
A particular application of the former mercy exhibited in Christ Jesus. The
first belief and confession, it is of Logitians termed the General or Matter
whereof a visible Christian consists: but this second (namely. the particular
or personal application of the former) it is termed the Difference or Form,
because it differenceth the thing from other things by his form: even as the
form of an house does difference the house from tyber and stone lying loose
and vnapplyed together: which in such vnmortised estate may be termed the
matter of an house, but not called an house, because the different form is
lackinge. Both the parts of this definition (nor is any thing truly defined
without them two) blessed Paul lays down for himself thus: 1. Tim. ^ 15.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners (that is the General: the
Difference follows thus:) of whom I am chief: that is, the Anointed
Savior came to save his people that lay captiued in Syn: of which number he
was thus to save. I believe my self to be One. Which point of apprehe^ding
faith as it is the fre work of God his spirit through the ministry of the
gospel: so, the same Apostle testifies that the testimony to be given unto
all the true Christians, saying: Romans 8. 16.
The same spirit bears witness to our spirit, that we are the Children off
GOD. I knoe very well, that our justification with God, it lies rather Phil.
3. 9 12.
in our being comprehended of Christ, then in our comprehending of him (so
far is all merit from us) but it is impossible we should be comprehended of
Christ and never have intelligence thereof by his word and spirit (for Christ
is not tongueles, Christ is not altogether vn-living in any of his instified
members.
and he looks the Saved should praise his father for such a mercy) and
impossible (as before) that such can be possessed of the spirit, and not utter
their faith unto others. So much for faith General and Particular Now
follows the fruits.

Secondly, such a soul professes it self willing to stand subject to the
saviors laws, as by the Ministry of the word shall be revealed unto it. Having
Hope of salvation administered by the ministry of faith, such a Soul cannot
but promise obedience to the Author and Finisher of his says, Christ Jesus: as
also, to square obedience unto his Saviors hests alone. The equity whereof,
Josh. 24
Joshua (the Heb. 4. 8 9.
figure of Jesus, who is to seat us in heavens Canaan, where he is gone to
prepare Mansions for his trybes) he urges it to Israel (the type of the
Catholic Church) who Verse. 16. 18. 21. 22. 24.
willingly again and again to the Lo. his Minister professed themselves bound
to the Lord alone, and that him alone they would serve. And the holy man David,
for tyinge the ronagate heart unto dutiful obedience he bynds it to the
Goodabearinge thus: Psalm. 119. 106.
I have sworn and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.
And because such a vow may be current, I add:

And this only for bringing glory to the father in heaven.] Obedience is not
promised to the end the promiser shall merit thereby (for our Merit-obedience
fully and wholely abides in Christ) but that by such orderly carriage
(specially) God may receive glory from the mouths of Many, who behold such
conversation, according to that our Savior: Math. ^0 16.
Let your light so shine before men, as they may se your good works and
glorify your father which is in heaven. 1. Cor. 10 31.
And that of the Apostle Paul: The Glory of God, it is the e^d off al our good
works*
Whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God. So that vow of obedience and
obedience it self, all is alone to be referred unto the Lord his glory: seeing
his Glory is the end of all things. Thus much touching a visible Christian
unbaptized, who by reason of such faith and avowed allegiance cannot but covet
baptism: nor may be denied Baptism. Who, as he is by the ministry of Some
begotten unto the faith, so is he not to refuse the seal of his faith by such
ministry: even as the Males under the law received Circumcision by the
ministry of their Parents. And such subjection is due under pain of being cut
of from Israel. I mean, such refusers of Baptism by the ministry of such as
have begot them (notwithstanding all other protestations of faith and
obedience) they are to stand excommunicate to the Church, because they rebel
against the glorious seal of entering into the Church: for Ge. 17. 14
so they cast themselves out of the Covenant, whereinto they were entered by
such a spiritual Parent.

NOW touching the Baptized somewhat. What is further required in the Baptized.
The former two points of faith and confession, they being essential to usward
for visible Christianity, they at no hand may be lacking in the Baptized.
Whereunto I also add: being so com under the outward Covert of the Church, it
is of absolute necessity that they be found in the Catholic Church, holding
communion with some particular congregation, although the same assembly be as a
member passing corrupt and vlcerous. Touching spiritual defects we are to
admonish, but not in pain of death to forsake the fellowship, according to
that of the Ho. Gh. unto the Hebrews: Heb. 10. 24. 25.
Let us consider one another, to provooke unto love and to good works: not
forsaking the fellowship we have amongst our selves as the manner of some is:
but let us exhort: and that so much the more, because ye se the day draws
nere. For if we syn willingly (that is, forsake the faith and fellowschip before
spoke of) after we have received knowledge of the truth there remains no more
sacrifice for sins. Now, though the cawse of a Schismatike yet retayning the
faith in opynton, it be not so incurable as his who schisms both from the
Church, and apostates from the faith, yet, that mere schismatike withdrawes
unto perdition. And therefore (as Verse. 38
the Lords soul shall have no pleasure in such, so) the Author of that epistle
cleares himself and others of such judgment, thus: But we are not they which
withdravve our selves unto perdition, but follow faith unto conservation of
the soul. Nor does John (...)e them otherwise then s^^ing: 1 John. 2.^^.^9.
Even now are many Anti-christes they went out from us, Schismatiks ever have
the cloak or bifor of Purity and sheepish co^versation: but inwardly rending
wolves, thorns and thistles.
but they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they would have continued
with us. Nor can they be otherwise then opposite unto Christ, seeing they are
opponed to the Body of Christ: though it may be, cloked with a zeal against
the ulcers in Jobs body, I mean the corrupted Church. For if there can be no
true faith without Love, then those in breaking Love (the bond of perfection
and the end of the law) they break faith and highly violate the same. Nor can
they be termed beleiuers of Noah's doctrine, seeing they are found without the
Arc, when the church is within. Nor if they deny to tarry in Rahabs house
because she tavernes bad with good, shall they be fre from Ioshuahs sword and
Isreal's just censure of cuttinge off, when the Lords sword is lift up against
Jericho: for our salvation is not by the goodness of Rahabs house, but by the
blood of the Lamb sacramentally fore-typed by the coard of Josh. 2. 18.
red thread tied in Rahabs wyndowe. To avoyde this judgment, our Savior
therefore says, Go not out,

Secondly, as they are to keep in the unity of the Church, so, the are to walk
in the obedience of faith toward God and his people, and this to-vs-ward
truly, though infirmly. Such regular carriage the Lo. enioynes on Abraham, thus:
Genesis 17. ^
walk before me and be thou upright. Luke, 1. 74. 75.
To that end (says Zecharias) we are delivered, namely: for serving him
without fear all the days of our life, in holiness and righteousness before
him. Nor is it possible to have the spirit of adoption, but there must be the
power of sanctification: because, Ephesians. 4. 24.
the nevvman put upon (instead of thold Adam cast of) he is after god (his
likeness) created in righteousness and true holiness. Otherwise walking, persons
may be within the Church but not of it, Gal. 5. 12.
even as the Apostaticall persons whom S. Paul could have wished cut of from
the churches of Galatia, Cleaninge tares cannot be pulled up, but with
da^gering the wheat.
if so it might be don with safety of the body: whereof more largely in his
own chapter. Whereas I have added, truly though vveakly, it is because there
will be (even amongst true Christians, whither in a church established, or in a
church scatred in the mountains) as much difference in obedience, as there is
difference of strength in an army of Soldiers. And therefore Ro^. 14. 1.
the Stronger is commanded (not to cast of, Gal. 6. 2.
but) to bear the infirmities of the vveak: yea, to bear one another burden
and so fulfill the law of Christ. Yea, some will somtymes prove so weak, as
the spiritual Physician can only gather they have Christ living in them by
motion of the pulses, or spirit moving. In the person of such an infirm soul
the Apostle thus speaks: Romans 7. 15. 17. 18.
That I do, I allow not: for what I would I do not: but that I hate I do.
It is not therefore I any more that do it, That this place is uttered in the
Person off the Regenerate (for Romanists would have it of the vnreg.) those are
so minded: Hierom in Epist to Ctesipho^ Augustine in 2. b. against Julian
Pelagian: alleging also Ambr. there. Beda and Tho. Aquinas on. Romans 7. with
others
but syn that dwells in me. For I knoe that in me (that is, in my flesh)
there dwells no good thing: for to will is present with me, but I attain
not to that is good. In a word he thus concludes: In the mind I do service to
the law of God, but in the flesh to the law of syn. Which crazie estate of a
Christian, we must not condemn for dead: no more the^ men (who would not be
thought to burye the Quick) will tumble a person under board, who yet has some
breathinge The husbandman seeing his vine in winter season to have lost his
leaves, hang down bruized, he therefore commits it not to the fire: because in
the roo^e, and Bole next above it he perceives some sap. Nor must such shaken
infirm sowles be proclaimed Antichristian, when as the wise by touching their
conscience, may perceive a sense of spiritual feelinge. They are but blind
spiteful brethren that condemn David for no Soldier, because he cannot hea^e
the weighty harness of Saul. Not unlike to the error of Bro(...)e, which
cannot knoe a violet but in an established Garden: nor knoe a sheep from a
swyne, if it be tangled in briers. So Much for that.

But to make some further use of that has been said, as there must first be
Confession of apprehe^ding the true Christ unto salvation sufficient: secondly,
that such Confession must be found within the Catholic Church, whither yet
baptized or but calling for Baptism (for out of the Church he cannot be, who
is so joined in his will or spirit, 2, Cor. 8 11. 12.
god acceptinge (in all such turns) the will for the deed) it now will be
demanded, if the schriptures have been for the^ two points so vnd^rstood, as I
myself have thereon concluded? I answer, yea: First, that confession is to he
made, all learned Readers will witness with me, how all ancient writers, not
only testify that to be the rule whereby the Church walked (their Classis of
Catechumenists proves that) but they ever have enjoined Christians to be fre
and faithful in such Confession, Those are read can testify also, how ernestly
the Catholic writers ever urged Baptism (some leauinge no hope of salvation to
any one, in any case dying unbaptized) together with a Dying to syn and a
Living to holiness and righteousness, publikly avowed by such baptism. Touching
them points, I need not here utter any particular testimonye: seeing they are
granted of all such as reverence the travels of Ancients. As for satisfaction
of Hogs and Dogs I am not to produce pearls. Touching my testimony of Jesus
his two distinct Natures united for constitutinge One person Mediator, what
gates of hell cold ever prevayle against that? The first general Council held
at Nice Year of our Lo. 327.
up 318. Episcops, it condemned Arius for denying Christ to be One with the
father for eternity of essence, and for teaching him to be only a Creature. The
second general Council up 150 fathers at Co^sta^tinople, 383. y.
it condemned Macedonius for denying the spirit to be God, and so by consequent
denying the Father, Word and Spirit to be one and the same Essence. Which right
conceit of the Spirit, although some may have been true Christians before they
attained so far up particular knowledge, yet to gain say it (being of the
Church taught it) it makes the case of such condemnable. In the former
description therefore, as I urged not such particular knowledge of the spirit,
so it was, because I put down a visible Christian in the lowest degree: whose
ignorances are to be termed Infirmities, not wilful or obstinate rebellious.
In the third general Synod, held at Ephesus y. 433.
by 200. Episcops, Nestorius was condemned for teachinge Christ to be two
Persons. And in the fourth universal council heald at Chalcedon y. 455.
up 630. Presbyters (I use Isidors word) was Eutiches anathematized, for
teaching Christ to consist but on One nature, and that divine. And in every of
the said Councels (as was by all me^ of good report before and since taught by
word or writing) our savior Christ Jesus was concluded (for Natures, Person,
and office of redemption) in the same sort as I have written and no otherwiser
as all read-scholers can testify with me.

But two points there be whereof I must speak more particularly. The fiest for
satisfaction of the equal Romaniste: the second for our Protestants
contentment. For the Romaniste he denies Justification with God to be only by
Faith. Unto whom I oppose those Ancients. Origin on Romans 3. 27.
Origin writes so: The Apostle says, Justification by Faith ALONE it is
sufficient: so that the beleiuer whosoever is ONLY so justified: yea, though no
work have been performed by him. Whereunto he adds the theif his
justification on the Cross, so does Beda on Romans 4. ^
saying: The Lord required not of him what before he had wrought nor did
expect what work he should fulfill after he believed, but being justified by
SOLE confession (namely, of faith) he joined him companyon unto him, being ready
to enter into Paradise. And that Origin may not be demed wavering herein, he
afterward says: on chapter 4.
Abraham might have glory for his works with holy and just men that savve
them, but this glory with God was ONLY by Faith hid. And so he straight
reconciles S. Paul, and S. James, adding this: The Apostle elsvvhere says, the
stipend of Syn is death, but here he says not, the stipend of Righteousness is
life eternal, But, the Grace of God is life eternal. And Clemens his Mr. writ
thus before him: Clem. in histromata, b 7.
By Faith ALONE the beleiuer is perfected. Cyprian has this: Cypria^, b. 3. to
Quirine, chap. 42.
Faith ALONE profils, and so much we can as we believe. After him Victor
Antiochian preaches thus: Vict. on Mark chap. 534
These words (thy faith has made the hole) they show that the ga^ments
touched cured her not, but Faith. Therefore, neither place, nor words, nor any
such thing external does save a man, but every man is saved by his faith. And
Ambrose treades the same tract, so: Ambr. on Romans 3. 24.
They are justified GRATIS, because Working Nothing, nor restoring any thing in
the rovvne thereof, by Faith ALONE they are justified through the guifte of
God. And at large the same Elder presses th'opposition (not between the works
of the law and the works off faith, as the Romanist would have it, but) between
the works of the law and (SOLA FIDES) Faith alone. For Chrysostom he thus
syngs the same songue: Chrysostom. on Romans 3.
here the Apostle shows the virtue off God, not because he only saves, but
also justifies and leads into glory, using no works hereunto, but exacting
ONLY faith. And Basilius Magnus writes so Basil. in ser. of humility.
That glorying in God is then by all means perfect, when as a Man is not
extolled by reason of his own righteousness: but acknowledges himself verily
to be destitute of Righteousness, but to be justified by Faith ONLY in Christ.
And Paul so glories in that, as he contemnes his own Righteousness. Pope Leo
writes thus: Leo primus. in 4. sermon. of Christ's Nativity.
Even as righteousness is by Faith, so likewise by true faith is life eternal
obtained. Rabanus walks in the same padde with his predecessors, saying: Rab.
b. 7 c. 2. on Ecclus.
By the Grace of Christ ALONE, the Elect are delivered from every Sca^dale.
Thus Remigius: Remig. on ps. 29.
Life eternalis not by Merit (because of our selves we ca^ fall, but of our
selves we cannot rise) but by his will, that is, by his Mercy. But yet lower
to corrupted times. The Idiote Idiot ch 6. of conflict.
writes so: To justify is better then to create: seeing by creating, Nature is
given: but by justifyinge, flesh and Spirit.
both the falt is taken away, and Grace is conferred. Then Giselbert follows
on with his pen thus: Giselb. in Altercation. ch 8.
I say the righteousness of God, not whereby god is just, but whereby he
cloths man, when as he justifies the wicked Gratis. Afterward Theophilact so
subscribes: Theoph. on Romans 10.
It is the Righteousness of God which is by Faith. This needs not our Labors
or works: but the WHOLE partaineth to God his grace. But I will yet descend to
corrupter times: Abbot Barnard has this: Barn. on the Annunc. of Marp.
If thou shall believe that thy sins cannot be blotted out, but Only of him
against whom thou have sinned, and in whom syn is not, thou do well:
but add therevvithall and se also thou believe it, That is, because by him
sins are forgiven unto the. This is the testimony which the H. Gh. bears
in our heart, saying: Thy sins are forgiven the. For so the Apostle thought
(namely) that Man was justified by Faith, GRATIS. And abbot Rupertus so:
Rupert on John, b. 1. c. 1.
It is expedient to knoe Christ, and he must seek him, who being found does
bring profit: in whom to believe it is Salvation. And afterward book. 7.
chap. 7.
In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, nor Gentile nor
levve, but FAITH ONLY is required. And the Manke lo. Baptista Folengius
protests his faith thus: Foleng. on Psa. 2.
what greater Sign can there be, both of God his justice vvherby of Sinners
he has MADE us lust: as also of his Goodness, whereby we are GRATIS invited
to the inheritance of Eternal happiness: and after a manner, even drawn us,
being vnvvillinge. But to allege all I cold allege, it were to make a Book
and not to conclude a Chapter: and none of the former writers can be rejected
off the Romanist. With whose so evident testimony, if so He will not be
satisfied, neither is a Cloud of witnesses more, likly to be accepted. As for
works whereby Faith is declared to Man (according to that of James, Shevve me
thy Faith by thy works) ^noue of those writers but ever urged them, as men
would thereby receive assurance of their Election: 2 Pet. 1. 1^
according to that of S. Peter: make your calling and election sure, namely,
by works. Not that thereby our Election is made sure with GOD, but unto us.
whereunto lo. This Interpretation of the Papist does overthwart the Romanist 1.
in the cause of Election: 2. their (...) works: and so Midia^s sword is turned
into his own guts.
Viguerius Doctor of Theology amongst the Papists (in his Theological
Institutions approved by Sorbon, privileged by the King, Ao. 1549.) he thus
co^senteth By those words (2, Pet. 1. 10.) no way can be had, that Election
should be by reason of works follovvinge: but that by perseverance in good
works, Praedestination which is immovable, it is by conjecturall assurance
so shovven, Certain unto us.

Touching the Euer-visibility of the Church, it is One way then proved, when
there be found in Catholic unity such as hold the former two points: 1.
Christ. 2. so apprehendinge Christ unto perfection of salvation. But that there
have been some who have so believed and confessed (even through the corruptest
times) it may appear up that is already said. Objection: But some of them
lived under Antichrists external Church-gouernment, therefore such visible
Antichristian. This blind argument of Brounisme. I answer with the like: 3.
John. 9.
Diotrephes, Revel. 2. 6. 13 14 15 20. etc.
Nicolaitans, Satan's throne, Balaamites, Iesabel prophetisse, 1 Cor. 15. 12.
Denyers of Resurrection etc. they lived under Christ his external
church-gouernment, therefore all they were true visible Christians. If this be
sottish, the^ the former for if Christ his church-gouernment be not able to
make all true visible Christians under it: The government external of the
spirit it is not only to (...) distinguished, but also can without Nullity be
severed, from external Church Government.
then neither can Antichrist his external regiment make all under it visible
Antichristian. There is a greater government then the church government, and
that is, the government of Christ and Antichrists Spirit: and that is it which
makes the soul visible Christian or Antichristian. But hereof as also of the
Church her euer-visibility in his own chapter: for the probation whereof,
variety of Arguments shall not be lackinge. That is already said, it may
suffice to manifest, who is a true visible Christian.

All glory to God.

