The Flower of Physic.

Wherein is perfectly comprehended a true introduction and method for man's
assured health: with three books of Philosophy for the due temperature of
man's life. In which easily may be perceived the high and wonderful works of
God in the governance of all things.

Written by W. C. as a glass of true knowledge for the better direction of al
willing and virtuous practitioners.

Non est viuere, sed valere vita. Printed at London by Roger Ward 1590.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR John Rooper knight, of Lynstead park in Kent,
pencioner to the Queens most excellent Majesty, and one of the Prothonotaries
to her Majesty's highness honorable court of the Bench at Westminster W. C.
wishes long life, increase of worship and continual health.
I Have well regarded many outward testimonies (right worshipful) from your
inward desire, freely addressed toward learning and virtue. And for the
continual exercise of those indovvements in you, am moved the rather to
judge, that God blesses you in Jacob, and the world loves you with Solon
For as you have attained high preheminences in this life, you do not possess
nor enjoy the^, with Crates the Philosopher, otherways then gods will and
pleasure has allotted you, preferring a conte^platiue care, beyond the
transitory reach thereof. Therefore I might the more boldly utter your
Heroycall life to be matched and performed with the good endeavors of that
noble knight Scipio Affricanus, for whose behalf Lelius, in the best degree
discharges his duty, and in three respects aduanceth before the senate, the
chivalry of his noble knighthoode, As chiefly his love to the senate, with
dear favor, and many hard adventures, for his country, and firm heart to
the oppressed: so likewise, you are nothing inferior to Scipio in faithful
heart toward your prince and country, have purchased an endless solace to
your inward soul thereby. And therewithal do extend your ready benignity,
and familiar friendship for incoraging of the better sort, so your good advise
never fails to admonish the worser sort. And as the tree of virtue has
sprung up with you and your house, so there is a most desired hope amongst all
good men, that it may floorish and bring forth fruits for the benefit of the
Common wealth, to the end of the world. Then lastly, touching the true
simpathie of my heart, which in double duty, I and mine do owe unto you and
your house, may not without some due knowledge, and sincere service,
pretermit to express in the course of this my life, by executing some
thankful action for the same. Having therefore at this present presented and
preferred unto your worshipful discretion, all the whole counsels and high
judgments of Physic, written by those monarche Physicians of the world,
Galen, Hypocrates, Auycen, and Dyoscorides, with three books of Philosophy,
comprehending the admirable works of nature in the frame of all living things:
In reading hereof you shall find most rich treasures, discovered from a
fruitful soil, A pure water running from a clear fountain, And most sweet
flowers, from the pleasant garden of human and liberal arts. The condignitie
thereof has had a right use and free permission for many hundred years
before, although I have at this present, broke the ye, and smoothed the path
from the greek and Latin, so that every reasonable practicioner may make
safe enteraunce into the bodily health of man thereby. Beseeching your
worship to make acceptance thereof, and pardon my boldness* committing your
health, long life and prosperity to be continued and blessed by him that
governs all things by the instinct order of divine power.

Your Worships in all humble duty William Cleuer.

TO THE READER.
FOr that in this our age, sundry strange alterations in the elements
distraming the bodily health of man upon earth with many unusual
corruptions: and also for that man has a proper inclination to gross
liberty, contagiously nourishing many unclean diseases in him self as a
venomous serpent in his own bosom, for remedy whereof, as for the diligence
and careful furtherance of many unskillful practicioners, with whom the
world is ouercharged. I have put forth this general work for the benefit of
the commonwealth: and what profit may ensue hereof, time approves the same:
Remembering the old proverb. Vino vendibili, non est opus suspensa hedera

Fare you well.
In Cleueri Medicinam
Artis Appollineae multum studiosa inuentus
Hippocrati debet: plura, Galene, tibi:
Plurima Cleuero, quia libro claudit in vno
Hippocrates quicquid, sieve Galenus habet.
Johannes Down.

A general Diet both for sickness AND HEALTH.
IN all former ages to this present time, in which we now live, the opinion of
writers was never doubted of, whether abstinence or fullness did ouercharge or
most offend bodily health: And never yet found out to the contrary, but that
every degree of the world, have both felt and confessed, either of them in
their excess, were sharp and express enemies both to the law of nature, and
bodily temperance of this life. Yet seeing both the learned as the unlearned,
although with difference, had rather offend both the sound as the sick, with
the immoderate saturitie, then with sparing abstinence, for which cause in
ministering of medicines it were needful to show their inconvenience on
either side. A full and satisfied body is chiefly preserved, fortified and
continued with strength and flourishing liuelihood by wholesome Iulepes and
such like, clarified potions according to the property of the sickness. And a
pennurious body is weakened, punished, exhausted, and oftentimes perishes in
most sharp agonies, except it be comforted, preserved and renewed by some
restible electuaries and such like. And surely such bodies which are perfect
under temperance and strength, if at any time they be distempered with grief
or sickness, may forthwith be tempered, seasoned and salued by medicinable help:
for medicine most of al rejoices to show forth power and work high effects in
a strong nature. Certainly Auycen has a very secret and metaphisicall
judgment heerem, who commands that nature and medicine, whether in strength
or weakness, be always united, and neither in health nor sickness do
dissociat, but solutiue medicines, especially ought to be of diverse natures,
convenient and agreeable for their property, in every several age, and
natural complexion, with their just and comprehensible manner of diet to be in
like sort observed therein: although most commonly neglected, and that not
without decaie both to body and health: only and because equal measure of
medecin, with equal diet, and equal disposition, is not added, neither with
consideration, of what cause the sickness ru^^e^h: whether there be a
likelihood therein to continue for any long time, or shortly to be perfected:
or whether it be gentle or sharp, and whether it consists and slays in one
course, or in heretical nature confirms: All which as before said is utterly
unrespected. Some ancient writers hold at special verity as well in great
reading as in principal experience, that headdie and stately diseases,
happening in the constitution of strong bobies, (...) diet shall minister best
remedy for their mittigation: so when long and langushing sicknesses distemper
and vex the body, thin diet is very dangerous. For consider that fullness
of body in sharp and sudden sicknesses is most difficult, putting this
difference in either of them: that as continual fullness pestreth and inageth
the disease in a fleshie body to become more stronger, so on the contrary, if
a patient be incombred and infeebled with the fever Ephimcras or any such
like sickness, surely thin diet is not then meet for such a thin body,
seeing strength thereby is decayed, and through variable torments all the
members venomed, the vital blood corrupted and benu(...)ed, as the spiritual
parts of man distructioned: the remedy hereof as well to the first as to the
last, is to observe the constitution of the body, that like as hot fires are
sonest quenched with clear and pure water before it exceed: so these fleshly
rages are subdued, if the extreme thirstinesse of the body through cold
remedies, be quieted and mittigated before it (...)tch to the farthest bounds
and becomes contumatious and without remedy. Also a body almost devoured
with emptiness, and where both nature vigor and blood are quite overthrown,
cannot easily be recovered except by artificial remedy, and through due
opportunity be nursed up: therefore it is a most singular skill commended by
the learned writers of all ages, in sickness to preserve and continue nature
in her full power and strength. And to comfort, nourishe and increase strength
and (...)re in a body fallen away. For oftentimes a strong body in sickness
favors himself, is both similiar and defensible against sickness,
resisting the assaults of many diseases interchancing in man's life. Whereas a
thin and leave body easily is vanquished, when both sickness and penurye,
dangerously attempt the ruin and decay thereof. As the desperate estate of man
in sickness, is either furthered or hindered by fullness or emptiness, so
will not I confirm, those bodies who have engrossed their garbages with
excess fatness, and stuffed all their members with superfluous humors, as
having fed upon sundry inordinate varieties of meats, or infected with
variety of diseases. As they live without order, so I purpose not to prescribe
an order, where fatal confusion has ouerrun them.

Furthermore, set not the blind ignorance of many unskillful practitioners be
herein pertermitted, who should with moderate cherishing help nature, do with
immoderate chasing hinder and inflame those hot bodies which were before
infected by the most hot seasons of the year. In stead of thin nutriment do
ingurge their stomachs with thick spices, or drudges of high hot and subtle
operation: whereas in those sicknesses regard and view must be taken upon
sundry and several casualties, which strangely fall out in sickness that
neither appetite be cloyed, or clunged with ouermuche or over little resection:
nor yet that nature be ouerdried, either by great sweates, or overmuch
resisting, or wrastlinges with the force of sickness.

These strong diseases most commonly happen under a swift chrysis, whose
mighty predomination ouerruleth, difframeth and disseperateth those bodies
from due temperance, which should be thereto subject and framed. These
diseases The strength of nature furthereth all medicines by a right
constitution in sickness.
most violently and swiftly settle in the root of the heart, except prevented
and aleuiated by present medicine, as well that nature may weaken the force, as
displace and expel the poison of the disease. And for as much then as it does
engender upon the liver, from which place the blood is soonest corrupted, and
therewithal draws and staineth all the inward parts of man: In the end
becomes pestilentiall, and therewithal, the senses through the same so far
ouercharged, as that many times col^quation or destruction inua^eth the mind,
in the loss of life. Therefore whosoeue^ desires to cure these or such like
infectious diseases, must chiefly prepare and season the body with waters of
cold and natural herbs, in the first and second degree, before The
pestil^nc^ ought to be prevented before ^o^ the taken at the heart, and the
medicine must be stronger th^n the disease.
the disease be possessed: then forthwith flux the body, by some gentle and
potatiue electuarie, in equal and artificial^ degree, favorably casting out
the infected humors. Forthwith after these painful defatigations, let
natural sweat and quiet sleep, consolidat and refresh the body, to become
more v^gent, and the stomach more sharp. Then next thereunto: it were not
good, that emptiness or abstinence were used, but to have sustinance in
continual practice, not of the grosest, but of the chosen sorts of meats:
for if the poores through emptiness, be left open and unshut, for want of
nourishment, to increse natural blood and strength, are not only in danger
again to be corrupted, but do stain, foyzen and infect others. Then how
grievous a thing is it, in beholding some busy medlers, repayring unto sick
pacientes, do not in any perfect skill, distinguish upon the disease, whether
there be any crud and raw matter, or concockt settled in some part of the body:
or whether the disease consist and stand at a stay, or increase: or whether
nature be of any forcible power in the body or no: but without searching the
cause or understanding the matter of the sickness, do prefer their own
hazard, and exasperating the disease, either with fulsome medicine, or gross
nourishment, stuffing their sick bodies, either by entisement or force. And
whereas before they had some ability, appetite forthwith waxes weary and
lothesome in them. Galen affirms that the perfectest rule to The patient
might be nourished and measured under appetite.
health, is to repress a cold sickness by nourishing food, so that
nourishment and appetite agree. He gives no such large liberty to the hot
diseases: notwithstanding, many have adventured in the greatest heat and
travel of diseases, not only to purge the body, to cut veins, and let
blood, but also have stifeled their bodies, rather with inchaunted meats, then
wholesome medicines: and for that nature cannot digest such gross
imperfections, stand in so hard a stay of recovery, as commonly in the end
become immedicable and mortal. Cornelius Celsus, a most excellent writer,
affirms that a satictie and fullness of meat in sickness, is never
profitable, a^^ therefore to avoid either mischief, does appertain to
singular skill. The safest and directest passage, for the unskillful physician
herein, is, that the patient rather be continued with a thin diet, then
unordered fullness, so that he be not overmuch extenuated.

Galen and Hypocrates both consenting together affirm that fasting and thin
diet, do surely and secretly mortify such diseases, which happen under
surfeit, or any other unordered and glottonous meats, and a staying of many
sharp diseases that follow thereupon. And some high clerks hold opinion
that abstinence ought in time of sickness to be guided with discretion, and
all medicines to be congruent and martched under perfect constitution, and of
double operation, which is as well to comfort nature, as to expel the disease:
for if the substance of strength be diminished, and the malice of the disease
increased, appetite and nature, are estranged and variable within themselves.
For nature many times desires those things which appetite abhors: the
reason is, for that appetite is ouercloyed with diversity of meats, and
interchaunge of medicines, that both the stomach and all the lusts of the
body incessantly are pursued, fatigated, and improuidently thrown upon many
dangerous extremities.

Therefore under these mean constitutions: whereas tranquillity and appetite
flourish and bear sway, there is a good and happy expectation: as if the
vital parts be not wearied, the disease may be cured, and the decayed
strength by little and little restored. Surely when the heart, through over
great abstinence, is languished, the stomach cloyed, and the liver viduated
and forsaken of the wholesome blood. All things thereby have lost their
natural and proper course, that forthwith opi^ations and ventosites in the
guts, work all contrary indirections to health: and the rather because the
miseriake veins, which are the conduit pipes of all good blood from the liver,
are obstructed and stayed, it were not immethodicall so to distinguish these
cold and hot diseases, as that one of them in their quality and original may
be known from the other, and the better understood and furthered thereby to
health. For these cold diseases proceed of earthly (...)ses, are subject and
bound to watery elements, whereupon cold and humid vapors of congealed
thickness engender into gross substance: so that all natural heat is
excluded, from comfore^ig man's blood, through which melancholic heau^nesse is
generated, which most principally oftendeth. And the malicious operation that
rests in this humor, makes the body leave and cold, stir^eth up the
passion of the heart, int^icateth the wit and understanding to all du^nesse, and
blunteth memory. These bodies are much encumbered with putrisied seuers, which
proceed of undigested hum^dities, and augmented with ^uming ven^osites,
putrified about the muskels, veins and joints. Furthermore, all manner of
ruins, are hereby drawn to all the parts of the body, which vapors after
that coldness has engrossed them to the low parts of man called
Ca^arrizans, the passages and proper ways of nature, from the sp^eane to the
mouth of the stomach, are intercluded.

Be it further known, that these cold rewines thereby issue from one member
to an other, and infect the body with many cold diseases, and are called by
three names: Catarri, Branchus, and Corizan, for so Arnoldus de noua villa
sets them forth. Catarri infect the lights: Branchus infecteth the head
and cheeks: Corizam stuffeth and infar^eth the nostrels with most humid
fluxes: and sometimes concockt into very hard substance by means of
continuance. These bodies are best conserved by a natural and perfect
conjunction of dry meats, inwardly digested by artificial means, reviving
the principal members before decayed, for lack of natural heat. In these
and such like bodies, I do greatly commend a greedy appetite, and a plenary
diet: especially in regard that many such complections are f^^xible, and
overmuch spend nature of their own inclinement. Therefore plenarie, fresh
variety of sustenance, helps many of these sorts of men to natural hear,
even as the hard stone is molified and findered to nothing by many drops of
rain, or as the strong and slately oak, through moist issues becomes
putrified: so these cold and moist complections, in their natures wash and
vanish to nothing.

The moist ^ra^p the shaking palsy, the dangerous dropsy, the collicke in
sundry degrees are the generable (...) her(...), ben^^mning the members, to
become (...) one to another for upon these diseases the veins become conugated
and appetite disfranchised, for that corrupt humors may not have perfect
resolution, besides all which, the whole body is instated with cold
influences, producing these ven^me^^ (...)rpions Asclides, ^
Iposarca, and Timpana, the one is the mater^^l cause in offense of nature, the
second is an active cause inflat^ng all the members to become swelling and
monstrous: the small cause is delatiue, converting all good and perfect
nourishmentes to windy and waterie substance, so when these extr^mities grow
upon the guts, called Colon and Ylyon, are shut up: and thereby both the
Dropsy, Tympany, the wind and stone Collicke, preposterously creep in:
besides which the raynes of the back, by a grauesly congested substance,
hereby bends and be^^mmeth crooked. All which are not to be deueyded,
without pure and regular diet, of increasing wholesome blood, to become vigent
in nature. Therefore the disease having a scowring virtue is principally
comforted and cherished with sweet meats, tarsed with vinegar ^
to work a sharp disposition, contrary to eua^uation, least that the body
grow subtle, incisiue and ever resolutiue. And yet Galen plainly affirms,
that sweet meats are aptly converted to choler: but ^a^t viniger commixed
therewith, does greatly fortify the subtle pear^ing and ^^tring virtue,
causing the gross humors to become pure and easily to issue.

Galen says, Non quosuis, sed rudes duntaxat videor taxare morbos, atque
potissimum, non incerta diuinatione, quam probabili conucl^ra egrorum
indagatione conditionem: which is, I do not prescribe and limit every
disease, but the gross and most dangerous diseases, and chiefly do I s^arch
out their natures not by uncertain g^sse, as by probable conjecture: then let
not occasion be omitted of more larger speech in such bod^^s, subject to these
moist sicknesses before spoken, and of another sort of men, which oftentimes
pass from this world by untimely death in strength of youth, being gross and
corpulert in their stature, which men difficulty endure any adicction to alter
nature, when sickness languisheth upon them.

And although they are of measurable ability in natural vigor, yet unable to
bear the burden of sickness, or subject their bodies to any strong
accidence: but forthwith their gathered grosnesse is converted to a thin and
weak debilitie: for that in the first degree of sickness, the virtue digestive
is taken away, so that most commonly meat becomes loathsome to their sight,
whereas in health the virtue digestive being most strong, did eat much, and
made few meals. Whosoever therefore will either counsel or comfort any sick
patient, must observe the natural complexion, with diet thereunto, and that
supplement of medicene both in quality and quantity, be framed as well in
preservation, as restoration of nature: and therewithal by contrary effects
alter the disease as may best serve to the opportunity of health.

Galen plainly affyrmeth, that hot complections are altered with cold
sicknesses, and cured with moderate medicines. And Auycene agrees hereunto,
that if the complexion of man may have alteration, either by medicine, or
disease, and once recovered to health, is ever after most perfect, and of
longer continuance in this world, and less subject to sickness: for that
nature takes such regiment in it self over them, that commonly they scower,
wash, and dry their natural property of the body, from those corrupt
influences of the air, which by infection they were before subject unto.

Furthermore it is a great securitye to draw some general rules both for
hot, cold, and myxt complections, to serve this our purpose, that every one may
be instructed under measure, fit for their inclinement of heat and cold, or all
other motions good or bad, whereunto any change is made in the vexation of
sickness Therefore chiefly there must be a consideration had to understand
what maling humors have possessed the body, and whether the disease by reason
of weakness desires strength, or by overmuch fullness dissolution: if the
disease through weakness has lost appetite, then a profitable medecin to health
is required, as well to search the property of the disease: as to chase the
infectious vent^^s from the v^tall parts: For as in fulness of stomach (...) is
ouercrushed, so appetite is favorably intysed in weakness of stomach. And in
these sharp sicknesses, equal property of medicine must be reduced to equal
property of d^^t, for the pacients appetite must be framed according to
strength and corporal might, desiring always to make sustinance, appetite,
and the disease familiar one with another, remembering what Thriuerus says, In
egritudine longa non eadem virium ratio, in egritudine infesta non eadem victus
proportio, that in long sicknesses there cannot be equal manner of strength,
neither infectious sicknesses have equal portion of diet: therefore both diet
and medicines, ought in sickness to be divided into several conditions of men
in health: for those which have lived both daintly and pleasantly in health,
their stomach cannot bear gross medicines, nor gross diet in sickness, as
they who have lived more rudely, and fed more basely. Yet Auycene affyrmeth,
that medicine and diet in sickness, is brooked according to the strength and
weakness of stomach. Therefore Hypocates most wisely and learnedly speaks
of the Physician, who in a common infection of sickness, comes to diverse
estates of men of several manners, several education, and of several
appetites, hazarding his credit to be praised or dispraised among them, is
like a swift ship, pearcing many blustering storms, or dangerous rocks of the
sea, hardly escapes drowning: or to a Pilgrym passing over the wild desert,
compassed on every side with wild beasts, scarsly escapes slaying. So does
it fall out, that although many times the learned Physician puts all the
wholesome rules of physic in use and practice in the times of so great
infections and mortalities, yet by the immeasurable minds of men (for their
travels and skill) are they either overmuch contemned, or over little commended.
The rudest and basest sort of the world, with their sharp slanderous tongues
practice nothing else, then to murder and slay the Physicians credit, whereas
the Physician deserves renown and honor.

I further do wish that in all general diseases that the godly Physician
behold and respect generally not only the complexion of the pacient, but the
course of his living in health, and whether the corruption of old diseases have
drawn any fresh alteration to the body by infection, and of what nature the
disease is of, and under what season of the year the infection falls out:
Lastly, what perilous influence does then trouble and foyzen th air:
likewise to consider, what diseases happen in the diverse ages of men: As
whether abundance of blood, or drines do abound or want. And in middle age,
whether the body be moist, dry, or hot, or whether in that age, the mouth of
the stomach be clean, for that in those years man is most apt to riot and
surfeit, infestring the ^^ward parts with innumerable corruption. I wish
therefore that middle age be considered upon, against the miserable days and
dangers of old age, seeing that the offensive days of middle age by diseases
takes hold, continues and gnaweth upon old age to death, as sometimes by one
disease, sometimes by an other, so that the natural spirits hereby are so
overthrown, whereby their first qualities of cold moist and drought are
utterly extinguished, neither can be tempered in the last days of man to any
good health by art: especially and the rather when two places in the inward
parts called Myrac, Syphax are either dried up, or ingurged with superfluous
and unnatural floudes of immateriall water: therefore man is to respect the
daily trymming of his body in health, with wholesome dyed, and artificial ^
medicines of perfect operation in sickness: for so nature is fortified in all
duties without excess, and beware that appetite do not settle to any
loathsome or odious custom of gluttony or dro^kinnes, which can hardly
afterward be repressed. Therefore learned Hypocrates speaks most phth^ly,
Crapula inescantur robust qlimi athletae: The most strong champions of the
world are vayned through surfeit, hereby become weak and without stomach.

Therefore it is most great wisdom to beware that custom do not alluae the
outward senses to mordinate appetite, and de^our the inward pati^tes of man at
length, to become fulso^e and deadly in t^^^r own feeling. For riot and
excess sometimes asia fit the ap(...) of the most wisest men: yet so stayed in
their own dispositions, as that never utterly vanquished having always
pricks and sharp defenses to disposs^sse those corrupt burdens, which
universally prepare to op(...) their senses, sometimes by natural purgations,
sometimes by natural vomites, sometimes by natural sweates, sometimes by one
means, sometimes by an other. It stands far otherwise among the ruder sort,
having stuffed and ingorged their stomachs by outrageous and mighty
surfettinges, do expose their bodies and senses to all ravening diseases,
neither by reverent abstinence, or any other approved remedy, can leave off,
in favor of their infeebled and stuffed affections, for that greedines of
appetite has so snared them. These men permit prodigal surfeit, in large
breadth and length, to creep more and more upon the bounds of nature, so that
profiand healthful diet becomes contumelious and contrary to table their
disposition.

These and such like men shall find sobriety to become holy and wholesome
appetite, and nature subdued to a sufficient contentment one with an other, if
in the first onset, unreasonable conditions be repulsed through reasonable and
moderate manners.

I do not speak herein as Menardus puts down, as either to choke nature,
or crush the body in pieces, or universally suppress all the lustful
inclinations of man. Seeing all things are for the use of man created, it is
without offense to take his reasonable benefit thereof. Surely these creatures
desire a spedy dissolution, and restoration to more excellent perfectnes, as
ouerfatigated and in their service to man's corruption, showing and confirming
the same through many prodigious signs. And also because nature is oppressed,
the senses subdued, the dody distempered through man's over great gluttony and
dronkennes, the elements thereby so offended in their natural courses pour
down super abundance of moisting showers, disseasoning the earthly fruits
of man's mortal estate: so at sundry times, great famins, and mortalities
ouerspread mighty kingdoms and nations of the world, thereby the natural
order of all things are discomforted, and the temperance of natural heat
quite taken away, for surely there can be no motion of attraction, where there
is no motion of expulsion. Therefore in those miserable seasons of the world
where famine and hunger increases, the mortal pestilence shortly after rages,
as the instrument of wrath for the sin of fulness. The reason hereof is, because
emptines of man's body draws in st(...)ing co^mixed vapors of the air, which
corrupt and smuge the natural spirits, that all the parts of man thereby loses
his natural generation of blood: therefore Hypocrates most aptly says, Nisi
pecoribus simus rudiores, non aliter componamus fam^m, quae ex infami,
antionae, caritate, contingit, quam nimi^ saturitatis, and satietatis antea
vindicta, and ruina. which is, except we be more rude then bruit beasts, and
over gross in our own conceits, may not otherwise compare, reckon or account
hunger and famme, which through a notable dearnes of victuals happens, then a
very revenge and ruin of over great fullness and satiety before. And in
another place says, Vi^tum tenuem and exquisitum, si antea paulo plentor
fuerit, magis periculosum esse, agnoscamus. Let us confess a thin and exquisue
diet is more dangerous. if it were before a full diet. Then is it to be
marueiled, why the creator denies not to give his creatures food in due
season, considering how much, how greatly and wickedly, they are abused and
dishonored in the sensual liberty of man's nature. Surely such is the
disposition of man, who had rather lead appetite to a desperate riot of all
things, then to the custom of a satisfied and contented measure: the first
does nothing vary from the desire of bruit beasts, the other comes more
nearer natural appetite.

Galen therefore reprooueth man's favor toward inexpleble liberty with these
words, Natura tantum appetat, quantum ferri potest, and quantum facillime
concoqui potest Let nature only desire as much as can be borne, and as much as
easily may be digested, but the cold stomach vouchsafes not to endure this
(...) of living, for that appetite ouerreacheth dig(...) (...) warm (...)
misliketh where appetite is (...) their digestion: yet there cannot be at all
times an ^q^all prescription observed. For an ordinary diet to a ^ound bo^y
hat^ the qu^ckest means to health, if the body be (...) prepared, that the
disease more easier may be exp^^^d And those diets are most directest to all
sick patientes, those properties are both curatiue, as restoratiue.

Manardus in his second book of diseases, counsels to find the apt
constitution of the body both in sickness and health. In sickness, because the
disease may be outwardly (...) and inwardly corrected to amendment. In health
(...) be ha^ because every man may understand what is (...) un(...)t. it for
his disposition, that he neither exceed ^o (...), for the dangers before
expressed, Nor decline to (...) (...)s, because ventosire motions are easily
ingend^ed through moving vapors: For nature immediately (...) upon some
labouous and superfluous matter, sinding no (...)nance otherwise to feed upon.
And yet I find that (...) in old diseases is a present remedy, for thereby the
matter is ^^mini^hed, dried, ripened and consumed: for when nature finde^^ no
matter or substance to work upon, alters it self upon the disease, quite
chaseth and disperseth the same. Yet let heed be taken, that the subtle
humidities be not so much resolved and dried, wherein nature is utterly
repressed: let heed be taken that no maling humor being possessed of one part of
the body, forthwith possess an other part, and settle in the root o the
heart: Take heed the sinewy members be not ouerweakned, especially the stomach
which is a sinewy member: take heed the poores be not overmuch opened or
stopped, for the one may extract variable vapors of corruption, and the other
stop the fulsome matter under the skin, breaking out to outward fluxes and
blaines, which may most ragingly ouerspread man's body, for that the inward
cause was not before perfectly corrected.

Indeed this abstinence very well beseems old and moiste diseases: otherwise
in fadoming the bottom of man's nature, such deep abstinence is not permitted.
^et in these sa^ter ages, and among some new practitioners, this kind of
abstinence is drawn to use, in cu^ing the most fulsome and filthy diseases of
the world, through which man's body is infectuously stained by the slimy and
ryotous course of his life: so that hereby every (...)full man that can bring
to knowledge the names of some cert^^^ simples, although without property,
composition, prop(...)n or degree, forthwith among the ignorant sort (...),
without learning, knowledge, method or estimation, (...) names of Physicians.
Surely they which row at an uncertain mark shall nothing prevail: especially
for that being ignorant of the complexion, as also the medicine being
repugnant, more harmeth then profits: wherefore many are secretly and
suddenly overtaken with death under the usurped regiment of a painted diet,
as well when they think to mortify the inward corruptions, do overmuch
excie^ate the body, as also stop up the entercourses of blood, in ouerstirring
nature, to a fresh increase: so that intemperance ever after pursues these men
to their grave.

Many times these diets are joined to unskillful practitioners as high just
plagues for wicked offenses, both for that by them natural heat is
extinguished, appetite destroyed, and the complexion discolored.

These diets ought to be tempered to this good effect, as that drines and
humiditie are to be united of one subtle conjunction and property. And
therefore Cornelius Celsus says, that dry, subtle and hungry airs are most
best for these diets, if their complections be thick and gross: But low and
vaporous airs are most preserving of thin pearcing bodies and open diets.

And further says, that interchanges of diets and airs, for winter and summer
by several habitations, produce health and long life. But Manardus affyrmeth
that commixed bodies continue long lived upon high grounds, open airs and full
diets. Therefore it is a most excellent contemplation for every man to cast up
his senses, and perfectly find under what temperance he lives, for the
wholesome regiment of health, and therewithal to way his bodily complexion:
always directing his diet, habitation, and course of living according to the
same. And lastly, let every man beware of variety and grosnesse of meats,
and variety and grosnes of diets which engender and bring forth variety and
grosnes of diseases.

How times and seasons ought to be obscrued when diseases do most abound.
Opportunity of very propertye and natural disposition every where,
perfourmeth great occasion in the accomplishment of all things. And truly in
healing and curing of diseases most greatest of all: for not without great
difference and variety, the ordinance of meat and medicine are two special
means, through the which every Physician altogether prevails in furthering of
all sicknesses to health, yet sometimes most notable danger and hurt arises
thereby: for medicine in the tedious and wear^some ways of sickness, may at
some one time bend down to a hurtful and intricate purpose, which was to the
Patient before an effectua^l remedy. Neither is there any less then great
offense committed, if meat be given to a sick patient, whereas it ought to
be taken away, although it be good, wholesome, and perfect: or that meat be
taken away, when, and where it ought to be given: wherefore wisdom ought to
be had in high consideration, that all things in this life depend upon
opportunities, times and seasons. For Galen says, nothing can neither be well
spoken or done by the use and benefit of one reasonable creature to an other,
if the difference of times and seasons be not rightly understood,

And the writers of this latter age most justly are reproved, for that not
a^re one of them have drawn the times and seasons of ye^^^ in a right
method^call observation. For Galen and (...)rates have evermore conjoined, that
all diseases stay vp^^ accidents and concoction in the diseased patient. And
accidents only apperta^^e to the infection and corruption of times and
seasons vncertain^y and swiftly breaks out either in their own universal
rottenness, or else by the contagion of man's body, which most easily lies
open unto them: so all diseases (...) desire to (...) their poisoned strength
(...) (...)exions, as are soonest by them vanqui(...) And co^coction is the
most easiest and comfortablest signs (...)knesse which especially consist upon
these marks, and sig(...)tions, as follows. That is if nature be in full
power and strength, the material substance of the ingendered humors, di(...)h
and vanishe by little and little quite away, or else concocteth, setleth and
possesses some one place, or property in the body: otherwise if nature be
weak and feeble, and the disease inforcible, malignitie insulteth over the
body, hastening swiftly toward the borders of the diaphragm, or else
vanquisheth the diaphragm, and enters upon the spiritual parts, whereas
forthwith, nature is deadly, medicine imperfect, and the disease unable to
retire back, death presently inuadeth thereupon: for medicine is best
entertained, when the virtue thereof gathers the disease together, whilst
nature is favorable, the disease un(...), or the body vnuenomed with
corruption and able to be de^uered from the power of the disease by expulsion.

Here may be set forth a more playner declaration of such fevers which ingeader
upon the body of man: for as some there be depending upon unnatural
inflammations, congested by an evil humor, or some vehement hot blood
possessed in some one part of the body, as of the loonges or side: so there is
another kind of fever which unnaturally is kindled at the heart, deducted from
thence by the veins and arte^^es, and by the mean of the spirit and veins
into all the bodies sensible hurting the natural open(...). Furthermore if some
special cause of sickness were not (...) the urine, or some other alteration
of the excrementes, it were a hard thing to find out the difference of simple
fevers, from those fevers which hold upon inflammation, for single fevers are
known, either by the corruption ^
of the air, or by distemperance of heat or cold dangerously crept in,
disquieting the natural disposition of such bodies which are thereunto
subject, or by the unnaturalness of the body it self, in excessive ^askes by
surfeiting sweates, by over great fasting by incontinent opening the poo^es, by
^
troubled travels in thirstinesse, by inordinate sleepings (...) over great
watchings. So other fevers which h^ld upon (...) dentall inflammation, as their
property is evermore regarded by speediness of their accidents toward the
vital parts always flaming out under some proposterous Ch^ysis.

These inflamatiue fevers must either have a chryticall expulsion, or else do
they alter from one degree to another, after the greatness and insatiablenesse
of their accidents. There is a chief and principal cause moving us herein to
speak of some humorall inflammations, which are cowched under a hard and thick
covering, of strange congested vaporous humor upon the side, or by
impostumation of the loonges, whose substance once perfectly grown is not
removed or extenuated, except by little and little, or else by present immission
of blood in the basilicke vain, as all and every of these seuers happening to
have egresse either upon the animal and The co^su^ption is ^n nature (...)
hect. ^2.
vital parts of man: so the other only desire a long and tedious
consumption, nourishing themselves upon the moral parts, by continual
fretting, laboring, foming, wasting and devouring the outward flesh, do by a
super(...)s trauerse invade nature: and the more the body wastes and
vanishes away, the more redolent the strength and power of these fevers abound.

But for the better understanding of these raging diseases, it were a most
necessary discretion, so to mark them in their degrees, as that they may be
better known, and more easier provided for hereafter: for chiefly there
spittle is cla^n^e, tough, stimte, and sometimes full of bloody and matterie
corruption: their breath is almost stopped, do reach and d^^w far and
slowly for the same. The cough is hard, hollow and short, cannot without
greeuing other parts of the body, deliver it self: Their urine is fearce,
furious and of most high complexion and of ruddie black color.

Touching these and such like sicknesses infestered with inflammations,
happening under distemperance of times, are chiefly regarded, helped and cured
in their concoction, but not in their accidents. As they are never advanced
together at one time, so the greater place is given in concoction, the
accidence becomes more peaceable and quiet. Yet there is great disagreement
among the latter writers, that if the disease be vnualurable inestat or
fashion, how can the accidents of the disease be valurable or sharp: and if
putrefaction, or corruption be most great and forcible in estat, how can
concoction be most perfect, for concoction is contrary to putrefaction.
Howsoever it does here fall out by controversy, the surest stay upon the
sick patient is, when the disease is settled, the infection is peaceable: for
then the medicine more certainly expels the cause.

And therefore behold that all diseasses, break forth their malice, by
depending upon special seasons of the year: So that there is a double kind of
offensive matter in all fevers, one which can never be corrected, and the other
which by little and little setleth, and at length thereby expelled. And yet
there be some most dangerous fevers, so alienated, and estranged in their
natures, as neither will rypen of themselves to be utterly deuoyded, nor yet be
altered by any medicine, to become certain.

These and such like fevers in their strong operations, are chiefly dom^^^ed by
vomites in the superior parts of the stomach, or else by favorable glisters
not only shall search many engendered humors and corruptions, but clears,
cleanses and searches all the principal parts of nature: so that the troubled
senses after many pains, shall hereby be drawn to quietness and rest.

Therefore Galen most sapiently distinguishes as well upon single as
inflammatiue fevers, as of the plurisie and such like. Many most excellent
writers very much have complained of times and seasons of the year as not
sufficiently elucydat or set forth to the knowledge of men, after the needful
manner of ages, for that several nations and countries of the world, do follow
their seasons and times by the due course of the elements, and after the
property of the sun in vprising and down se^ting, who gives refreshing,
growing, natural moystnesse and ripening to all living things, according to
the soil and situation of all such grounds and places, upon whom it gives
a shining comfort, be it either early, or late, short, or long. I find by all
good writers that Autum is the most dangerous and poisoned season of the
year, under Europe, and most complained of, both for the indirect temperature
thereof, as that especially the effectual cause of all pestilence then,
breaks out, as also in that the strong heat of summer is weakened, and
transumpted until another year, and also because variable distemperaunce of
warmth and cold then abounds in liberty of all corruption and rottenness:
for the clear sun, having consumed his natural strength and mighty force
upon all living earthly things is utterly weakened, not able to endure so
strong a course any longer, until a fresh direction be renewed from one degree
to an other.

Whereas coldness and dryness are in that season of the year coniunct, so
rottenness and corruption, before intricated in any part of man, presently
breaks forth: for as cold has ouershadowed heat, so dryness vanquisheth
moisture, for which cause both morning, noone, and evening, have their sundry
operations in that season of the year.

Auycen says it must needs fall out that either sorts of fevers in those
seasons most readily show their fury. For cold and heat gelied together in
one substance of dryness, makes demonstration of elimentall corruption, and
therefore do imperfectly rypen. And gross humors also before settled, do
openly instat within the poores of man: so that corruptions may not a^^e more
be couched, but break forth in open rage. Hypocrates in his first book of
Aphorisms, says the appro^hing, assentings, and constitutions of diseases do
show both the passing away of the year, and a successiue increase of diseases
by interchangeable courses of times, as whether it be every day, or every other
day, or by a more larger compass, and space: For in the judgment of Rasis,
most dangerous diseases fall out, in these wavering seasons of the year, as
when the body and the elements are both corrupted together, presently without
stay, are bewrayed in their own natures. For do we not behold these winter
diseases, are searched in the bottom of their corruptions, by cold frostie
weather, which were before infected with moist seasons, and hereby break
forth into quartan and tertian fevers, so that it is further to be considered,
that these coniested diseases of winter immoderately in the spring time assail
the body, especially in those natures whose bodies are evermore incombred with
fumaticke grossness, their passage in their veins is interdicted, their
blood cannot with east dissolution ascend and descend, do by infection
apprehend, cold consuming fevers: so also these and such like vaporous
diseases: their blood being through a contagious spring time discolored,
tainted, and unperfected, draws and ingendreth a venomous nature upon the
liver, and whose fortitude and virtue assimilatiue thereby diminished becomes
prassiue in it self, all which is most venomous to the vital parts.

Herein may be perceived, that all contrary interchanges of the year, do
approve and try their inclinations of one season The vapors of the spring or
winter season are exhausted into the elements and are scowred and cleared by a
hot summer from the elements into the body of man* under the corruption of the
body, for one corruption entertaine^^ another.
by another, and the rather for that all unnatural diseases grow and engender
by means either of stinking and unseasonable grounds, or corrupt vapors in
the air, infecting and weakening those bodies which are empty and void of
substance: or else difflorisheth the laudable generation of blood in gross
bodies: or else universally infeeble and excoriat the bowels of all men, either
by a peri^^ons flux called Dissenteia and such like, in the approaching of
summer: or else by a secret Chrysis in the dog days, upon the liver, stomach,
loonges, and giddiness of the head.

And surely upon the accidents of these diseases, the patient is infected with
venomous humors as aforesaid, as grossenes of blood impostumated in the liver,
the face disfigured, the arteries discolored with yellow black humors, and
the rather for that the gall speweth and stayneth all the superior parts of
man.

Wherefore as these and such like diseases fall out by interchanges of seasons,
as well from some accidental influence in the distemperance of the elements,
as also in the corruption of the body it self: So such dangerous and fluxible
diseases after the judgment of Dyoscorides are best comforted, scowred and
restored by potatiue vnguentes inwardly taken. Touching those singular fevers,
are in their first beginning very remotiue, and give easy place to medicine:
so if those fevers be not in their first onset oppressed, will wax sturdie and
very forcible over nature, for which cause the counsel of Hypocrates
principally is herein to be followed. Cum morbi inchoant, si quid mouendum,
move, cum consistunt, and vigent, melius est quietem habere: When sicknesses
and diseases do begin, remove them, before they take root, but if the disease
stand at a stay, for some good property in it self, it is far better the
patient take rest. And yet no such prescription is of necessity here set
down, but if the disease hasten to concoction, may the better be curable, and
operative, both in medicine and nature, although opportunity was omitted in the
first beginning of the sickness.

Furthermore many writers of this latter age approve this place of Hypocrates
by the comparison of a botch, or some other preposterous outward sore, which
do congest and gather upon the flesh under some vile and inordinat substance,
is not to be cleared and cured from corruption, before it come to perfect
estate, both of ripeness and rottenness. So these single diseases are not to
be removed in the first beginning of their infection, but in the beginning of
their increase to concoction, so Hypocrates meaning is received of the best
sort. And yet the best means is not denied, but that every skillful wise man,
may in the excellency of his knowledge, at the first entrance of the
infection, ministe^ medicine, not only for the easing and mittigaiting the
rigor of the infection, but for a speedy performance of the same to
concoction. It stands far otherwise in those infla(...)tiue and sharp
diseases of the plurisie and such like, whose accidents is to be prevented and
subdued in the first beginning, for if these ^ur^ous diseases grow to
perfection, they will be immed^^able and without remedy. For as there must be a
perfect con^ection and medicine aptly framed to diminishe the same; so there
must be a thin reformed diet, both because of thickness of hot fleame, and
the unnatural heat of the disease it self. And as these effects must be
wisely decerned, so these pota^i^e confections must be made meet, equal and
apt to the same constitution.

As first regarding the grossness of the accidents, and secondly to
understand more artificially by experience, from the variety of excrementes,
that is to say, by the signs either of some raw or concoct matter possessing
some one part of the body, besides which, if there is one orderly progress in
the disease. As when the disease begins to settle, then the increase thereof
finisheth: And when the perfection of the disease manifests in the highest
degree, there is the disease in full estate: and when the accidents are
general, there is the infection sharpest in nature: when the disease begins
to give over, and to loosed, then an universal alienation shows the same:
for that the urine is not raw as in the beginning, grows to substance,
color and verdour, the countenance thereof is scowred, cleared and perfected
like a fair bright day, after a strong and stormy tempest.

Next and lastly there follows a disease, called Dyspnaea so set forth by
Auycen, most commmonly does break forth in summer season about the judicial
days, and gathers strong vapors into the body about the breast, by reason of
a disseasonable winter or unnatural spring before: Or by reason of a great
retent^on in thick blood, inordinately congealed about the breast or heart of
man. So that the passages of the inward parts are stopped up, that one member
cannot have use and service of another, matched with a difficult extremity of
certain dry knottes or knottes upon the liver, lights and loonges: besides
which all material substance is quite exhausted, for lack of excellent and
perfect moisture in that place.

These pectoral diseases are best known, for that there spittle is tough,
thick, bloody, proceeding o^ black color, reaches deeply, draws wind
hardly, for their wind pipes are ouercharged, as well with humorall substance,
as that sometimes also, their loonges are utterly wasted. Even as a hot fire
causes a pot to foam over, so the boiling heat hereof inwardly chafeth these
diseases, to become more extreme and fierce.

These diseases I say are best eased and resolved both by opening the nether
parts by glisters, and comforted in the upper parts by cullicies of thin
substance, without addition of any hot cause put therein. So that by the
comforting of the one, and opening the passages of the nether parts in the
other, the disease is dissundered and easily avoided downward: it has been
seldom seen, that very few have escaped this dangerous contagion.

Here might be placed sondrie other dangerous diseases, especial fevers
happening in man's body upon contrary and disseasonable operations of times:
But these are sufficiently prescribed as a universal admonition, with care to
regard health from sickness in every several constitution more exactlie then
heretofore.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE BEginning of every disease.
Old writers among many wholesome disciplines and necessary laws delivered
out for the government of man's body, have not omitted what rules are best to be
observed in the beginning of every hot disease and sickness, that is with
gentle and favorable medicine, mollify the hard excrements of the body, and
not only because nature is departed from due disposition, shall hereby the
better be restored, as also in that the strong heat of sickness, with
thickness of blood has stained the humors, as that all moist passages
dangerously are stopped up. Therefore by this molifieng, humous are thereby
made more agitatiue, and the poores to receive such comfort, are redilie
opened, so that both body and nature yield together more flexible, and the
stubbornness of the disease hereby is made more obedient.

Auycen called this mollefaction the liberty of nature: Dioscorides says, it
is the messenger of health: And Galen says, it is the controller of sickness:
Arnoldus de noua villa says, it is the glass of true knowledge in sickness.
This mollefaction is of most gentle quality, both in attracting of good
digestion, in retention of perfect substance and strength for the behoof of
nature, and the superfluous spum of most gross and imperfect humors
therewithal are provoked more apparent: for the causes of diseases are not
only hereby stirred to readiness against euacuat^on and expulsion, But the
nature of the disease it self wholly is discovered in the work of medicine,
and the P^isi^ians knowledge hereby made more lu^ulent.

There are some which have mistaken this kind of mollefaction in stead of
minoration, and are altogether therein deceived, for that mynoration is an
attractiue medicine, searching and proouing the qualities of the complexion, or
else galding and chasing nature by some superfluous repressing or altering the
drift of the disease. For sickness in the first beginning has no absolute
place, especially those which be laborious and sharp: yet many have great
opinion of that place of the Aphorisms, as at the first beginning of diseases,
remove that which is to be removed: but when diseases keep at a stay it is
better to take rest.

Many writers of the same function which Theophrastu^ Paracelsus is of, having
allowed this mynoration, durst never take in hand that weighty matter unto
which other were persuaded by them.

Galen so evidently distinguishes those sharp diseases, as no man is
occasioned to doubt what is to be done, either in the beginning, middle course,
or end thereof: for he fashioneth them in their first entrance to be called
Insulsum, that is, unsavory and without feeling,

And Ieremias Thriuerius does call the accidents of every disease Insultum, a
brag, in reproach of the whole body.

In the second course of sickness, it is called Accessio, which is an
augmentation to a more supreme power over the body. And this third placing of
this sickness is called concoction, which is a preparation of manifest matter to
some certainty, so that the medicine is the more aptly constituted for the
perfect expelling and fluxing of the same. Forasmuch as all accidents of
diseases may have one violent drift in the beginning, and alter in the estate,
and both of them within themselves may dissunder in operation, and engender a
several disposition contrary to euacuation: for the one may swiftly inflam,
convert to choler, and ouercharge the estate of the sickness, and the other
may attract some virtuous property and thereby comfort nature, and expel the
disease without medicine.

Auycen wills that in the accidence of every disease, there be a true
observation, to consider whether the disease be ghostly or bodily: moist, or
dry: and whether the body be of good or evil complexion: whether the stomach
and the liver be cold or hot, whether the humors be quick or dead, and
whether the operations be heavy or sharp: Whether choler has a burning
pre-eminence in the lunges or mouth of the stomach: or whether a dust choler
have kindeled an improper heat upon the spleen.

The second observation is, when the disease consists and staieth in a
property, whether the humors have passage and due course by the straight
conduites of the body or no, or whether there be a quick springing blood in
the veins, or whether the disease relinquisheth or retains nature.

The third observation in concoction is, to consider the pulses, whether they
be hard or soft, hot or cold, moist or dry, and whether the humors have
perfect resolution or no. Surely without perfect regard of all these causes to
be either direct or indirect in sickness, there is no intermedling with
purgation, before cuncoction be pefectly comprehended: for if in sickness there
be no alteration, why should nature be vehemently vexed: As purging when the
accidents are most strong, does nothing else but stir and chafe the disease,
to wax more powefull and cruel, And to purge when the disease consists,
disquieteth both the disease, and the patient also being at rest: besides which
not only disperseth, but venometh the disease to be in all the parts of the
body imperfect, so that neither in the beginning, or the ^state, medicine
avails in the disease: but the surest passage for health and life, in all
sick patients is, that in the uttermost course of sickness purgation be
placed: that is, when al putrified infections be gathered to a certainty by
co^coction: notwithstanding there is an universal judgment pronounced of the
best sort, that all such medicines which extenu^te and diminish, either the
extremity of the disease, or unsettle other congeled humors therewith, are to
practiced, a lowed and used, both in the beginning, and estate, so that the
disease thereby may more swyftly be hastened and rip^ned to concoction: yet it
is not herein so spoken, that so large a liberty is granted, as to use any
purgation at all, except mollefaction or extenuation, which only is permitted
in strong acciden^s, for styrring up congested humors or provoking bodies
insoluble. And so long as the beginning of every disease continues, so long
these weak medicines may be perfectly permitted, it cannot hold together that
the sickness of one month has equal beginning with the disease that has
continued but one week: and yet who dare be so bold as to purge within the
compass thereof, before the signs of manifest concoction appear?

Certainly if the beginning of the disease continue in one accidence six
months, or a whole year, before concoction be gathered, yet there ought to
be no troubling, or molesting the body with purgative medicine, both because
the disease is thereby unperfected, and the course to concoction quite stopped
up. It is to be wished and counseled for all such to take heed and be hereby
advertised, which run at hasard with present purgation upon all diseases: for
the learned Physician, which in judicial reading is before made to understand
the same, is neither to be warned, counseled nor taught.

Lastly, no practioner is abridged, either by medicine, or diet, or any, or
all good endeavors to draw such diseases to concoction, as a ready
preparatiue for purgation, which is a singular and perfect way to health,
agreeable to all the rules of Physic. These things so highly considered, who
does not marvel to behold some careless rude persons, who under the
counterfeit show of Physicians, do in the first beginning of diseases profer
three or four draughtes of desperate physic, with purgations, inchaunt the
body of the sick patient, not only to innumerable inconveniences, but most
commonly to death it self? These rather desire to behold the number of
physic cups standing upon tables round about them, then the motion of
nature in the diseased patient.

Hear may rightly be understood and perceived, that concoction ought to have
a most high superiority in gathering and preferring the universal corruption
of the body on a heap, before purgation take place. But there is a consociety
of very dangerous persons in this our age, whose custom and manner is, the
very same instant and day, when they approach and draw near the sick patient,
do first prescribe minoration, do the second day expect concoction, the third
day eradication, the fourth day a potion consortatiue: the custom hereof is
doubtful to be allowed, both because the disease is carried by so large a
compass without stay into many afflictions, ^ooseth his stomach and grace,
lies dead in the body immovable, and every several confection may have
hereby a several operative nature to do harm, in some fresh and contrary
property.

Auycen utterly disaloweth their practice herein. How much the preparing and
seasoning of the body avails, for the perfect altering of the disease to
concoction, whereby purgation may more naturally and effectually do the
duty of a trusty messenger, in perfourming the intent of the Physician, the
sick patient shall evidently find the ease thereof, being released from such
and so great continual dolours.

Galen, Hypocrates, Auycen, Dyoscorides do confound and consent with this
virtuous and medicable endeavor, whereas these rude and corrupt practitioners in
the first instant and beginning of the infection, minister a strong purgation
in offense of the whole constitution, is like as if a rotten fulsome channel
were raked or stirred to the bottom, corrupts the senses and infecteth the
air in more poisoned putrefaction, so that many dangerous effects ensue
thereby. The skillful physician does far otherwise, that as the sweet
fountain water, or the pure celestial showers of rain, by little and little
purge and purify the fulsome savors and contagions of the earth, do not
only keep them under, whereby their fulsome smelles break not out, but also
by little and little utterly takes away both their intolerable foyzing the
air, as the corrupt stopping up, and poisoning, the comfortable and essential
estate of man's health.

Here follows an other diligent observation, that all bodies overtaken with
any universal malefaction, are not, beesides the which, clear and free from
other corruptions, as having ingenderment with black fleamie and yellowe
choler, so that one of them are very offensive to an other, and therefore
ought they to be mundified and diminished, as two offensive causes
inconuenientlie conioined in one disease. For if they ^ee not concocted and
gathered to a mutual certainty, their gross and thick matter being
discovered and estraunged, thinlie and vncertainlie breaks into all the
parts of the body. For Auycen says, thick things are easily comprehended,
and swiftly excluded, as evidently is perceived in those diseases which happen
in the breast: as whether their spytcle be thick or thin, is scarslie reached
up, because the shortness of breathing from the lungs preventing, must of
necessity retire back. Therefore when these parts cannot be scowred by
natural action in the quality of the breath, must in these seasons of
infection be concocted and seasoned together by medicine, so that the one with
the other may be confluxed out of the body. There is an other observation that
choler of what nature soever it be, is not in his own property to be more
styfned, but drawn more thin and open, i^ the humor of the sickness be
thick, but if the humor of the disease be thin, then both choler and
fleame must into due concoction be thickly gathered: and yet those bodies
which be naturally fluxible, are the easier emptied of those ex^rements against
the difficult bruntes of such infections.

And my further desire is, that herewith be set down an other observation of
natural and unnatural choler, which most vehemently aggrauateth the cause in
sickness, as being mingled with gross and thick ^leame, burns in it self,
and inflameth the disease, for that the property thereof cannnot be separated
therefrom. Also there is choler which has no issue, is of a red bloody
condition, it is engendered upon the liver, redilie conioined with those
diseases which happen under some preposterous chrysis. Furthermore, there is a
choler engendered of evil meats, which not perfectly digested, grossly
gathers into y^ veins, do lie open to all infectious sicknesses, alters
with the disease it self, and tergiuer sateth from his own property.

There is an other choler, which rests in the gall, or else conuerteth to
wholesome blood, every disease by this choler is made more perfect and
excellent, does comfort the body in health and does of his own property
comfort the disease to concoction in all general infections.

Furthermore in the beginning of every sickness you shall understand whether
there be any gross choler adjoined therewith by two special notes: the one,
if the urine have a very thick substance: and the other, if most vehement
heat arise in the complexion. Surely, surely let this be an universal
doctrine, that all infections do search and seek after some excrementall
superfluity, to become of more higher corruption in their supreme dignity
and estate, As by hot choler the infection more vehemently rages, as by
melancholic thoughts the disease becomes more gross and heavy: by fleame,
the disease becomes mo^e cankered, and yet natural fleame conuerteth to
nutrimentall substance, and many times of very property is a perfect medicine
to withstand the assaults of all hard and extreme infections.

Thus to conclude, even as the learned Physician never aduentureth his Patient
at hasard, so let all Practitioners by degrees, regard every disease from the
beginning, then by wisdom health is universally maintained not by hazard, as
in the same artfull knowledge many grievous diseases are recovered from evil
and venomous corruptions.

Next follows to show what is to be done in the time of the increase,
estate, decrease and falling away of every sickness.
IT now may be lawful somewhat to take in hand a practice for purgation and
yet no otherwise to purge, then as concoction has yielded, and gives leave
unto: For it is reason that nature be somewhat ruled and reformed, whereby the
tediousness of her burden may be measurablie performed, and shaken off most
lightly. The ancient fathers although they have laid open all the counsels of
Physic very largely, yet none of them do consent, that it should be a
lawful action, at the same instant to purge, when the increase of the disease
is powerful, for then is it doubtful whether nature has resigned her motive
course: And therefore medicine ought to be stayed, until nature return again
in her own property to the uttermost. Some are in contrary opinion doubtful
and uncertain, whether nature have an active motion in the increase of every
sickness: for if the chrysis be perfect and certain, there is then disease
languishing, and laborious: if not, then ye disease is in some part discovered,
so that the remnaunt more easily is performed. By which means, it so comes
to pass, that there is a sudden alteration and change of nature to a more
better and excellenter hope: for in all such like diseases, nature is approved
in her highest substance, whether she be able to endure or no.

And when there is a substantial dissolution of the disease in the behoof of
nature, the same is easily known and perceived, either by urine, or ordour, or
the temperature of the body. And yet in all sharp sicknesses the same is no
consequent discouerture. But it cannot be denied in those sicknesses which have
length and continuance, that if nature perfectly be descryed is be strong,
powerful, and replenished with liuel^hood, then the sickness has free
passage and evident approchment to full increase, and therewithal many times,
the body purges, and fluxeth off her own free property, so that the motion
of nature is greatly therein revealed: and surely the physician* is cleared
from any excess danger, that may ensue thereof, so neither is he partaker of
any good perfection that comes thereby. For in all diseases there are good
and evil works in the property of nature, and withal, there ought to be
most high consideration in the study and endeavor of the physician, for the
restoration both of nature and health together. Whereas in sharp diseases the
physician does euacuate the principal parts of the disease by medicine: so
nature ought to be favored, and maintained in perfect substance, for if she be
not in potentiall estate, she presently decays and falls away as well
through the sharpness of the medicine, as the painfulness of the disease.
For where nature performs her strength, there she not only preheminently
vanquisheth the disease, but expels and chaseth the infection thereof quite
away: so that these operations of nature are accustomed abundantly to pour
forth their gracious fruits in the conservation and consolation of bodily
strength, and are most certainly tried, when the disease consists or stays:
as if it were in the time of health, if the physician do at any time fear
the decay of nature, he ought by artificial skill, practice, not only to
fortify the natural course of the body, but there withal search the nature
of the disease. Notwithstanding the physician is forbidden to intermeddle with
the works of nature, when she of her own property, has any moving toward
health: but surely in dangerous sickness if nature sometimes ouerexquisitely
purges of her own property, then take heed that neither the flure exceed,
nor yet concoction ouerrun the perfect course and wayfare to health: Remembering
the old saying, Quum fluor excedat, mors intrat, vita recedit. The physician
ought to surpass the disease both in wisdom, experience, and high counsel
with natural causes, both in releasing the languishing compunction of
infection, as to gather all crud and raw causes together, whilst the disease
has a time of increase, and to profer a practice by some meet framed
medicine, to ripen the disease, except the disease consist and stand at a stay.
And in ministering of purgative medicines there must be called to remembrance
whether nature have ready strength and full power, to perform a limited duty
in purgation or no. And heed must be further regarded whether nature be
ouercharged with the foreign estate of the disease not then to be troubled or
drawn to worser inconveniences, by unseasonable medicines.

Auycen says every disease is both powerful and wavering when it decreaseth:
but when it consists, is more certain and better stayed, and then most
easily overcome by nature and medicine, for which cause not only crud and raw
matter, but also dured and settled matter is then principally expelled.

And yet many approved writers affirm that the greatness of accidents are to
be appeased by the physicians skill, and not permitted to straggle out, except
equally measured to concur one with another in the motion of nature. And it
is most inconvenient at the same time to provoke the accidents with any heavy
or sturdie medicine, which neither the disease nor nature can then brook.

Cornelius Celsus very prec^^ely stands upon the words of Hipocrates, Si
quid mouendum videtur in principi^, move. Who understands that the increase
of the sickness, is a p^^t of the beginning. Ierimias Thriuerius a learned
writer says, that if any act has been ouerpassed in the increased of those
sicknesses which have been more prosir, then casefull, may be more strickly
regarded in their full and perfect estate not because it was an error, or
neglected, but because the increase of the disease required no such thing,
until there were a full (...)nesse in the disease accomplished. Galen writing
to Gla^^^ in his book de art curatiua seems to interdict every medicine,
before the estate: especially where crud matter possesses it self. And cast
aside, says Galen, all solutiue and hot medicines: and whosoever proffereth
any medicines at all in such diseases, which are stuffed with crud, raw and
sluny substance, before some ease and releasement in the disease be finished,
shall bring double dangers upon the disease. For being before single and of one
property, thereby both the disease and nature are altered under double grief,
as well of great inflammation, as opilation, whereby the ercrementes, loose the
due disposition, and the blood corrupted, and the arte^is wherein The (...) a
are (...) and like to the veins.
the spirit of life walks, are exposed to innumerable dangers.

Now as you do understand, what is to perfected in such diseases contained
under crud and raw matter coming to their estate: So there must be a like
caution taken, in these sharp diseases happening under some evil and
dangerous chrysts, not to interdeale therewith by sturing, before ye disease,
with all inconveniences thereto appertaining be fully settled.

There is a certain gross and imperfect substance so settled in the property
of these and such like fevers, as if they do aspire to a high strength and
estate, are unable to be vanquished and driven away, both because nature is
weak and feeble, as also for that the medicine has no direct operation.

Be it assuredly known that where nature is more weaker then the disease, and
therewithal the property of medicine loathsome to the disease, is a plain
indication of death: and although nature may herein, for a time be succored,
yet can never be recoured.

The ignorance of many are greatly to be lamented, who after nature is
overthrown, seek a life in the midst of death: therefore Galen in his 29.
Aphorism of his second book, denounces safeguard to all such, which in the
time of long sicknesses are prospered with nature. And although medicine is
such a general thing as may be framed to serve in every degree of sickness
with virtue, measure and time: yet whosoever, either by unequal virtue,
unequal measure, and unseasonable time, reaches into any such disease, when
nature is before decayed and oppressed, is to be adjudged in a damnable estate
for the death of that person.

Then let the Physician thoroughly consider both bodily constitution, and the
course of the disease, before he attempteth any thing: for by rash enterprise,
the course and motion of nature may be prevented, and the disease offended.

Surely when nature neither moves, nor innouateth, there is no enterdealing
with medicine for euacuation: as whether it be by potatiue electuarie, pills,
or otherwise, all is vain and therein utterly to be refused, for rest and
quietness in those diseases most prevails.

Then lastly whosoever neglects these wholesome rules, and without
observation runs at hazard, not only vainly magnifieth himself among the
rude and ignorant sort, but through their unskillfulness either do they dull and
blunt the disease or else cherish and continue the danger of the same: for by
such rude persons, nature is both spoiled and troubled, the worthy knowledge of
physic slaundered, the deserts of the worthier sort derogated, and the
public estate of the people offended.

Here next follovveth how meat ought to be increased or taken away,
according as the times of sickenesses require.
Now remains to search out not only the nature of sicknesses, but in what
seasons diseases are most perilous and apt in offense of bodly health, and
also how meat ought to be increased, withdrawn, or quite taken away, the which
part is most hardest of all: for neither old writers have clearly and purely
expressed it, neither yet new writers sufficiently revealed the darkness and
obscurity thereof. Yet that ancient Hypocrates in his first of the Aphorisms
vouchsafes to give advertisement, that when diseases both begin, increase
and come to estate, full meats are to be abstracted, and thin dyets most
chiefly commended, until both nature and the disease be well pleased with the
thinnest of all. For it is a manifest rule, that there belongs to every
degree of sickness a due ordinance: that is, when meat is quite taken away,
some great practice is to be expected and accomplished by medicine, which then,
and thereby, must work most effectually and soundly.

Yet Galen on the contrary does seem to command the patient in time of
sickness to proceed from a barraine and unfruitful diet, to a satiable,
vberious, and complet diet, which of the writers in this latter age is
understood, that after great emptiness, nature is greedy to recover her
former perfection. All which must be done with such discretion as that meat
and measure concur upon the estate of the disease: But in these inflammatiue
diseases of the sides, liver, loonges, or such like, all nourishment in the
beginning of such diseases is denied and quite taken away: Especially if the
spittle be clammie, gluttonous, or deuoyded out with thick blood, then except
the disease be loosed, either by cutting off the basilicke vain, or by some
other skillful attraction, the patient is thrown headlong upon death. For
although some use ptisans, made of exoriated and vnhusked barley to be dronk, in
mitigation of such extreme furious diseases, yet all nourishment plainly is
denied, before some thing in so dangerous a case be perfected.

There is a farther counsel to be here in extended, that if the patient be
desirous of sustenance, or some supping, and will not there from be refrayned:
then shall be ministered unto him some slender food in very small quantity,
as is neither operative, nor nourishable, both because of the dryness and
distemperature of the body.

Many very good writers agree and consent that fountain water, and sharp
vinegar, not sophistical, but seasoned from the natural grape, aromatized
with honny, is of s^owring property, if it be well boiled together, and drunk
next the heart morning and evening: also it is a most wholesome oxin^ell to
mundifie fleame in the stomach, gently penetrateth congested An oximell is
pure to mundifie the stomocke in sickness.
blood in the sides, does quench and appease the fury of flammatiue fevers,
and sharpeneth the stomach, therein shall be found most present helps, in so
hard dangers. Next it is good to understand how the patient profits or
disprofiteth by these significatiue marks as follow. That is, when the
increase of the sickness prospers toward health, the concoction therewith
prospers also to a full estate, as appears by the mouth waxing moist, or
else reaching up from the loonges some concoct matter of ripe quality to be
easily delivered forth in full quantity: For the more abundant those
excrements be purged out, so much the rather the stomach is framed, and
sharpened ^it for food and sustenance. Then it behooves to yield the body some
slender relief, so that continually it be limited within iudication. For as
every disease is rather qualified under a barraine diet in the beginning: so a
small and thin diet is commended in the increase of every sickness.

Surely a thin diet is best approved in the opinion of Auycen: that is, when
the disease consists and stays in one course toward health: But if the
disease in forceable assault runs forward without stay, then all dyets are
subtracted, until the nature of the disease appear more open and perfect.
For the body having escaped these and such like perils of sickness, is like
a wayfaring man having passed a tedious and hard journey, through long fasting,
and much labor, desires food: So these bodies ouerpassing and preventing
variable hazardes by fatigable wrestling, and painful enduring both the
beginning, increase with the estate and perfection of the disease, are like a
strong captain, after conquest and victory, desires quietness, rest, meat,
and sustinance. And yet many of these diseases, recovered both by good
ordinance of medicine, and wholesome food, have returned back to their old
dangers, and not stayed their course before death. All which falls out, both
because there was some disordered surfeit before health settled in perfection,
and the disease not quite rooted out.

Auycen says, that if the body fall into present misgouernance, after that it
has been recovered from sharp sicknesses, especially inflammatiue diseases,
and before nature be restored to her prestinat and potentiall estate and
dignity, death without commisseration insulteth over life. And therefore he
advises all men universally to settle nature, to sharpen the stomach, to shut
the poores, and to entertain sleep and quiet rest, after sickness, before
they expoose their body to any hard practice. Now these perfect canons, holden
by general consent have confounded and overthrown the controversies of new
writers, and retired unto their ancient and former separation of diseases, and
secretly therewithal hold back, and inwardly contain their knowledge and
counsel, touching simple diseases, As though no such thing appertain unto
them: But largely comprehend the estate of these inflammatiue fevers in either
of their natures under one general method for remedy to either of them: so
that these diseases have diverse natures and operations, as well in their
accidents as in their concoction. And many times it so falls out, that
medicine alters and setleth them, not only to concoction, but also to be of
an nature: whereas before they were in their accidents, variable, and diverse
in their course and property. Touching the difference of these simple and
co^pounded fevers, I cannot find no direct agreement, between Hypocrates in
his book, de ratione victus, and other writers, but Hypocrates and Leonard
Fuchsins, do consent, and with a true report sound out, that all diseases
happening in the spring, ought to be under a moderate diet in their beginning,
because nature is then most occupied in digesting raw flegmatike humors
congested the winter before, and by the natural ascending of blood, painefully
diuerteth from common course. And also the body which is replenished with
humors, is in the spring season more troubled, then any other time.

But touching those diseases which fall out in summer, thin diet is then most
meetest: for that both natural and unnatural heat, exceed moystnesse, and
those diseases which then happen, are most aptest to inflame.

But all those diseases which happen in Autumn, meat is measured according to
the disease: for no perfect diet (says Fuchsins) can be prescribed, for that
diseases are then of diverse properties and contagions, And therefore to be
measured according to the physicians skill, knowledge and discretion. So also
such diseases which fall out in winter, are furthered or hindered according to
the seasonablenesse, or unseasonableness of the time. For moist foggy winters
engender corrupt diseases in the body to the uttermost: And natural whether of
frosts and snow approve and search the body either to great welfare of much
health, or else to speedy death: therefore Fuchsins Frost and cold purifieth
the veins and sinews for the blood ascending in the spring season.
says, diseases in thin bodies are then guided with restoratiue dyets, for
oftentimes such bodies are in those seasons apt to be consumpted and utterly
wasted, both because the natural blood is departed in the deepest veins, and
strong bodies inwinter seasons subject to sickness are best pleased and
approved with mean stipticall and sauorie dyets. If in these bodies both
medicine and diet by present remedy have not a positive operation to conserve
a strong estate in nature, Forthwith nature perishes. For as they are not able
to endure the pinching cold outward, so their fleshie foggines cannot inwardly
suffer for want of perfect and pure blood: so that no outward shelter, nor
inward nourishment counteruaileth to recover health in the^.

Let us return to the substance of our purpose, for the searching out the best
diet in all diseases, either simple or co^pound. Galen in the first of the
Aphorisms, the seuenteeth Comment wishes a thin and sharp diet to be
established in all sharp diseases, both because the body is infected with most
greatest fleames, and because inflammations do therein most abound.

One Hugh Senensis a learned man, disputes that thin diets are meetest in the
beginning of sharp sicknesses, both because strength is in full property
vndecaied, and the material substance of the disease over rebellious, and
thereby without stay easily subdueth the body.

Hypocrates generally and deeply speaks of all feauers, either simple or
compound: that first the disease is unsettled, and uncertainly roueth in the
body: and next, for that it does abound with paynfull travels, difficultlie
wrastleth, skyrmisheth and trauelleth, either to settle and possess some one
part of the body, or after the spyrituall parts possessed, inuadeth all the
parts of the body to destruction.

Herein is it manifestly proved, that in the beginning of diseases nature has
no need of such nourishments: for if appetite were gredy and desirous thereof,
yet not able to bear that which is wished and lingered upon. For whosoever
infarceth and inforceth nature in the first entrance of every such sickness,
both cherishes the disease, weakeneth and defoyleth nature.

Galen in his first book de art curatiua, writing to Glawco, in his chapter
de cura febrium continuarum, says, that if continual feauers consist in one
estate, and the body very weak are best ruled under an exquisite and sharp
diet, if strength and age agree therewith: but if the disease exceed beyond
that lymittation, is then to be vnderstaied with a plenarie and stronger food,
so the same be apt to constitution.

Auycen says, when the estate is perfected in the disease, let the diet be
more plentiful, or otherwise, let the diet be augmented, or diminished as the
disease increases or vanishes away. So also this is a general agreement
among all the ancient Fathers, for the regiment of man's health, having put
forth an universal edict, that in all mestiue mortalites, thin diets are most
pertinent, for medicine to work upon, because their accidents are infectious
and of indiuertible substance, and especially so long as these infections in
their accidents are conjoined to the beginning: otherwise if the increase of
the disease prosper and proceed to be perfected and settled to some very
likely estate, they ought to be solicited more at large, either by curatiue
medicine, or diet, until the usurped properties be expelled: after which, the
body is to be enlarged to a full diet until nature be revived, restored, and
recovered in full strength.

These rules and reasons proceed from men of great countenance, of sound and
upright judgment, repugning the wrongful and erroneous interpretations and
opinions of certain new writers, who having set open their shop of
counterfect practices in defrauding the good constitutions of heath in man's
body, who in the beginning of simple fevers in place of a gracil and thin diet,
have constituted and put in place a free and bountiful diet.

Secondly in simple fevers, when the disease increases, do prefer a thin diet
in steed of a complete diet.

And thirdlye, they do in the estate of compound and inflamatiue fevers
magnify a full diet, in steed and place of a thin and peaceable diet. Surely
Hypocrates somewhat bends to the second controversy, that in the increase of
al simple fevers, a competent diet is most meetest, so that if the disease do
proceed in the increase, or forsheweth any similie end, either by ripeness to
cease, or else take safe degrees to estate: Then the Physician has full power
over the disease, either to recover health, or else to stay the patient from
large and strong sustenance.

Petrus Brissotus and Lionicius do say, if in the estate of simple fevers,
sustenance be denied to the patient because of the strength of the disease,
then what ieopardie are those pacientes put into in their time of estate, when
inflammations and accidents together yield no place to rest, their bodies
being strenghened with nutrimentall sustenance, do continue the disease most
cruel, fierce, dangerous and outrageous, unto the approchment of death.

Hereby all patientes may perceive, that all diseases within the knowledge and
help of man, are under laws and ordinances: Therefore whosoever shall either
violate or mistake these laws and ordinances, offends both the sick patient
and his own conscience.

And furthermore, if the sick Patient will not be ordered, but rebel against
this wholesome government, preferring both his own wilful mind and reason
before the sound and perfect counsel of the Physician, Let him be adjudged
guilty of his own death and destruction.

The first Book of the Temperamentes.
AN Element is the least part of every proper thing compounded and united into
one substance, perfourmeth not the least, but the immixt parcels of the same
things to be made a perfect element, and equally to place those smallest
things to be tempered with the highest, as that (not in any behalf) any one of
them be immixt from an other. It is an high onderstanding: wherefore we oguht
to divide the least portion of every tempered body as follows. That is,
there ought to be in number four elements, neither ought there to be more or
less: and yet can there be but one element alone, for that with an
unreprovable quality all things return to destruction: neither can there
be two elements, as fire and air, because all interior things would
presently be consumed with their coniomed strength of heat. Then may it be
imagined, that nature might have framed fire and water to bear their several
course alone, both because they do in variableness differ one from another,
or that they might seem more durable in their course above the rest.

The third element is the air, which nature has so placed between the rest, as
that moistness is joined to water, and heat to fire: neither do these three
elements suffice, except there be a fourth element conjoined hereunto, that is
say, the earth, not only because it is the seat and habitation of men in this
world, but also and much rather being commixed with water, does by her
coldness, temper the other two elements: therefore nature most decently has
bound, not one, nor two, nor three, but four elements, and that with a straight
and agreeable concord, as when they were dis^ramed and dissociated from their
equal places: As when the earth was downward, the water and the* air in the
middle, and the fire upward, although there are not only some philosophers,
but very Christians which have practiced to discover Which is taken as an
error.
for the knowledge of man, a certain dark, thick, and shadowed fire, about the
point and center of the earth by a direct light gleaming and irradiating from
the stars, The which fire is vestall and pure, not elementarie. Herein if we
consider that both the earth and the water do not only entertain the same
fire, but the air interiected, forthwith follows the same: even as there is
a conjunction of the earth to the air, so is the water placed between both of
them otherwise the air should wholly remain moist, being placed between two
dry elements.

Galen and other grave Philosophers do seem otherwise to think, who on their
behalf call the water most moist, and is so adjudged in the absolute power of
nature, for by touching the same is perfectly bewraied: whereas the air is not
comprehended at all by touching, therefore the air is more moist: and yet
because water is of more rounder and compact substance, then of an intentive
quality, some philosophers report water is more moist then air: otherwise how
should yse more cool then water? and yet not more colder.

Galen affirms water to be most moist, for that it is clear, and no dryness
is contained within the substance thereof. By this reason no simple medicine
can show in his uttermost nature to be either hot, cold, moist, or dry in
the highest degree, in respect of equalite (...)ature from contrary pla^ing,
therefore this reason most pro^pereth and proves in ^urt bodies: and although
the air were clearly hot, yet not in the highest degree: So likewise if water
were clearlie moist, yet not in the highest degree, for it ^s repugnant in the
reasonable on^e: standing of elements, that there should be two qualities, or
else no^ at all obtained in the highest degree: for if air has not maystnesse,
it should then unnaturally exceed in the uttermost place, which is against
the nature and order of the elements.

And furthermore, it is greatly to be marueyled, that certain new Philosophers
with some counterfeit weak reasons, blaste abroad in the world, that water is
more moist then air, which cannot hold: for then the elements should fall
out in contrary order, which otherwise have an equal constitution in the rest
of the bodies one after an other, although they be of disframed conditions and
qualities: or else we may judge of man's body to have more earth and water,
little air and less fire, whereas it is in holy writing far otherwise
declared, that man was not fashioned, neither of air, water, nor fire, but of
the earth, showing that earth and water are imperious and ruling elements.

This element as a heavy substance does bear great sway in the constitution
of man, for that heat and dryness are of more lighter matter: Then does it
stand by natural reason, that heat among other qualities is active, and as
the quality thereof is most plain, so the least portion thereof as in man: for
which cause these two outward bodies cold and heat, may be perceived, and
that coldness is tempered by heat, and heat dela^ed by cold, drines by
moystnesse, and moystnesse by drenesse, that one of them should have equal
service by an other: so there is also a motive cause of coldness and dryness
through the sinews, so also there is coldness and moystnes in the brain, where
the conceit and sense begins their place. The heart is the instrument of
life, the liver the instrument of blood, the which of necessity are hot and
moist: and so from thencefoorth there are certain instruments of necessity,
some cold, some hot, some moist, and some dry: if any one of them at any time
do bend or writh aside from these just temperature, their active quality must
be disured and fall away therewith, for that the instrument which leads the
same, is decayed. Therefore the body of necessity is to possess and enjoy a
perfect estate in his members, in service of all the offices appertaining
thereunto.

And the rather because all bodies have a conjunction of the four elements,
otherwise choler which is hot, dry, and cold, cannot serve the body in
perfect nature and operation, for that unnatural choler corrupts the whole
body.

And furthermore, as the four humors are separated one from another, in
several estates and constitutions, so such members which are insigned under any
one of these humors* are commoderated one by an other, until there be a
judicial temperance reigning over all the wholl members: for although any such
instrument were of necessity cold, yet it is not convenient so to be in the
highest degree, for that certain immixt elements do want the temperance of
the second quality. Now if successively these instruments were by this means
most righteous and equal, they ought not to be tempered on some one behalf,
but on every behalf: for no instrument can be meet, whereas if any part
thereof be unmeet. And for this cause it is not only a seemly sight, that
these elements after their greatest portions, should be grossly mingled in a
myxt body, but that in the whole they become perfectly united, and that there
be no want in any part thereof.

Therefore as diverse elements are so mixed in one body, as that there is a full
service of all the members one to another. So was it righteous, that there
should be a whole perfect conjunction in the just commoderation of all other
instruments: for if all and every part were not equally moderated, one part
would decay and fall away from another. For is not the body conserved and
satisfied by the said elements from hunger and thirst, which otherwise would in all the parts thereof languish and fall Wine is a bounti^ull element, ordained
to me perfect properties.
away: therefore man is nourished of the four elem^ts, in that the heat of the
sun is commixed with the earth, and the water and air commixed, are of
generable nature, producing sustenance, agreeing with all natures indumentes.

And furthermore consider, that whosoever drinks w^^e for coldness of
stomach, does not pour or infuse fire into his body: although the moistness
of water is tempered with a fiery element to frame a perfect body, not in
outward action, but by the pure power of heat.

This verily proves that one element is fashioned with another, so that all
the elements are of equal power and property one with another. Otherwise if
man were framed of one element, he were impassible, and without suffering: Or
if there were such a dissimilitude in the elements, as that not one of them
could be drawn in agreement with the other, but still continue a contrariety,
then all passive actions were dispropriated and imperfectly disequalled. Even
as there is manifestly showed forth all necessary causes to the construction
of every one body: So these elements all in all, are commixed without
separation, following upon the immixion of humors in man's body, unto which
every living man is subject and bound unto by natures ordinance. And there are
some which wallowing in their own wills do affirm, that blood is nothing else,
but a certain confounded humor, extracted out of three humors: although the
same is utterly false, Yet may it manifestly prove a great variety in the
permixio^ of elements. Therefore if it be possible that four humors are
confounded Manners do follow the humor of blood.
within themselves, and yet their forms kept together vndiffacioned, or that
one form or fashion appears for them all: then surely these elements are
as well commixed in these humors, as wholly perfected through the body it self:
that although their forms were either disfigured, or in some part abstracted,
yet there qualities are undefaced. Otherwise the reason and measure of mixture
should perish together both in form and qualtie, touching corporal forms as
they are never taken from their substance. So not the form, but the qualit^e
has increased by the mutual actions of the form and qualities together. It
is therefore most difficult to withdraw nature and quality, from these most
excellent temperatures, The difficulness. of the o^e is cased by the perfection
of the other in the course of the veins.
which of the ancient Philosophers are called complexions, possessing diverse
parts of man, as coldness and dryness in the bones, and hot and moist in
many other parts of the body. So the rather may it be perceived, that all cold
things in man's complexion are overcome with hot and moist temperatures,
nourishing blood in every man to be perfected after natural inclimation.
Therefore he has finished a good and perfect work, which can uprightly
discern a perfect temperature in the estate and constitution of all men.

The Physician is largely to distinguish upon the natural complexion of all
men, for it is his part and duty to compare man with man, and all men to be
under some one temperance. And yet there are many differences to be found under
these temperatures.

Galen shows by experience of some men which are ouertroubled with fleame,
that although some part be taken away, and not in all, yet the superfluous
humor that remains, is made more moist, and the easier digested and
resolved. Auycen says those things which be over moist are tempered by
dryness: then there ought to be an accidental heat indifferently and equally
compounded with humiditie: but yet the intemperance of heat and moystnesse is
an unequal commixture. For Galen says that the decay of complexions are upon
superaboiuidant qualities one with another, which is the overthrow of nature,
and brings death.

Leonard Fuchsins says, if the seasons of the year should be compared
according to their temperatures, the spring season is most wholesome and
temperat* because it is hot and moist, if that by strange exhaltations it be
not corrupted. And Autumn season (says he) is most intemperat, for that it
is cold and dry.

Galen says otherwise, that if the spring be compared or co^oyned with an
unnatural summer following, shall be then ^old and moist, because of the strong
exhaltations of heat following thereupon. And on the contrary, if it be
compared or conjoined with the unnaturalness of winter, it is hot and dry,
because of the elements were distramed with heat, by an extreme and
unnatural course in the elements the season before. Surely Dyoscorides very
uprightly touches the mark, that the temperature of the spring time ought to
be regarded and marked of natural and unnatural properties in it self, and
not by the comparison of another season.

Arnoldus de noua villa affirms, that the spring season is found neither hot
nor moist, but temperate: so that neither susuperfluous moistness nor
exceeding dryness do abound: for the Spring indifferently seasoneth all
things.

Ieremias Thriuerius says, that Spring has no perfect temperaunce, through
which, either the winter before, or the summer after have lost their
temperaunce in the heat of the earth: when as the veins and sweet fountains
of the earth are decayed, having not only lost their natural progressions,
but through strange exhalations the aireis distemptred and becomes gross,
loathsome, and furiousin all open corrupitons.

So on the contrary, all the parts of the earth may be enraged with hot
dryness, for that the elements exceedingly do suck the joyce of the earth,
drawing in all filthye corruptions, which infester in the highest degree:
seeing the spring time is then of property and nature most comfortable, and
that in all natural and wholesome temperanre, does never bring forth sickness,
except by some former corruption, which has forestalled the sweet refreshing
joy thereof.

It is good to consider then the temperances of the yeare^ how they do agree
with the complections of men, both for the conservation of health, and the
avoiding of sickness: for collerick persons do best take comfort and joy in
themselves in winter, for the heat of their complections is best delayed and
tempered with the moistness of that season: Flegmatike persons do live more
safer in summer, then in the spring time, for this temperature chiefly agree
with their complecions: so may we not forget that women do live in greater
joy of nature and: norwholsome in summer, then either in winter, or spring
season: and Hypocrates does simply grant that women are both in the spring
and summer season most prone, and then principally esteemed with men, yet Rasis
says, that chol^erike women both in winter and spring season are excessiuely
stirred up with natures inclinements, and then most of al possessed inwardly
with great heat and very apt to digestion, and therefore their natural
courses and prouocations are then most apt and plentiful.

Arnoldus de noua villa affyrmeth, that there are superfluous humors, which of
their own malicious property, redilie are prepared to infect the flemmatique
woman, and are open to many other unnatural accidents, and yet sometimes by a
favorable property of nature do release themselves: Therefore Theophrastus
Paracelsus says, that if those accidents did not perform great works of
natures inclinements of moystnesse and heat, in the change and alteration of
the moon, A woman were then cold and dry in the perfection of death. But yet
those bodies which are of their own property both temperate and long during
in the perfectest constitution of a woman's body, is hot and dry.

Now furthermore, it were a very good and special doctrine, somewhat most
largely to discover the properties and variable conditions of Autumn: and the
rather for that many have failed in the true explication thereof. Some affirm
that season to be hot and dry: other some say it is cold and dry: and some
other some say, that the qualities and disposition of this season depends
upon days, weeks, and months, and the diversities thereof, happen not like
as other times and seasons, as cold in the noone time, and hot in the morning
and evening, al which ouerpasseth the right and equal proportion of temperance.

Cornelius Celsus says, that in Autumn there is a contrary motion of the
Elements in all superior causes, so in these inferior causes there is also a
chaungeablenesse in all things: as from moystnesse and greenesse, to ripeness
and rottennes, through which distemperance many things do draw strange
vapors of the air into their quality, whereby many infections do corrupt
and take hold of the body, in gendring variable diseases. Besides which their
is a contrary motion of the elements corruptly rouing abroad in those
seasons: Not only because heat and moisture are coniuncted in the variable
parts of the elements, but also for that there is no certain nor constant
induction of the weather for health and wholesomnesse, to comfort man's body
withal. For first the planets are in their courses utterly difframed one from
an other, so the sun upon the nightlie and north passage, fretteth upon the
circle, dividing the half sphere called horyzon, as also having entered upon
a contrary point of Ar^es, inforceth the mornings of those seasons to be hot,
moist, and soultrie. And after the dissolution of this ouerraging heat, the
north grows to a most extreme vapor of cold about the noone season. This
may easily be gathered hereof, that the opposite points of the north and the
south, having strangely and diversely altered both their properties and courses,
the inferior causes are so poisoned in a corrupt degree, as that ouerraging
pestilences are inkindled in such like seasons, and there shall be perceived
great lights and furious flames of heat arise in those parts of the north,
all which foresheweth excessive gluttes in the unseasonable abundance of rain
the winter following.

Some new writers persuade the world that man's body is ouerweakened by those
seasons: as well because of the vnnatuturall distemperance, as also for that the
vygent heat of blood not only descends, but either thereby decays, waxes
thin, or corrupts in unordered bodies.

It is a most high contemplation in the herbs and plants of the earth, whose
fortitude and power is in the coldness and dryness of this Autumn greatly
diminished and fallen away, so also subject to putrefaction and corruption
therewith. For the generation of humors which were clearly nourished by the
pureness of the spring season, are now utterly surprised, either by
euacuation, corruption, or putrefaction.

Auycen says, that Autumn is like a woman which when the time is come cannot
conceal her travel, so Autumn cannot be covered or hid, which tries and
approves man's body, whether that it be with diseases infected, or no: which
may be also

After threscore and ten years, this fleame knitteth in the joints,
s^oppeth the veins, ingrosseth nature, decays digestion. And in the
canicular days this fleame becummeth ponderous, and by an excessive and
inordinate heat, odiously stencheth in the lower parts, especially upon the
legs, and that until putrefaction be perfected therein.

There is another watrish fleame, thick and subtle most hard to be digested,
gluttonous and dronken persons are much herewith infected, and this fleame
about the fall of the leaf, is white, thick, hard and corme: it offends the
brames and nosteels very much, except it be addressed with warmenesse: this
fleame most of all offends in winter season, and by reason of outrageous
coldness and distemperance of weather, alters at the same season more than
any other time, for that the cold and hot humors disagree one with another.

There is a most dangerous fleame called by Cornelius Celsus, Rallium, of
others, Gibseum: this fleame setleth in the joints, and sometimes in the
arteries, dries into hard kernels not only ingendreth putrefaction, but
remediless gowtes: and as all maling distemperatures have conspired herewith,
so does it crase and break forth in open liberty by all distemperate seasons
of the year.

There is an other heavy and clammie fleame, proceeding from the lights, and
shows it self most principally in the Autumn season, like to yse, because
the blood discending, is overtaken with coldness.

There is a fleame which many times is incident to very black and
chollericke persons, and shows a dangerous nature in the finishing up of
Autumn, it proceeds chiefly by inordinate and evil customs of youth, as
excessive lechery, and such like bloody unctious and greasy contagions. This
fleame is ingendered upon the heart, kidneys and raynes of the back. There is
a chollericke fleame, showing most of all in Autumn, engendered of salt meats.

This fleame moves a belching hicket in the mouth of the stomach, causes
great pensiveness and sorrow of mind, proceeding of greedy eating of raw
fruits before the natural heat of the sun, be perfectly coagulated therein,
and yet if there be pefect digestion hereof, it is converted to blood.

There is also an other humor annexed hereunto called choler, the which is
either natural or unnatural. Choler unnatural is an outward cause known
through the whole body, and melancholiously mingled: it is cytrin, or like the
color of gold, Cytrin is the color. of an O^renge.
it is intermixed with subtle fleame, and sometimes of smaller substance, and
in similitude of the yolks of eggs, and enterioyned with gross fleame and
natural choler. There is a choler burn^ng in itself, and converted to
ashes: there is also adjoined herewith a melancholious choler, which is of a
reddy color engendered upon the liver. There is a choler engendered upon evil
digestion of meats, and it is engendered in the veins by other evil humors,
this is prassiue choler, like to the herb Prassion: it burns until there
be no moisture left therein, and the dryness thereof waxes white.

Furthermore, as all these temperatures of the body, coneur with the
temperatures of the year, and as yet no temperature certainly is found out at
any time, which shows some great reproach to nature, both because she has
ordained nothing certainly to continue, neither has she performed all things
alike: and as many accide^ts of unnatural influences do on some variable
behalf corrupt and distemper the universal earth, so by great murrayne in
cattle, by excess pestilence in mankind, and by putrefaction of earthly
fruits, show forth a variable alteration of the four elements in all other
living creatures. Therefore Hypocrates says, it were more then reasonable in
nature, if all seasons of the year were tempered or distempered alike, for
therein the government of man's complexion oftentimes falls out by the
natural or unnatural course of times: for the work of nature cannot be
showed or tempered in any thing more glorious, or a greeable, then that
temperance or distemperance are framed to serve equally in their places, as the
four seasons of the year fall out, under which man's complexion is best
ordered, or worst disordered according to the proportions of the said times.

Galen calls the estate of man in the spring time of the greek word
EVCRATON, which is that nothing can be changed from his temperature.

The new writers have indeauoured their wits to prove, the most wholsommest
and sit estate for the health of man's body is that season, which is most
best tempered under moisture and heat, and that the flemmatike man is best
delighted therewith: yet if we do both approve by experience, and also for
our further doctrine understand, what Hypocrates says hereunto: that no
seasons of the year are more corrupted, then those which happen under the
estate of moist and heat, And chiefly if the said estate be either long or
superfluous: under which said times, often falls out great changeableness in
nature: for that not only simple corruptions are then easily taken hold of,
but all general infections of pestilences are ouerspread, in swalowing up the
life of men, for which cause moystnesse and heat, and of most excelling
quickness and full of life: and yet distemperance therewith has full and
large conjunction and corruption to do harm herein. For Galen himself
confesses, Humidissimam naturam esse vinacissimam, cum intemperatis, non autem
temperata confert, The moist nature is most quickest in the state of
intemperate things, but it nothing prevails in those things which are
temperate: for certainly superfluous moistness, scarreth and breaks natural
color.

Some hold in opinion, that if heat by a strong proportion do superabound,
cannot offend at all: as if it be tempered with excellent moistness does
always conserve a lively temperance.

This opinion is much reprooues by Dyoscorides, who judges those bodies which
of necessity exceed and ouerflowe in fleame, do also exceed in heat and
moystnesse: and in like sort, they are so deseperate one from an other, as that
they cannot per^ake or comprehend any perfect quickness at all, considering
that nature is rather hurt by the excess of two properties then one: for there
ought to be always a medio^ritie and an indifferent estate in nature.
Therefore it is necessary that heat do not extend in a sanguine man more then
humiditie: for if moist humor preheminentlie be placed, the intemperature of
the sanguine complexion is more quick then any other temperatures, and yet not
in a temperate disposition. As such intemperatures are of a more quicker
operation then the rest, so are they more vnwholsommer and esiest suspected of
their unsoundness, and nature oftentimes speedily perishes in them: especially
for that contag^on is over powerful therein: although this may be true, yet was
there ever any that searched the true understanding thereof? For surely these
sanguine complexions, as they are hot and moist, so their bones, sinews, and
veins are covered with thick flesh ingendring great abundance of blood, many
of them through exceeding great riot, easily do intertaine many diseases,
untimely devouring and overthrowing them.

And in very deed there is in these sanguin complexions a contagion which
falls out, both by strange and unnatural heat, which easily gathers both
because the same is forensical and improper, and also for that it has a
principal power in it self, so that the old pruerbe herein is verified: that
smoke is next fire. And as it insulteth upon moystnesse, so is it easily
conjoined, and yet not nourished therewith. The reason falls out, for that
heat and mo(...)e were distemperatly united: Also dryness very hardly
intertayneth heat. Yet if it be a hot dryness, contagion is very greatly
repugned and withstood thereby. Therefore it stands with daily experience,
that whatsoever things can be preserved, sa^ored or tempered with vimger or
salt, from corruption, is wholesome and pure. It is a most excellent workmanship
in like sort to continue the sound estate of man, under good and perfect
ordinance in the time of heat and moistnes. Yet some writers verily think such
seasons can hardly be recovered from corruption, but that some one disease or
other, falls out upon the distemperance of the weather.

Furthermore, the authority of Aristotle or Theophrastus shall not any thing
herein prevail, who wrongfully place the life of man between heat and
moisture, in the definitive sentence of death.

The old writers never did so think, having by three means gathered heat,
cold, moistness, and dryness: although the earth is more drier,
notwithstanding the quality thereof is impermixt: (...) their bodies forthwith
decline. And surely the indowment of these sanguine complexions, are neither
hot nor cold, but temperate. They are men compounded of most excellent
dispositions: and for that they are of yellow whitish hair like flax, much
good speech is used of them, both by Galen and Dyoscondes: they endure health
strongly, and do resist and bear out the danger of sickness familiarlie,
withstand the fury of accidental diseases, (called infections) most stiffly,
and the rather by reason of the variety of their permixion and confused
humors.

Furthermore, for that we are distinctly to handle not only the constitution
of man's body, but chiefly the several complexion, under which every man is
governed: therefore are we next to consider of two sorts of melancholicke men,
of the which one kind has a helpefull humor and is appropriat to nature, the
other is improper, or rather unnatural. The disease of the melancholicke
person, is engendered of two parts: of which one enters into blood, and
possesses the veins, and the other is conuered into the spleen. It is
profitable if the blood thereof be thick, whereas it was before thin,
watrish and weak, being so converted does much strengthen all the members of
man's body.

There is a melancholious humor engendered upon the liver, which simple is
neither hot nor cold, but absolutely dry and cold. And as Galen reports
Socrates to be a melancholicke person, and a man of a thin blood, by reason he
had no active increase in heat, and of a rough skin, because continual vapors
from the stomach moved intentive coldness, because the comfortable blood did
not freely at all times return to proper course, his bones, mouth and brain
were dry, and his stomach feeble.

Cornelius Celsus says, that Socrates was a melancholic person on the worst
part, both for that the liver blood was not perfect, neither had free and open
passage or recourse unto the veins, or yet was temperately conveyed unto the
spleen, in which places blood should be plentiful, vigent and nutrimental,
and by which means all melancholious superfluity should be expelled.

Melancholy which is taken in good part many ways profits the body, to all
wholesome comfortes, and has a special regiment in the highest and best place
to the spleen. But if it possess the body on the worse behalf, becomes a
dust, saltish, sower, and boyleth upon the inward parts, and is altogether
gross, rumous, and has a final inclinement to death.

A melancholic man is of countenance black and yellowe, and of nature in two
degrees, and the one more tolerable in condition then the other. The one sort
are most unconstant, and readily do tergiuersat from every perfect purpose.
Whosoever reads the opinion of Auycen in a certain epistle supposed to be
written to a noble Duke of Sabelayn Hispalis in Spain, shall find there
described more certainly the properties of a melancholious person, then I
purpose to intermedle withal. Yet Dyoscorides makes a very commendable report
of a certain excellent potion, called Diospoliciton, first An excellent potion
called Diospolic^ton.
devised and approved by Architas, Prince of Tarentum, a most sovereign
remedy against all melancholious diseases. And Galen in his book de sanitate
tuenda, Speaks most deuinely, and reputeth those men to be me^ of high
happiness, who in their dispositions understand the wor^es of nature, do by
inward contemplation, as by wisdom and experience continually consider, to
instruct and reform nature, to a better inclinement, until perfect grace,
old years, and gray hayres have prevented the inconvenience of such desperate
humors, and also to have made an utter conquest of all the evil practices
thereof.

It is further to be noted, that many evil manners do grow upon the natural
disposition of man like weeds, and that as well by daily use and custom, as by
excessive distemperance, dipped and colored every dayin wicked practices, from
the pureness of their first innoce^tie, as that sometimes they are become
vnreformable. And Galen affirms, that no greater per^l happens unto man,
then when evil custom ouerruleth, ouerrunneth and ouerreacheth both
disposition and temperance, which ought to underset and prolong the body with
great fe(...)e and health: Therefore let us herein following, set down (...)
two kinds of temperance. The first is observed and referred to weight, or
heaule burden in respect of the elements: as that no quality do therein
exceed another, both for that all bodies are of equal wayght in the qualities
of the elements called temperate: for it is impossible that temperance should
be settled, either under excess or defect. For as it seems the four
elements are commixed within the comprehension of the same weight: And as fire
has his natural quality, and active motion with the other elements: so if
there be a greater portion of fire then earth, surely heat with a preheminent
dominion surpasses coldness. Hipocrates is missensed or mistook.


There are many which despise Hypocrates in his Aphorisines, altogether
missensing his doctrine of heat, not understanding simply heat, but a hot
body, that is to say, the breath and blood of the body. And doctor Measues
says, that children have more breath and blood, according to the proportion of
their body, then others of higher age: that even as a fire of green wood
burns most strongly and vehemently, so the heat of the children, (according
to natural measure and temperance) ouerpasse higher ages.

Leoncenus says, neither the one, nor the other stand with truth, because
both sorts are of one and the same degree according to proportion. But Galen
by the way plainly admits children to have more heat: not because heat is
in them more intentive, but more abundant: the which is most certain and true.
For seeing breath and blood are of necessity more abundant in children, it
cannot otherwise be, but that natural color ought more abundantly to
possess them.

Galen puts down next hereunto a second manner of temperance to
righteousness, as a positive law to be observed of all men: the which
righteousness consists to pay every man his right, as well in due deserts,
as to him that receives it, as in discovering the glorious works of natural*
duty in the payer: for herein not only consists a simple temperance, for
that it is a principal thing, agreeable with equity, but also because it is
begotten and brought forth, as a fructifieng tree, from natures perfect
inclination. Wherefore we are to think of, and inquire, whether nature has
favored one place, and country more then an other, in the favorable behalf
of temperaunce, not only for duty in righteousness, but for the perfourmance
of all honest actions. In perfourming which purpose, Greece is magnified and
highly regarded as a temperate country, both because famous and excellent wits
have sprung up therein, as that experience has tried them a famous people in
ordinance of manners, and the works of wisdom have discovered them by their
wholesome laws both for martial, polliticke, and civil government, And the
inclination of nature has polished them to walk most temperately in their
conditions, during the course of this life.

Demosthenes in his orations against Philip of Macedonia, persuades them to
live according to the temperate soil of their country. And yet if we behold
all living men in their order, there is not one so to be found, which attaineth
that excelcellencie of wisdom and understanding, as he ought to the
uttermost of natures indowmentes, except some few persons presigned thereunto.
And yet every living creature redily perfourmeth some temperate work of
nature: as some men in running swiftly, some men in resisting strongly, and
some men in agilitie, and some men in policy, but few men in learning,
wisdom, gravity, and the natural faculty of eloquent speaking: and the
fewest of all in the confession of their creation: And yet every one has a
several work of perfect temperance in the best behalf.

So certainly all other unreasonable creatures are framed out of this natural
mould, to some temperate property or purpose, or other, as the horse for
swifenes, the Cow for fruitfulfulnes, the sheep for profitablenesse, and many
other precious works temperatly do herein excel.

There is an other temperate creation in the plants and herbs of the fleld:
although their virtue is quick and vegetable, Unequal qualities of diverse
herbs are made of one proper operation by the art of man.
yet cannot skilfully use their own property, but their properties are
known, used, and searched out by the art of man: and as many qualties
exceeding one another, are so made and compo^nded one by an other, into one
quality of medicine, as that they do not swarne or exceed one above an other
in operation. For as hot water and cold snow commixed together, are made one
perfect temperance of warmness, so all bodies or natural qualities
appereinent thereunto, are contained or compaged under one bur^hen, stoop
down and take hold of seasonablenesse in every kind of conjugation or
knitting together. Therefore the Physician not only croppeth all these herbs
of the field, but takes his best delight and joy in the property and virtue
thereof, for recoueryng, helping, and comforting his sick patient by some
confected medicine, aptly and wholsomely framed to the bodyly constitution: for
which cause, surely, this man in all the parts and practices of honest duty
is a most perfect temperate man,

But let us return to our purpose, and insert under this volume a most high,
and secret workmanship touching the forming of mankind in his creation, which
most sufficiently shall be proved both by reason, argument and demonstration:
and that man's proportion had a begunning by the insight of a divine creature,
first formed under an invisible substance, and afterward visible, possessed
under an anathomie of flesh and blood, yields to a natural inclinement in
every one to some several property or other; so that one of them from
thencefoorth has from time to time increased in the flesh and blood of an
other, and chiefly under the protection of the divine providence, as well as by
the continuance both of the earth and elements in one due progress and course
of all things.

Hereby may be perceived that man's generation has grown up from age to age,
under temperance and distemperance of the four elements: not only until
every sever all office of the same, he performed in quality and quantity of a
proportion able body, as also to be perfected in fashion, that ^a^ure begins
competently to partake her wonderful and admyrable works, therewith under cause
and effect.

Then herein is to be required a commoderate difference of these bodies,
whether the substance, as the in^^^^ents appertaining hereunto be natural or
artificial: if natural, then their form is under wholesome or unwholesome
temperance. The disagreements shall be herein most largely declared: for the
first beginning of artificial form, was comprehended under the hands of man:
as either by etuming caruing, or skillful payating. The chief masters of that
faculty was Policletus or Apelles, their workmansh^p was without natural
temperance, active motion, or sensible feeling: And for that the four eleme^s
had not tempered or united a motive life or breath in them, the^r work is not
passive, nor subject either to temperance or distemperance, health nor
sickness: they f^e^e neither friendship nor hatred, good nor harm: when they
are in tired they cannot revenge, nor yet requite any good benefit bestowed
upon them: they are ignorant of the alterations and chaunges of seasons: They
neither feel the pleasure of life, nor the pain of death: Their complexion is
without disposition or inclination, to any good or evil things, where as
natural form, has a most high place in the work of a visible substance. So
that Lyonicenus hereunder, places Physiognomy to be conjoined and annexed
under natural form, and therewithal the parts and gestures of the body are
framed, according to the manners of the mind. Aristotle in like sort does
reckon the actions of the body, to be agreeable with most men, after the
manners of the mind.

Fuchsyus says, a temperate body is not considered or measured in the weight
of the elements, but in the perfect action of every several member. If which
reason be true, then those bodies cannot be temperate, which are not
fashionable: then also those actions which are done without form, are neither
perfect nor effectual. No credit is assumed hereunto, either of learning,
wisdom, or experience: for otherwise the head cannot conceive any good
purpose, if the joints be perverted from nature.

Surely the highest and happiest temperance appertaining hereunto, is when the
mind in natural property is provided to all good deeds and perfect works,
and that nothing may hinder or entercept the honest intent thereof, this is
perfect temperance. For otherwise if there wanted hands to do a good service,
in distributing: if the composition of the body were vytiate, either in the
mothers womb, or by the unskillfulness of the Mydwife, in some one joint,
shall this prove the child to be disabled from all temperance, and imperfect
in all actions, and therefore in him all neighbourly benevolence were to be
quite taken away, if in any such respect temperaunce did consist. This stands
far both from reason and judgment, therefore seeing a temperate work, frames
a temperate man, to be equal and measurable, we are to understand, that
formitie and fashion is an isntrumental cause, not effectual without the
qualit^e of the mind, so that an elementall body measurably commixed in
disposition, may be temperate although the same be not fashionable.

Ulysses may be adjoined an example hereunto, who was far wyser then Achilles,
notwithstanding he wanted outward induments and comely form, which both
Achylles and Nereus possessed. I will possith forth a lively picture in the
perfect description of this matter, of one Acsop a Philosopher, of all men that
lived in his age, was in all the parts of his body most deformed, as being
goor-bellied, bowe-legged, crooked-backed, a misshapen head, with a crooked
neck, the carootes thereof were both, short and slender, having also flat
nostrels, and hanging lips ouerreaching their sights in all misshapen
deformities: notwithstanding, nature endued him with a temperate brame, he was
most witty, pregnant, fruitful, and in setting forth of feigned fantasies and
sudden devises among al men then living most happy. Therefore it follows,
that the best fashion in body does not attain the best and wholsommest
temperance, in the ornament of the mind. Manardus is deceived, affyrning that
outward form is better then inward temperance: which if it should so fall out,
form is the principal and efficient cause, and inward temperance is a cause
coniunctiue following. For Ajax was of a fashionable, strong, and mighty body:
yet was he mad, raging and furious: so that it is to be proved, that the
outward frame and form (although it be never so fair and beautiful) cannot
be well directed and governed, where inward temperance wants. And Hypocrates
affyrmeth that form and fashion, with reasonable creatures, ought to be
possessed under a proportion or measure of the inward qualities, and that
temperance is a seasonable gift, from that heavenly workman, infused in man
contriuing all inward qualities to become most splendant and virtuous in all
metaphisica^. causes, far beyond man's conceit.

The Philosopher says. Homo hominem generat and sol. Man and the sun do
generat and bring forth man. Therefore inferior causes do not enforce the
superior causes from above.

And Galen says, that the divine cause has fashioned the proportion of the
body, after the manners of the mind, and do many times oen of them agree with
an other, which if it do so fall out, then corporal actions and natural
conditions, depend within themselves, one upon another, by a mutual consent in
temperance.

Arnoldus de noua villa says, that every member in a serviceable body,
obtains perfect temperance from the inward mind: and yet he does further
report that blood and humors are more thicker in an intemperate body, and
therefore degenerate in conditions.

Auycen concludes, that the four elements are congested into every several
body, predominating every man, in some special disposition of good or evil,
touching the qualities of the mind, of what fashion or disfashion soever the
body is: but the power of heaven ouerruleth all.

Dyoscorides says, innocence has begotten man, in a perfect Man's innocence
compared to a paynters tinsell.
mind, in the beginning of his days, and was stained afterward by (...) or
larger corruption, like a paynters tinsell, from white to red, in the carnation
of man's blood, but the celestial power by a regular order, reformeth all
things.

Thus ends the first book of temperaments.
The Lord made heaven and earth and all things therein, Blessed be the works
of his hands.
HERE FOLLOWS THE SECOND Book of Temperamentes.
Seeing in this first book we have spoken of the nature, number, and order of
elements, as well of their proportion and substance in body, as their property
in quality, have found out not two, but four compounded temperamentes. So
also by delatiue circumstance, have we distinguished, in the temperatures of
times and seasons of the year: the one by universal substance, the other by
universal nature: the one in temperature or distemperature of heat, dryness,
moisture and coldness, and the other touching pureness in health, as
corruptions in sickness, happening under the good or evil regiment thereof.

We are further now to proceed, until by rule and order we find out, by an
uttermost endeavor, the plenary parts of man's estate, and condition in this
life, the comprehension thereof, is in one behalf natural, and the other
animal: So that a temperat man is by rule and (...) in (...) kindo of work,
by good manuring, and civil framing of his outward members, made inwardly
perfect, for that voluntary motion has before performed many several duties
in the most excellent senses of a virtuous man. And yet it is a necessary
thing to discern under these senses a common sense: so the insignes and
renowned tokens thereof are st^ntomaticke, for that all cogitations in the
heart of man are shut up under sleeping, and set at liberty under waking.

The excellency hereof is incomprehensible in a perfect virtuous Cardo est
cordis ienua. vt animantia motu^ a cord suscipiunt, it^ fores a cardine.
Tasting. Feeling. Touching. Hearing. Seeing. Melancholicke men naturally
excel in memory.
man. Yet among the Pythagorian philosophers, he is accounted most unhappy,
which interdealeth any thing at all in those primarie faculties, under which is
contained fantasy, reason and memory: as among the other senses is inserted
a primary and perfect operation, through which, all the animal powers of a man
are moved. And yet as a melancholicke person under his temperance, may be
indewed with a strong and stiff memory, yet by the same property he shall
nothing prevail either in imagination or conceit: so also some others may be
insigned to prevail in other good ornaments, as ability of learning, or
sharpness of wit and understanding, except memory which is not placed a like
in all men: for no man is happy on every behalf.

Surely sensible creatures (as Auycen affirms) on the greatest behalf, do
follow the temperature of blood, and that he alone is temperate, which is so
measurable in all primarie powers, chiefly to satisfy all natural works,
which ought of duty to be performed.

For the more plainer understanding the deep reach hereof, there is to be
considered four special and natural operations: atraction, retention,
concoction, and expulsion. These are placed in double use for the service of
the whole body, not only touching the inward parts, properly belonging to the
stomach and liver, but there are some outwardly deputated, for continual use
to minister inward relief and nourishment, for the preservation of the whole
body: so that he which is perfect in every work hereof, is highly preferred
in temperance.

These things are manifestly enough discovered, and their difference only
consists herein, for that every one serves his place to some proper work.
And yet these inward works manifest themselves to every one that outwardly,
and seriously beholds them: as boldness, fear and such like. Therefore a
temperate man is neither bold, nor fearful, but strong: neither headlong, nor
slow, but speedy: neither cruel nor soft, but gentle: neither envious, nor
yet a negligent despiser of other men's substance, but a lover of his own
estate: no tyrant, nor rashly merciful, but righteous: neither full of hatred,
nor love, but a lover of his friends. These affections are possessed under the
liver and lights, in which place love and desire have their chief and
principal mansion: And therefore this proverb has been universal among
philosophers, that the liver is the cause of love, and the spleen moves
laughter, although oftentimes sadness draws occasion from the spleen
thereunto.

Galen in his third book of affections, the fourth chapter, calls these
affections moral works, and unreasonable, for that they proceed from an
unreasonable soul. And Galen says that so long as the soul and the mind
conflict within them selves, these differences are made: that the mind is
increased with moral passions, and the soul with principal faculties.

The soul is a created substance, invisible, has no image nor fashion but
only of his creature: The mind after the opinion of the philosophers,
possesses the heart, forasmuch as from that place proceeds boldness,
valiantness, and stoutnesse, fearfulness, and cowardly dastardness.

There is no man that denies, or may interdict the mind from participating
with the heart: Therefore the mind and the heart mutually inhabit one with
another, and sometimes the soul consents with all the passions of the mind,
and pass over in mutual agreement alike: hereby the soul is so humbled with
the mind, that the supreme dignity thereof, falls down into the moral
parts.

And Dyoscorides says, that when the soul and the mind are united and
compassed within the moral passions, sadness, fear, boldness and such like
belongs thereunto: all which do season the perfect nature of a temperate man.

Jeremy Thriuerius says, ye although the mind is possessed with reason and
understanding under the power of the soul, yet if conceit either decays, or
swarueth aside, from the right use of the principal faculties, the wit is
vanquished, and the mind wandreth at large, having neither guide nor place:
hereupon falls out the disease of madness. Yet if the wits and the mind
sometimes appeal to the primarie senses, and uncertainly retire again, then
the disease is lunaticalli following the temperance, or distemperance of the
moon and the elements. And also when the wit is apprehended by secret
motions, and by sudden alienations carried a far off, the disease is then
called Lethargye when the principal faculties are decayed and ouerrun by old
age, sickness or any such distemperance, so that the conceit is also over
tired, blunted or dulled, that the wit thereby cannot perform any duty or
office of sharpness, or redynesse, in any perfect temperance, then this
disease is called dotage, or a defection in the primary senses: for surely a
measurable and moderate man, ought to be perfect in all natural, animal,
primary and moral works, and every one ought to perform them as from a
moderate body, disposed to all temperance, and the signs of a seasonable
substance are, that the body he neither hard, nor soft, warm nor c^lde. And
although these insignes fail either outward or inward, yet certainly, they
may be true and approoueable in all temperate works.

Galen conioineth unto this temperature, a natural, active, and conte^platiue
motion: and says, that a man which is composed of four elements ought to be
indifferent in all these properties, as well in color, stature and
smoothness, as courage, stoutnesse, and all other conditions belonging to
merciful temperance in a blessed mind.

Hereunto also is commended unto us, an excellent temperance in the hair of
the body, which is best agreeable to young men, natiuely brought up in
temperate regions: It largely shows the powerful and lusty government of
youth, adorning young years as well in nature, as in complexion: For all other
ages are intemperate. Wherefore in reckoning up the drift of ages by dyuiding
and directing the life of man into diverse and variable courses, from his first
age to his last and final end, we are first to consider of infancy, which
has continuance from the first nativity, to the springing of the teeth: Then
childehoode afterward takes place until yoongmanship, called adolescencie
(which is the ripeness of time to generation, to be performed) which age is
commonly known by hayres, either about the chin, or privy parts: this age is
very hot and moist.

Galen says, this age begins in virgins at twelve or fourteen years, and
continues to twenty and somewhat beyond: And in this age dryness has his
best place and chiefest felicity although heat and moystnesse in most part of
them, continues until thirty and three, as the last and farthest drist of
adolescencie. Petrus Galiensis calls that age, the spreading, gathering and
stretching forth of the body, as then does it most chieslye lout in strength.
Arnoldus de noua villa says, that the most part, especially women, beginning
their adolescencie before ripeneise of age has given them liberty thereunto,
do afterward ^iue like untimely fruit: as pears, plummes, or apples
gathered before scasonablenesse and ripeness has perfected them, do most
speedily dry, rot, decay, and utterly perish.

This commonly is well perceived and known to fall out in south countries,
where heat and moisture excessiuely ouermatcheth with many corruptions and
diseases, in such rash ages.

Petrus Galiensis says, that although the south countries bring forth strong
men, yet their age is not certainly of hot and moist temperance, nor yet
constant under dryness, but rather most of all bends to extreme heat, which
moistness being so much inflamed therewith, as that the young and tender
skin is utterly unable to contain the measure thereof, but naturally speweth
and breaks forth without artificial expulsion.

Next follows man's estate, which stands for a while at a stay. And although
their bodies by little and little decaieth, yet their senses continue unbroken
above forty years: and in some men of stong and sound complexion until
threescore and above.

Then comes old age, alienating and declining aside, altogether replenished
with melancholious coldness and dryness, at which season, blood and heat are
settled and commixed in the bottom of the arteries, and veins like dregs:
And the longer they are stayed and lodged, so much the sooner the artion of
blood is obstructed and combusted, and the strength infeebled and disabled: the
which falls out, as well because of thickness in the shinne, grown and
fastened with the bones and sinews, as also because the excrementes have been
there long stayed and closed up: The which calamity many men in their
decrepit, and extreme age, undertake and sustain. For their former impuritie
of lusty youth, is not only vanquished, but partched in there bodies with
fuliginous superfluities like soote to a chinmey, afflicting them with dry
coldness unto death.

Therefore happy is lusty old age, whose former purity has drawn comfort,
ease and joy upon gray hairs, whose blood is odiferous and sweet, whose breath
is easy and who some, whose bones veins and sinews are direct, whose digestion
is easy and light, whose expulsion is natural, in whom the temperance of
heat, as dryness of bones, and moystnesse of blood, are to old years most
nourishable: that like as the dry hot ground is not corrupted with every
moisture of rain, but the distemperance thicketh and freeseth above the
ground, before it pearceth: even so temperate hot bodies are not easily pierced
with the contagion or distemperance of moist coldness, or any such like
superfluous vapors.

Galen herewith concordeth that dry brains are less encumbered with super
fluities, and moist brains naturallye appertains unto ideotes and fools,
which lack diiscretion, for that their primary faculties, are ouerf^oted or
intermixed with superfluous grosnes: so likewise a woman of moiste complexion
is most menstruous, especially if she want the use of man, yet this rule and
order is manifested by Galen in these words, Si virago fuerit fortis pre
caliditate and siccitate, nunquam hoc profluuium admittet. Therefore hot and
dry bodies of some women, are euenmuch infarced with excrements and grow into
many inward diseases for want of natural deuoydance of their inconcocted super
fluities: for which respect their piteous fulsomnes, unnaturally gathered,
yssueth by their nostrels, therefore by th^s reason women of moist complections
are most wholesome for the use of man.

It falls out far otherwise after the course of nature, in men's
constitutions, for that Dioscorides holds his opinion after this manner, who
says, Mallem siceitatem plenitudinis, humiditatem, incoctarum superfluitatum,
occasionem esse. I had rather dryness should be the occasion of fullness, then
moistness the occasion undigested superfluities: For a moist body in a man is
easily ingurged, difflated, puffed, and as it does greedily desire sustenance,
so does it redily nourish excrementes, transcormeth much blood into watrie
matter, overmuch insumeth and spends upon nature: whereas on the contrary, a
dry body scarsly admits or indureth most nourishment, but that it does
presently comprehend thereby a pure blood into the veins, dries and utterly
consumes al waterye and matery substance for dryness in adolescencie,
furnishes the body with good blood, disouereth the body from raw excrementes,
dries, purges and perfecteth the body from all corruptions: As for example:
Let us distinguish between a phlegmatic and a melancholic person, between a
moist and dry brain: that hereby a moist temperance in respect of a dry is
perceived and known to have most superfluous humors abounding, and many times
old men are more stuffed with excrementes then young men: the cause hereof is
want of nourishing blood, which produces coldness. For prooffe, if two old
men were placed under one air, did both feed* upon one diet, and were of one
like age, surely he which of them generateth a moist temperance, shall abound
with the greatest superfluities. For it cannot be otherways found out, but
that dryness always is the cause of purity, and maystnesse the occasion of
great impuritie. For all men do obtain the first parts of moystnesse by
carnat generation and therefore children are nourished by sleep in their
mothers womb.

The second part of cold superfluities, are obtained by moistnes of complexion,
which naturally disfigureth many flegmatike old men, and draws them subject
to every unconstant vapor.

Auycen assigns the cause of these and such like piteous excrementes in old
men rather of an immoderate manner of diet, then of natures distemperance.

Galens opinion is most sauorie to our senses: and yet disagreeing from Auycen,
who says, that although old men's diet, were much more dryer then y^ diet of
young men, yet for that excessive coldness puri^^eth them, must of necessity
abound with ouergreat excramentall superfluity.

There are many which have wandered very wide, both in the constitution of old
men and children, especially Manardus first declaring that old men be enforced
with fleame, by reason of riotous youth and every variable accidence
exhausteth their bodies, with most perrillous pestilences. This is contrary to
Galen, who plainly affirms, that after old age draws on, the body is set
free from all accidence, and brings forth diseases of natural property, for
that nature either alienateth, or then weakeneth, or else quite decays.

And furthermore, whereas Manardus seems to conioyne coldness, as a natural
essence in children, his reason is proper, only for that they took the
substance thereof in the first place of generation, and their heat is
afterward gathered rather by nourishable meats then of natural substance.
This is contrary to Galen, who is fortified with experience on the one side,
and stands highly upon the works of nature, on the other side, does think
that children are more hot and moist then adolescency. Children are apt to
increase blood.
And why is Galen moved so to think? First, for that children has multitude
of blood. Secondly, they have greediness in appetite. And lastly, they have a
substantial valor in concoction.

As these reasons show a great ground why there should be more abundant heat
in children, so he denies their heat to be intentive. For Dyoscorides verily
affirms, that adolescencie has more abundance thereof, not according to the
proportion of the body: For the body of a child, although in the small
quantity thereof has not more intentive heat, yet has more coyious and
intentive blood, then adolescencie. Surely children in their proportion
observed and considered, have a greedy and quick desire to sustenance, and
are of ready digestion thereunto. Therefore I think it extreme madness in
Theophrastus Peracelsus, who absolutely grants a larger sustenance to
children, then adolescencie, seeing natural operation refuses to be more
stronger in children, and yet there heat is most plentiful, and their
digestion most ready. Yet I do not mislike his difference made between
children and infantes. For infantes in their first nativity, are cold, and
therefore wholly given to sleep: but growing up to children, are every day
more sanguine, and therefore more hot and moist: for as heat provoke
appetite, so moystaesse, is the cause efficient, as well to nourish great sleep
in the body, as to advance therewith the office of good nourishment.

And truly Dyoscorides affirms, that children are under diverse inclinements,
both of weakness and strength: And the same is well discerned under a double
operation of their excrementes, as that the one being ouersoft, and the other
utterly void of moystnesse. The first argues moist coldness, which stirs
up a natural desire and disposition to sleep in children, the other provoke
and increases blood, releeueth and comfort the vital parts.

The Philosopher is woonted to declare, that moystnesse is the first cause of
sleep, and coldness is the second cause: And therefore when the humors of
the body be de^ected either by nature or art, both moystnesse and coldness
both in the first and second degree are possessed in the body. Yet these cold
humid de^ections upward, many times infeebleth the stomachs of children with
cold distemperance, and do egerly scower, wast and extenuate their bodies
downward, as that thereby all their natural virtues are quite weakened and
their faculty of appetite, quite overthrown.

Then surely we have just cause, to make further search and inquierie as
touching the difference between adolescencie and In respect of natural
ch^ller adoleseencie exceeds children in ^eate or else not.
children in their heat, which is challenged, that adolescencie exceeds
children in larger abundance of heat in respect of natural choler, which
more sharply inflameth and pursues the body. And except the same be
prevented, oftentimes in gluttonous und glassie corruption, excessiuely draws
the body to inflaming diseases thereby: In this respect adolescencie surpasses
children in heat, or else not.

For the better understanding hereof, let us use this comparison following, and
agreeable hereunto: that if two cups being of unlike quantity, filled with
hot pure water, without slime or corruption put thereunto, the quality of the
lesser, may exceed the quantity of the greater in heat: and yet their equal
quantity according to proportion is nothing diminished. Even so blood may
according to proportion be matched in children and adolescencie alike, and yet
their heat may exceed one above another.

This is only spoken, for that heat is established by blood: for as in some
dispositions, nature is earthly and cold from their conception, so heat of
blood aduaunceth and promoteth the same, to become vegetable and wholesome in
the universal parts of the body by nutrimentall means. For which respect if
the quality be unlike, yet the quantity according to prportion may equally
agree together. This proves, heat in children and young men ought to have
several proportions in substance, and yet in quality they do exceed unlike:
for as heat in young men may be more sharper, so in children more sweeter
and tastefull. And whereas blood is in Children more intentive, so heat is in
young men more intentive, as is aforesaid. For which cause, medicines prepared
for young men, are of more higher degree, both in nature and operation,
Otherwise vnforceable to reach the constitution of adolescencie, only and
because of their high courage and strength, which is in the substance of thetr
intentive heat: for which cause, the greatest skill that belongs to the
heedefull and wise physician is evermore, to consider as well of the cause as
the constitution, that temperance may thereby be perfected into good estate and
condition, by quality, and that medicine and the body do not exceed one
another. For heat ought to be more sharper comprehended therein, not by a
variable substance in it self, but by artificial help advanced thereunto,
so that sometimes bodies of cold and raw constitutions do swiftly hasten
toward many dangerous diseases, except only translated into some other more
perfect nature, or otherwise revived both in substance of blood, and strength
of heat. As if a hot stone being dipped in a cold bath, or a cold stone in a
hot bath of water, does forthwith alter both the water and the air, to be of
a like quality with the stone. So these distempered bodies are reformed by
artfull knowledge to become in equal temperance alike: and yet not in
operation, for want of blood, so that heat may be restored, or the excess
thereof diminished. For like as difference is interposed between a clear and
gross air, as having like quality of heat, yet not like neither in
substance nor natural operaion, so diverse constitutions by this means may be
l^ke in quality, and the variable estate thereof may become also of one
temperance and operation.

There is a difference to be set down in the outward estate of two temperat
bodies together. As first, to regard their differences, by touching and feeling
the substance, according to proportion of every several part by it self: for
many times by the proportion of outward things, the good and evil estate of
inward things, are known and believed, as only by a supposed Hypothesis. For
if the heat of adolescencie and childhood, may be found equal by teeling,
then would it fall out, that the comparison of ages between adolescencie and
children, were of necessity equal: unto which there must be adjoined both
discretion, consideration and constant stay. For Cornelius Celsus says, that
young men which are perfect in conceit and understanding, are of hot
dispositions, and have very little desire to sleep, the which thing somewhat
bends toward dryness: Hot brains are apt and inuentiue and small desire
to sleep.
And yet nothing is in the obscure works of nature to be discerned in them
either by feeling or touching.

Galen in his book de sanitate tuenda, rehearses many high and variable
dispositions, both in adolescencie and children, and puts forth most
excellent preseruations in either their defenses.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, that heat belonging to children is increased
and multiplied with nourishmentes, until adolescencie be perfected, and
afterward shorteneth, decays, and falls away, as the somme^ days, upon the
approchment of winter: And therefore he says, that generation is cold and
moist. As a kernel thrown into cold earth, is by the natural operation of
the earth, nourished by one degree to another, until it become a plant, and so
forth unto a perfect tree, so is blood and heat directed to increase, and
arise from generation to conception, until a perfect birth be performed to
infancy, and then forwards to childhoode, until adolescencie be consummat.
This reason stands very proper to many dispositions.

As touching adolescencie, it is most largely set down in the second of the
Aphorisines, touching worms in young men, proceeding of an intentive heat, and
by the same reason, adolescency more easily falls into sharp feauers than
children. First, not only because heat is in them more intentive, but also
sharp and dry: all which is manifested by touching and feeling the complexion,
whether in the course of blood, it be soft or hard: for those kinds of feauers
are of diverse natures, which either by an extreme deuoydance, or defect of
blood, do as well offend the arteries, as other principal members, the heart,
the liver, the lunges, the stomach, and the raines, which in their vegetative
nature are wasted and consumed: so that by the highest degree of danger, the
spirits vital, natural, and animal, are excessiuely infoizned: or in an
other respect, the natural humors boyles and seethes about the stomach, or
the brains, oftimes are vanquished by strong vapoures, so that both giddiness
distempereth the head, and disapetteth the stomach: and the rather if natural
heat be interdicted from all rightful and due passage in the veins: for which
respect these rotten feauers do grow upon adolescencie in the contagion
aforesaid: or else by reason of gross blood, salt fleame, or prassiue choler,
or melancholious sorrow, or by distemperance of mordinate heat in the sun,
or putrified airs, or inordinate surfets, or for lack of exercises.

There are diverse sorts of these feauers, having diverse natural inconuemences
attending upon them: Some of them are called humerall, some are called
Ephimerae, some are called Hecticae, some are called Capillares. These feauers
have diverse secreet perils depending upon them, and oftentimes when their
constitution is inwardly dry, do denunciate great outward moystnesse. For as
wax is moist and dry, or cold and dry in one nature, so these feauers may be
more noysome^, aduersible and impedimental, for that nature molested by cold
dryness is like soft clay congealed to dry hardness, of a frozen compact
substance: which reason declares that cold dryness takes his first
substance from cold moystnesse. In which dangerous degree immedicable
corruptions depend hereupon, nature being transpersed in the first manner of
comparison, as the elements reserve in themselves a perfect substance, and yet
dispose and alter the quality an other way. For where the substance falls
away, there putrefaction begins a common calamity, nature utterly desisteth,
and leaves of her common and operative course thereby.

These differences of moystnesse and dryness (by alteration of nature) are
known in sustance of all living things. For where liquid property of fluxing
has power, there the course of corruption poysoneth and putrifieth all
things: for fluxible things are moist, ouerflowe and run forth, abroad to
every detrimental mischief, and those things which easily concreat are
speedily dry, and will not afterward vnderbend to the quality of
moistness. So after this manner the contrarieties of dryness and moystnesse,
are in their natures esteemed and accounted off. We are then to consider not
only the humors, which every man is best disposed unto, but all the parts
of a man, under what constitution, either of dryness or moystnesse he do
wholly depend. As first, we are to plead upon the highness and excellency
of fatness, which is so much advanced in the body of man, As that through that
mediocritie all voluptuous delights are prospered, and by the exesse thereof
the vital blood is much corrupted: And as pure fatness is contained under
health and wholsomnesse, so fat which comes of gluttonous ingurgitation is
very deceitful to the body. And therefore fatness is contained under diverse
kinds, and after diverse complexons, so the property thereof is also diverse.
For as faines inlarded upon the flesh, is most purely congested into substance,
so is it moistly nourishable in digestion. And yet the parchment skin called
the membrans, as the call This moistnes is like a running gutter which if the
fountain be stopped above the gutter forthwith dries beneath.
and fylme, wherein the guters or bowels are lapped, are most dry after the
opinion of Theophrastus, both because their moistness swiftly is transported
into the liver veins, and oftentimes deuoided away by the urine, or ordour,
and also for that all the inward parts continually, as also hotly and
excessiuely breathing thereupon made thereby of necessity dry: although hot
moistnes reeketh thereupon, yet can it never grow into perfect substance
therewith.

There is an other fatness impertinent from the temperature of man, called
tallow, only belonging to Oxen and other such like unreasonable creatures,
partible in the hooffe, the which is both dry and yearthly.

Likewise there is an other fatness called grease, which nothing appertains
to man, except that which moystlie is gathered in the gall. And as that grease
which is so gathered is moist, so is it moistlie digested, and drawn into
moist substance, especially upon claw footed beasts and fowls of the air.

Auycen assures, that nothing is more preserving to man's life then natural
grease, gathered upon pure and perfect sustenance, yet many make no choice of
their meats, but in their feeding do groslie satisfy appetite, greedily
furnish their stomaches, and in pursuing their own delights, do thereby
utterly disfavor complexion, corrupt blood, and nourish diseases: And the
fatness so gathered upon such slymie and loathsome sustenance, is moist in
the highest degree: through which the body is engrossed, the guts puffed,
the brains inuapoured, and the stomach ingurged, Besides which, it does
congeale into a variable viscous, and matery substance of waterie blood,
inundating between the skin and the flesh: so that swelling tympanies
oftentimes break forth in the fulsome generation thereof.

Auycen says, that whosoever desires health and long days, let him make his
choice of dry meats to feed upon, and thereby to increase and gather
perfect substance of fat, so that the flesh and the fat may be equallye
inlarded-agreeable one together with an other, as that nothing may exceed
therein one from another, under Natures temperaunce: And that the vital blood
taking perfect liking and pleasure therewith, may fruitfully flow into all the
parts of man without opilation.

There is moreover a fat deeply couched in the bones, which Auycen calls
the pyth and kernel of the bones, it is hot and dry, and being melted,
presently yields and spreads to be liquid, and yet forthwith returns to
the same natural substance as before.

This marrowe is of diverse qualities in the disposition of the The spinall
marrow is the back bone marrowe. There be two oments, one in the head, called
P^a matter, and the other belonging to the open fat over the belly
bones. As first in the brains, next in the fiat, broad, hollow and round
bones.

Galen says, that the marrow of the bones is most dry, and the spinall
marrowe moist in the second degree: for the bone marrowe is perfected and made
pure, naturallye compacted within the hard shell of the bones, and the oment
marrowe is liquid in the celles of the head, and void of all during substance,
for that the humors have such large access thereunto, that the same is
thereby continually molified and very highly weakened in operation.

Surely it is a wonderful mystery to consider, and thoroughly weigh this
excellent work of nature, for the variable couching this pyth, in the deep
bottom of the bones, sowpling, scouring, renewing and fortifieng the strength
and swiftnes of the body thereby.

Galen has many degrees in the variable art of nature, touching marrow of
diverse kinds and properties: and touching the universal frame of the bones,
is nothing else but an outward anathomie of the whole body, covered and set
forth with flesh, blood, s^i^, veins and sinews. So also there wants no
necessary office within, that appertains to the life of man. But touching
measelled or kernelled flesh, with which we have not to interdeale within the
drift of this our purpose, both beccause it is a monstrous misshapen substance,
gathered within the flesh, contrary to nature, and also because sundry
infections arise thereby, in mutual consort one with an other, so that having
this spoken of the inward work in the outward temperance, are not to omit
also the temperaunce of the inward motions.

Touching the lights, spleen and raines which are of hot and moist
dispositions, and yet their ordinances minister many dry effects in the body:
for there are some writers, as Petrus Brissotus, Petrus Galiensis, Johannes
Glarensis, Michell Scotus, or Cornelius Celsus, who suppose the loonges to be
endued with lesser moystnesse then the liver, and the rather, because
choleric blood is not intermingled therewith, except that which perfectly
purges the same.

Theophrastus Paracelsus concludes the loonges to be a certain spungie
instrument in the side, and is of such hot property, as that most chiefly it
is nourished by extracting moystnesse from the liver: And also it is to be
adjudged under the nature of dryness, for that the spirit and breath has
such a forceable exhalation from the same. Therefore Auycen affirms That
which is hot is easily corrupted with cold.
that as all accidental herbs, do much comfort the loonges, so all
accidental coldness, is most harmefull thereunto, as generating tysickes,
coughes, belchinges, short breathinges. And yet the loonges are much comforted
under a natural choler, in these bodies which can best possess and enjoy the
same: whereas the liver blood is moist and earthly, and under a melancholious
temperance, and a melancholious body is very thick, and subject to putrified
corruptions in the air, and therefore subject to pestilence, especially under
every cold and dry distemperance.

Galen speaks of certain hot moystnesse, in mucilaginous flesh, inclineable
to the second degree: such bodies do draw from the loonges and liver, by an
excess exhalation, either of temperance or distemperance, the corruption
hereof is easily found out by a stinking and contagious breath, and other
superfluous excrementes deuoyded by fleanie. And although the morning breath
may be unsavory by filthy and hurtful contagions, proceeding either by long
fasting, emptiness of the stomach, or the breath closly detayned under long
sleep, gathers excrementall filthiness thereby: so surely all the fathers
and best writers, do attribute the efficient cause, upon a slimie decay, and
noisome corruption in the loonges, which necessarily falls out by the
moystnesse of the liver, feeding the same.

It is a very hard thing to find one member hot and dry together, except the
heart, which stands upon the dyaphragm^, which makes division upon the
spiritual parts: Therefore Auycen places the heart absolutely dry.

Dyoscorides somewhat does contradict Auycen herein, Who says, that although
the loonges give breath, yet their comfort proceeds from the heart, gives
heat and strength thereunto: And also breath by either parts adjoined
thereunto, is made more hoter. So likewise the liver blood is deferued and
strengthened in heat, by pursuing and searching upon other parts of the body
adjoined thereunto, otherwise it is earthly, especially when accidental
effects in diseases are transferred beyond the power of nature: And as the
breath follows the nature of the loonges, so the blood only follows the
nature of the liver, and yet in their property they do both decline, for
breath is most filthily corrupted as well by inward excreme^ts as inward
diseases. So the blood by sweet and delicious nourishmentes is converted to
choler, and is then both hot and inflammatiue: So that discrepating from his
first property, utterly orrupteth, decays, becomes absumpt in the degree
of death.

Cornelius Celsus says, the spirit, the heart, the blood, the liver, the
single flesh, the musculous flesh, the spleen, the raynes, the arteries, the
veins, are hot by accidental means, otherwise they are cold: this his
meaning is left raw and unseasoned: it is to be coniectured he means those
accidents to be the nourishment which increases, prospers and cherishes
those parts of the body, in quality and quantity, which otherwise after the
manner of the membrance, would debilitate and surcease their power. All this
considered, as the spirit is more exquisite and searching so is it also in due
property more warmer then blood. Likewise and on the contrary, the arteries
with the veins and fatness, are hot, and yet by all and every evil and
subtle accidents, cold, if the body infecting or touching be found soft, it
is not forthwith moist: for reason may not judge such a body to be soft, which
by unnatural humor is many times fluxible. For even as wax is not of his
own property only moist, as by the excess of accidental heat put
thereunto, so clear water, is thickened or hardened by accidental cold. This
proves all things to be under some unnatural property, and reuertible from
their first fresh flourishing natural course. So that hitherto having defined
temperance with all measurable moderation, so also have we differenced ages and
proportions of young men, from old men: and old men from children: and
children from infantes.

Next, after the opinion of Galen we are only to show the temperature of
these accidents, which very highly vary many times from nature and become
deformed and unproper in themselves: As slenderness, thickenesse, corpulencie
and a measurablenesse in the natural condition of all men. And touching
slenderness, there are two evidences thereby signified, that is, as well the
small quantity of flesh, as the pu^r fatness concreated upon dry bodies,
through which the dyaphragma is thereby safest preserved from contagion: as the
reason and understanding unvanquished, so that a large and liberal life, with
sondrie excellent indowmentes are appertayning to those bodies. But corpulencie
declares the abundance of flesh, which ingrosseth and vapoureth upon
moistness, brings forth many noisome and filthy diseases in the body:
Whereas thinness and smalenesse of flesh, shows perfect dryness, so
corpulencie does show coldness and moystnesse.

Cornelius Celsus does affirm, that a thin body shows frugall fatness,
nourished in the warmenesse of a thin blood. So these gross bodies nurse up
thick blood, and venomed humors.

These men are in a most dangerous case, if there be a cold congealement in
the veins and other members, which belongs to surfeiting dronkardes and such
like disordered persons.

Galen affirms, very much good appertains to those men, which are
perfected under a measurable comprehension. First if their blood be hot,
thin, and clearly recourseth in the veins: if their breath be sharp,
sweet and thin: if their blood be warm, sharp and sweet, all which makes
indication of a perfect substance, except these natures be poisoned otherwise
by some cold vaporous accidents: for cold things do easily concreate upon a
warm substance: or except also this unnatural, distemperat coldness, falls
out in melancholious complexions, whose blood is thick, slimie, and sower. And
yet there are some sanguine complexions of inclineable fat, as they do greatly
favor dainty meats, so do they yield good liking to every several office
and portion in the body. And nature evermore favors, comfort, nourishes
and purges these complexions in her own property.

These complexions do never concord with any earthly exhalations, but
speedily decay and perish therewith.

Galen says in his book of simples, that the natural fat in these men is
both hot and tastfull: And the waterie fat, which is congested into substance
upon these men is sower, bitter, and exposed to innumerable perils. Also when
thin portions of this earthly blood, through cold vapors is made thick, and
through slender veins falling down, best likes and desires to possess the
coldest parts of the body, forthwith congealeth into cold fatness, not only
thereby pearceth the thin substance of the body, but also hurts the
natural actions in the senses, especially by the diseases of ye crampe,
stitches, feauers, rewnis, crickes, lamenesse, numnesse, painful gripinges
and such like: whereas otherwise, good nourishment, warmenesse, comfortable
sweates, bathinges, opening the poores, electuaries, purginges, omission of
blood, choice of meats, might be sufficient means, to chase away the
intolerable hurtes and perilles that may ensue hereof, as also by preserving
and nourishing of a more hotter and sweeter blood.

Next follows that whatsoever has bin spoken heretofore, touching dryness
in the oment of the belly, which is a couerture above and beyond the filme,
under which all the guts are lapped, so there is another oment in the head
which is moist called the skin or rim of the brain and commonly called of
the chyrurgians pia matter: It is coarcted in the middle parts of the head,
with many offices and appurtenances thereto belonging. Therefore as well such
men as women, whose bodies are invested with corpulent and fattie flesh, are
molested in the substance thereof with an interflowing inundation, so that
their complexion is commonly moist and there oment in the head moyster.

Yet surely there are some natures, so equally compacted in the order of the
four elements, whose temperance is under the gretlie word EVCRATON, which is
never changed or molested with any malignitie, but stand mightily against all
distemperances. And as their temperatures are indifferent in all measures, so
are they never deprehended by any impropertie or evil accidence: if the blood
be thick, then the veins be straight and narrow, and the blood slowly
interfloweth.

The which sort of men are troubled with giddines and swimming in the head, are
unable to endure any pains, or undertake fasting or honger: Whereas the other
temperatures under this word EVCRATON undertake strongly, are swift in
digestion, do wholsomly nourish al sustenance: into perfect substance their
blood flows and comfortablie interfloweth in the course of the whole body:
Their sleep is sweet, chearable and restfull: they live in health: Their young
days are joyful, and their old days peaceable to their grave.

And seeing we are farther to pursue the body of man in his whole and
substantial essence, we are next to consider the temperatures of the air.
And although Auycen reports, that the bones of man has more dryness then
the hayres, yet I cannot otherwise read, but that hayres have increase of an
earthly vapor, and the bones are under a sharp thin vegetation of blood:
and the stronger nature is, there the increase is made more valourable, thick
and styffe: and as nature is insigned out in the work hereof most perfect to
the eyes of all men, so do they valiantly sustain the travels and miseries,
which appertain to this life.

Here might be a gathered conjunction in the temperatures of the gristles or
the gristely lygumens, the tendons, which are the great sinews, or the cords
of the body: as also the arterick veins, where the spirit of life recourseth,
and the hard and soft sinews sensitive, with the spinall marrowe. For the more
softer these portions do appear, the rather do they obtain and generate an
indifferent nature, both of moistness and dryness, as well of heat, as of
cold: so that the good temperature of all these portions in the body, do
yield a perfect increase and nourishment to the hayr of the head, except they
be distempered through any superfluous accidence otherwise.

Therefore Rasis says, that the hair is a material cause derived from the
humors of the inward parts of the body, as of the veins. Ruellius says,
that strong is the officient and perfect cause of thick hair, which somewat
consists and ^ayeth under the estate and condition of the skin, and is not
generated of every supersiuitie, ercept only of that superaboundant
temperature, which is gathered in the extreme parts of man: and those
excrements are variable. As first, the excrementes in the bleather are of two
sorts: the one clear, and the other thick: the one is called Hypostasis,
which by a perfect digestion The excrement of moisture is of two sorts.
is advanced in the substance of the brine, and either is in the blather or
seroot, or strained and extenuated from the body, is passed over into vapors,
for the increase of hayres: or else in styrring and chafing the body, is
delivered forth by sweates, or else grows into flegmatike inundations.

Galen avouches that there is one part thereof ascending up and peacing the
brains, delivered and absumed away, by a dry rewmatike spyttell, an other part
is delivered away by common course of excrementes at the nostrels, and an other
part is delivered away by swea^es, an other part is delivered away by sorrow of
the eyes, in weeping, an other part is left for the increase of hairs: so that
whatsoever remains, is congested into the moist parts of the body. For
although humors do sometimes abide within those thin breathinges, yet have
they no due ordinance from nature: and therefore for that nature has no power
nor force in those degenerate humors, do retire back, and in respect of
excess moystnesse, cannot continue themselves within their poores, or
breathing places, until there be a sufficient generation gathered together,
arising up into a fullness of hayres, in the head, beard, or privy parts, in
which Nature would not disornate the beauty of the face with h^iree, but place
them in a seemlye orde^.
places the humors do longest abide and settle. And nature has prepared a
way and passage for those excrementes, to inflowe by the bank and brinkes of
the cheeks, to the chinne, whereby there should be a comely grace in the
hairs, upon the fauaur of the face.

There remains a probable conjecture for us to think, that hairs do only
increase of excrementes thicklie congested: and the rather are we so to think
and judge herein, for that some part of those excrements sensibly pass away
by weakness, as also for that they are universal throughout the body. For when
the body is disturbed, by any fuliginous or smokie vapors, then the outward
form of the body alters and changes therewith: besides which, the hairs
do either alter in their outward form, and fall away, as leaves decay from
the moisture of the tree.

And surely it is a high Philosophy to consider, that when the body is loose
and purgative of nature, such excrementes forthwith do yield and deuoyd,
that the poores therewithal open, wax weak and loose, so that many times
those open exhalations do not only disturb the body, but as ingrosers of
pure blood, discover themselves, yet in stay of their malice become subject
both to natural and artificial purgation. Therefore Dioscorides says, that
excrementall exhalations are no cause of growth in the hair, but good blood:
and that as blood flourishes and decays, so hayres both in youth and age,
discover and open themselves: and also for that sickness extenuateth blood,
does also decay hairs in the body, being extenuated from blood. Also as
health increases blood and good liking in the body, so the hairs therewithal
prosper, flourish and grow forth at large.

Auycen discourses and trauelleth most highly herein, that blood is no cause
of hair, but rather a vaporous exhalation from blood: And as blood changes,
so exhalations do herein alter: so that Avycen agrees not with Dyoscorides.
Yet Galen flatly concludes, that moistness is the cause of hayres: and
although the body be struck asunder from the head, yet there is an increase
of hayres, so long as there is moystnesse in the head, and therefore dead men
have increase of hayres, until all moystnesse be absumed by putrefaction.

Let us also in this treatise somewhat discover the growth of hayres, which
after the straightness or crokenednesse of the poores be either curled or
straight.

These curled hairs fall out of diverse causes: not because the skin is soft
of it self, neither because the exhalation is weak, but because the passage
of the exhalation is cross, and the poors crooked, otherwise hairs are
enlarged in a right course, as well by strong vapors, by temperate moistnes,
and soundnes of the body.

Theophrastus Paracelsus reproteth an other cause of curled hairs: as both
because the roots of the hairs, are wrinkled in the right passage, through
excess dryness, as also because exhalations are in their natures over dry,
fuliginous and stretched: And (as Rasis says) for that, moystnes is devoured
and swallowed up by a contrary effect of dryness: Wherefore hairs both in
color and curlednes, and playnnesse do differ according to these courses. And
yet Rasis says, all hayres follow their natural complexion in color, until
old age conuneth on, and alters all things,

Let us take better examples hereof, in the difference between the hairs of a
man, and a beast: for that the moystest skin is allowed by natural course, to
have the thickest and shortest hair, and the rather for that hot moisture
floteth and swimmeth between the skin and the flesh, is of like quality in all
the parts, as well of cloven hofed, as claw-footed beasts, so that the growth of
hair in a beast, is like a flashie fresh medowe over floten with a shalow
water in the roots, and the grass therewithal over florisheth: but cold
frostes and alteration of weather decays and perishes the roots thereof.
Even so intemperate calamities of times and seasons, ouerturneth the natural
temperance of hair, in all vnreasunable creatures. So likewise in these humain
complexions, whose hair although it be of most high quality in plentiful
growing, yet through excess benerie falling into cold diseases, their hair
decays, waxes thin, and utterly loses in the roots, especially when the
poores in a man's body are over traueiled by a moist exhalation.

Thophrastus Paracelsus puts forth these reasons, that footsteps in moist
grounds, are easily with every storm washed away, but footsteps in dry
grounds do longest endure and abide. So that, as these moist exhalations in
the flesh, do nourish and greatly comfort the hairs, so also if those
exhalations be altered, either by malign vapors, or corrupt blood, or
distempered by the contagion of cold diseases, the hairs decline and vanish
therewithal.

Now furthermore there are some bodies, whose dryness exceeds on the
contrary, and yet under some moisture produce a competent number of hayres: but
when their dryness becomes combust, are like to starched earth, which
without some moisture cannot bring forth grass. This dryness under the diverse
ages of men happens in the brains. So also there is another sort of men who
are like unto moist tempered clay in spring season, or beginning of summer, yet
partched up and ouerdried in the latter end of the year, bring forth nothing
but barrenness and dust. So there is a most unhappy sort of men, who by
ex^esse dryness in their adolescencie, become bald, bare and barrainous in
their brains, toward their latter age.

It is to be marked that hayres in all ages, follow the course and temperance of
nature, and leave off to show themselves under those properties, unto whom
they do appertain.

Cornelius Celsus says, that a bald-headed man, is destitute of moystnesse in
the brain pan, and the rather because the veins of the neck, being called
the guides, are obstructed, do not perfectly recourse, except upon the hinder
part of the head.

Ieremias Thriuerius says, that it is as impossible a thing, for lobsters or
crab-fishes to bear feathers, or oysters wool, as a bald-headed man to
produce natural hair: not only because there is both an opilation in blood,
but also because there is an extreme dryness, and shrinking of the sinews,
in those material parts of the brain.

Surely all dry complexions of black chollericke inclination, are hearie in
the highest degree, but falling into contagion and hot diseases through the
same, as they do become bare and bald, so are they men of very evil and
dangerous manners. Yet Auycen greatly commends bald men, of sanguine
complexion and flaxen hair, to be trusty, honest, and very precise and
devout: and yet many of them have reaching wits in high causes.

Hypocrates says there can be no direct temperance in baldness: for that in
the first place, those things which be hearie only are hot and moist: In the
second place bald men are dry, and in the third place, bald men are in their
extremes: so of sickness and discases, do swiftly approve in the nature of
cold and dry: therefore we are verily to conjecture, that all ages of men,
denunciat their natures after the temperance of the regions and countries,
under which they are borne, as well as their own private complexion and age:
for as the ages of youth are hot dry and hayrie, so infancy is smooth cold
and moist and without hair. Then seeing there must altogether fall out a
perfect sympathy, or equal combination under the temperatures of countries,
and that hayrie men natiuely appertain under regions hot and dry: so then
there must be a temperat cause in contrariety hereof, for that Theophrastus
Paracelsus holds in opinion that hot and dry countries, absinne and quite
take away all the humors, which intentiuely nourish hayres.

Auycen says, that heat and dryness in those bodies, are not so easily
nourished, and therefore heat and dryness of those countries, are nothing
profitable in the generation of hayres after the natural simpathie, and
mutual combination in temperance of the bodies themselves.

Galen speaks of young men of the Ethiopians, who of their own complexion
and natural inclination, are hot and dry, in respect of other countries, the
which property furnishes their bodies with an excess strength of hayres: And
although curled, yet not diuersty colored like other countries, which
signifies the superaboundant heat, under which they live.

Surely I am persuaded, it is a most direct point, not to compare nature with
age, but to compare countries with ages, which in all the conditions of hayres,
may be best accounted of: For the Ethiopian young men in temperance of hayres,
both in multitude and strength, exceedes the young men of these our countries
in the highest degree.

Let somewhat more, in this our treatise, be attended upon, and diligently
considered in the temperance of women, touching hair, for that there are some
who think the same far disagreeing from this our purpose: that is, a woman
of cold and moist te^perance, is indewed with a vecie thick hair, who for the
material substance of moystnesse following upon her, has not only many
hayres, but most long hayres, for which cause, women of moist complexions can
never be bald. And a flegmatike woman following the temperance of the whole
body, cannot in any respect, want hayres, and sometimes exceedes therein far
otherwise then common course, Except a woman of moderate and due temperance,
which cannot over pass the bounds and limits of nature, in the ornature of
the body: for those women are of pure feminine complexion, and are not bearded
like men for two causes: the one, because the vapors of the matrix, are
ranckly deuoyded by natural profitmitie, as also for that the ascending
moisture thereof, is subtly occupied in the brains, for the plentiful
generation of hairs, so that the ^hin parts are utterly barrained thereby.
Then touching those hayres, which have comely treases upon the eyelids, and
banks of the brows, do show the excellent ornature and seemly grace of
nature, by a certain liberal benefit, in beautifi^ng the woman's proportion,
tar above all other creatures: for as these hayres are outwardly planted, so
are they regarded as increasing, and springing up in their due disposition, by
an outward view, for if they did follow the temperature of men, they should
grow confusedly and without order. Then how greatly do those women scandelize
both nature and affection, which by coloring, crisping, platting or striking
forth of their hairs, do deforme and disguise their favor and countenance,
in the open shame of the world: notwithstanding all which, are not able to
alter the seemly shows of nature, whose power both in the head, banckes of
the brows, and eyelids, is both absolutely and artificially expressed. And I
would have it further known and marked, that the difference of moystnesse and
dryness in natures goodly works, is unlike: as if grain or seeds were
planted, or sowed in earth of two natures, so that the one should be in
temperance more fruitful then another, so does the hair follow the
temperance of the skin, both in substance, complexion and color. In like
sort, as the hayres in the heads of women, be moist or dry after their
temperance, so universally, both the hayres in the banks of the brows and
eyelids are dry, because the continual humectation of the eyes purges the
same.

But twice and once is either man or woman happy, who safeguard their head
under a dry temperance: for that moist corruptions within, do speedily and
dangerously alter the outward hair, to become gray and grisly, and the rather,
if the body be unequally distempered, by any cold and vaporous disease.

Therefore two sorts of gray hayres are to be considered upon herein. The
first sort, through the rage of surfeiting youth, in the untimely age of man,
especially when the temperance is altered by cold venerian vapors, the
extreme malice whereof, suggesteth these cold and perfect diseases of fevers,
bloody eyes, flegmatike spittle, impostumations, short breathinges, head aches,
as also the whirling and giddiness of the brains. There are also gray hayres,
which naturally fall upon the pure old age of man, signifyeng temperance,
chastity, soundness of body, as pleasure and health to the grave. As these
graye hayres were attained and gotten by wisdom and good advise, so are they
preserved and continued, as an ornament of great and inestimable honor to old
age.

Likewise, after the temperance of hair, the nails of the hands and feet,
are preserved or decayed in good or evil condition and estate: and yet they
do not so speedily alter, by the interchange of the inward humors, as the
hair does.

Dyoscorides says, that the increment of nails, proceeds of pure blood: his
reason is, for that if the nails decline and putrify, a fresh nourishment
springs thereof again.

Cornelius Celsus says, because the veins begin and end in the fingers and
toes, therefore nature shows an outward work, like a comely pentise to cover
the same.

Ruellius says, the flegmaticke and moist man has a most prolixe increment
in the nails, for that there is a continual moist interflowing vapor from
the sinews, feeding and nourishing the same. So the hot and chollericke man
has sharp, thin and little nails, because large moisture from the sinews
wants thereto.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, a moist woman has thin short nails, if she
be aptlye menstruous, or else not.

Galen says, if the plat, chest, or bulk of the body be wide and broade^, so
that the heat of the heart has free and plentiful passage^, the increase
both of the hairs and nails, are The heart has a dry heat.
much prospered therewith, especially if the heat of the heart be both pure,
excellent, and nourishable: Whereas if slenderness and straightness be in
the bulk, does show the natural dryness of the heart and chest from the
birth day, through which there is great obstruction from the natural course of
good blood, offending the vegetation both of the nails, hairs, and all other
parts. Therefore the straightness of the bulk, is perrilous to the wholesome
ordinance of health, for those bodies are commonly preserved with natural
fevers all the days of their life, do not only absume in the tenuity of
their flesh, but many of them perish and decay in the substance of the heart.
Some certain, as well by the strength of nature, as by year and time,
ouergrowe the eager humor, and so escape the dangers hereof. And yet many of
them after any such recovery, are greatly encumbered with a tisich upon the
lunges. Although it is possible by medicinable art, to repress and reprove
the dryness of these parts, yet not so perfectly, but that a smache thereof
will follow upon them unto their last end.

There is an other sort of men which are both of hot stomaches and rank
livers, as their red colored countenances declare the same: they are also
purple-nosed and hayrie about the breast: Auycen reports them to be men of
forcefull stomaches, apt to warfare, and yet their courage very much subdued
from inflammation, and desire to lechery.

Dyoscorides says, that a true martial man is altogether without lustful
pleasure, or desire toward women: and yet full of mercy and love toward
them. And furthermore, alechemus man is not always bold: for both by quality
as quantity, his thighs and loins and other lineamentes, show the
constitutione of a faint liver. So also the broadnes of the breast, and length
of the neck, are the outward signs of an inward troublesome mind.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, that a short necked man, is apt to conceive,
pregmaticall, and very of dangerous disposition, and yet his body very
subiectiuelie is vanquished, under every strange accideniall disease. A wrie
necked person, has very high conceits to accomplish, and their minds are
easily infected under many dangerous practices.

Galen says, that reason cannot instruct us in these outward signs of nature,
but an inward and direct constitution, makes a perfect experience hereof.

Auycen says, that if the outward complexion be cold, the inward constitution
is hot. If evil manners be outwardly discovered, the inward thoughts are more
easily coniectured, which is more suffientlie proved by the estate of seasons
and countries, for that all men generally are procliue and apt to show the
manners of their country, in their conversation, whether it be in poverty or
pride: either in rudeness, or civility. We are therefore the rather to
suspect the wonderful and high constitutions of nature inwardly, by these
outward evil properties and dispositions: For in the south regions all outward
things are hot, and all inward things cold. So on the other behafe, all
outward things upon the north parts are cold and freesing, when the inward
estate is warm, and the temperance therewithal yields hot: whereby it
comes to pass, that the people borne in those parts of the world, are of
most fierce courage: and although very bold, yet in all their enterprises
headlong.

Auycen says, those which be borne upon the Meridian point, are unmeet for
wars. So Justin reports, that men of the north parts of the world, are in
the beginning stout and fierce to battle, but their hearts in the end, are
soluble and melting with the snow. For all outward temperaunces do retire
and fly back to the inward parts of man, by reason of outward cold:
wherefore they have not a strong digestion, but all inward things are in them
thereby of great valor.

Some may think that Hypocrates reasoning with Galen, has made a very unlikely
argument or proofte herein, as the Europians, are more fiercer then the Asians,
for that they endure greater inequalities of seasons: and whereas summer is
very hot in the one, and winter very cold in the other, so an inward heat is
contemperated under the condition or estate of either temperance. Cornelius
Celsus verily thinks, that Hypocrates respects the experience which those
countries approve by by war, or by such great inequalities of seasons, are the
better prepared to abide and suffer all interchangeable calamities of the
body, which ought to be borne and suffered in wars, and therefore these
sorts of pleople are more fitter for wars then other countries.

It is most certainly to be credited that those which inhabit the Meridian
point, are more hotter in the liver and heart, then other countries: yet their
heat is strange, not natural: they have plenty of good blood and breath: they
are wise, but not valiant: And those which inhabit those cold regions, are
therefore flerce, stout and apt for warfare, and have a conioined substance of
breath and blood abundantly in their bodies. And therefore Auycen reports,
that those which inhabit under the Bear, do in fiercenes, courage and valor
give place to no man. And Hypocrates does call their temperance flerce and
sharp, because their heat is united and ouermatched with cold. Also in those
temperate regions which inhabit the Meridian point, heat draws and inforceth
heat, as may be well perceived and understood in those extreme and hot seasons
of the year, whereas strong and flerce corruptions, do infect and draw upon the
body of man, by hot and malicious contagions. So in these Europian
countries, the times and seasons of the summer, excessiuely inforceth heat
upon the extreme parts of man: and also their winters are over much cold
and very bitter to the outward paries: so that their digestion in winter time
is more strong, and their natural heat more aboundaunt.

There is a sufficient discourse in in the first book of these Chollerike men
have great tranquillity in winter.
Temperamentes of chollericke men, inhabyting these Europian countries, whose
outrage has the greatest domination in summer, and do live at most pleasure,
quietness, and rest in winter. So flegmatike men, have their joy in summer and
greatest distemperature in winter. Yet Theophrastus Paracelsus says, that
seeing nature has differenced the chollerike man from the fiegmatike, by
vnequalnesse of seasons, so the inward heat in the time of winter, is more
shorter in the one, and natural heat in the time of winter is more stronger in
the other, which if it be so, then all living creatures (without exception) are
to have a more pleasant and happy estate of life in winter then summer,
because natural heat is the artificer and instrument of all living things.

Cornelius Celsus says, that like as the sun is lodged under the dark
veins of the clouds, in the night season, so heat is hid and shrouded in the
secret veins of all things in winter, and waxes more outward and stronger
with the increase of the year, until by the temperature of the sun it be
powerful and mighty.

Arnoldus de noua villa affyrmeth, that the complexion of man arises and
falls, with the temperature or distemperature of the year: so may we gather
hereby that choler rages and super abounds more in summer then winter, only
by an intentive quality. Then fieam does not argue no full quantity of heat in
winter, but rather shows some remissiuenesse therein: for which we have some
opportunity offered, to discover these living creatures of the water, as the
crab-fish, and other shel-fishes, whose outward vesiure is always hard and
dry, yet there inward temperance is moist and soft, especially in winter.

The Physicians do minister these and such like fishes to patients, which are
wasted and consumed upon the loonges and liver, and other affected parts of
the body, as a special nourishment and restoratiue. They are much deceived
herein: for the egredience thereof, proffereth little moisture, is of saltish
taste, and stubborn digestion. And those which are endangered and vexed with
that disease, do take best liking of easy, and light meats, which speedily
do digest.

There is another kind of shell fish, called an Oyster, is in operation
easily converted to choler, the constitution thereof is most wholesome in
winter, under qualification of strong and eger fe^stes: they have perfect
digestion in the body of man, by the bountifulness of pure good wine,
especially if the same It is an error that rackt wines may be perfected by
observing seasons of the year.
wine be virtuous in odor, color, sapour, and fervor, then does it putrify
corrupt blood, vnsetleth evil humors, refreshes the senses. But rackt wines
are most unwholesome for the body of man, although the seasons of the year be
observed, for perfecting them, in their degree.

And furthermore we must make conjecture of the inward temperance of fishes,
by their outward proportion and property, of which there is four sorts: as
chrustie, shellie, scaly, soft and sleeke skinned fish. Their inward causes
do most easily convert into dangerous diseases, if that circumspectly they be
not remedied and prevented in their strange operation. For whereas some kind
of fish, are in their natural property cold, so are they flegmatike,
nourishing, variable and gross substance. Whereas some kind of fish are
hot, so are they chollericke and of most churlish operation in the body of man.

Also there is some kind of fish dry, vnnourishable, and returns to slender
excrementes. But Auycen affirms, that chollericke fish, is best brooked and
digested in winter, and flegmaticke fish in summer.

And Ruellius with many other excellent writers, do commend the Sammon king of
fishes, which of very nature ministers If the S^mon be moderately eaten is
easily digested.
great safety to the body of man, both in sickness and health, and has a
very perfect constitution to be resolved into pure blood, especially being
drunk with wine: as Cornelius Celsus says, is an approved medicine for
costiuenesse in the loonges, and perfecteth the opilation of the liver.

So also, a most high and singular commendation belongs to the constitution
of the Gurnet. And although fish is a lenitiue food, being of an
extenuatethinne slimie substance, yet are they of diverse temperatures and
orders, and hardly coniectured upon, in their several operations: for
flegmaticke and vaporous fish nourishes hollow belching, immoderat thirst,
sower and sharp fleame, and as many have a most greedy desire thereunto, so
their stomachs are mordicated and ouercharged under vilde, monstrous and
vaporous humors, and not by the unmeasurable means of any distemperance
otherwise.

And surely the stomach indureth these vaporous humectations, rather by evil
nourishmentes then any distemperance of the body, or putrified corruptions in
the air. And yet there are very great considerations to be herein understood:
whether these belchinges, or coughinges proceed of evil nourishments, or of
natural humors in the body, or from accidental corruptions in the air. For
if gross feeding and evil nourishments, be cause hereof, then the universal
body is infected, with fuliginous vapors, of disposition, yielding to be
pituitous and flegmaticke: And if it proceed of natural humors; and the body
inclined thereunto, then the flesh abs^meth, and by little and little
mynorateth, not only in substance, but digestion waxes weak, the guts
clung, the liver and loonges waste, the sinews and veins in their natural
and just course of blood stoop. And also if it proceed of the corruption and
interchange of the air, the evidence thereof is regarded in the alteration and
deflowring of the excrementes, by a pituitous disposition of rewins in all
parts of the body.

There is also another most hot and contrary excrement, called choler: as it
is deciued from the liver, so does it outrage, and superabound in the bodies of
those men, over whom it bears rule. If the strength thereof grow great, and
troublesome it is best remedied by euacuation downward, so that the humors be
before unsettled, by some preparatiue medicine: But if the stomach be therewith
ouercharged, it were not amiss, by moist vomites, to be advanced upward. And
yet there be many, which cannot be so helped: both for that they be naturally
disframed, as also for that their passage from the gall to the bowels, is
ouer-little, and more larger about the stomach, comprehending excessive
excrementes, which impureth vital blood over grossly. For unto whom such
choler is generated in the stomach, cannot otherwise be withdrawn, except by
natural euacuation downward: therefore it is both unnatural, and without
art, to purge them upward, except there cannot be deuoydance otherwise,
especially and the rather because of a green rotten prassiue substance
congested in the stomach. There is a further and a more higher weight to be
here in respected, as not only in putting a difference in knowing the diverse
natures of this choler, but an artfull experience, in purging and putting away
the same: For if it proceed from the liver, it is yellow and pale: if it
engender upon the stomach, it is green, like to the color of a Leeke: if it
breed through a malicious corruption, it is ouerprassiue, and an enemy to all
the natural and sensible members of the body, deflowreth, discoloureth and
defaceth man's native and perfect complexion, and in it self, favors a
venomous property.

Galens opinion is, that if a cold liver be warmed under any accidental
heat, it increases and ingendreth a profluous choler, exceeds all the
heates of stomach, and all other parts of the body, although they be never so
full of fervor and heat. And green choler has for his condition and
quality, an exceeding heat, which through any accidental dislike, it be
chased from the stomach, does forthwith recourse to the liver, and desires a
perfection therein.

Although appetite delights to gnawe and whet upon gross and fulsome meats,
and to infarce and ingorge the stomach therewith, so do they contagiously
breed, nourish and infester venomous choler to become high stubborn and
unvanquishable.

So also there are some meats which in their own property, (through their
exceeding corruption in the stomach) do euaporat and defume the brains, with
grievous swimming aches in the head, payneth and aggrauateth the eyes. So hard
eggs, honey, shellfish and such like, as great and perilous instruments of
enforcing the danger hereof: And nature is also hardly and painefully occupied
in digesting them, into a ready and perfect substance. As if it were sowes
flesh, or bulls flesh, which impresseth and setleth raw humors most deeply,
to ouermelt and transspread the whole body of man, so that no medicineable
means, neither upward nor downward, makes expulsion thereof.

Surely the disposition of the head, ought to be always regarded under some
temperance: as whether it be cold or moist, hot or dry: for coldness
brings forth flegmatike humors, whose often and daily distillations,
absumpt the good indowmentes of the brain. For mordicat rewmes are hurtful to
all natural operations, loosen the roots of the hayres, discloseth the body
to all pestiferous corruptions and stenches, dimmeth and obscureth the eyes,
dulleth the senses, benummeth feeling, astonieth hearing, dissmacheth tasting,
and stencheth smelling: yet many gross contagious meats, are by wholesome
sauces qualified and delayed in the artfull knowledge, and skifull handling of
good cooks. So also redolent wines, if they be entertained A good cook is in
the nature of a good physician.
into a perfect body, are both converted to fragrant blood, and establishe the
complexion, to become delightsome and remedious herein.

Ruellius affirms, that great operation consists in the virtue and
property of a raw or rear egg, especially for the rewme, if it be
wholesomely taken: for then it purges foul blood, strengthens nature,
cleanses the liver, fortifieth the stomach, sharpneth the senses, melloweth
and increases appetite. And wine is much commended, if it be of good and
perfect flauour and substance, to be drunk therewith in the morning. All which
being equally tempered does much prevail against flegmaticke rewmes, for
certainly these rewmes happen and fall out many times, by alterations and
uncertainties of diets: Therefore it is to be distinguished, whether it be an
issue from the brains downward, or a vapor from the stomach upward: And yet
many times also, the body is inclinatiue to these rewmes under strange
accidents, by alterations and variety of seasons: then is it impossible to
overcome the incomprehensible distemperances of nature.

And lastly, there is a conjecture by some methood, to be outwardly discerned
and regarded, not for inclinatiue dispositions only, but for sundry natural
infirmities and diseases which most bodies under some elementall
distemperan^ance are subject unto. Examples hereof may be taken from the
primary reason, which is joined in property with fantasy, and grows in
custom both together to be bewrayed with Phisiognomy, or outward gesture,
whether it be in countenance or body. And as they are altogether united, and
inseperably magnified, to be of one perfect substance both in mind and manners,
so every man is thereby inwardly proved or reproved, in the whole universal
proportion of his said body: so that as Rasis affyrmeth, that a flat nosed
man, is of dry complexion, and a man having a camoysed nose, indicateth much
chollerike dryness. If he be endued with hollow eyes, signifies dryness in
the head: if he be of sallow and pale countenance, signifies moistness: and
yet many men are in forms and fashions contrary to their dispositions. And
that howsoever nature has portrayed with thin and hayrie legs, shows a
natural dryness in the liver, so red and fiery eyes declares the purity and
small quantity of blood.

Black eyes signify the impuritie, thickness and superaboundance of blood:
graie eyes observe the indifferent estate throughout the whole body: those eyes
which are blew like the sky, do exceed in some season of the year, in great
dryness, and on the contrary in some other seasons do surpass in moistness:
little twinkling eyes like Ferrets, signify moistness: bleared eyes have
diverse estates and operations in the body of man, both of flegmatike humors
and chollerike vapors, digressing from their own kind and property: the one
proceeds of cold moisture, and the other of a hot tyrannous fretting humor
generated and contracted to the eyes in the superaboundant heat of the brains,
or by and excess heat in the stomach, vapouring to the cells of the head.

Rasis affyrmeth, that although great inundations and intercourses, either of
superfluous moistures in the head, or venomous vapors in the stomach,
defluxing and galding the eyes, yet the precious eie-sight may long be
preserved and continued without darkness and decay: and yet confesses that
continuance utterly overthrows and sinketh the pearl to the bottom. The
same Rasis says, that a waall-eyed man is of dry dispotition upon the liver,
and the liuer-blood thereupon is made most pure: yet these waall-eyed,
squynt-eyed, and lame-eyed men, are most rumatike, are so far subjected in
their own nature, as that the whole universal infections of rewmes concur
upon them.

But touching the dangerous conditions, and most villainous manners, which that
sort of men are inclined unto, are sufficiently portraied and painted forth by
Auycen.

I will not therein intermedle so largely as they deserve: and for that my
purpose only tends to find out the due temperance, which every man is
subject unto. And yet Galen thinks, that for as much as man has a divine
beginning from his creation, temperaunce ought not to be coniectured upon.

Leonardus Fuchsyus says, They which judge upon temperance of many ages,
offend very much. For do not the outward signs of hair, both by sickness
and age, alter after the inward disposition? And likewise, all members wrinkle
and alter, after the inward corruption of natural blood? Then the easiest and
perfectest judgment that herein is to be required upon the several
temperatures of man is to conjecture upon melancholic temperance, whose
inclinement is cold and dry, and their blood soonest does corrupt, which is
best outwardly regarded by the outward alteration, and disfashionment of
hayres, which inwardly proceeds of fuliginous blood and smokie humors: for
the old pouerbe is true, that soote is next smoke, and smoke next stre: and
wax after it is tempered, is more easile imprinted upon with a scale. So
likewise infections alter the humors, and humors alter the outward estate of
man: and after that nature is made subject to coruption, a strong impression
follows ever after until death.

And furthermore, there are many which cannot be recovered from this error,
affyrming, that temperature ought not to be adjudged upon in old men,
especially if they be flegmatik: for as old flegmatike men be cold an moist, so
their excrements are uncertain and subject to bloody fluxes, scowring laskes,
the urine muddie, bloody, black, and thick: and likewise a melancholic man,
whose youthful temperature consists upon a perfect blo^^: but natural
complexion is dry and cold, when age comes upon them.

Theophrastus Paracelsus gives counsel, and therewithal assures, that no
good scarch^r of man's disposition, after forty and six years of age,
inderdealeth with the excrementes.

Arnoldus de noua villa gives more larger liberty in perfect bodies, until
fyftie and five years be accomplished. For as many old men have a hot dry
bodies, so many others have yearthly and waterie bodies, under which, several
dispositions in old age falls out.

Last of all, it is a doubtful and uncertain thing, to discern the
temperature of every old man, in age and sicnesse.

Rasis holds in opinion, that in age nothing is to be gathered, neither from
excrementes, neither from form, nor shape, nor scarce from operation: for
operation of some part, by occasion of variable disposition, may be confounded
in an other part.

I do let pass the opionins and judgments of many Writers, how the signs
of diverse ages differ in sickness, neither through out the whole ages of man
do they obtain or continue any one perfect significatiue agreement. Therefore
whosoever traueileth in the variable temperances of man, let his best direction
be taken from the pulses, as feeling every office of the body in his proper
work: Yet surely whatsoever is spoken against the view of excrementes in the
sickness of old men. Ruellius says, that excrementes are not altogether to be
rejected or despised, but according to the strangeness of the sickness and
accidents of the disease, duly to be considered upon.

To conclude, every practitioner has a large field to travel in, in the time
of sickness. As first, to understand the disease, by feeling the pulses.
Next, to consider whether every office of the body labors alike or no.
And thirdly, whether the Accidents do stay in any one part of the body,
more then an other. And last of all, whether the duty of the excrementes be
performed in a natural course, or no.

Thus ends the second book of the Temperamentes.
The Lord made heaven and earth, and all things therein: blessed be the
w^orkes of his hands.
HERE BEGINS THE THIRD book of the Temperaments.
IN these former books there is set open, the differences, significations and
accidents of cold, hot, moist and dry things in their active natures, and
to find out the reason not only why they should be approved in action, as also
why they should obtain their equal qualities to be comprehended and easily
perceived by touching. I will not much herein travel. For as one of them has
no powerful, nor perfect constitution without the equal travel and
furtherance of one another. So one constitution does still appeal unto
another, until the occasion, (which before was obscure and imperfect) be
drawn unto manifestation, power, strength and agreement, which (as Galen
says) does confirm all medicinable confections. And there must be hereunto
also annexed not only the sensible understanding of these natural causes, but
a just co^senting of their forcible power and virtue to have one success. Also
there must be a very high regard had, that medicines do nothing in nature
digress from the assenting inclination of such bodies, unto which they owe
their defense, help and succor. For contrary medicines dangerously do
imprint their malice and power, enforcing the grief to become more outrageous
inflammatiue and unsettled: Experience may instruct herein, that a powerful
medicine in the fourth degree hot, cannot escape, or be driven back, from
Causticke i^ burning.
some very dangerous action. For these putrifactiue or corosiue playsters
which in their causticke nature do work upon outward sores, although they be
suddenly taken away from that place, over which they did work power and
effect, yet their impression or action of heat, cannot suddenly or unawares be
taken away, for the deepenesse of the sore has comprehended the power thereof.
And therefore these inflammatiue actions, without more larger liberty and
skill, cannot be extinguished.

The same thing by cold medicines is more clearly perceived and understood.
For black popy cannot in the fourth degree, unawares be entertained into the
body, but that, by the same means, does oftentimes forthwith alter the body,
and the active mouinges sensible hindered, in the unnatural course and action
thereof.

It is otherwise with hot medicines, which although they exceed from us in
common course of heat, yet the power thereof, many either be mitigated or
utterly put out.

As touching cold medicines, the reason and understanding is not heereunto
alike, because coldness, not only deeply lurketh in the veins, but stops
the vegetation and quickenesse of nature, having once overcome the sensible
parts of man: that although warm things be proffered for restoring,
quickening, and lifting up of that sleepie and deadly invasion, either shall it
nothing at all prevail, or else the sensible and natural parts cannot be
recovered to a perfect, and due estate and disposition as before. For if cold
water by a secret potentiall estate, be entertained into a warm body, and the
body by a variable disposition thereof, alters into a more higher degree of
coldness, does extenuate nature, and decays the power of blood, although the
strength of the body exhausteth the sensible coldness thereof, yet there
remains a sharp impression for many discases to ensue.

Furthermore warm water, being received into a hot body, although it be
possessed with the body for a whole days space, as it has nourished under
some natural warmth by the strength of the body, so can it not be otherwise
known or perceived, but that the body is made more colder thereby, although
under natural warmness, it passes from the bleather again.

So do we behold the power of a cataplasma, which although it has a natural
power of coldness, yet if it be removed and the place touched, all
inflammations shall sensibly appear more subdued, moderated and seasoned, for
inducement of a more higher and excellenter practice in the work thereof,
which as some hold in opinion is contrary in powdered medicines, whose power
is only to purge, dry, and excoriat. Yet no doubt there are some powdered
medicines which in revealing an imagination of dryness in substance, are in
property altogether moist. And except the body be of a dry chollericke
disposition, shall nothing prevail to accomplish any dry action to become
perfect and sound.

Some will marvel, why the quality of elements should minister health,
ease, and safeguard to one, And show no potentiall act, but rather offense, in
another.

Certainly as all inferior causes are subject to the alteration of celestial
dispositions, so celestial bodies are stable, firm, and perfect, and in their
properties are void from alterations. Then no scruple herein need to arise,
whether this potentiall estate be ingendered or given to medicineable herbs
from nature, or from celestial bodies.

I do think not only power, but all indicible properties enjoy a
metaphisicall effect. And surely form or bodily shape, which heerewith is
adjoined, has an indifferent participation from the complexion of elements,
and the condition of celestial things. Yet the judgment of old writers is,
that the property of these natural causes, to be no other thing, the^ an
indicible All indicible things have a indicible temperance.
temperature, having some indicible property: and form is no other thing then
a temperance in his own nature, or the immediate and extraordinary reason
from the celestial influence: therefore the natural philosophers have not
spoken in vain, that Man and the son did beget man: Then surely the stars
are nothing at all occupied in the generation of mixed things, rather do they
claim a most great part to themselves of that which appertains to these
immixt properties and powers: And it is no marvel, but that these virtues,
powers and strength, are so opposite and manifest to our feeling and
perceiving, that heat and cold should also have a singular prehemmence in the
stars. Theophrastus Paracelsus says that all these medicineable herbs are
not elementarily engendered. But brought forth, of some divine power, from the
pure celestial estate above. But yet these elementall qualities so highly do
bear their force in the countenance of all inferior things, and their powers
are so full and large in all medicineable effects, that no furtherance or
means preuayleth, either to confirm them, or else bring them back, to any
other strange act, or unusual alteration.

Dyoscorides says, that the divine power moves the elements to become either
natural, or unnatural to the earth: And the earth withal the bountiful
creatures therein, do take their essence, increase, or decrease from the due
course or alteration of the said elements.

The chief Philosophers do say, that the high fruitful situation of the
sun, works upon all living creatures, that all natural causes greatly
prevail thereby.

Then it is no marvel that single medicines, have an appropriat inclination in
themselves, but artificially qualified from their own nature, have a more
clearer and peaceable effect: And although the sun, does in every place east
her seasonable power and strength, yet not with one indifferent quality of
warmenesse and heat, to be entertained into all things alike, not for that
there is any defect in the primarie property of the sun, but because there
is a several property from the complexion of elements. For as no physician
can frame one medicine, to be indifferently received and entertained into
every several constitution: So the sun is showed forth in one force, and
potentiall estate alike, although the action upon all inferior causes unlike
for that, every thing follows the property of nature from the complexion of
elements in generation and the property of the sun in augmentation.

The unseasonable elements do oftentimes darken the sun, and thereby
distemper and disseason the inferior causes of the earth. So also the confused
courses and running together of the fl^^s, (...)oursing by an vnsingled and
variable power within themselves, is the only cause why all the herbs and
fruits of the stelde, are of medicionable and saluing condition over one, and
nothing at all profiting but rather hurting unto another.

Therefore the power of all these things are distinguished three manner of
ways. As first, their possibility has one ordinary power in themselves.
Secondly, that a supreme natural substance, coagulateth in the power of all
inferior causes. Thirdly, does in the same power obtain and accomplish some
effectual property in it self, which by any foreign accidents can neither
be interuented, nor altered, except enforced from one propertte to an other, to
some supreme excess within their own natural essence.

Therefore these medicines whose virtues are determined hot in the second
degree, are most easily made hot in their action, and also most easily are they
converted to fire in open extremity, exceeding their natures: as vnflaken
lune, rosenne, or gum, which yssueth from the excess vapors of trees.

But the greatest danger happens in cold medicines, especially if nature
has determined their operation hot, and their action cold: as the Hemlock,
which of Dyoscorides is called Cicuta (a most poisonsome practice in the fourth
degree,) has not only a hot property and troublesome effect, but an
impressiue action of a cold benumming the senses, which cannot be afterward
rased out. And yet many times some strong and forcible complections will rather
alter and subdue such strong medicines, to become inclinable to the body, then
endure themselves to be altered or subdued af the body.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, it is no perfect opinion, neither of the old
nor new writers, that medicines ought to be first drawn into actual
pre-eminence, before the corruption be styrred and prepared by some
preparatiue or gentle mollefaceion, the easier the power of of purgation is
extended to mortify and slay the disease: Always provided that medicines be
matched with the nature of the body as well in sickness as in health. Like as
clear water contemperated with pure wine, does much profit, and season a hot
and inflammatiue body, to become ttmperate: After the same manner weak
medicines, gentely are framed to do their effect, then those medicines which
are of high and gross operation. For the more weaker medicines are composed,
for slender bodies* the easier their strength is evidently known, their limits
and bounds discovered, and thereby less feared. Whereas gross, hot and strong
medicines are subtle, fierce, easily do insinuate and wind themselves into
all the parts of man, and although they be most charily regarded, yet will
they many times exceed art: wherefore medicine ought to be framed, and drawn
after the measure of bodyly heat, otherwise it is no equal instrument of
nature, neither can nature be used in her potentiall measure for the speedy
overthrow of the disease. For as medicine ought to be framed most like unto
nature, so the disease from time to time, is directed by nature: Therefore
medicine ought to be received into the body, under the warmness of new
milk, or man's blood, although Galen counsels that medicines in summer
season be proffered unto some bodily constitutions under the coldness of
fountain water.

But touching medicines outwardly applied, some high and singular practice must
be attained, for healing and curing such outward sores. First, by rubbing and
searching the grieved place of the patient, whereupon sometimes the
inflammatiue infection of the furious and hot humor increases, and far
surpasses the bounds both of medicine and nature, except peradventure, it be
corrected by some drieng drink, or purgative potion inwardlye taken: or that
the outward medicine be of some very cold and slender power in operation,
which sensibly is perceived. For and if medicines be unapt, they will
contrarile wrestle, both against nature and the afflicted sore, as swiftly,
vncertainlie, and groslie wind in their power and strength. But if cold
medicines be slow, they may be remedied and preferred (after the skill of the
Chirurgian) to a more fuller and larger estate and degree.

Yet hot searching and inflammatiue medicines, are necessarily required in
fulsome, putrified and cor^siue sores either for searching, searing, scowring
and fadoming the deepenesse thereof, as for the staying and stopping of some
further impendent danger. And as some medicines are changed in their own
qualities, so there are also some medicines, which through their lenetiue nature
pass over into the substance of the body.

There is also an other cause in the universal participation of joining
superior causes together, into one perfect substance is so duly regarded in
them, as that their quality in action has no domination in it self, but
their properties are rather deducted and brought down from the stars into
the power of herbs. Otherwise this wandering desert herb Scanmionyum, which
imperfectly purges choler, and leaves the constitution of the body in more
worse estate then before, should be as familiar to the body, as Succorie,
Endiffe, Buglosse, and such like herbs of saluing and curing nature. And yet
Dyoscorides says, that Succory is of diverse kinds: one is cherished in
Gardens as a precious treasure, preserved for bodily health, so the other is
wild and of more resisting virtue. Yet because they do both alike draw a
natural power from the stars, in one perfect kind and substance, do equally
agree in one manner of operation: for they are so indicible and evident, as
that their property is not known only by reason^, as by experience, as also
highly occupied in the government of man's health although they have a right
and due property of evident virtue, which man's art cannot seperat or put away:
and therefore action and passion are due unto their qualities, as well for that
they have a whole and perfect substance of moving power, as also for that
there is an easy transmutation of their nature, into the natural substance of
man's body.

There is also an herb called Molios, which draws a power from the high
governor of Spirits, called Amy, and has sixteen legions under his
dominion, as Dyoscorides reports in his third book, and the fifty two
chapters in the Commentes of Barbarus, and Virgilius, that this herb is of an
outward virtue most excellent, it has great power against witchcraft, south
saying, and coniuration: it is not inwardly to be taken, but outwardly to be
carried about: it is of a property by it self, and will not inwardly be changed
into the substance of man's nature, neither does it prevail in remedy of any
disease, except the falling sickness.

And surely, all other herbs have some natural or vnnatuturall portion, with
our body. Yet it is vnpossibly, that they should be of one power and effect
together, neither is there a like alteration one with an other: For if their
properties were of equal agreement, then one substance could not have equal
operation into an other.

Even as these prrperties do very much disagree within themselves, so can
they not forthwith pass over into mutual substance of man's body, without
artful knowledge, aptly composing them thereto. As fire suddenly without art,
can not be trasformed into water, nor air into earth.

So by the same difference medicines are distinguished and and known from
nourishments. For as nourishmentys agree with the natural comfortes of men, so
medicines have their properties, differing from the properties of men. And as
medicines are repugnant to the disease, so both the body and the disease not
only become subject, but reformed to medicine, for health and safety
thereby. And although Art domifieth them, to become gentle, kind, and
natural: yet art never depriueth them from their free property: For how much
the rather they are of contrary substance, so do they show themselves the
rather in the similitude of a more greater action: and yet for that one
substance is passed over into an other, they are qualified also in power:
therefore let us once again distinguish the estate and condition of medicines
within themselves.

Although there is an artificial form in the constitution of all medicines,
framed to some special appointed purpose, yet as Galen says, there are some
herbs cold, which take a very little portion of change in the heat of man's
blood: And many times, not only because they are of cold nature, but venomed
in some degree of poison, very notably do they corrupt man's body: As the
mandragoron and such like. There are also some other poisoned herbs, in a
most hot degree of strong venym* as the Daphnaydes the Coloci^tida^^the* I^ios.
As they do exceed the heat of man's body, so do they reach most highly beyond
man's nature, do forthwith oppress life, and entertain death, if their
strength be not artificially remedied.

There are also medicines, neither of hurting nor saluing power, neither of
hot nor cold operation, neither do they nourish nor yet destroy, but very
indifferent to the body of man.

There are also composed medicines of honnie, butter, sweet oil, as they are
not of no pure nor clear verdoue, so are they very nourishable and
restauratiue to nature: And as nourishmentes are easily changed into nature, so
the power of all other medicines do comprehend a work in their own
properties, and therefore it is impossible, their power should be both kept and
changed.

Galen does make further report, that so long as medicines do continue their
nature and degree, under the equal condition of the body, are not only gentle
and favorably incertayned, but changed into blood with the nature of the body:
are no more under the compass of medicines, but rather follow the due course
of vegetation, preservation and simpathie, with natuturall operation, both in
quality and power of the body.

Whether Galen has extended his reasons to hot medicines, I know not, but I
fear not to speak, that oftentimes both hot and cold medicines are under one
property turned into blood, when as the body meanly is subdued with coldness
from the extremity of heat, and advanced to heat, from the extremity of
coldness: for then is it impossible that any impropertie, should at all
remain, where many properties are duly changed.

And also it is a most hard and difficult estate, if substance in the nature of
every one thing, should wholly be taken away or diminished, so neither then,
is any such blood left alone to do good in absolute power: for humors, do
nourish themselves, where good blood wants. And every natural thing has no
natural operation nor measure, where any such defect is. For Where no natural
operati^is, there is no measure.
surely there is no doubt, but whosoever ouer-largely feeds upon honnie,
cannot escape, but that at length his complexion is discolored, defiled and
stained with a hott flegmaticke blood. So likewise in summer season, some
bodies, by eating of cold Lattice are drawn to over great comminution, and
heat, nature and blood are many times extenuated, weakened and altered in
their due course. Let every one therefore most highly call to memory, that
measure and moderation are much preferred under the constitution of man's health.

Thrusianus an old fatherly writer (as one falfly persuaded) does say, that
nothing is carried, or conveyed beyond the heat of man's body, and that bodily
heat congruently consents to all foreign heates, being of never so strong
and high valor: and says further, that single medicines cannot be changed,
beyond their own nature. The which wrongful opinion and judgment he seems
to consent with Paracelsus, who affirms that every thing is borne and
brought forth into this world, to aduouch his own property in the actual
accomplishing of some effectual virtue, for the help or hinderance of an
other thing. And yet this nothing proves why any quality either of heat or
blood should be advanced beyond his own nature, except by some enforced
extremity: or except only because the manner of diet, is more stronger in one
body then another: or except some bodies are disposed to feed upon grosser
sustenance then another: for that body does enjoy and obtain greatest health
which feeds upon the purest, cleerest and most choice sustenance.

Surely as the body begets his portion of heat after the greatness, manner
and meetnesse of sustenance, so warmenesse of blood, equally either by
tenuitie, indifferency, or fullness, is matched and advanced with the body:
but the office of the liver is not herewith compared, having no natural
indowment of heat from the affluence of heat, and blood in the body.

There is a constitution of variable humors by the same temperance of the
liver, under which one is more colder then the liver it self, and the other
more hotter after the condition of some material cause, from whence the heat
of the liver is derived, especially for that nothing is so single in nature,
but that it is variably altered by the heat of the sun: so that some bodies,
in the variable disposition of man are like unto wax molified, or clay hardened
by the virtue and strength of the sun.

Dyoscorides reports, that the complexion of every man draws upon the
sun, and the grace of the sun has a differing action upon all several
things variable, being comprehended in it self: and that every man is
disposed alter the four orders of the elements. So that some men are white,
some men black, some men red, some of one color, some of another, thereby
Galen says that herein may be perceived that all heates feed upon the sun.
And furthermore does say, that like as fire is stroke from the hardness, and
secret veins of the flint, so the liver is fed and nourished by an intentive
hot humor enforced from the sun. For which cause and after this manner
nourishment subtly and most secretly passes into the natural heat of man's
body, chiefly when nature joins in property therewith.

So nourishment nothing disagreeth from wood joined unto fire, which first
stands at a state, then presently alters into the nature of fire, and
becomes into one perfect substance therewith. And as heat is more weak in
one body then another, so heat according to the copiousnesse of sustenance
increases throoughout the whole body: And heat also more speedily flameth out
after the constitution of a hot, high, and strong sustenance, then by a cold,
thin and weak diet. And therefore food ought with care and diligence to be
wayed and regarded, both for the preservation of man's life, as also for that
some bodies are through evil regiment easier corrupted and overtaken then
others.

Then have we just cause to think that heat is not properly nourished of any
property in it self, but either violently drawn from some other inferior and
natural causes of fire, or else from the supernatural comfort of the sun,
which is the only restoration of all inferior causes, to become with them of
one parmanent and firm operation.

Surely then nourishment is received into the body by three manner of means: as
first, when an excess quantity of diet is received into the body, brings
forth some monsirous or unnatural disposition in it self: And such strange
dispositions will not consent ever after, to follow the right direction of
perfect nourishment. As wine although it be of excellent quality, and most
easily retained and digested down into the body, yet being received by excess
quantity, oftentimes does benumme and ouercoole natural temperance, and does
of it self convert into cold humors, by some strange alteration, for that not
only the abundance thereof confounds heat, and the verdour being over
charged by a surfeiting distemperance, oppresses both the power of heat and
nourishment, and altogether therewithal surpriseth bodily constitution.

There may be also wayed a consideration in the second degree, how nourishment
alters and transferreth it self. For while it continues, the stomach has
the only effect of food: but being digested from the stomach passes from
one office to another, until the substance, strength and power thereof, be
distilled, converted and altered, to become of one union in man's body: and when
the body is unapt to intertaine perfect nourishment, both shows a
degeneration of nature, and the distemperance of the body reclined to some
foreign contagion.

There is an absolute comprehension in the third degree, which is most perfect
both to health, long life and the natural substance of man, that is, when
meat most sufficiently brooketh man's body, and the body takes good liking and
relishe of the meat, are forthwith resembled into one similitude together.

And yet there are four degrees, which are called second humidities, besides
four humors which participate upon the liver. The first cause is contained
under the subtle veins and arteries: and therefore because heat is not only
degenerated, but settled and concocted in a corrupt blood, there is a plain
digression of nature, and all moystnesse do wax thin thereby.

The second degree of these Humidities, is when a dispersed due interfloweth
from sustenance, into all the parts of the body, the which if by alteration
of strange humors it falls into corruption, is the only efficient cause of
a third humiditie, and no nourishment is favorable unto the body, and all
gluttonous Exanguit, that is without blood.
causes are quite separated from the body, by means it is exanguit,
consumpted, and quite deuoyded from heat: yet it cannot be denied, but that
there is some clammie matter impendent upon the loonges, which gnaweth upon the
desire of sustenance, always belonging to such humid diseases. The fourth
humidity represents a hungry nourishment.

Galen in his sixth book in the causes of Symptomatickes does say, that
although they have diverse names, yet are they of one sharp hurtful operation
in nourishment, except that which makes some delay either in the stomach or in
the maw, and that the veins may extract a moving comfort therefrom.

And also we must understand, that this nourishment extends to the extreme
parts. Otherwise truly in my opinion, other parts need not to contract nor
travel with the stomach and liver for moisture to their better nourishment. Al
which perfectly shows that nature draws a potentiall substance for the
strength of nourishment: and the more nearer there is a communion of substance
in all the parts of the body, the more easier is there a return of
nourishment, except it otherwise happereth by means of any foreign accidence.
For sowes flesh, although it has great affinity and nearness with man's
flesh, yet by the good operation of wine, it is passed over into a perfect
substance, and the digestion thereof is slow, sower, and heavy, for because
the union hereof is of a more thick and grown substance, it is operative and
ouerburthensome, then familiar, usual and accustomed. Therefore the power of
hot things, have a double difference, for which cause there are medicines of
on operation, and nourishmentes of an other, the which nourishmentes ought to
have an easy gracious nature, either to help nature decayed, or to pacify
the troubles of any disease offending wholesome constitution, do justify and
continue the health and safeguard of the body, are preferred before all
medicines, and nature the more graciously, and easily does accept them to be
placed in some due ordinance with the body. For such like nutritive medicines,
as they have an inward mollifieng operation, so have they an outward
application. And yet some, according to the demonstration of Galen do think
that nutritive medicines inwardly taken, having possessed and matched their
heat, under the form of a hot complexion, are of moore greater force and
strength, and such medicines are easily reduced, and manifested in their own
nature and property more quickly.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, that medicines outwardly ministered more
speedily do show their nature, then those which be inwardly entertained,
especially if in their action they be hot and firm: and although under the
skin are more inwardlye tender, then is outwardly showed, yet have they a
more ready duty hereby, to search the deepnesse of the wound, and gri^ued
place, and the deepnesse of the sore, more speedily does yield and open, if
the inward humor be corrected by some purgative drieng drtnke, the diseased and
grieved sore presently alters his issue, yields to a sound union, and is
presently comprehanded under one fafe substance of the body.

Aristotle in his Probleames (speaking of viniger and such like sharp sauces)
does say, that the as well inward, as outward applications, very sensibly do
freate, and if heat be bewrayed of a more stronger power in the pacient, does
grow to an inward excess, and outwardly offends: yet a strong and hot body
will easily and very much blunt and dull the power hereof. As first, by
extenuation and comminution. Secondly, by concoction, and thirdly by motion,
for that they are rouing, never continuing themselves in one estate, but
dispose them selves into al other parts. As fourthly by separation, especially
of those parts* which are more sharp, as prepared, purged and sifted either
by fluring, either by urine, or vomit and breathing vapors from the stomach,
rather then of those parts of the body, which are more calm, sound, bening and
bountiful. In which it is to be marked whether nature be impaired, in the
exclusion of one part more then an other, or remains wholly, sound, and
perfect. Also whether the blood be made clear and kindly by a fresh and new
coiunction. Also whether the rind and bark of the veins be wrinkled,
dimished, and broken in pieces, and whether medicine have a natural power to
unite, and conioine in the nature of the body, for if the medicine be blunted
and dulled by the strength of the body, then the body is utterly unable to
defend it self from corruption, but presently infected with all kind of
vlceration. And these kind of ulcers are comprehended either from rank
abundance of melancholious corruption arising between the flesh and the
skin into some outward preposterous sore, or else most commonly by reason of
some hot fluxing humor unnaturally settling in some part of the body, wherein
some unkindly worm breeds and ouereateth, except some present stay and
remedy be had, And Galen says there are diverse sorts breeding in their kind
according to the nature and disposition of the body.

And although the Chirurgians do give them several names yet they ought not so
to do, because they are worms gathered and misshapen according to the
monstrousness of the humor, and never continue in one kind.

And yet some old writers divide these sorts of sores into four names:
Herpes, Phagedina, Chironia, and Telephia, The first is of very affinity with
a plague sore. The second is some filthy black worm, or Fystula fretting
between the flesh and the bones. The third is a foul sore, hard to be cured,
and being poisoned with the melancholiousnesse of the humor is called, Noli me
tangere. The fourth complecteth it self under the name of all Boyles or
Carbunckles: and surly al sharp, sower, swift, styffe and cruel medicines,
whether they be hot, or cold, have in themselves a natural poison to do
hurt hereunto: And they are more harmefull being eaten, then when they be
outwardly applied, for in their nature, they do not only intoxicate the primary
parts of man, but deeply pearce the power of the heart.

We have a manifest and rare example of Socrates, who lived in strong power of
health, except by drinking that dangerous and murthersome hear be Cicuta, who
sensibly feeling the coldness and power thereof to insinuate and wind it self,
did vanquish the highness and mightines of his heart: confessed that Cicuta
was the sting of death, and the venym of destruction.

Dyoscorides discribeth this herb Cycuta, to be both in nature and growth,
like to our english Henilocke.

Surely these medicines do little hurt being outwardly applied, but they are
poisonsome and deadly, being inwardly taken, except the small quantity thereof
be such, as that the body be of stronger power to vanquish and shake off the
mortality thereof.

There is also a certain joyce now in use, strained and squeased out of the
leaves of Lascrpitium. Antonius Musa says, it is the gum of the tree it self
called Rosen, or Belswyn, and Bewguyn.

There is no difference whether it proceed of the joyce, or weeping tears and
licour of the tree. But certainly, that Rosen which grows into a gum, by
means of tears and weeping of the trees, shows through an unnatural heat,
in the elements a general infection and disease upon the trees, either by
unnatural heat in the elements, or by a distemperate and furious course in the
stars, and the substance therewithal, is thickened, hardened and congealed.

As it is not our purpose to join together these differences, so neither are
we to search out their particular power and stri^gth neither their form,
likeness nor shape, ^or their good use, or evil abuse thereof. How much could
I here utter in disgrace of the Pandect, for false exposition of these and such
like ioyces, or congealed gums, which of the common people are one for an
other, falsely put in place: as the first misordering of Asa fetida, which the
Arabians do rather seem to put in place of Mumy, and many very ^sophistically
do frame the filth of men long dead to serve herein.

But there are two principal sorts of Mumy: the best sort proceeds of the
rich Ba^samum, Catabalsamum, frankensence, Oppobalsamum, Myrre, Alloes,
Beniamyn, and many other sweet odours, imbalmed within the dead* coorses of
most noble personages which do cendensate into substance with the flesh by
long continuance, as is afterward taken up for perfect Mumy. There is an other
sort of Mumy which comes by means of men traveling over the high mountains
of Arabia, are oftentimes swallowed up in the dangerous deepnesse of the
sands, and their flesh by large continuance of times, concreat therewith,
growing to be of one perfect substance and nature together: the Arabian writers
do much commend this kind of Mumy.

Now to return to our purpose in the natural causes of cold and heat, for
that there was never any able to show the action of cold and heat in one
like quality of the same. And who was ever able to draw, the strength of hot
causes to take effect, from man's natural heat? Or who was ever able, or yet
would bring to pass, that cold things should take their action of cold and
heat in one like degree, from man's natural heat? Except in suffocating the
senses utterly thereby. For cold medicines do in their own property and
nature follow their own strength and quality in the body.

Galen proves by the example of cold water, which if it be invested with an
accidental heat, will by potentiall essence in it self, return to a
natural property of coldness. For as water has a secret interflowing from
the veins of the earth, which although it has some secret heat by vapors,
or the influent exhalations of the elements, ascending and discending, yet is
it in property altogether cold, without alteration, and therefore it is to be
regarded that hot fire is extinguished and put out with scalding water, so
medicines many times have an action of heat, yet of their potentiall power
they do ouercoole and infrefe the body.

So likewise there is another degree of medicines of cold actions, which
although they be altered by art, to become of a more hot power, yet do they
return to the former first frigiditie, yet altogether without excellency in
it self. So water does return always to a peculiar and natural coldness.
Therefore if medicines be ministered in any degree to the body, and
therewithal do congeale and extreme with coldness, it is done in the
property and nature of medicine, not because they are preferred beyond their
accustomed action.

Now it is further to be inquired, whether medicines in the fourth degree,
drunk under evident coldness, may in any sort be quite translated from the
natural heat of man. For that it does not much appertain to our question,
we will not much here dispute with Galen, neither is it a matter of any
importance or weight.

It cannot be denied, but if these cold medicines be in small quantity
proffered upon any distemperance of the body, cannot escape altogether the
work of nature, but therewithal profits the body. For like as medicines
framed and composed of fumitorie, much prevail in help of the dropsy, so the
disease called Hydros, that is, when the skin is filled with water, is
presently cured with black popie. And Galen somewhat touched in conscience,
practices to wash away his former objection against the preparation of popie,
seems to admit the use thereof against those hot vlcerations, so it be both
artificially tempered and naturally composed with the complexion.

Then such medicines are not in same quantity always so deeply foreset with
cold, but that they may have some natural instinct of heat, especially such
herbs which are in the second and third degree cold, and may not altogether
reject and dispossess themselves from the strength of heat: So do they
easily convert themselves to become in union with bodily heat, and their
wholesome kindly temperance, quietly, secretly and suddenly subdueth and
appeaseth all extreme distemperances of heat in the body.

But Theophrastus Paracelsus on the contrary affirms, that Galen is herein
greatly deceived. For he further says that cold medicines have a private and
effectual nature of cooling and entertained into the body, as possibly to be
endured, until it be regenerat with bodily heat. Paracelsus reason herein is,
for that heat and cold may in both their properties obtain a double
distinction: as either are they to do some effect in their own properties, or
else by accidental means, the which has been sufficiently handled in the
former books of these temperaments especially in the qualities of dry and moist
things.

We may find out sufficient similitudes and testimonies of cold and hot
things, as popie being of cold nature, so Henbane is of ho^e nature, although
they be hotly tempered in their single natures together, without artfull
confection into the body, are not of equal operation: so are their actions
unequal and discrepant one from another, and their accidental heat, has
supreme intendment in the one, and disgraceth the other.

So likewise if Celledin be drunk in natural kindness of it self, much
profits the body, but being received into the body by an accidental heat,
do greatly hurt and distemper the vital parts of man, not so much in respect
of action as of operation. And certainly, as there may be a translation of all
things beyond nature. So oil is not simply called hot, because it is turned
into a flame of fire, but because it has a natural and powerful heat in it
self. For surely hot nourishmentes, although they be put into the body in
the nature of fire, yet are they no fire: for such kind of nourishmentes are
oftentimes to profit the body in place of medicines, and yet the same
trasferred beyond the common course of temperance, disprofiteth and
distempereth the body. I would have it to be here understood, that whatsoever
alters the disease is a medicine, except only that meat and sustenance
which aduaunceth it self beyond common temperance: otherwise all food
ministered unto the body should be medicinable, shows some natural effect
either of liking or disliking property. For some are of equal power to
comfort and nourish the body, some do alter the body to some unkindly
distemperance, some do purge the body, some do surfeit the body, and some do
poison the body. We may not therefore conjecture, that all sorts of meats,
suffered in the body are medicines, but we must certainly persuade our selves
that all purgations ministered unto the body, are poison some for present
operation, although not deadly: for purgative medicines are of three natures.
In their first nature, lenitiuely do approve and molifie the body: In their
second property, vehemently do search and strongly feed upon the body. They
do in their third property, insume nature, utterly oppress the body by a
sharp adust fluxing of blood, or cls a deadly benumming of the vital parts.

As all natural sustenance agreeing with the body, is converted to the
substance of flesh and blood, so all poisons of what condition soever they be,
after they be chastised from their poisonsome malice, are most curable
antidotes, and remedies against all venims and stenchfull corruptions, which
either offend or ouercharge the wholesome estate of man's life. Yet Galen says
that whosoever drinks juice of the vyper or aspes, is deadly poisoned, can
never be healed, nor the poison thereof subdued, corrected or surprised, by any
art in man. Yet Dyoscorides says, that the stone taken from the corse and
sepulcher, of some ancient king, after he has been long dead, is a special
remedy against the poison of vyper or aspes, and all other poisons in the
highest degree.

Galen calls every distemperate action (in property) deleterion, that is
venomous, to which he rehearses two several kinds of hot and cold poisons
as aforesaid.

Dyoscorides reports that the natures of poisons, are of sondrie degrees to
man's body: And this contrariety not only respects a most mischievous
operation for a peculiar quality in it self, but has also an indicible
property in his own substance, which is not only contrary, uncertain and
gathered from the most distemperat influences above, but of the most
contagious vaporations beneath, all which easily is known by a certain
ordinary mutation going between: so that all those which continently do not
pass over in agreement with nature, are contrary in their power to bodily
substance, although they do in either quality disagree. As many of these
unnatural poisons, are within themselves, of one proper quality, so many of
them are of two qualities, one disagreeing from another, and yet are they not
contrary in their seueall operative malice.

There are on the other side, many poisons which in their own proper qualities
resist again, and yet in their kind are not contrary: therefore some
extraordinary mutation may determine, and correct this only contrariety.

Yet I do greatly marvel that Auycen holds opinion, that all cold poisons
are wholly contrary to man's nature, in their kind and property, as that
they may not be corrected, or delayed.

Dyoscorides reports, that an old wife of Athens, made a contrary
experience hereof, transmuting the heath Cicuta, by little and little without
danger agreeable to purge her own nature. And Galen in his third book of
Simples the xxi. chapter does say, that all cold poisons, show their venom
not in nature, but in quantity, neither can they be altered from their
malignitie, nor yet pass over into substance.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, this opinion is very dangerous, neither can it
be true, that poisonsome medicines obtain their force, rather from powerful
quantity, then active malignitie: for the force of cold poisons being lost
under the action of heat, manifestly do infrigerate the body, which cannot be
more notably discovered, then if cold water being made of an accidental
heat, from a former property of cold, not only returns to nature, but
becomes more colder, then before.

So whosoever drinks cold medicines, being drawn into accidental heat, do
in their operation return to former property, and not only alter, in their
own power, but are preferred to a more greater manifestation. For oftentimes
cold fieame is so discerned, as if the urine be thick and clammie by
contemplation, or by some foreign corruption, has an usurping accidence of
heat, which although natural medicine has some operative inclinatio, nyet
there may be a texgiuer sation to their former property and power of
coldness, and thereby oftentimes greatly offend us, except the strength of our
nature ouertrauell the danger thereof, or that the quantity be small, or
because little heat is obtained and gotten in the virtue thereof, is the more
easier dejected.

We have an example of the Salamander, who has a continual property of fire,
and yet being of extreme natural power of coldness, extinguisheth and
quenches all fire. Even so this herb Cycuta and such like unconstant
poisons, have an outward affynitie with fire: yet the practice thereof
benummeth the most perfect heat of the body, to become uncertain and wavering.

Dyoscorides affyrmeth, that although artificial practice should delay this
herb Cycuta to work in a moderat property, yet will it return to a former
affliction and evil disposition in it self: Which easily may be perceived, in
that al cold poisons are of contrary natures to hot poisons. So both of them
are two dangerous contrarie^^es to the substance of the body: as also such
medicines which work beyond common course are poisons, and all such medicines
which hasten the disease to become more swift, sharp, and insult the spiritual
parts are po^sons. And all such medicines which disgrace the disease, are
ordinary and of high condignitie with nature. And all such medicines whith
purely frame and unite with the body, are prepreseruations for the help, both
of health and long life to the body.

Therefore in ministering of medicines, there is both an ordinary and an
extraordinary composition: ministration and operation. For medicines are
rather framed of an active, then passive nature. As Pepper or Mustard seed are
active: so wine and honnie are passive in operation.

Also there be other simples of doubtful property in their work. As the
Lettuce, which although Galen commends the property thereof, to be wholesome
against the heat of the the stomach, yet Theophrastus Paracelsus reports,
that it has an energiecall work to moderate, cool, and season the body in
the midst of hot infectious diseases, but neither Valerius Cordus, neither
the Pande^t, nor yet the Luminarie make any such rehearsal.

But Petrus Galiensis says, that both the Lettuce, and herbs of such like
virtue, draw upon the north Pole: as some more nearer, and some farther off,
and therefore in degrees they exceed one an other. And says, all herbs
whose properties are levied from the south hot, are mitigated, measured, and
equally compounded by an increment of the north ^ind.

And he further says, that all single herbs, work after the coasts of the
elements: except herbs of cold property, which of themselves have no
elemental attraction, the Fusun notwithstanding has a singular conflexion upon
them. And although it was before spoken in the first book of these
Temperaments that the Sun splendeth or diminishes her force upon all living
creatures, yet there must be understood, that the Sun has a permanent
reflection in her own power and nature, but only that the heat of the Sun is
styrred and provoked to be of greater strength in summer by means of certain
hot planets, which then have special domination in the elements. So on the
contrary, the coldness of the elements in winter do weaken and infeeble the
heat, and yet the sun has one like power both in winter and summer: so that
as the sun arris^th in heat, by the temperance of the year also the fruits of
the ground arise and ripen therewith: and as the sun with the course of the
year falls, so do the natural fruits of the earth recline.

Then are we rightly to conjecture, that the herbs of the field attract from
the elements an operative power in the universal estate of man's health: for
the herb Peperites has a wonderful and excellent operation, against the
commi^iall disease, called the falling sickness, and draws upon the full of
the moon in the east: and the said herb in growth is always ascendent and
discendent, with the increase and decrease of the moon. So also there is an
other herb called Scopa Regia, which draws a most high dignity from a
star, which follows the new moon, called Occulus Lunae, and is of right
virtue to heal a swelling congesled blood in the throat, called the kings
evil.

Petrus Galiensis says, the herb Dragon is of cold operation and draws a
virtue from the Lode star. The heat of the Sun without difference warmeth all
things, yet in deeper penetration of one thing more then another.

Herewithall it is a most excellent thing to consider the property of Honey:
the which honey is respected to be in the use of man in one degree, and in the
use of a Be in an other degree. For as the heat of the Sun is sincere and
pure in nature and property, so does it conioine with the course of stars
discending by a certain mellifluous dew, inseaseth it self upon the herbs
of the earth by attraction. Neither is it of right judgment that this honey, is
natural and indifferent to all the herbs of the earth, although the Be has
a general portion thorowout. Therefore Dyoscorides says, that the natural Be
sucketh the most mellifluous fruits of the earth. But the unnatural Beeroueth
and rangeth as well upon the one as the other, especially all wild and savage
weeds.

And yet as the Magnet or Lode-stone is vnforceable to attract upon every
complexion, so all sorts of herbs are not drawn from the Elements: for
their attractiue aptness many times fall out diversely, after the complexion
of men. For as there be herbs of thin and light operation, so there are thin
and light humors in men. And as there be thick and gross operations in
herbs, so are there also thick and gross humors in men. Therefore the
power of hot things, may not be adjudged by touching, neither yet understood
by reason, for that al things are diverse in operation. For as hot things are
not always thin and light, so thick things are not always cold: yet does it
commonly fall out, that solutiue medicines are always hot, sharp, and bitter.
But we may not justly affirm that all sweet medicines are hot, for that
bitter medicines are shadowed many times with outward sweetness, As Galen says
Sub melle venenum tegitur. Surely al hot things are of subtle extenuation, and
yet oftentimes through a hot substance in themselves, do grow into sleshie
thickness.

Hypocrates reports his help toward a young man which was ouergrowen with
fleshie thickness both of belly and other parts of his body, did
abundantly wash, bath, and soke himself in the midst of summer in cold
water: And whereas chiefly his face, and other parts of his body were
styffened, thickened and bound with cold humors, and for the exceeding
thickness of his skin, the deflation of heat was repressed, forthwith a
righteous experience took a prooffe. For that, fresh union and natural
collection of heat did follow.

This excellent temperance follows the elements by a natural repercussion of
all cold temperatures, into the sweet and medicionable springes of the earth:
for that the hot summer course, in the Elements has repressed all cold
temperaments of morning dewes, into the veins and heart of the earth, the water
springes become thereby potatiue, wholesome and medicionable, and both within,
as without the body of high operation. For now as the increase of heat is
hereby styrred up, so also the exteame coldness, and over great thickness of
the skin, conceiueth a free relaxation in the poores, whereas also both the
blood and breath were inwardly repulsed, so the one freely interfloweth the
veins, and the other has a temperate and equal property from the loonges.
And also the humors which were before half settled, do become now more
plentiful and are perfected into a regular order, and heat herewith
regenerated, does first spring up and forthwith return and strike back
again, thereby at length heat overcomes cold in the extreme and uttermost
parts, and permanently there does settle.

Galen does seem to call this repercussion, only the same repulsion, which is
made after the concoction of humors. Neither is it to be marvelled if heat
hereby, return more plentiful, both because the blood being increased and
renewed, the heat also must of necessity be increased.

Theophrastus Paracelsus says, I do esteem heat to be borne out more
evident and manifest to outward things by many repercussions, although no
increase of blood shall follow in outward things* for certain momentanie
repercussions may hinder blood any more to bend, yet it may not be said, that
the cause thereof happens in the ripeness of imperfect humors. For this cause
does it seem to come to pass after this manner, that blood cannot easily be
drawn, when it is chased from the outward plenty and fullness, uncertainly to
possess the inward parts: after which being again enforced to any outward
operation, draws a portion of humors to pursue those veins ever after, as
the old proverb is. Fluxus, fluxum prouocat.

Therefore it is a most excellent ornament to behold the signs of the
elements in all euacuations. For seeing inferior causes do express and
exercise the nature of superior causes, it stands with equity they should
be obeyed: Especially the tides of the sea, drawing upon the course of the
moon: the sun giving increase to the universal creation: The herbs having
an excellent, pure and secret use in the stars: The plannets having their
temperance or distemperance in the complexions of all things. So then it is a
most high assurance, that every sickness, which distempereth in offending
the life of man, ought to be considered upon, after the high temperance, or
distemperance of the elements, as well as the complexion of the patient. I end
to the laud of God and profit of christian health.

Thus ends the third Book of the Temperamentes.
The Lord made heaven and earth and all things that therein is, blessed are
the works of his hands. At my next convenient leisure three books more are
to come forth under one volume as follows. A book of the Distemperamentes.
An Apology to the Plurisies. A discourse upon the diseases in the Arteries.
FINIS.

