BIBLIOTHECA THEOLOGICA: OR, A LIBRARYE THEOLOGICAL containinge,

1. A general ANALYSIS or Resolution: 2. A breife ELVCIDATION, off the most
sacred Chapters off Elohim his Bible:
Drawn for the use off young Christians / specially off the poorer sort,
unable to purchase Variety off holy-men their wrytinges:

By HENOCH CLAPHAM.



Nihil primum perfectum.

IMPRINTED AT AMSTELRODAM,

Anno 1597.

THE PROEME.
Half A year together was I ernestly fol^^^ted to undergo the Analysinge of
God his sacred Book / and that but for the first heads off the Chapters. For
so long time I refused that attempt / though much was ofred for promouinge the
work / yet that help being cut off / I finally took pen and did some what
soc. But then thinkinge with my self that such A general Division would little
help without some Sub-diuision, I therefore subdivided some chapters. Yet me
thought / it should little to edify / except from obscure places in the text were
made clear / where upon I finally drew an Elucidation / such as it is.

At this my work I look that may should storm: disdayners off all men's
wrytinges but their own: specially / the Heretical sort off people: and no
Marvel though Satan belloe from their mouths / saying my Pen is as A Goade in
his sudes. Carpers do profane and snatch some times at Manner, somtymes at
Matter. For the Manner / I expect their snarlings specially at the Division:
some curiously as tyingme me to Dichotomie or partition into two: others that
less delight in that form, fallinge me for using it so much. Between them both
I have here walked / that so I might sanssy both partly, whom I knew it to be
impossible to satisfy wholy.

For the Matter, some will snarle at some few words, some at Doctrine. Off such
does Erasmus speak thus in his Antidore on Hieroms epistle to Heliodore: His
mos est, e toto libro quatuor aut quinque verba decerpere etc. It is the manner
off these persons to pick 4. or 5. words out off A whole book, and in these
to shoe by calumny the excellency off their Ingene. They animaduert not in
what times, to women, o^ what occasion, with what mind that man writ; nor
do they confer what preceded, what folovves, what in another place is
written on the same matter. Only they urge and press them 4. words: Against
them they move all their syllogisticall engines: they vvrythe, deprave, and
sometimes speak evil of the things they understand not.

Off this which Erasmus speaks / I off experience can speak this: In my
Bibles breife / I said that Elohim was the plural off El: and to the proper
Name Ehjeh, I suffired, I AM. In Scotland the learned excepted not against it
that I heard of: Mr. Brought on as sufficient for the holy tongue as any
publicly known off in Europe / he also could read it without stumblinge: but
2. or 3. englis he youths some off them hardly knowinge Beth from A Batle dor /
they behind my has because of them two words / did labor the disgrace off
Author and his book.

They (for I will not turn my speech to them though I speak off them) did not
for the first understand (or would not understand) what like scholars and
Christians charitable / they might have understood. When Hebrew Lexicons or
Grammarians do say that Jehovah is derived off hajah, To be, do they speak
properly? Hajah is not properly to be: but he has been: yet every scholar
knows what the speech means: so they might have thought that I meant Elohim
the plural came off El his Root: off which El comes also Eloha his
singular. That Elohim is said to com off El in english Strong, it so gives us
rightly to conceive both Elohlm and Eloha his singular in direct form off
Declenson. And as I spoke it / it helped to the understanding off Gen 17. 1.
where it is El-shaddai^, God alsufficient: not Eloah-shaddaj: and so off many
other places. The Declenson-deriual / no Child that had been two days lessoned
in his Declensons could de possibly ignorant off.

And whereas they would have Ehjeh to be the future time / I will, not the
present tense I am: then babble they knoe not what. Ehjeh ca^ neither be
restrained to time to com, time present / or time past: for as it is A proper
name off God / it is off all three times: and therefore (as Vatablus well
observes) John in Apoc. 1. 4. he expounds it by / which was which is, and
which is to come. The Thalmudists so understand it: and all Hebrews do by
Ehieh understand the eternity of God. The Septuagint turn Ehjeh asher Ehieh in
Exodus 3. 14. thus: Ego Eimi ho ^n: and their Interpreter, Ego sum qui sum.
Tremellius, Arias and such as translate it, I VVIL BE. they do it not for
tyinge men to that: and that they shoe by the other translation in their
margen-annotations. Hierom in his tennanes off God / and in his Bibles version
/ and all aancients do express it as I have. And ^ff A man set down one off
the 3. times and not all. 3. let the learned judge if I AM agree not rather
with the nature off God / to whom thing preter it and future are present /
then I ^^DE BEEN / or I WILL BE. And let the how sober spirited also judge (for
the spirit of the prophets must be subject to the prophets) if my annotatio^
there upon Ehjeh, do not more fully set down the nature off God / then the
future time would. Let the foolishnes past cawse them be more sparinge in
censouringe hereafter off words.

For Doctrine / as it is either Literal or Mystical / so also their Calumny
will be twofole. The Literal or Grammatical doctrine I here mean to be that
which at next had arises from Open text. At such doctrine I look to hear off
thunderclaps* from our english Dona^^^^es, Anabaptists, Arrians, and Sects
off all sorts: and no marvel / for / as I labor to hold fast / so they
labor to transgress the bounds off the (...): except off ancient heresy /
which they a new fur^ish. Against such doctrine they have made an insurrection
/ since my publishinge off the XII. Theological Axioms: nor was my Bibles ^r.
fre from their enuenonied tongue. I therein (from the consideration off / 2.
Cor. 3.) did affirm that the Judicial, Moral, Ceremonial laws were peculiar
to Canaan: but to us the letter removed / yet equity and spirit thereoff
remayninge, Some bear (who would only have Moses his Judicial laws established)
did wickedly give out that thereby I shut the maiestrate out off the Church
etc. For Ceremonial laws they knew that every one holds them abolished. For
the Moral / the ^leainge letter off them two tables is abolished / the former
scripture teaches: and so ^^. Beza with others Old and New understand it. As
for the state off the Judicial / I knoe none / that is not madly fond / but he
graunts they were peculiar to Ganaan. Mr. Calvin in his Iustitutions / ^ib. 4.
chapter 20. he teaches it at large: and in the 16. section he uses the word
peculiar which they carry at in me.

For Doctrine mystical / more reasonable sprites (it may be) will say
somthinge: and the rather because some late holy writers have disliked off
Mystical interpretation. Their reason is: Bapistes use it much for
establishing their matters. This reason indeed is no reason: for the Papists
use as much the Letter for their purposes: and neither Donatist, Anabaptist,
Arrian etc. but they call to the Bible and the letter of the Bible for only
discussinge their matters. Should we therefore reject the Bibles Such slender
reason has caused late factions Spirits to reject the ancient holy writers:
because ^omanistes use them: and such insufficient collection / has caused the
Svvenkfeldians to cast the Bible vnderfonte / and to lissen to the private
motions off their own fleshly sprite.

An / it is damgerous medlinge with mystical expositions: true ^s so. It Is
damgerous medlinge with two edged instruments (and the word off God is ^ two
edged sword) and damgerous to meddle with the Bibles bare letter. (...) or
yongones ca^ hardly meddle with the letter but with peril. Learn that off the
Iues and our ages Donatistes. And I would with Pithagoras his scholars they would
at first be five years silent: more ready to hear and slower to speak. Every
one should knoe ^eyr measure off faith and keep themselves within their limits
/ not medlinge with things to hy for them: Yet him that has some knowledge how
to handle A two edged sword / this is no bar to his medlinge with it.

One and the same spirit administreth diversely: to some abundance in the sense
Grammatical or literal: unto others A rauishment ut the sense mystical: nor
ought the One to despise the other. Yet this always understood / the Mystery
can never be builded safely / except the Grammar sense be first rightly laid:
for the Letter is the Ground and foundation to the Mystery. Which is green
heads did well look into / they would not easly wade in Allegorical,
Tropological, and anagogicall constructions / surder then first is by sad
discreet sprites administered unto them.

For Mystical senses necessarily lyinge hid under the letter or History / I
would men would not only read Greek and Latin Fathers / who herein solaced their
sowles: but also word go hear what reasons Moses Bar-kepha Syrian Bishop off
Bethrawan in his Commentary off paradise has concluded for repulsinge such
Calumny: where / amongst the rest he writes so: Except therein lay mystical
senses, from whence could the ancient Fathers, Prophets and other holy men
off old knoe Christ to com: and therein be so solaced? Finally, if ire should
with these heretics be so minded, off a troth we fall into Iudaisme: for the
lues (who are void off the holy sprite) they embrace no senses but what is
corporal and gross. And indeed to understand the scripture only literally /
it is but gross Iudaisme: and ^^ not liftinge it up hyer then A human
Cronicle / that contains no further wisdom then bare letter affords. Paul
drawinge Sarah and Hagar, Ismael and Isaac into Allegorn / he understood
otherwise: and the Author to the Hebrews / who calls the Law A shadovve off
good things to com: John in his Apocal^ps: the Prophets on Moses / and the
Apostles on All / they conceived off scripture otherwise. So Much for Adverse
Spirits.

As for Freindly Spirits / some off them it may be / will be making question
touching Manner and Matter: but not as the former with purpose to abuse the
work. A godly Ma(...) Scotland hearing that my foresaid Breif-booke had
english Verses in it / she for ^^ season refused to read it: ^n some such like
enough will here be stumblinge at the Chapters Arguments because they are
verse. For the proud Donatist that termed them ^ymes and Trumyeries (though I
could justly twite such to the judgment off their own faction) etc. and for
the english Anabaptist that called them Playeclike things / I will not answer
the fool according to his foolishnes least I be like unto him: but to the
holy spirited I speak thus: The learned do knoe that sundry books off
scripture are off Poetical shape / consistinge off apt Number and some off
Kythmed form But where our language admits the Kythme in the end off A
Measure / that holy tongue gives it in the begininge. One Instance do take in
the 119 psalm. First / it is divided into 22. parts according to the number
off the Hebrew Alpha^et / every part answeringe to one Letter: secondly / every
part consists off 8. verses / and every verse with the same Letter with which
that Octouary begins. So that herein (as also in other places) there is not
only verse / but also Kythme / and that with admirable elegancy These therefore
that condemn Poetry because some profane it / they may for like abuse as well
reject other excellent guiftes off the Spirit.

^t my form off Division the Learned may say some thing / because it utters
no Art: butas the Division it self is homely / so the branches thereoff not
uttered in Logical terms. These must knoe / that I write specially for the
erudition off unlearned Christians: by whom I have sometimes been s^^^bd for
speakinge so darkly. Nor do I expect otherwise to be entreated off some such
(though godly) to whom I must also say: though I writ specially for them / yet
not only for them. And therefore / what unto them seems difficill at first /
that shall be made unto them more easy by more readinge. As for words in
anotherr language / let them leap over such / and if they be vnenglished after
/ the thing concerns them not much.

Touching the Matter / it is but an vnbowellinge off the sacred book off
Elohim: and that is don first by comparinge scripture with scripture: secondly
/ by introducinge the Ancient holy writers for confirmation off my judgment in
things of most waighte: that so it may not be demed mine own private fancy.
And least I should play the Theyfe to wisdom (for so Clemens Alexandrinus. 1.
Stromaton calls such) I have ordinarily put down his name from whom I
borrowed it. I could with Others have passed by them unmentioned / and so have
flowen abroad with other men's feathers as if they had been my own: but I
detest that paid to be thought to walk alone. Our Ages heretics that are unto
me contrary minded / they for their alone walkinge do commonly allege Elijah:
saying he was somtymes alone. But if the liars would search the scriptures they
should knoe / that notwithstanding he se himselff alone in Israel, yet he could
not be ignorant that the state was otherwise in Judah: for then good Iosaphat
reigned. Nor yet in Israel was the hali seed extinguished / as the Lord does
teach the Prophet / but many there were that did neither inward nor outward
homage unto Baal. To say that the Church off God many age has been holy
invisible / it is A dayngerous introduction to all heresy.

The Ancient Fathers (Greek and Latin for the first 600. Years, but
specially for the first 400.) they are unto me so dear / as (after all the
trial and knowledge I have taken off, all Sects) I cannot se how I ought to
swarne from them in any one point essential. what heresy is there in these
days whose grounds they then ouerturnd not? Our English Brownisme is but flat
Donatisme: he that knoes the Son may fetch the Father out by his face in the
Arguments off Parmeneanus, Petilianus, Cresconius the Grammarian / and such
other Vermin strangled long since by holy Augustine. Large Anabaptisme grew
also out off Donatus: for making all other ministry void besides theyrs / it
must then follow that only themselves could administer Baptism. The holy
Father then tells Parmenean lib. 2. cap. 12. that they ought as well make void
the Sacrament off ministerial ordination (for if th^one was good / both stood
good: if the one void / the other also) and so Donatus and his sectary
Ministry / who had and could have no other Ordination then first they from them
/ that also should be void: and so themselves deliver no baptism rightly. Our
Donatistes must learn also / if their Ordination in the English church be
fully frustrate / then also their Baptism: If Baptism remain good / then
also the Ordination. And if the Ordination be fully nothing / then they are
like for ever to minister without Ordination: except private laynien may impose
hands: which is flatly false* as I have showed in Our book off In Conclusions.

As for Artianisme / Iudaisme and other our Factions their doctrines / not only
Augustine, but many others have cut the stringe off their bow: that if the
Deuel were not on men / their Bow should have been burnt or ever it had been
stroong again. But not to digress far from the purpose of my Proeme: the
holy Reader must not be offended / though in this Matter off Matters I consult
with those Ancient my Betters: who have so valiantly fought the Lord Battles /
and sealed the sanctifying truth with their latest breathinge. There is not A
Sectary in these days but he reionceth in the writings off his own faction:
and why should not the faith full be as careful to uphold the Men^ornall off
the just. Let us be faithles hereyn / yet God will have his own Captains
(though dead) their Ensigns displayed in his temple / when the memorial off
the wicked shall rotte. Show me One off Arrius, or Donatus, or Pelagins, or
any off the sophistical ancient Heretics their Books if now can. No / God
has cased them from the fate off the earth: that were it not the holy Fathers
do mention them and their stuff (as the sacred scriptures remember Achan,
Judas and their stealth) we should not have known so much as their rotten Names.
This Argument (if there were no more) it urges me to celebrate the Memorial
of the anncient ^ighteous: verily here withal beleiuinge / that my writings
(though off thowsands most unworthy) they shall ourline the Fartions: and be as
an Aegles fether to other feathers / A final consumption: For every plant our
heavenly father has not plained / it shall be pulled up by the ^ootes.

Whereas sometimes I alleadg some Jew or profane writer / it is but in such A
case as the parti may without prejudice be a fit witness. Hierom (or serom, all
is one) being off Ruff^nus unto Magnus charged with the like as with ^^ryme /
he unto the Romayne Grator alleges Paul's practice / there withal sainge /
that he first (according to the law) pareth their nails / washes them ^^^
and then why may he not matry with the captine of the Gentiles: and also by
occasion take by Goliahs sword for cuttinge off the uncircumcised head off the
Owner. what he might say / I also for my self may say: whereunto I add: unto
the pure are all things pure / but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving /
nothing is pure: but even their minds and consciences are defiled.

The Scriptures I here allege for Canonical, they are these off the Old and
new testament which are usually off Protestant Churches received for the Only
Canon or Rule off Faith. For the Old testaments books there is chiefest
controversy and disconte^tment. Some off the Books called Apocrypha are by
Rome and some others made regular for Faith: off us not: and good reason why.
Josephus in his first book againstte Appion has this, There are not vvih us
thovvsands of books discrepant and fightinge in themselves, but only bare two
and twenty. And then A little after he tells the Atheist Appion, that the
writings from Arrayezxes time till then ( these were our Apocrypha) there was
not like faith to be given unto them / as unto the former 22, because with them
there was not like certain succession of Prophets. Origin on ps. 1. and
Eusebius from him / do witness that the Hebrews only acknowledged, 22. Hierom
not inferior to any for Hebrews iudments he in his Prologo Galeato does tell
us the same / sainge that the 22. books (answeringe the 22. letters) they were
thus called* and into three Orders disposed.

1. Breshith. Eenes^s. 2. Velleshemoth. Erod. 3. Vaijkta. ^euit. 4. Vaidabber.
Nomb. 5. Elleh haddebarim. Dent. 6. Iehoshuag^^en-Nu^. Ios. 7. Shophtim. Judges
8. Shemuel. Ruth. 9. Melacim. Sam. 1. and 2. 10. Ieshagniah. Kings 1. and 2.
11. Iirmiah. Isa. 12. Iechezekel. Ier. 13. Tere-gnasar. Ezekiel. 14. Job. the 12.
15. David. less proph. 16. Mishle. Psalm. 17. Koheleth. Prou. 18. Shir
hasharim. Eccl. 19. Daniel. Cant. 20. Dibre haiamim. Chro. 21. Gnezra. Esrah.
22. Ester. Nehem.

Under the which he suffireth: Quicquid extra hos est etc. whatsoever is
besides these books / they are to be ^ut amongst the Apocrypha. And touching
the Apocryphal writings / Augustine thus writes in his 15. book off the City
off ap. God and chapter 23. Omittamus igitur earum scripturatum fabulas quae
Apocryphae noninantur etc. Let us pass by the fables of those Scriptures
which are called Apocryphal, because that their hid begininge appeared not
to the Fathers, from whom unto us the Authority of the true-speaking
Scriptures, by most sure and evident succession has com. For in the Apocrypha,
although there be found some verity: yet by reason of many untruths, they are
not of Canonical Authority. Ruffinus in his exposition off the Symbol /
affirms the former books to be the Canon off the old testament / from whose
fountain we were to draw the drinck of God. Some off thy rest he says were
Ecclasiasticall / but not Canomicall.

But touching this point I need say no more / saying our vvhitakres in his
first off the six Questions controuerted with Bella^mine, has set such A fire
in their Coat / as I troe they shall neuerin England but smell off the smoke
hereafter. But had neither late nor ancient Christian writers ever disclamed
them / it is sufficient that Zion (mother church off the Gentiles) she never
Named them. He^ers tongue they knew not, Judah nor Israel ever cir^^m^cised
them: nor had the Apostles ever commandment t^ baptize them. Some off them as
Ecclesiasticus, VVisdome, Baruch, Machabees, they may be used well / provided
not for rule off faith: but for Esdras, Tobit: Susanna, Bell, ludeth, I knoe not
if so they be dreams: and for the fragmentes ^rep in under the name off
Manasse^, Ester and Daniel they openly shoe themselves to be straingers in
Israel. The Ancient Church never Acknowledged: the New testaments Church has
less cawse to receive them.

As for the New testaments books there is betwixt Protestant and Papist no
controversy. Both then and we receive as the holy Fathers received / the 4.
Euangels, Acts, Paul his 13. Epistles: to the Hebr. 1. James one Ep: two off
Peter: 3. off John: one off Jude: and the book off Apocalypse which is the
seal off the whole. Our unity for the books one: god grant that his spirit
may once for the senre thereoff cawse both off us therein to be One. For
Arrians, E^tychians, Anabaptists, and the residue off those dregs and most
filthy off washinges off the Church off the Gentiles / they reject some off the
lynks off God his golden chain / or else trample both the sacred bracelets
underfoot. The Papists add unto the Canon (A more tolerable transgression)
these detract or utterly destroy the Book off Elohim, A transgression
intolerable: fitter to be scourged with that lash wherewithal Jesus whipped
the theiues out off his fathers house / then to be reasoned about pro and coir,
as our savior did with the Temples Doctors at another season. To answer such
according to their foolishnes / it does first make them proud: secondly / it
rawseth us seem foolish. They will hear no Ancient Christian writer speak:
what hope have we they will hear us. They can turn all Auntients by / in
saying: you propound unto us the judgments of men: I answer them: But of such
men as had the spirit of God. Do not they propound to us the judgments of Men?
Yea / off heretical Arrius, Manes, Donatus, Serueitus etc. The Svvenkfeldians
ran say: All is but the indgements off men / and so they will hear no man: but
listen to the suggestion off their own spirit. We set no man's judgment above
the scripture / but reuerrnce their interpretations who have the Spirit off the
scripentes. We knoe that the best Man has his Ignorance and error / but
having the spirit off Jesus he holds A true foundation and finally conquers:
whereas the Hereti^^^ slip from the Corner stone Jesus and are ground unto
powder. Such we must answer in Sword: The spirit of the Prophets, must be
subject to the prophets, and that is semelynes and Order: if any will be
contentious, the Church of God has no such Custom: but he that is ignorant,
let him be more ignorant: 1. Cor. 14.

A year and A halfes labor I have taken about the 5. books off Moses. That I
have to communicate unto God his Church here and there dispersed / if Such be
the good pleasure off God. About the residue I am not idle: but Moses will be
sufficient for one reasonable volume. I have labored because it should pass
the press for public vtility / but I smell now at the very beginning off the
books outgate / that not only Sectaries, but Sectarie Favorites will be no
furtherance herein. What then My God he knows that I herein seck the Glory.
off his name / in the edifiyng his poor people / by propounding to them / what
first he has manifested to me. And he knoes that I would have every work off
mine to perish as an untimely birth / the continuance whereoff might prejudice
his Church: the issue therefore off all / I refer to his will / his fatherly
will. I labor to discharge duty imposed upon me / if others not only neglect
duty enjoined on them / but also shall oppose to duty in others: I say no more
but this: the Lord rebuke Satan.

If any good Christian except at the work for over weak and unworthy so
excellent A subicet / I answer: Every one off Israel cannot cast at an puch
with Benjamin. David had three worthies beyond the rest: and 30. more excellent
then the multitude / but inferior to the 3: if I bring but some what with the
meanest off the lower rank / god will accept off it as worthy / though in my
self unworthy. Some offered to the Tabernacles work Gold / some Gemnies / and
othersom but Badgers skynnes and Goats hair / so my offringe serve to any
Holy use: though not to the most Holy, I shall be glad: for I had lever to stand
on that house his threshold then to dwell in the Tabernacle off ungodliness.

This I knoe / that sad discreet and humbled sprites / they will value the
Labor by the mind off the Labourer / who more would / if more he could: as
for our Britanick sectaries / I only yet knoe / that whatsoever they snarle at
secretly / they dare controuert nothing openly. So my travels may be approved
off the Lord his people I have that I would: though wherein it is possible / I
covet peace with the world. Let the Righteous smite me / it shall be A benefit:
let him / rebuke me and it shall be as Sontraygne oil not lost on my head. Not
but I have else learned / that Shimeyes railinges shall be turned unto the best
of such as are called according to God his purpose.

But in the heel off my proeme / let me unto the young Christian Student
exhibit some Direction / for profitinge by readinge mine and others their
writings.

1. It is ordinary with People to give them sel^e^ after Nouelty in writings
humayne ^^ divine: but without any great pains taking in the holy book of
God: or else through a proud disdain of vsinge other holy men their hands and
helps / they only cast ey unto the holy Cano^. The first error proceeds of
Profaneness: the second off proud superstition. Between these two vices
consists Virtue: A right use of Both. And this is do^ / first by having a
recourse to the holy Bible: secondly by reading other men's writings: human /
for humanity: divine for Divinity. And off writers divine: first to se what? o
holy friend writes / secondly what an unholy adversary concludes: for without
readinge the Adversary / thou shall want much assurance / what and how to think
and speak off such.

2. But thus readinge / all shall be but a gatheringe of falsehood and a loosinge
off Truth / if first in humility thou ron not by Prayer unto the God off truth
Ad Light. The poor and humble spirited / he will fill their hand and heart with
every good thing / but the proud and rich he will se^d empty away. The lack of
this orderly course is cawse / that every Heretic thinks his heresy in the
Bible: whereas the blessed word is without shadow off chainge / as God himself
is: Yet most off that hellish brood cry / scripture / scripture / and nothing
but scripture: although it is far enough from purposinge to play the Baude to
proud harlot heresy. Others sekinge themselves in Ecclesiastical writers /
they neither have better success: for Rome against Luther, He against them /
and others against them both / they think the godly Fathers make for them. If
men can bend God his golden reed / no marvel though they can bow and break
the Leaden squ^^e of men. Co^sideringe the dainger so many ron into / I troe
men need to pray before they read / that so with the Be they may from that
f^oure draw honey, from whence the Spider draggeth his poison.

He that Reads / Notes / Mediates without much prayer / is much his own Foe:
and he that attempts it without all prayer / he is passinge profane. This has
cawsed me more then once to wonder at some men: who (co^sideringe their
judgment) me thinks in their Library they should not pray: and yet considering
their othergates carriage / methinks they should pray: specially saying they
study from writers Old an New / Popish and Protestant etc. The opinion off such
is this: viz. It is symply unlawful to preach or Pray in Synagogues / and yet
make no scruple to study for their church exercises / and that in A Synagogues
Library: which book cloister must be as deeply in Idolatry (if not deper) as
any part off the Temple. Pray there methinks they should / and yet consideringe
the former opinion / methinkes they should not. For my part (I praise God for
it) I still have learned / that all the Creatures of God are to me sanctified
by the word and prayer: and therefore laufull to hold up pure hands every
where, and that vvithhout wrath and doubtinge: as also that is is A doctrine
of Deuels to say, touch not, taste not, handle not, all which perish with the
vsinge: having indeed A shevve of vvisdome, but not to be observed of those
that are risen with Christ from under the power of the Law.

As thou Couets therefore to have God his spirit to guide the in tryinge off
all things to retain that is good / do pray wheresoever thou reads / studies
/ meditates and that to this effect.

Heavenly Father, I sinning together with my Parents Adam and Heuah, I so
brought A Vale of darkness and spiritual blyndnes upon my mind, the ey of my
soul: and the ey being dark, how great must be my darkness? For thy Sons sake
my blessed savior Christ Jesus, do by the power of thy sprite (thy
illuminatinge and sanctifying sprite) dispell this Egiptian like darkness and
foggie mystes that hinder my poor soul in the work of my nevv-byrth. Call
Light out of my Darkness, and fix in the firmament of my heart, Light for the
Day, and Light for the Night, that so I may be able to discern times, seaso^s:
spirits, doctrine: whereby I thy poor Creature may be enabled to glorify the
my Creator. For if, svveet father, thy spirit do not lead me into truth, I
shall but pollute and profane all the means of saving knovledge and holiness:
for Christ thy Son his sake, do not therefore leave me now to mine own sense
and coll^ction, for then I perish and vanish away in myn^ ^vvne imaginations:
but as thou haste promised to be found, to open and to give to them that seek,
knock and crave: so be with me now thy own handy-vvorke, who seek, knock
and crave in the name of Jesus remission of all my vnvvorthinesses, and A
being further enlightened in the knowledge of thy will and works, for the
furtherance of that Nevv-vvork thou in fre-mercy have begone in me. Amen. Svveet
father, Amen. for the glory of thy Sons name put upon me, Ame^.

To like effect pray / or else do hold thy lewd eyes back from polluting the
words / and works off our God. Nor do thou pray / but first purge thy heart:
for the pure in heart shall se god: as for the sacrifice off the wicked / it is
abomination to the Lord. And so besuchinge the Lord his blessinge to accompany
my labors / I commit the Sequel to the reading off well disposed spirits /
whom the Lord do guide unto good for ever: Amen.

In the Begininge, in Engl.
So called, not only because the first word is ^oe: but a so, for that it
delivers the Begininge of all things.

Generation, in Engl.
So called, because it lays down, the generation of Heaven and Earth with
their furnitures.

Argument: Chap 1. Great Elohim of Nothing makes all, Which we by name of
Creature / aptly call.
Division of the text.
HErein principally considerable / the of spring of all things existinge:

I. First in the Cawse: and that is Elohim, the Creator:

II. Secondly, in the thing Cawsed (and that is the Creature) in the residue of
the Chapter.

I. The thing cawsed, is, First A Lump of Matter properly Created (because it
is made of Nothing) and this is set down, 1. in the whole. under the words
heaven and earth, verse. 1: then in the 2. verse. in the courser part of that
Lump, under the word Earth. And this is described, 1. from the rarenes of his
form ( it was void and had darkness upon the deep) 2. from the Conseruer of
his Being: namely, the Spirit moved upon the waters.

II. The second kind of Creature cawsed, it has his Being from the former,
either Immediately (as the Elements, unto verse. 11.) or Mediatlie, as the Mixed
Creatures, thence to the end.

1. The Elements are of two sorts: the 1. superior and light (as FIre and
Air) of whom and their offices, verse. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.

II. The second sort Inferior and heavy (as Water and Earth) thence unto
verse. 11.

I. The Mixed Creatures, are either void of Life:

II. Or possessed with life.

I. These be void of life, are: 1. Earth crescents, verse. 11. 12. 13.

II. Secondly, Heaven adjuncts, verse. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

I. The Creatures possessed with life, are: 1. Irrational creatures* verse. 20.
21. 22. 23. 24. 25.

II. Secondly, Creatures rational: thence to the end.

ELVCIDATION of the Chap. 1.
Verse. 1. In the beginning, Elohim made. The Septuagint (least the Greeks should
think it a Parase of disgrace, in fore placing any wo^des before, God: They
therefore turned it into Greek thus: God in the begininge made etc. As
witnesses Ben Gorion, lib. 1.

Elohim (God) the plural of ^loha and EL. it propunderth unto us the mus^ery
of Father, word and Sprite. The word Bata, (created) being of the singular
Number, it pulls us back to an Essence. One. By which distinct 3. (contrary
to Sabellins) and yet but One (contrary to (...)) was created Heaven and
Earth: that is that Chaos and indigest rude confused matter (as Lactantius and
others call it) out of which Mass* other Creatures arise. Augustine, and some
^^chynustes from him, they speak of an Antecedinge Matter called hyle: which
Egidius de vadis (Cap. 4. dialog. philos.) defines, That which betvveene
Som^thing and Nothing is perceived. But seeing that is rather A Perception then
Conception (potius Idea animi, quam quid materiale) I leave it.

This Matter from the holy ghost his phrase, I understand to be twofold: 1.
heavenly: 2 Earthly, From which two all sorts of creatures succedinge are
deduced Hebr. 11. 3. In which matter is an aptitude to ^oe and Suffer (called
Nature) by which Creatures are said to be such and so by inclination, or by
Natures ^nstinct: which Nature (by subtle conceit) to called the first
Creature.

The Efficient Cawse of this Chaos is Elohim (the Father, Word and Sprite
eternal, immense and therefore vndefutable) which Mo^er of Moue^s the
Philosophers groping after, Some with A^a^imander called him Infinitum: Some with
Chius Metro^er ^ termed him, ple(...) and mane: Some the Being of Beinges Some
came down ^^sely and entitled him by such and such A creature in heaven or in
Earth: but because (I think) they understood that the Being of Beinges had
being in every Creature: of which mind was Mar^ ^ainge louis omnia (...) as
also (...)hylus when he cries out: la(...) (...), (...): Coelumque and (...)
and (...) s^pta.

Verse 2 And the Earth, Leauinge the Heavenly Matter he now describes the
Earthly. And the Earth was ^ohu and Boh^. Some de^ue Toha of T^han Desolation:
some of Iehom ^ g^^lfe or darkness: both good. Do thou shut thy eyes close and
tell me what in mind or Conceit thou sees? A swallowinge wast darkness, So I
conceive here of Toha. The other wrod, Boh^ (void) Pagni^e defines to be. The
Form which grueth being to Matter. Herein then lies the Matter and his
Internal form. The external form. I may call the Figure of this Lump, by
the which it appeared outwardly, and that was Darkness ouerspreadinge. The first
2000. Years from the Creation* the Iues call Tohu, from this place and
consideration.

The Lump thus formed* the^e Sits upon the waters thereof (the waters
naturally lighter) the Spirit. as an Hen fo^inge the Egg, for^oduringe the
followinge creatures. Jesus He sanctifying the waters ( Math 3 10) for
Baptismes use, lo the spirit (in form of A Dove: some think of A Pillar but
their thought intolerable, seeing no Greek copy ever had for: pe(...) written
for pe(...), se Chyt(...) on Ioh 1.) he ouershadoweth Jesus, (...)ing over the
waters for the M^sticall produceme^t of more excellent creatures then were the
former. Cursed therefore the Ca^a-paydistes, that will not hope infants of the
faithful sacrified from the womb, 1. Cor. ^. 14. as were Jeremiah and John
Baptiste. The Cauillers who by Spirit would understand vvynd, they speak
besides book, for that Creature yet had not his being. Ben. joch a^ calling
it the spirit of Messiah, he may set such Christians to school.

Verse. 3. Then Elohim said. Elohim having with the begininge of time (and time
is A number of Motion) effected the Matter ^oelestiall and terrestrial. Moses
in the next place passes to procedents visible. I say visible, to distinguish
the following creatures from ^^ visible creatures before the others produced.
These Invisible ones, I understand to be ^ugelicall principalities and powers
Colos 1 16. who are denied by Gregorius (from they^ precious stones, E^ek 28
13) to be of 9. several orders: the 10. place being that from which Lucifer
and his damned cr^e are fallen, to the filling of which place the m^sticall
body of Jesus is a^otted. The like doctrine does Origin deliver from the
parabolicall t^th gr^ate ^ound b^ the woman seking. These Angels all of them I
deem most likly to be created in the first da^ together with the Light, because
they are called Angels of light. Against this point in my Bibles Brief, A great
scholar in S. has opposed, by report of one of his principal hearers. His
opposition is delivered in this his Ariome: Quicquid Natura excellentius, id
creatione poster^us: that is latter in order of Creation, which is in nature
more excellent: and therefore says he ( A te go) the Angels must be last of
creatures created. Against his judgment I will not oppose waters Aun^ient and
Now, but against his physical Ar^ome I oppose Meta-phisicall order, order
divine. What if I should affirm woman (though latter created) to be inferior
in nature to man, would no subtle disputer take my part? But I oppose Moses in
the former speech Heaven and Earth, giuinge the heavens matter the first place:
and I trow that is in Nature more excellent then this. Moses closely passing
over their Creation and the fall of some, these things are to be opened by the
succeding light of scripture. They therefore termed Angels of Light, I se not
why they might not (as most probable) have their Being together with the Light:
and if produced out of the first lump, then out of the heavens (not earths)
Nature Besides that ( Ioh. 8. 44.) pointing out the Deuel of Deuels, by whom
the other apostate angels were murdered, the charge ( from the begininge) can be
but over straightly tied only to His murdring of Man in the 6. day. As in Man
kind though but two, One was first in transgression, so the phrase S^tan and
De^el (considering the infinite Legions of them) it may easily, persuade (at
least not with unlikeness) that Some One of the Angels was first in
tra^sgression, and so the murdrer of the rest: and properly (their fall being
in the first day) He so ^ murdrer from the begininge. Q^icquid must therefore be
turned into Aliquid: and his Ar^ome must admit a Caution.

Out of Darkness Elohim fetches Light. If one Lemuristes (Lemares are in engl.
^obgoblins or night sprites) will have this Light ^o be Christ, then by like
proportion must affirm darkness to be the Deuel: and so, out of the Deuel then
fetch their Christ. John in his Ghospel affirms that Light he speaks of to be
the vvoid and God, by whom every Creature existing was made. By the word of
the father is this Light, 1. Created, 2. approved for good.

From the Effects we must turn back to consider their next cawse. The Light is
an Effect of the Elementall fire working by the (...)e. The Generation of Light
is then by fire (the Agent) and the ^ure, the patient: the light it self as the
child conceuied. Thus by the more known thing the Effect, we find out that is
less known, the Elemetns of Fire and ^^re. The Elementalsl fire is most hot
and dry (so is the Complexion Choler: the East wynd: and summer quarter) and
therefore it draws by exhalations from below which coming into the uppermost
Region of the Air, the matter there is turned into Comets, fury shootings
etc. But stayinge in the Middle Region, it is turned there (by reason of his
cold) into some waterish cloud, afterward by the Sun dissolved, it Comes
down again in ^ayne, if the Cloud be naturally dissolved: But in Snow, if
the clowd be not orderly melted, speciallly if it be wynd shaken much: Or else
in the lower part of that Region it is turned into ^aile. Vapors but a little
drawn up, is easily turned into Frost or Dew.

The Air (next Element in lightness) is moderatly hot and moist, unto him is
compared the complexion sanguine: the South wynd, and Spring Season. Some have
demed the vvynd and Air all One. The wynd being Dr^ not Moist, it argues the
contrary. The wynd is whot and dry (of nature with the fore) consisting (for
Matter) of such qualified vapors, and drawn up up strength of Sun, (as A
straw by the heat of Ieat) but coming into the Middle Region of the Air,
they are repulsed by cold Meteors or vapors, and underneath them they have
exhalations propulsing forward and upward: by reason of which doble opposition
(being not able to ascend or descend directly) they break out in the sides and
so circuits the inferior Region of the Air. Thus the Air has his 3.
Regions, and in every of them are Creatures (termed of the learned / Meteors)
effected.

The Light is termed day: the Darkness going before, is termed Night. Saying
Darkened a privation of Light, properly. The E^en-tydes darkness and the
Morrow-tides light, they constitute the first Day. The day consisting thus of
his 24. hours, it is called the Day Natural: but the day (accomptinge from
the Sun his rizinge above the earth, until his going down again from our
^emisphere) it is termed a day Artificial. The Ancient Romans begone and
ended there Natural day at Midnigyht: and so do ordinarily all natural
Magitians, by giuinge that planet the first hour in the Night before, which is
the governing planet of the day after. The Arabians (Ioh. de Sacr. in comput.
eccles. begin and end there Natural day with the Midday: but the Iues
according to this place of Moses begin with the Night. If any ask me when we
that live in the new creation ( heb. 12. 27. Isa. 66. 22.) should begin our
Natural day? I answer: The Night and Old things are passed: the Sun of
Righteousness rose out of his tomb in the Morning and so went forth preachinge
that Day and the night followinge. Paul so preached Day and night (^^t. 20.)
and Night and day. The first creation begone in darkness, the second begone with
light.

Thus out of Darkness natural, god by his ghospel has shined in our hearts, 2.
Cor. 4. 6. calling light out of that Tohu: Order out of that Confusion: and of
old made us new creatures. As the first (or natural) light is effected by the
Fire and ^pre, so is this second (or supernatural light) effected in our
hearts by the spirit of life compared for his working unto fire and the A^re.
Saying then we are of the Day: let us walck as in the Day, that when the Lord
of the house shall com suddenly in the Night, our darkness may be light in the
lord.

THE SECOND DAY.
Verse. 6. 7. 8. Again Elohim said. Again (in another vicissitude of time)
Elohim proceeds by the Spirit and rod of his mouth (Ps. 104. 30.) makeinge more
creatueres, In this Day he creates and constitutes Rak^^ga (of Rakagn to extend
or unwrap) commonly translated Firmament. The Firmament properly is that heaven
or Sphere (in number the 8. upward) wherein the fixed stars are. This
signifies an orderly vnwrapping and spreading out, namely, of the whole
heavens as A Curtain, Ps. 104. 2. These heavens (a more excellent Natural
then many things below and made after, contrary to my adversaries Ariome)
they cannot (for any thing I se) mean an extension of the air: though One
(otherwise of much learning and worthy much reverence) have so written. For
the Air must in the former Day be expanded, else how could the fire by it have
effected such orderly Light, as worthily might be termed Day? where he thinks
it must be so, because the Airs region contains the uppermost waters, I
answer: The upper waters in the Airs Region are only such, as (all
philosophers huntaine and divine grant) are first exhalations from the Earth
and weaters below, drawn up by heat and congest into a cloud: finally
dissolved and sent down to the Parent below. These Cloudwaters had no place
in this creation: and this, the same learned man may observe the better from
his translating of Gen 2. 4. 5. thus: And there was no man to ^ill the earth,
or vapor ascending from the earth, for vvateringe the universal face of the
Earth.

These waters therefore are vpheld by the heavens, and by that Celestial
vnwrapped web are separated from the waters under the heavens, whither in the
Air or Earth: like enough to be the waters that drowned the old world: who,
besides the rain, rused down by openinge of heavens wyndowes, Genesis 7. 11. and
8. 2. The learned Chuo^^dus Pellicanus denies these superior waters to be
Spiritual substances, so called for their number or purity. If he had said,
then mystically import such substances (for the lower import earthly people,
^en. 17. 15.) I thinck he had been never the mark / and so Orige^ mystically
applies these waters unto such holy People as have their conversation in the
heavens: but that these waters are really such substances, it cannot be: for so
the Grammatical or ^^terall story of Creation should be ouerturned. Whereas. 1.
we have propounded the plain letter: 2. the spiritual mystery under the veil
of the literal story.

The waters before confused, and now and thus digest into O^der ^ Law is
imposed on the firmament or Spheriall expansion* for standing ^ partition wall
between these waters, psa. 148. 4. As it were an Aatonicall priest for
diuidinge between people and people: and so the Eueninge and Morninge is the
second Day.

What need this second, and afterward the third, fourth, Fifte and sixth
repeat of Eueninge and morninge for making up so many several days* seeing
the Evening and morninge was the first day? It was necessary for the
perfecting of the work literal and mystical. 1. the Eueninge and Morning
having ron once the glass of A Natural day, they could not have don that
again for effectinge another Day, except Elohim had again turned Times Glass
for A new number of Motion: 2. Nor after the experiment of one ages spiritual
Darkness and Light, could there be A second, third, fourth, fi^te sixth
vicissitude of that wo^ke mystical, were it not that the Decre of god has
sealed to every such distinct age and his work. In six Natural days was all
the ^^ch frame and se^ely furniture of heauein and earth effected: and in the
world his 6. ages shall the whole work of Justice and Mercy be com to his
period. The 7. Day it has not this speech of Evening and Morning to the
effecting of it, because as the 7. day was Sabaot, so the 7. age of the world
shall put an end to the spiritual and mystical Evening, ^eu. 10. 7. and 11.
15. Happy is he that man sing that songne, the kingdom of the world is Our
Lords and his Cristes and he shall reign for evermore.

THE THIRD DAY.
Verse. 9 10. 11. 12. 13. Elohim said again. In this days work observe, 1. the
Collection and dispos(...) of the waters under heaven, by reason whereof 2. the
dry Land (...)steth up his head, that before (as it were) had been covered
with the sacramental wates: this Land called Earth: the waters, Seas: which
Earth is naturalized unto procreation of Herbs and Trees. Twice in this third
days work [first in the Division of waters and earth, secondly in the Earths
fructification] Elohim sees the work Good. In the second day it is not once
said, he savve it good: not because it was not good, but because of the
Mystical partition wall dividing between people and people (as between Jew,
and Gentile) closely thereby teaching all sorts of people / that it is [ kata
tj, respectiuely] not good that the Lord his sheepfold is not yet One: but then
it shall be perfectly good when both sorts are gathered into One unto One Pastor.

The waters in this Day remain barren: but the earth conceiues and brings
forth Twyns Herbs and Trees in their kinds. And here to the full view of the
other two Elements, water and Earth. Water is passive to the Air, as the Air
passive unto Fire: and it is ^^ Nature Moist and Cold. So is the phlegmatic
complexion / the westw^nde, and wynters quarter. The water is of a Globe like
form / as may not only appear by Drops / but also by sailinge the Seas, which
Io. de Sac^obusto in his book of the Sphere proves by plain Demonstration.

The Earth is patient to the water, as the water to the Air, and it to the
Elementall fire: and so the Earth A female to All, as the Fire is the Agent or
Male to all. It is naturally Cold and Dry: and therefore unto it Naturians
refer the North wind* the Melan-cholik humor, Autumme, and age decrepit,
fit to be gathered into the ^arth as into A Barn until the day of Division.
Of all Elements the Earth is most ponderous, and therefore it keeps the Center
or Period of the worlds Sphere or Globe. Seas navigations, Stars compossinge
et^. prove it to be of A sphericall form, howsoever Ptolemeus and many others
have demed the contrary. And in as much as the Earth is as the midprick of the
worlds Circle [contained of all, but containinge none] it must therefore be
immovable, as ^^s. 104. 5.

THE FOWRTH DAY.
Verse 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. And Elohim said, Let there be Lights. Herein
observe 1. the Creation of stars: 2. the end of their Creation. The Stars
are either Planeticall [of these is spoken. Jude 13.] and of these wandrers,
two principal, the Sun and Moon are put for the whole 7. Or secondly, the
stars are Firmamentall, called for their slow motion in comparison of the
former 7 under them, unmoueable or stars fired. Of this number to the
^lejades, Orion, Matzaroth, Arcturus, Job 38 31. 32. with infinite more, Genesis ^.
5. scintillizinge in our e^es beholding them. All these does Elohim number and
call them by their names.

These stars are placed in the firmamentall body for this end: 1. For
distinguishing between Day and Night: 2. For distinguishinge times and Seasons,
with their natural Ab^^^edes. Astralogie kept within these bounds, and indeed
what wandreth from these points that is besides the Art, it is A Science
glo^ons fitting A Christian to hy Contemplation.

Abraham could not behold the stars, but he expected another gates church of
spiritual stars in the mystical Firmament, then our Heretical spirits
cause; who by their blasphemous conclusions infer A Nullitie of these stars
for these 1^00 Years. I am not ignorant that the churches firmament should have
many of her stars apostatinge (Reu. 6. 13.) but they must also knoe, 1. the
time of such A copious flat fall [namely under the breaking up of the 6. seal:
2. they must knoe that all should not fall, Reu. 12. 4. Thirdly, they must knoe,
that the stars thus plentifully fallinge, they did specially foretype the
fall Ministerial [for so stars are expounded, Reu. 1. 20.] not the fall of
the popular or vulgar sort of the church: and of these As Well as of the former
is the promise, Genesis 15. 5. And for this cawse, immediately after John saw the
Ministerial fall, the Lord [to his and our comfort] affordes him the sight of
an Angel [Chap. 7. 2.] coming from the East, 1. for sealing up the thowsands
of Israel: 2. for enforming him of the Infi(...)e of the Gentiles preserved [in
that downfall of ministers, and stoppage of the Euangels passage] though not
without ma^^fold afflictions. The Heretics [and amongst the residue, the right
Brownistes] that for prouinge themselves the only visible church of god) do
much babble [euery unlearned ^obbino^ of them / of this mystical book of
Revelation. I give them boldly to understand, that their use of that book is,
but as A parable in A fools mouth, or an arrowe in a dogs thighe: Prou. 26. 9.
9. The lip of excellency fits not A fool, Prove. 17. 7.

Pa^l lookinge unto these stars, 1. Cor. 15. he durst boldly conclude A
difference of glow in the ^esurrection. And I doubt not, but these stars are
of A more excellent Nature then some Creatures made after. Let David's wonderment
at the sight of these superiors, Psa. 8. 3. help me out in that: as also the
distinction of bodies, 1. Cor. 15. 40. compared with verse. 48. Elohim having
with the breath of his Mouth, not only created but also kyndled these torches
and Lamps in the heavens for / their Sphaeres were rolled out in the second Day
/ he so seals up the 4. Day, consisting of his morning and eueninge.

THE FIFTE DAY.
Verse. 20. 21. 22. 23. Afterward Elohim said.

Now the Lord casts aside his Ep unto the former Earth waters, emoyning them.
1. to bring forth Fishes in their kynds: 2. Fethered fowls in their kynds. As
the Earth was the womb of Twyns / Herbs and Trees so is the water the womb of
Fishes and Fowls, Ps. 8. 8. Objection. But in chapter 2. 19. it is s^^de: he
formed every foul, of the Earth, therefore not of the water. I answer: The
Earth brought not forth his Herb and Plant without the symbolization of the
other Elements, and therefore we se in them the nature of fire, air, water: so,
the waters here produce this cople of creatures by combyninge with the Earth /
as his female / subiarent, but yet it is termed principal by reason the waters
/ as at the next hand to vowarde / do reach the same forth.

Of fishes / some are superiors: as Leuiathan* whales, the Sea wolf / or ^yke
/ etc. some inferiors: and that specially vnfinned fishes / as Eel^s: and
crepe^s / as frogs etc. The fowls are either ^ thereall / as these that delight
naturally above as the Egle / etc. Or Terrestricall as all such fowls as have
I natural heaviness in flight because the Elements of water and earth do much
sway in them. These sorts preachinge (as it were) A mystical difference
betwixt Man and Man their Super visours / whither in the state Political or
Ecclesiastical: yet all of them bound to look back to the Baptism waters
from whence / if they be created up the word and the Spirit / they have their
orderly producture. Exept A Man be borne again of the water and Sprite / he
cannot enter into the kingdom of Elohim / Ioh. 3. 5.

David / psalm. 104. 25. etc. looking with his spiritual ey into the Sea / he
cannot but admire the wisdom of God and his riches therein. Wisdom in the
variety and excellenc^ of the Creatueres: Riches / in the abundance of them.
He that coms unto these waters of Elohim / and casts in his Net or Angle for
snaringe the Creatuere / before he have asked leave / by reverent prayer / of
the Creator / that Man is but A sawc^ usurper and no promise has he of A
blessinge there. This doctrine is mystically taught in the disciples fishinge /
Ioh. 21. 3. etc. who until the word Christ / came and had them cast out there
net on the Right-side / they fished not rightly. Snarers of Fowls must also
ask leave of the Lord of the Game / before they meddle with his Byrds: for they
are Byrds of vvarant.

THE SIXTH DAY.
Verse. 24. etc. Moreover, Elohim said. Herein

I observe the Creation / 1. of Beasts: pasinge and Crepinge: 2. of Mankind:
and of either these works it is said seueraly / They were good. Pasing Beasts
are Domestical / as the Ox / Sheep / psalm. 8. 7. Isa. 1. 3 or Foraigne / as
Behemoth / the Vincorne, Io^ 39. 12. and 40. 10. Crepinge beasts are only
foraigne* for we speak of Natures instinct: and the Serpent Chapter 3. 1.
transgressed by Satan's instinct, and such are the Dragon and all other earth
serpents / that proceed not since the Fall, of corruption or Mongrel generation.

Oh the glorious Consent and harmonious unity then amongst the Earth Creatures
/ as also of the water Creatures created in the former Day. The Pyke that now
deuoureth other fishes by whole and by half / he was then vnpossessed of such
tyranny. The water Frog that now sits upon the hillock side / and syninge the
Tyrannous Pyke passinge by / both leap into his neck / and there holdinge fast
with the hinder legs / does with former stretch over to his eyes and so finally
scratch out the Deuou^ers eyes: the silly creature (before man warred with god)
did not in secret (...) in ambuish for the dest^nction of his fellow. As for
the Earth creatures / they then were all in natural league: the wolf thirsted
not the ruin of the Lamb / nor the Hound the wrack of them both. The god of
peace created all at peace: nor was it any but the possessor of the Dragon,
that in the first work day made battle in heaven, though he was cast out in
to the Earth / and in the earth on the last work day wrought myscheife in
Paradise / though allotted to have his brains dashed out by the seed of woman:
it was none but he / that setting God and man at odds / did thereby effect a
dissension amongst other creatures. A feeling of this fall the vegetative and
sensitive Creatures then have after A sort / and therefore groan after the day
of our final deliverance / that so the Day com they may be delivered into the
glorious libert^ of Eloh^ms sons. Romans 8. 19. 20. 21. Happily / then we shall
se how excellent at first they were that so by ^^ and them A work in unity may
redound unto Elohim / whose handy work we all are. Sed de his ^^ce ac sobrius
dicendum: saltem Rudibus ac (...)bus nostris.

In the second part of this 6. days work / Mankind, to whom the Angels should
be ministringe spirits / Heb^ 1. 14. and the residue of the creatures
serui^^able and subject / ps. 8. 6. as unto Christ / 1. Cor. 15. 27. God
creates: and that Male and female / verse. 27. 29. contrary to their blind
assertion / who would have woman created after this day / because her form of
Creation is described in the Next chapter after the finishment of the 7. Day.
They may as well say that Man was also then created: because the Matter whereof
he is made / is only there mentioned. Besides / Moses testifying in the next
cha. verse. 1. and Jehovah himself, Exodus 20. 11. that the whole host / that is
/ all things that had bring in heaven and in Earth / were in 6. days created /
these odd spirits so give the ^y unto Jehovah and Moses. Male and Female he
made them / the Matter remains unto the next Chap. but how? by A simple word
/ as were the former Creatures? No* There is A Consultatio^ about the Matter /
for herein lies the ground of the whole work. Other creatures / says Clemens
Alexandriuus, lib. 1. cap. 3. paedag. He made with A bare command / but Man he
builded with his own hand / in sp^^ing that who proper to himself.

Let us make Man according to our Image: Will not the Sabellians grant here a
Plurality in that one God? or will they with ^ues accursed say that God
speaks to Angels / or to the 4. Elements or to the other Creatures? or will
they say that God at first occupied that new found phrase of princes One for
Excellency sake saying We command though the commander but one? They may
as well say that Elohim through out this chap. is to be translated Gods, and so
let us not hear of God so much as once in the whole work of Creation.

If our image be an ^mage traduced from Creatures / though the Creature were
Arri^s his Christ / how sq^^res then the Apostles exhort: put on the New man,
which after God not after Creatures is created in Righteousness and true
holiness Cyrillus Alex in his 2. section of the 1. chap. on John his Euangel /
he learnedly proves that the words Let us and our image do ^^wort that Trine
number in that One substance. This Number / the Greeks do call hypostases; the
Latins persons, becawse these 3. Father / word / Spirit / spe^se so nau^ quid
do distinctly sound somewhat: and into these 3. three in number / One in essence
/ is the new-man created / Math. 28. 19. The Number strangles also the
Patripassi^us / who taught that the Father suffered really: the Diutie' for
Vnitas non est ^u^e^u. One is properly no Number / it presses the guts of
A^rius / as also of Theodoras the Tanner Ringleader to A^te^non.

Thus Elohim makes man kind: Male and female: and that according to his
Mystical ^mage: for away with the block headed A^thropo morphits who imagine
God and Man to be of like external form: an hidden secret containing in it ^
just and holy Trinity in unity. The principal part of Man being his soul:
for the Body is but the sowles instrument: therein we consider / 1. the Mind:
includinge all the Senses: 2 the will includinge: all the Affections. 3. the
Power of doing, arisinge from them Both. These are 3. in Number, arisinge from
One Essence and that spiritual Yet this Trinity in Unity effects not Elohims
image, except considered in the qualification. And therefore the Mind was
possessed with Light holy and divine ^ul^n: the Will as an handmaid* approving
the Mynds Light and affecting only that: The Power arising both from Mind and
will / as the spirit from the Father and Son: corresponding to both: each before
other not in time but in a^ order respecting the thing wrought: Mind, will and
Power conspiring in one the glory of Elohim.

This Sowles Trinity in unity is covered with an house of Clay, Job 4. 19. as
with ^ Dayle: that so we may knoe Elohim the Father of Sowles;* Heb. 12 9.: to
be for our concerning of him, shadowed with and by Earthly things: that so
thereby we may happily se him: though darkly: quasi per Ae^igma. The Body thus
is the Temple communicated, as also of the Spirit communicatinge: and therefore
after the Fall redeemed by ^ dear price: contrary to the foolishnes of
C^ssianus, who said that the Bodies of Mankind were but the Coats Made of
skynnes, Clem. strom. 3: as also contrary to the blasphemy of the Pa(...)ans:
A^gust. de haeres: who say Man's ^^esh is of the Deuel: denying with
Ca^pocr^tes: ^^eares lib. 1. 24.: salua(...) to the body.

As Elohim to this Creature subjecteth the former Creatures, so first to him he
here prescribes Meat: and that only is, to ea^ of the Earths-crescents, the
g^^^th of the Third day before. Then in the second place, he in forms
mankind: for Man has only ^ reasonable s^wle and to him Elohim communicates
his Mind: of Food for Beasts and Birds, namely the grene herbs. Unto the
living irrational treasures, only herbs and their adjunctes: but to Man,
Herbs and Trees with their app^^tenaunces. Reasonable seruers of God* shall
with Iaako^: the G^^keb Genesis 3. 15. (...) ^^eele in creation: have and doble
blessinge: unreasonable worshippers must with Esau be contented with one
blessinge* growing as far from heaven and ^er^ the Earth, as the Herb or grass
that goes with the belly on the earth.

Unto all the Creatures of the former Day Fish and Foul: the lord enjoyneth
openly encreasment and multiplication: in this Day he so speaks to Mankind:
and how can our Misogymstes think that the Male should multiply without ^
female, except with the Part they believe he might with Bacchus cut ^ son out
of his thighe? I say* in this day he speaks so only to Mankind, not to Beasts
or any other creatures aforegoinge. In the third Day, he enjoined the Earth to
bring forth Herb and plant with his seed, that so by seedffall the kind might
be preserved. But lays not the open law of multiplicatio^ upon them: so also,
he omitteth the open law of Multiplicatio^ to the former part of this days
work, namely in the Beasts. All the work with his Adjuncts: for common people
are incapable of many knots lynckinge Natures work together: the blessed
Elohim finally / even at the end of 6 days / he sets this Seal of
Approbation upon it: All that he made, ^oe it was very Good. The first day, he
so sealed once: the second Day, his Seal semes not to touch: the third day he
seals twice: the fourth day, once: the fifte day, once: this Sixth day, he
first seals in the Beasts, secondly in Mankind. As for this last seal of
approbation, it is not only to mankind, but also to the whole work wrought: and
that with additions of Excellency: for whereas before it was barely said, and
he savve it to be good: here the spirit turns he savve into BEHOLD: and the
word Good into VERY GOOD. Thus Mankind: the church consistinge in Adam and his
wife: it brings doble blessings unto the residue of the Creatures. Laban can
witness that. And so ends the 6. Day.

NOTA.
THinking here to have drawn a Mystical. Cronicle contained under the 6. days
works and the s^a^e^th days rest, I saw I could not do it without fore stalling
the Si^es and Seauens in the New testaments Revelation: and therefore for the
present I have passed by it: Yet speaking so much (...) of it, that by the
consideration thereof the wise spirited may be whetted by to consider, that the
nature of Elohims speech is, in one vvo^d to seal up 2. things.

Argument: Chap. 2. The stately work of Elohim / again Moses repeats / making
somthinges more plain.
Division of the text.
I. IN this Recapitulation is obseruable: First / What is laid down more
straightly (and that is, the Consummation of the 6. days works) once laid down
in A bare assertion, verse. 1. then in A Probation from Elohim his Rest in the
7. Day: verse. 2. 3.

II. Secondly, herein is obseruable, what is laid down more largely: and
therein, First, A Repeat of the Chaos verse. 4. secondly of the Creatures
arisinge there from: and that is also twofolde: First, of work peculiar to the
third day, verse. 5. 6. secondly, of another work peculiar to the sixth day
(namely, of Mankind with their Adjuncts) thence to the end.

Elucidation.
Verse 1, 2. 3. Thus the heavens. Elohim having dispatched his hands of the
Creature, He restes: giuinge A president to Man for Restinge [ Exodus 20 11]
from external works, what time he is specially to meditate on the works of
Creation. This first Creations work required the 7. Day: because the work was
finished in the former 6. The Second Creation (called New heavens and new
health, Psa ^ 22. shaking of the Old for establishinge A New kingdom that should
not be shaken, Heb. 12. 2^.) This work enjoyneth the first day 1. Cor. 16. 12.
because this is the Son our Lord his day, Reu. 1. 10. wherein he rested from
the burden of the dawe: pouringe out in that First (his Resurrection) day, the
guiftes of his Spirit for e^adling Meditation of the benefit redounding to Man
from the Father, through the Son, by the Spirit of light and Sa(...)a^ion. Se
for this Exodus 20

That Elohim had not don all he was minded to Do for ever, observe in the
Speech: he rested from al^ his work he HAD created Some from hence conclude,
that the sowles of Adams succession, are from God immediately made and sent in
all ages into Mankynds bodies. Touchi^g that anon. In the mean time, I
understand that the word [ Had created] does include all creatures that then
had existinge or being, or should afterward arise b^ virtue of the former.
And therefore to need afterward of Elohims speech ( Let it be, or, Let us
make) to be again used, as at the first, for any creature of the first
creations kind: seeing his blessinge of multiplicatio^ and grouth sealed on the
former, was as Life infused into the head of the fountain, for cawsinge Being
unto all the branches derived thensforth from that kind of Creature.

Verse. 4. 5. 6. These are the Generations. From the word DAY in the 4. ve^s.
Has been judged, that the whole work^ of Creation were made in the first Day.
(...) in the Indigest lump was their Matter, or Deed: but seeing the Form
g^^es being to any thing so and so denominated, I understand (as before) the
formation of the Creatures to arise in their several days. A(...) (^p. ^3.)
could well say, pro^o^^ est prim* op^^is pars, the Begininge is as good as the
whole. When Elohim had of Nothing made that Ch^os or Somthinge, the particular
Domthinges (that were to ar^^e out of that Head) were (in respect of the first
difficulty) as already made. To day there is in the ^^ld an heap of (...)ber,
stone etc whereon to make an house, but until the Day it be b^^lded ^^ cannot
be called an house: no more then ^ lump of clay can be called ^ po^^e. The
(...) of speech therefore gives us to k^de / that when God calls the things
that are not / as though they were* it is because unto him* who so infinite*
every future is present.

verse. 7. Iehouan Elohim made the Man. Hitherto Elohim, now Jehovah Elohim. If
Nownes be properly de(...)ed of Verbs / which seems unto me not / for is not
the Verb an effect of the nowne in nature? but till more learned yield / I
will not walk alone / it is deri^ed of Hajah, which signifies as be: because
He gives Being to all things (...)ge. If any creatures should have been creates
by the Angels (in whole or in part) then he could not have been I All properly.
Besides / the joyninge of it unto Elohim, it gives us plainly to kno^* that
Being was only by the Father, word and Sp^^te, who are One Ieh^uah or Being.

This Name Jehovah (consistinge of these 4. letters, I, H, V, H,) it is called
of the Greeks / Tetrag^ammation; because it rests on 4. letters. And of the
Iues it is not ordina^tly^ed / but in the (...) thereof they pronounce Ado^a^
(my Lord) of Adon, Dominus. And suerly / the profane and light pronouncinge of
God his heroical Titles / I fear it will and does hale down many judgments /
on the Gentiles heads: specially on our ages Heretics / who (for every wicked
thing they breach in their wast paper) do fill their sedu^^ge pages with
Scriptures allegations: As though Christ Jesus would be ^ Ba^de or Pando^ to
^ez^bels filthiness.

Jehovah Elohim makes man. Two by Attributes (the first expressing his Essence
/ the second the Power of that tryne Number considered in One Being) they
(...) in Creatinge Mankind: First in taking Dust (oh Abra^. thou remembered
this Gen 18. 2^.) then breathinge in his face (was not the Body then first?)
the Breath of life* whereby Man was made A li^inge Soul. Cursed are the
Spirits that say the Body wholly (as did the Patricians) ^ partly (as from the
girdle downward / the ve^ust^^^ herein) it to of the Deuel.

Oh blessed Earth / when Elohim is the Pottes and must temper (...) Clay? and
oh pure (...) / (more pure then Ch^^stall Glass) for the hiest (as with and
mouth) blows the: and oh con-junction of Body and soul right ad^^rable /
saying thereby / the Character and li^ely Image of Elohim is printed in Red
ea(...)? No marvel if Origin / on Genesis ^. said that the Heaven which is God
his Throne is Tropologically, in Man whose conversation is in he^uen. As our
Savior says / The kingdom of god is within; so is the throne whereon Elohim
sits within. The Soul is the throne / but the Body is Earth and his
foote-stoole. And happy is that body that will how with the Earth / that the
Hiest may seat his foot of affections thereon.

What is the Soul? Aristotle says / it is the beg^ninge whereby we li^e, by
sense pe^ceiue, are moved and first understand. I am as wise for this
description as before I heard it: for what that begininge is which sometimes he
calls E^delechia or A Motion / or the self life of the Natural body / I ^noe
not. Nor can I guess hereby (if Plutarch def^^e E^delechia truly / energia: and
Phil. Melancthoa, agitatio) but that Christoph. Regendo. ffinus his suppose was
true / though the ^^ch-deacon Schamotulanus say otherwise / not distinguishinge
between Entele^hia and Men's: for Aristotle puts the first for the Soul and
Form / namely: that he denied the soul to perish together with the Body. No
better was their judgment that taught the soul to be the Bodies temperat^re: ^
F^^y nat^^e etc. Let I^h^l. Me(...)cth. help Aristotle out / I will not
contend.

1. The Soul is A Rational Spirit; and by Reason in Act or Power natural / or
Ordinary / is Man his Spirit ascendinge Eccles. 12 7. distinguished from the
Beasts Spirit descendinge. The Beasts spirit may rather be called Endelechia
the life it self / temperature / vital heat / the Agitation of their body: And
that there is some Motion and Agitation in the Infants body before the Soul
enter into it / or at least / before it have any use of the Soul / I deem it
not im*probable. Nay / ^ Man is beheaded: the Read and body sundred / there
usually appears / specially in strong complerioned ones / Motion and
Agitation within them: and methinks none should then deem the Soul vndeparted
from the Members.

2. The Soul of Man / as it as A Spirit reasonable, so it is Immortal: for
though Man can kill the Body / yet he cannot kill the Soul, Math. 10. 28. L^k.
23. 43. 46. and no Marvel though the Sprite: of Mankind be thus distinguished
from the sprite of ^ Beast: saying the Beasts body and sprite were at one
punct of time / by one word / existinge one: ^s for Man / his Body was first /
then in another punct of time his soul was infused / and that from without:
even from a nerenes to Elohim, whereas the sensitive Spirit of Beasts / and
the vegetative spirit of Earth-grouth was not as from the Nerenes of Elohim,
nor from without / but arising within together with the Matter / whereto it is
the internal form.

But is the Soul now to Adams successors inspired immediately by God / or is it
a traduce immediately dernied from the parents / as is the Body? To cut that
short in A few words. Some with G^len say it is from the parents traduced: some
that it is imm^diatly inspired with God, as A new Creature ma^s by the father
and the word now A fresh: some, that all Sowles were essentially made in the
sixth day. The first sort stand and fall with the Greek philosophers judgment
about the Soul, Q^^d sit? for if the soul be not such an Agitation, power,
harmony, heat and in the body, then neither can the soul be together with the
body traduced from the parents. Secondly, whither is the Infants Soul traduced
from the father, or Mother, or Both? If the soul traduce Original some because
it is of them then seeing it partaketh with both their sins / it must be
treaduced from both their sowles: and how two sowles should beget another soul
/ seeing A Soul is A simple assence for no spirit is of A compound substance as
is the body / no reasonable soul living can give me any reason. Thirdly / if
the infants soul be traduced but from One of the Parents / that also is
impossible / seeing there is neither scripture to afford such A thought / nor
any natural reason can be given of one Single or spiritual essence begettinge
another. Such A conce^pt caused / by common (...)te / A Lanrashire Minister to
teach that the Apostate Angels had generation and procreation. Let this first
opinion therefore be turned back to the Grecians: who if they were ignorant of
such things as holy Scriptures afford Openly or by neccessary conseq^tion / we
cannot at all Marvel.

The second fort that hold the Soul newly created by God / etc. Some alledage
our Savors words, Hitherto my father and I do work: so they do work though
they work not So. As also they alledage / Heb. 12. 9. and Eccles. 12. 7. So,
God the father may give the Spirit and ^e the father of it / and yet not
exercise Now his power in making of it / as he did at first.

The third forte give Occasion to Men / to demand / where the sovvle^ are in
they mean time? how are they exercised. Sleep they, wake they? If thou
sleep / that is Against the nature of ^ (...) ^f they* wake / they are
acquainted with glory of heaven / or torment of Hell / or worlds broils: and
so coming into the Body / they should from heaven com into A prison: from Hell
into ^ Purgatory: from the earth into A bondage etc. much like to the
Origi^nists and other Heretics their conc^^sions herein: repeated and confuted
by Cyrill in his Comment. on Ioh. 1. 9.

What shall we say then? I for the present se not how to rest in any one of the
three. The First and Last afforde too many absard consequents. The Middle most
is most indifferet, but I se not necessity of God using his word whereby all
things are existinge after that Sixth day. After the word, his Son / is
promised / Genesis 3. 15. to be exercised in the New work of New Creation it
should seem an embasing of the Word, and prep^sterous* to pull him daly bark
from this Second work to that first: this being the new heaven and earth
unshaken / but the first shaken and every ^an inferior to this. I therefore* by
the christian leave of others more Learned, do understand that I say not /
hold / that first / Elohim his blessing of Mankind in the Sixth day / that is
cawse / without new business / that Sowles ever since have had their begininge
of Being: but / secondly / they only exist and have being / what time the
Infants body is adayced for entertaininge the use of it / and not before. So
that / as the first being of it is not considered in the body* as is the Spirit
of vege^at^^ and Sensitive Creat^^es, but out wardly and from the Mouth of
Elohim and Ieho^ah / so / without either any substance of the Parents / or new
workinge of Jehovah by his word, I understand the daly Sowles arising in the
world, to exist. And this take I to be most co^sonant to Reason Divine and
Natural: the best of the former three admitting more liklyhood of Error: If
God should create anewe / Sowles good or bad / and so commit them ^o their
sinful bodies / then for reverence owing to the writers / I am willing to
propound.

verse. 8. unto the 15. He man this made / for she to not so soon / nor yet
create / the Lord he planteth a paradise / or park of pleasure / in the
circuit of Heden / and that on the East side of Heden. Heden of Gnadan to be
delited: nor let the Ignorant stumble. if some write Heden, some Hheden, some
yeden, some Gneden, some Eden: for the first hebrew letter is for pronunciation
uncertain / the plot is so called for the delites and variety of pleasures it
possessed. A heavenly Orchard and Garden must that be / which is of (...)
^a^tinge and settinge. Profane Men and weomen / why meddle pow with the
Gardners d(...)tes / and ^^ur selves not more delited in the Gardener himself.
Thy Rose gay condemns the, for eyinge and smellinge so much the Creature / and
art not thereby drawn nere^ to affect the Creator. The cherries in your fistes
aod strawberries in your dish (oh people and princes profane) their bloodi
color denounces the sheddinge of your bloods / for choppinge by this
Gardiners fruit without askinge him leave and praisinge him therefore by Prayer.

This Paradise of God / and yet a paradise for Man / is set out in the
Adjunctes / which are of ^ sorts: the first is proper / as Trees of all
kinds: trees for Bodies delight and trees Sacramental: the second is borrowed:
namely / a s^^^er out of Heden / divided into 4. heads / ordained for
wateringe the Orcharde. Iul^^s Fron^inus writ two books De aquae-ductibus
Romae, but he tells us of no such waters nor Cond(...)es as here

These are waters for the Garden of Elohim, the church of the faithful / Cant.
4. 15. 16. the other but for Babel, a cage of unclean birds. Here is the Tree of
Life / Reu. 22. 2. there of Death. As for the tree of knowing Good and Evil /
Rome got some s^ips of it / as have also all heretical assemblies / but their
knowledge unto death / saying the Tree of Life / the true C(...), he woes not
in the midst of their Garden. Except this Tree g^oe in the midst, the other
trees d^^ up: Hiero^^ on Eccl: 2. 5.

The First River is (...). This River com^a^^eth Ha^^a^ where is excellent
Gold / as also (...) and the (...) o^ix stone* Bdel(...) it man be here
signifies only the Tree so called. The (...) o^ix is compounded of Sardis and
o(...)* it is black in the barrhom / red in the midst white above. The Second
^^urer is Gi(...) it compasses (...) or A through(...). The third is (...) or
Tyg^s / ^on^inge on the East side of As^^ i^* The fourth is pe^ath or Euphrates
One River of God (...) sacred Euangell is streamed out by (...) Ma^k, Luke and
John for wateringe the Second Adams Church. The woman of (...)ria must cast
Ass(...) bucket aside and open the Conduictes of the hear for drinkinge this
water. Where these waters ^o^ / and who dare say they are wholly da(...) up in
England? they co^^a^ whole so^^esse and l^fe Ezekiel. 4^. 8. 9. The fountain of
these waters to Jesus himself / and that the Church k^^es when she caleth upon
him: Oh fo^ntaine of the Gardens, oh well of the (...)ge waters, and the
springes of (...). Ser^h the scriptures: they will testif^^ into what parts of
the world / these waters must ^onne.

Verse. 1^ etc. Of this orchard the Lord gives Man possession / with liberty to
use the fruits: provided he first find himself exercised in dressing the same:
secondly / do avoid the eatinge of one only tree (namely of Good and Evil) and
that in pain o^ Death.

How should Paradise stand need of dressinge / corruption (as yet) not having
ceazed on the Creature? Surely / Corruption had no place before Syn / for Syn
brought in that curse upon the Creature. This dressinge or tillinge is therefore
but A kepinge and preseruinge of Order: and that / though the church syn-les /
should look unto / least Negligence (the woman's first syn) do introduce
Disorder. But / the Church corrupted / how great need there is of Digginge /
sowinge / p(...)inge / rootinge up / it man appear Isa. 5. Ioh. 15.

This peculiar Adjunct (Paradise) disparched / then unto Man is brought the
sorts of feild-beastes and heauens-fowles: unto whom Man / in the wisdom of
his spirit / guieth Names. Nor must we dare to give vnedif^^nge Names to
Persons and Things / and that in pain of woe / Isa. 5. 20. If all our words
should be seasoned with falt / Coloss. 4. 6. Then who dare impose un pondred
Names on Days / Months / Children / Buildinges etc. For days* the holy ghost
every where in the old and new Testament says: the First* second, third
Fourth, Fifte, Sixth, Seventh, or Sabaot. The Gentiles without god / have given
/ unto them their^ planets names: every planet* being to them A God or
Goddess: jmagininge (as I have noted in my B^^les breife) that the body was
qualified by those their wicked Gods and Godd^ses. The Months are also in the
Bible called first, second, third etc. or else have ^ name peculiar to the
years season: As the first Month is called A^^b (in English / ^ (...) of come
with the ear) because it was the Month of off^^nge the F^^st f(...)tes of
Cor^e etc. But the Gentiles have / beginning with nud-wy^ter / called our
First / January, off their two faced God I(...)s: the second / February* of
Fe(...) which is their God Pluto: the next March of Mars: the next April of
Aphros the Froth or Foam of the Sea / whereon their Goddess Venus was borne:
the next May of M(...) which is Mercury: the next June: f(...) have said of
(...) Younger Men / and so May of Majo^es, Elders: Ovid.

Tertius a Senibus, Iu^enum de nomine Quartus.
YEt not unlike but May / as before / and June of some Man called ^^nius: as
well as July of Iuli^s Caesar: and August of Augustus Caesar. The followinge
Months are well termed September of Heaven / October of Eight, November of
Name / December, of Ten. So July and August / before the time of Julius and
Augustus, were well called Q^^ntil^s, the Fifte and Sextilis, the Sixth. As for
Names of Mankind / Buildinge / Actions etc. In all this Genesis there is
president / how religious they were. Satan / enemy to Monuments of holy
Religion / he either has prevailed for giuinge Attributes of no signification
/ or else / Titles superstitions: whereas the Fountain is opened to the house
of David for abolishinge the Names of Idols / as well as other syn / Zech. 13.
12. So that we ought not to mention them in our ^^ys / but with a detestatio^
in our sowles.

Verse 21 etc. The Parentheticall Adjuncts finished / Moses returns to Man's
mate: for every creature Mated and Denaminated / He-man yet wants his Yoke
fellow. He there fore must soundly sleep / till SHE out of his side be
builded, Not of the Head / because the must not be (...) not of the Feet
because she ought to have place in his nerest affection.

1. The Flesh should sleep / while the wife is A choosinge: and in the knot
k^ittinge Parents consent / specially if they be under Parents tutelage (must
put them together. So Chytraeu^ upon Ioh. 2. And others understand it. Not as
some in SC. would needs teach me / to the g(...)nance and detriment of many
Sowles / that the board herrin represented the Ecclesiastical Pastor / without
whose Sol^m^^zation / they would have all Marriage simply unlawful: and
otherwise don / frustrate. Our Bishops in England would bl^sh to be pere^^tory
in that. Though in orderly Christian churches / no^e will ga^^ say the Pastor^
solemnization to be Necessary for Co^lynes and order.

2. And Mystically is herein uttered / the Church her Creation out of Jesus his
side (as on sleep / on the Cross) borne of v^^ter and blood: and yet stronger
then the Iaw-bone wherewith the Typical Samson flew the Philisti^^s. His Death
/ and yet but ^ sleep / for his flesh felt no corruption / Act. 2. 31. Was the
Church her life. And this ^o she whom he acknowledges Bone of his bones /
Ephesians. 5. 30. because through the water and Sprite Ioh. 3. 5. we are made
partakers of the Nature (...) / 2. Pet. 1. 4. What is it / quoth Gregory in
Ezekiel. hom. 6. that Adam sleping Eua is produced / but that Christ dyinge the
Church is forrmed?

Verse. 23. She shall be called Is^ah* Adam and Ish are in engl. Man: but the
first / deruied of Adamah / red earth / signifies A Man of inferious lotte:
the second / A Man more excellent. Man calls her Ishah rather then Admah /
because we must not only take Him here for Adam but also for Ish: that is / we
must under the first Adam and his Mate mystical / conceive the second Adam and
his s^owsesse / Ish and Ishah: Jesus and his Church. Adam homo: Ish, vir:
observed of Chytr. on Ioh. 1. 13.

Verse. 25. They were both Naked. Man and woman being Perfect they must / as well
and rather then other Creatures / be in their Nakedness / Beauteous. Nakedness
being their proper Beauty / how could there be cause of shame? Specially /
saying Shame rises upon recorda^^ge filthiness: and filthiness as ye^ ^ad no
place in Mankind: for all the work which Elohim wrought was good and very
good: Chapter 1. 31.

Fond are the heretical Adv^its who from hence do p^a(...)se Nakedness in their
Assembly / called Paradise: but indeed / the Picture of A Stews and
Brothe^hs^fe.

Ch^^ is Truth / and his Spowsesse / the Church the Pillet and ground of truth
/ 1. C^. 3. 15. This Truth / as God creates it is naked: and the more Naked the
Truth is within the assembly of the faithful / the more beauteous it is: for
indeed Nakedness is naturally truths Beauty. Neither Christ needs ^aynt^nges
/ nor his Church curious colorings.

Argument. Chap. III. Satan he temptes and so mankind does fall: God them
expulseth paradise withal.
Division of the text.
TWo parts Principally considerable:

I. First, Mankind falling from God:

II. Secondly, the pursuit of God his Justice. His Falling away or Apostacy
from God lies in the First 8. verses: The first five verses containinge A
Dialogue between the Instrument of Apostacy, viz. Satan: and the woman or
She-man, serving for an Introduction to the Fall.

In the 6. 7. 8. ver. Lies the fall it self.

The 6* verse laying down, 1. the inordinate ey: 2. the pride of heart, whereby
Man and woman were drawn to eat of the forbidden fruit.

The 7. and 8. verse. Laying down their sensible Sight and Feling off
Syn-ceazed on them: First in that they seek to cloth their Nakedness with
Figleaues: Secondly, in that they fly from the voice of God, to cover them
selves in the thickets.

The Pursuit
Of God his Justice (lying in the residue of the Chapter) is manifested, First
in his Huntinge out and examining the Malefactors / Verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
Calling out the Principal, Verse. 9. between whom and the Lord. Verse. 10. 11.
12. lies A conference: then in Verse 13. between the Lord and the woman.

Secondly, in his proceeding against the Malefactors, in the residue of the
Chap.

His proceeding is, first against the Serpent, 1. by A temporal punishment
inflicted on him, Verse. 14.

2. By A sudden destruction, Verse. 15.

His temporal punishment lying, 1. in the glewing his belly to the earth: 2. in
being f^d with dust.

His destruction, 1. prepared by an Enmity that should be put between the
Serpents and woman's seed: 2. fully accomplished by Her Seed his bruizing of
the Serpents head, what tune the Serpent first had nibled his heel.

Secondly,
The Lord his proceeding is against Mankind:

First by imposinge some what upon them, Verse. 16. 17. 18 19. 20. 21. Secondly
by taking somewhat from them, in the residue of the chapter. That he imposes on
them, are Signs memoratiue 1. Rough. 2. Easy.

The Rough signs of remembrance are two: the 1. imposed only on woman, Verse.
16. consisting in Sorrow and Appetites subjection: the second imposed
indifferently on both kynds, viz, Lawful sweating before lawful eating* For
which cawse the earth is cursed to their hands, Verse. 17. 18. 19.

The Easy signs memoratiue are likewise two: the 1. lying in the Name Heuah
giving unto woman by the instinct of Elohim, for both their instructions Verse.
20. the 2. in the apparellinge their bodies with Beasts skins, Verse. 21. So
much for the thing imposed.

That which is taken from them is twofolde: first they are ( Elohim deriding
them) deprived of the present enjoy of the sacramental trees with their
Subject Paradise it self, Verse 22. 23.

Secondly, they have the hope of reentring it again taken from them by reason
of the Cherubims brandishing Sword, keeping it, Verse. 24.

ELVCIDATION.
THis Accident appertains to the 6. Day: so understood of Old and New. The
Iues from ^s. 49. 20. Adam bikar etc. Adam in Glory. stood not / etc. for they
translate Adam for A Proper / not Appellatiue / they usually say he stood not
in glory One day: as Mr. H. ^r. has well observed in the beginning of Conc.
script. in the page / from some Rabbims.

Verse. 1. etc. Now the Serpent.
AS elsewhere I have written / it is most like from Reu. 12. that these Serpent
was the Dragon: but instincted by an euel spirit / as Balaam his Ass / was by
A good. Quest. why does Moses not say / Now satan? Ear-kepha, de Parad.
answers thus well: Moses was to tell A Narration / not to deliver an
Exposition: and therefore he spoke of the thing which appeared* Besides Moso^
consealed speech of Angels until Hagars time. least the rude people denied
there had been more then One God.

Some Angels having apostated from the Lord of Life now they Labor Man's ruin.
Qu. were these bad Angels first bad / as also / did they fall of them selves?
Ans. Seeing God is Good and goodness it self / he cold not create any thing bad:
for all badnes is A Defect / but no defect can fall in God / who is not only
goodness / but al sufficient Perfection. Secondly / Jude saying. The Angels
kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation: and Peter saying
The Angels that symed God cast them down into hell* it hereby appears and
That after they were created Good / they then sinned: 2. that their syn arose /
1. by not kepinge their first estate: 2. by forsaking it: not keeping, implyinge
Negligence or Idleness: forsaking importing wilfulnes and willinge desertion or
Apostasy: the Estate and habitation they had / implying Happiness: s^inge their
being cast down from thence for syn / is their chayning in utter darkness.
Their first estate was shyning as Luciser the Morninge star: their fall as
lightninge: their destinate place for Syn / Darkness. Mad was Ma^cion that
taught people there was A good and an Euel beginning: that is: A good and A bad
God. And no less mad were the Ophitae that worshipped this Serpent for Christ
/ who indeed was the instrument of the Apostate power which is adverse to
Christ.

Chrysos. in titul. ps. 51. says: when I hear of the Deuel fallen from heaven
/ his r^^ne ministers to me occasion* of rising from syn: as though he should
have said: what should I bolying in syn / saying there is A vacant place in
heavens glory for me repenting. And suerly: the glorious rooms the Angels are
separate from for ever / do as it were / hunger and thirst for being supplied
by Mankind. It was not for nothing that Jesus / Ioh. 14. 2. foretold his
scholars of many dwelleng places in the fathers house: for the preparinge of
which he must go thither. Like mough that the places neded the spri^^k^nge of
his blood / for taking away the Aposta^^s defileme^t. The Priest his going into
the most holy place was not without blood / Heb. 9. 7: and that most holy /
speci^lly fore figured heaven: Verse. 24. Something therefore it was that origin
harpeth on / (...) 1^ in (...) when he sa^t^ Christ offered up an carchly and
heavenly sacrifice / though I think he fails in the application.

This Servent / Satan's ^^gan / is said / of all the feilde beasts / to be
Gn^ru^^, crafty and Ders. 10. Man says he was Gne^rom, Naked: word which
arise both from one (...) / except the latter sh^ld com of Guarah, the one
Mystically looks unto another / as if (...) were the Cawse of Nakedness.

The first S^n in woman / I note to be the same that was first in the Angels:
not keeping the place. The Serpent aggressing her with unfruitful speeches she
opens the race: then secondly / she leaves her place / hoping / as the Denel
would have her / of an hier place. Man also / not keeping his standinge / lo he
secondly leaves his place / both eat for advantage / thinking by that ladder to
clyme into (...) place: but they fell downwards / as the Denel would have it.
Not contented to knoe Euel by Speculation / they would learn what it was by
Imitation: that is / by doing Euel as D^ta^ had don before them. Negligence
brought in Discontent: between them was begotten Pride pe^ish. Myde therefore
have then sh^t / which either do teach Glotony / or Pr^^e to be Man kynds
primordial (...)gression. Not watching in our calling* to the ^^^dical ca^^se
of all our several fallinges: and this / all learned heathen / so well as
d^^yue / have for him word and writings confessed.

They having transgressed / lo / they se themselves stripped naked ^inwardly and
outwardly. Outward / for Mortalilitay it ceased on their Bodies: Immortality is
gone. That ^^^tation could not be without pa^pable feeling: nor now cold the
Air and other ^reature^ together with their degenerate nature / he suitable but
adverse: even withas much sense of change as happens to od^ wowe sound then by
and by sick. Inward N^^ednes / then co^^o not but sensibly feel: seen^^ there
was sudden shipwreck of light. ^o^ites and Power to Move well. Assurance of
^se gone / Delperate terror ^^^ades th^^^ Light of Mind depr^^d. Dark
ignorance and misconstruction entered. ^ol^^es departinge the ^^ffectious /
vn^^^^nes takes possession. Power to Do well packing what power cold abide but
that which is improperly power / fe(...) to not of God / namely / A procl^^^te
to break as the blind Mind and unholy (...) shall set it on work. No marvel if
the 1. nakedness cawsed them to (...) ^o^^enth^elter: and the 2. en forced them
to fly from the Lord of Lose they being now the Servants of Vrath. Of whom A
man is ouercom / him he serves by whom he is ouercom.

Verse 8. etc. After that, they heard. The Subendnig toward the west / for so
the days ^oo leaves imports / Man and woman had by the ^^re a feelinge of
Ieho^ah his drawinge nere / whereupon they fly and hyde themselves. The lord
giuinge them an ^^ckling of his repair / they condemn themselves by flight.
Con(...), ^^lle testes: They need none to sit upon them / for within them /
Conscience set as Judge and Accuser / and the Heart it laid open as in A book
/ the Treason committed against the ^^st: Memory corroded inside and outside
worse then the Gangren guaweth the Carcass. Nihil miseri^s, could Plautus
Mostel. say, quam anim^s homiuis conscius.

Jehovah calls man / for he was principal / but not first in transgression /
examines hun / then woman. Each shifts it of Man to the woman: woman to the
Serpent / and there a stop: for there was the fountains head of Euel. As
Grego^^^s, lib. moral 22. Cap. 13. has said / so we may say: Inn^tom sibi
vitium hoc habet Natura etc. It is inbred in our Nature infected forth with of
our Protoplast / having liberty / to commit syn: committing son to cover it by
den^al: and co^^cied / to excuse the thing by defending it. This patronizing of
syn / he such. 21. calls an Addinge to syn. How far our forepare^ts were here
spent let their blind Mind / unholy will / and the use of their Soul and bodies
power / speak.

After Examination and conviction, Jehovah Elohim falls of ce^suringe: and
therein he proceeds according to syns Order: 1. with the Serpent: then with
the woman: lastly with Man. The possessor of the Serpent he had a^ ready
adu^dged / what time he cast him down into Darkness: here therefore he speaks
to his instrument alottinge him to the Earth for creping and ^^ding^: yet there
withal secretly smiling upon his Mouer / Satan / fore-tellinge him that the
woman's Seed (not Seeds / as Paul expounds another speech / Galat. 3. 16.
which to Christ^ should finally be his Destroyer. This Seed must he hold
against heritiks to be spoken properly of Messiah made of a woa^^ / Galat.
(...). / but ^^ properly of the churh / seeing she ouercom^ not but by her
Michael / Genesis 12. The Serpent ad(...) / and his possessor foretold of his
(...) fall / then wom^^ receives he doom. what it is and wherefore / let them
remember when they hung forth children with dolor. Man last synning / he last
is c^u^ured. What is (...) an him and wherefore / let him cast to (...) / when
he catleth in some call^^ge lawful. He that luteth u^ Idleness* is dep^^ned of
the Sermon which should preach unto him his fall and the cawse of his fall: the
which lack / effe^teth a lack of Repentance.

That Adam may have toil work till he sweat / the Earth is cursed: and this
curse the cawse of Garthes Corruption. Oh Adain / what have thou don? becawse
of the / the Earth is corrupted / and it corrupts all the Creatures living
therein and thereupon: for how can a corrupt fountain bring forth any thing
vncorrupte^^ / except a Metaphysical or Supernatural work c^m between / as did
in the Co^ception of Messiah? The herbs and Trees before incorrupted / now are
poisned / and they atta^^^ Man birds / fishes / Beasts. If the Meat he un
wholsomed / Bodies must be Corrupted. Bodies of all ^^^ts corrupted / Infection
^^eatheth into the ^^^re. In A word / by Sarans syn above and Adams syn below
^hemen and earth stand need of A new Creation. Syn brought in Death / Romans 5.
12. / Death haled in Corruption: Corruption / sickness: and sickness cawse of the
Physician / as Syn was cause of the Law given in Horeb.

All this felleth out by Neglecting the Calling at first. One syn has haled in
A thowsande / and ye that ^nowe was Dominatour of Creatures / is now in peril
of all creatures. Man having wracked them all / why should they not all wrack
him ^ only by faith in the promised seed / such have promise of leagne with
Beasts and / stones Job. 5. 23.

All creatures before were at peace / but Adams syn has poisned them. Poison
moving in their entrails / lo / they are at deadly Fe^d one with another: and
amongst the rest / ho^^o (...) l^pus, man worst of all. In Sir days all was
Made / and in A piece of the 6. day / all was Mard. One Sinner destroys much
good.

What shall we now san? is Syn the work of god? Elegant is the saying of
Clemens Alexandrinus (lib. strom. 4.) Spiri^s to be placed amongst Actions /
not Substances: therefore not of God. whose work is it then? The Deuels. And for
this cause / our Savior findinge the Pharisees committinge evil Actions / he
tells them plainly they did the work of the Deuel: Ioh. 8. 41. 44: contrary to
Valentinas his heresy.

Adam thus ruined / he turns himself to woman and (remembering that by wontans
Seed this hurt should be healed) he calls her He^^h (^^ing) because she was to
bring forth the Seed of Life by promise. As Hea^th catteth in it A great
mystery / so does the name Adam: Seeing Life is fetched out of death / as He^^h
out of Adam (or red earth) Le^inge. Augustine upon the speech in John Cap. 2.
20. pretermitting the (...) years of reco^^ing the Material temple he draws
the number 46. out of Adam, (^^ the Greek Charater) cited also by his scholar
P^^manus ^^ cap. 13. of the Revelation / ty^^:

A, 1. 46. d, 4 Alpha, 1. Deka, 4, a, 1 Alpha, 1. My. 40 m, 40.
REading this / I straight had recourse to Adam in ^ebrue character: and there
/ giving (for the pronunciation thereof) (...) for Carnets (otherwise it cannot
be sounded) there to the same number / thus:

Aleph, 1. Daleth, 4. Aleph, 1, Mem, 40. Where by the way Scholars man observe
that the Greeks borrowed many of (...) Characters shames and N^mbers of the
Hebrews: even / of the Hebrew characters we now possess: and therefore these we
are posse^^ed with / not only elder then (...) (who flourished in Zerobabels
time) but also elder then the greek tongue / Yea one and the same that first
were / howsoever / as befalls ^^ tongues character / they may b^ to ^^
refused. (...)tus therefore must of the Leached 10. SC. be otherwise understand.

The 46. p. mater^iall for rearing up the Temple material / to thus also
mystical: the first Adam carrying the Number of the second Adam Further
mystery arising from this ground / I leave to contemplative sprites.

Verse. 21. etc. unto Adam. The Lord having censoured the Malefactors / yet
Justice was mingled with A merciful promise unto Mankind / Satan and his seed
left desperate ^^e 1. clotheth Man and woman / then 2. he e^pulseth them
Paradise. Their covering is of Beasts ^^ynnes / preaching their beastly fact /
and they so set / as on A stage / (...) or Jehovah (...) he derideth them thus:
Lo, Man is become as one of us. He that prowe would be A God / lo now he is
like A beast: Yea glad to borrowe A Coueringe of the Beast for his body.
Asparell therefore should be so far from cawlinge us / with the Peacock* to wit
up our pl^^nes / as (looking to our black feet ^^^holy affections) we should
(...) be cast down: apparel being (...) of Man's rebellion / for which he had
the coat of Immortants and blessedness / pulled over his ears / as ^ ^aue
turned out of service. Every other (...) is beauteons in his own coat he
brings (...) himself into Sons light / only Man is glad to (...) A coueringe
o^ (...) creatures: Of the sheep his wool: Of sheep / Goats / B^^les etc.
their skins: Of the carth his flar: of worms their ^^^^webbe: of one or
other he borowes all. If any should be proud / the ^ender and Giver / not the
(...) and Taker / man have cawse to be puffed up. But miserable Man will not
leave his madding. Man and woman ^ad / like to the beast that perished for his
clothinge the Lord e^pulseth them the Garden / and that ^^ the Eastsyde: where
he placed the Ketob^^s for watch and ward. Woeful coople / their backs (for
fallinge backward) are turned on the Tree of Life / and they drive out by the
good Angel / for con(...) treason with the bad Angel.

Kerihim I take to be der^ed of Kaph (As) and Rab^^^ (A^ny) because the ^erub /
(^ o^e K rather then Chapter for the debucing it / seeing none write Chaph.) is As A
multitude or Host: and it may be they are Powers spoken of / Colos. 1. 16.

They are drive out of the East side / with their faces into the East / because
in the East the Day-sta^ must be looked for / by whom the faithful of Mankind
must be led back again into Paradise. This Star^e the Sophies said in the East
/ Math 2. so did John in the spirit Heu. 7. 2. nor was it for nothing that
Iudahs K^^g might only enter in at the East gate of the Temple. Ezeh 44. 1. 2.
3.

The Tome of their expulsion / must be at that time but Jesus brought in the
Penitent Theif into Paradise / Iuh. 23. 43. The lord repairing unto them for
era^^n a non sake / the Day was of the cooling hand / the Sun derlyning to the
west / and the Time of Bur second Adam his surrendering his Soul to his father
was A batit the 9 howrs (the was Midday) that is / Three in the afternoon: for
the former three howrs darkness / must allude unto the Time of Adam / standing A
miserable s^^ner in Paradise. In the heat of the Day Midday / dynner time and
fit for rasiinge A pleasant apple / Datan must tempt / our ^^^m and so bring
spiritual darkness ones Mankind: whereof when Mankind had feeling / the fly and
sheowd themselves in darkness. From the ^^rt unto the 9 hour / so was darkness
corpor^all ouerspred what time the second Adam was suffcing for the first Adams
Rebellion / Luke 23. 47. Math 27. 46. etc. who upon the ending of the darkness
does drinck bitterness: for that draught finished (Ioh. 19. 28 30.) the bitter
torment due unto Mankind. He there upon ye^^ds up his ghost and repaireth to
heavens Paradise / whither the found sheep the penitent theife / was that Day
present to repair. He that has dronk of Edens 4. waters let him here be
filled with d^uyne Meditation. Paul being here / saw in-effable mystery. 2.
Cor. 12. 4.

An Animaduersion upon 6. and 7.
Jehovah Elohim having in fix dans created all good and very Good: Man and
woman in A true on the 6. day / with the foot of it lend affection dashed the
work of the Potter to peers. Banished therefore in the last 3. hours of the 6.
day / he may go and prepare for Sab^^th solemnization / in the wildernis of the
world. In Paradise he might have soong an E^logie in the wast world / he may go
strain forth an Elegy.

Concerning the nombers of 6. and 7. Heaven and Earth humanity and divinity
procl^^^ them sacced and mystical. In six Mouths the Sun turns from ^^e
T^opikt^ another: and in 6. Moueths / as (...) teach / to the Young in the womb
perfected. The (...) to cut into two ^ees of Signs: the inst 6. decl^ninge
from the Egu^-nocticall to for Nor^^ the other 6. to the South. Every Sign is
by Reason divided into 5 fires of begrees: every degree into te^stres of
^^^m^tes etc. As for the Arith^^et^cians, 6. is to them the golden number:
which Haymon / on Reu. 13 observes on the Beasts 666: called by John. Bole the
number of A Man. And indeed / not only was Man made in the number of 6. but
perfected in the sixth day by Marriage first with woman / secondly with the Man
Christ. The consideration of the first marriage in the sixth day / it may be gave
occasion to Pithagoras sect for calling Marriage A Sepa^^e / that is A number of
6.

But what shall I say of 7: The week of 7. days has not only of Hebrews / but
also of Greeks and Lattins been received and held. From the Grecians therefore
it has the name Hebdowas / and from the Romans Septima ^^. Though the
Aegiptians compted them year somtymes by one Month or 2. or by the Suns sull
course through the Zodiak / as Zenophon deaequivocis notes / yet 7. days was
ever the week. Why should they make 7. days the week / and the seanenth
festival / rather then 6 or 8. or some other number? Suerly / Nature / for the
Mystery sake / held it fast in the hearts of the Gentiles. As for Homer,
Callimachus and others their Prophets how often do they term the Seventh day
holy In the 7. day the Moons shape is altered / and on the 7. day / the Sirfold
creation (as tired with toil) it washed the hands and sat down to Rest.

The 7. day 7. year single and multiplied / they are of the learned Physicians
termed Fatal. And here of arose the Proverb / Seven years suffer A chainge.
unto the Sirk body / every 7. day is Critical or Judicial: for if he sicken in
A hot sign / the 7. day he ^oms unto A cold: if man earthly sign / the 7. day
he suffers A fyru-one etc. and therefore the^ the skillful pronounce of his
state as plainly as one seeing Adam in the wast earth on the 7. day might have
said / this is Adams state. Not but as Picus Mirandala has well proved / the
effect follows the coarse of nature below / not of the Stars s^wposed
above. The Firmaments Ple^ades consists on 7. stars. So both the Pole-artik
or lesser Beare-slat: and 7. in Number are the Planeticall stars / called the
Soul unto the Zodiahs Body / an of them Stars of sovereign use.

But let nature in Heaven and Earth go: ^h the supernatural knowledge that
arises from the sacred Bible of Elohim in the nombers of 6. and 7. In 6. days
the whole host of heaven and earth was perfected / and the Seventh sealed it
by / Genesis 2. 1. 2. Sir are the Lords hatreds / the seventh seals them up /
prou. 6. 16. Sir are the New testaments prophetical Churches Angels. Seals
Trumpets / Dials / but the Seventh seals up all these: as if Ioshuahs 7.
preistes with their seven Hams Horns / should 6. days en compass cursed
Jericho / and in the 7. day with 7. blastes shutter down her walls / Josh. 6.
Let the sad discreet spirit observe the Nombers of 6. and 7. with their
Ad^^^^ts / he shall find wisdom of more worth then Salomons 666. talents of
Gold / 2 Chro. 9. 13. for wisdom is sealed by under 7. pillars / prou. 9. 1.
Golden is the Number of 6. and by the Jubilees 7. single and multiplied is
everlasting fredom and Redemption proclaimed: though one Ages S^nggards laffe
this wisdom to scorn / as wiser in their own conceit then 7. that can tender
A Reason: Prove. 26. 16.

6 Finisheth the work of earth and heaven. Sowles Sabaot Rest is sealed up with
7.
Argument. Chap. IIII. Kain slaughters Habel / Elohim therefore / Leaves him and
His alone to Natures Lore.
Division of the text.
IN this Chap. is laid down an Hystory off Adams first of spring: First in
the Twyns ( Kain and Habel together with Kains Seed. from the Beginning unto
verse. 25.

Secondly in A second Issue of Adam verse 25. 26.

The 1. part handles in the 16. First verses, such things as concern the
Immediate Seed of Adam: from thence unto ver. 25. is handled such things as
concern the Mediate Seed of Adam: viz, the seed of Kain and of his followers.

In the story of his Immediate seed, is considerable, 1. the time of adams
knowinge Heuah viz. Afterward: that is, After that He and she were expulsed
Paradise.

II. Heuahs. Pariture / first of Kain verse. 1. secondly of Habel, verse. 2.
first clawse.

III The Callings of this seed: Kain was bestowed in tilling of ground, and
Habel in keeping of sheep / 2. clawse of verse. 2.

IIII. The maine Narration of them two In which Narration is laid down, first
the spiritual exercise 1. of Kain, verse. 3: sec. of Habel, together with the
Lord his acception first of his Person, secondly of his oblation, verse. 4.

Sec. the Reiection of Kain and his Offringe together with these feet it had in
his heart, manifested externally by the Castinge down his countenance, verse. 5.

Thirdly, the Lord his manner of dealing therefore with Kain. 1. by
interrogatinge the cawse of wrath verse. 6. sec. up laboring to pull away the
cawse from his heart, verse. 7.

Fourthly, the bloody art of Kain, enlarged by circumstance of Craft Verse. 8.

Fifthly, a Dialogne between the Lord and Kain about the bloody art, containing
A Conviction and Condemnation of Kain. Verse. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

Sixthly, the place of Kains h^bitation after Kain forsoo^^ the Lords presence,
Verse. 16.

So much of the history of Adam his Immediate seed, now unto unto that of his
seek Mediate,

The mediate seed is the seed of Kain and his followers.

I. Kain begets an Henoch to whom he dedicated A city he then builte, Verse.
17.

II. That Henoch begot Irad: that Irad, Mehujael: that mehujael, Methushelah.
that Methushelah, Lamech, Verse. 18:

III. Then the progente of Lamech:

First, by introducinge hun with two wives ( Adah and Zillah) verse. 19.

Secondly, by settinge down their wombs fmite. Adah has Iabal. conninge in
tents and cattle, Verse. 20. secondly, she has Iub^l the Arch^^^sitian, Pers.
21.

Zillah has Tubalkain A Master in Brass and Iron: secondly she brings
forth Naamah his sister, Verse. 22.

IIII. Lamech (father of these natural Artistes) is introduced speakinge unto
his coople of wines.

His speech is A demonstration of his hearts proud cruelty (Verse. 23.) Mounded
on A misapplication of the Lord his words to Kam, Verse. 24.

So far the first general head.
The history of Adam his second issue (lyinge in the two next verses.

I. Does first offer unto us, his second ymmediate Seed, the name and reason
thereof: Verse. 25.

II. Secondly, of his other seed mediate (namely, of his Sons son, Enosh of
Sheth) together with A miserable Adiunct of that age: then the name of lehouah
begone by men to be profained for Invocation.

Elucidation.
BEfore hash been laid down the Creation / ^ut his strength, chap 1. and 2.
secondly, in his defect. chapter 3 Now follows the Effect, of the former / which
is / as was his Cawse, twofolde. The 1. effect or thing cawsed is a strong
seed: the second a defectuie or weak seed. And becawse God his thoughts are
about Man his thoughts / Isa. 55. 7. 8. therefore we must ever here after
measure Power by Godliness: and Defect by ungodliness: for all transgression is
a defect.

The Sabaot slipped over as in silence / for with how perplered spirits might
Man and woman pass it? the next news we hear of them is / Adam after his
expulsion / knew his wife carnally: where upon the conceived / and brought forth
Kain and then Habel. Kain A thing acquired or obtained and in possession:
Habel, A thing Vanishing. The ^an es cawse me to think that the Parents fore
saw in the spirit that the eldest should possess the Earth / but the second
should quickly vanish front the Earth. Sem have taught that the parents so named
them: as glorying in the first / but neglecting he second. No circumstance will
afford that sense: nay / her speech verse. 25. does plainly teach that she had
the spirit of prophecy: as also / that Habel was demed excellent / though
vanished, Opti^^^^^on o B^lla.

The sal^e Spirit that Named them / the same disposed of them for callings.
Rain packs to the Earth: Habel to the flock. The sons of the worlds Monarch /
must not play the Gentlemen.

Da Adam hackt, vnd Eua span,
Were was da ayn Edel-man?
In Engl.

When Adam delu'd and Eve span,
Where was then the Gentleman?
But marck verse. 2. that keeping of sheep is preferred to Earth tilling. All
the Patriarche before and David after the law were sheep-herds: mystically
imp^rtinge the chief sheopherd of our fowls.

As Adam Allotted them to bodily labor / so he taught them sowles exercise /
namely / to offer sacrifice to the hiest. Kain brought an o^lation / but Habel
himself brought an Oblation: that is / Kain brought it by the hand of another /
as by Custom / or by Fear: but his brother of Conscience that moved him
within. Hereof it rain / that thelder his work was evil, the Yongers good /
1. Ioh. 3. 12. for God ioneth A cheerful giver / 2. Cor. 9. 7.

The (...) which John Baptize pointed at / Isaiah fore spoke of / Him Habel
significatiuely offered: Gregor. Moral. lib. 29. Kains sacrifi^^ / Gregory (in
pastoral. admon. 11.) calls Hosti^^ and indeed / it being of the Earths
fruits / it was like to answer unto the Meat offering. (...). 2: as Habels to
the Burnt offering or Holocaust / Leuit. 1. and therein observe the Mystery.

Kain not daring in or nere his fathers lodging to execute his wrath / A sign
that Parents looked to his steps / til he could draw him aside / he hangs his
head as Male content. Jehovah (the hearts Physio gromer) fynds out the For by
his foot / and coun^^ceth his heart of Euel / by the external appearance of
ill: not saying (as the ^^omanistes would) that he had natural power whereby he
might overrule his affection within / but that Habel inasmuch as he was the
younger / should he subject unto him: the ^^ke subjection we se in Iaakob ^o
Esan. Genesis 32. 4. etc.

But Civil subjection could not satisfy Kain, (for Religion was his erraud) he
therefore al^^ring Habel into the field / sla^s him and pits him. But He (to
whose ties all things are naked and open) pursues the Murderer with (...), he
apprehends him / conuicts him of Bloodshed / pronounces him Nagn A ^^ague /
and so sets upon him the brand of ^^dgment: but ^^ch prouiso / that his further
punishment should not be committed to Man. what gets thou on that (...)? In the
state of (...) is most fearful to fall into the hands of the living Lord.

Hab^^ was the first type of Mankind stained with blood and he^e with our
Savior and sheophred of Sowles (Jesus) he rubbed the Scribes and Pharisees on
the Gall. Math. 3. 35.

verse. 16. Then Kain went out. He went out. with A vengeance / from the
presence of the Lord / into the land of Nod / that is / of wandringe / and no
doubt possessessed Nedudim, with vvandringe thoughts, and distractions of
mind. It was situated East from Heden: There he had by his wife / and who was
his Wife / but his sister? an Henoch: to the solemnization of whose Memorial /
he builds A Cyty / And calls it by his name / ^enoch. For thruterpretation of
the Name / look into the next chapter / for I^reds Henoch / who was better
taught / and to A better work dedicate / then was This.

Verse. 19. And Lamech. This Lamech (the Son of (...), the son of M(...)el, the
son of Irad, the son of Renoch of Kam) he took Adah and Zillah for wylles. The
First ^oble wi^^ be / but not the ^ast: for after him / not only wicked but
also godly Fathers were so possessed / what then? was it A spit? Ma^ach^* chapter
2. 14. 15.) ^^^eighinge against spiritual fornication / he labors to conu^rt
Israel thereof by allusion to Marriage corporeal / god having at first /
because he would have A godly seed / made to Man but one woman / though
otherwise / for abundance of Spirit / he could have made more.

As our Savior Math. 19. 8. in the que^tion of divorce / faith: from the
beginning it was not so, so say I of maryinge with this wives. Yet as he
there passes by M^ses mi^dly / because he was drawn thereto by obstimacy of
Man's heart / so I pass eas^^ by Lamech because Generation of Children for
passefu^nge the earth / might plead A Necessity. As for David and Others of
the faithful / in whose t^me there was no such necessity of Generation simply.
though in respe^t of fore figu^^nge something there might be A dispensation in
heaven saying the holy gh. has passed by them so easly as he has / I neither
dare boldly / as have specially late writers / either censure it Before or
Under the Law. Se chap. 29.

Lamech his slau^^ringe speech to his wives / Chrysostom affirms to be A
Confession of his Syn unto them. The Hebrews say that he unawares slew Rain in
a bush / and that should be his syn: lose his lib. 1. chap. 3. and Lyra on Genesis
4. A^gustine faith / that Lamech affirms how vengeannce should com seven fold
on him that sltas Kain. and therefore much more on ^^m that should slay Lamech:
saying this Murder should fall after A Murder before adjudged. And true it is /
that after the repeat of the law an Offense is less tolerable. But it seems
to me / that here as Mars with (...), or A bragging Th^aso with his Lais, he
boastes of his M^ndes blauery: as one not so base minded that will pocket up an
injury: And why? because Ieho^^h countenancing Kain, in alottinge a seven
fold plague to him that should hurt him / no doubt / he would much more bear
him out in his bloodshed. And why much more? because (forsooth) He had given
unto him such Inventiue children: The first Son A Tent maker: The second a
Musician: The third a Mettle smith / his daughter Noe^ma as autients write /
the Invent or of wool dressinge and cloth-makinge) which sense not only
follows orderly in the text / because he bursteth out into this speech /
after he had the children / but also cohereth with the form of application
common unto the wicked: For if God bless them in outward things / they then
say: God would not so beautify them / were it not he approves their faith and
conversatio^. 70 times 7. times we are to pardon our brother transgressinge
toward us / Math. 18. 22. not so to take or desire vengeance of any: Least of
all to be countenanced of God for doing ^^olence or injury to any in a
bravery.

Verse. 25. And Adam k^evve his wife. The seed of Christ is raised up in Sheth
(in Engl. ^ foundation / or pat) because he was Put in the ro^^ne of Habel, for
A figure of the Churches Foundation. Christ in Habel sufferinge / se^^ed A
vapne thing / but in the next place he will appear the Foundation that Paul
laid: 1. Cor. 3. 11.

Sheth begets Enosh (off Anash, signifyinge a Man) whereoff comes Anush,
Greyse or hemnes: and it may be / because this heavy news coms in with him:
Then begone the name of Jehovah to be profaned by calling upon.

The Hebrew is Huchal, the Passive of Chalal to wound or slay. Some translate it
Ceptum est, ^^ begone: some Prophanatum est it begone to be profaned. Off this
last judgment are all Hebrews / as Vatablus and Lyra observe: Whereunto Ari^s
Montanus consents in the Margen: and thereto I am forced to Consent from the
consideration off Enosh his name / as before: secondly / from the heavy Adjunct
or trobl^^s marriage off that age joined hereunto in the begininge off the 6.
chapter: For the fifte to but A parentheticall Repeat. Object. Men begone not
now to profane Jehovah for that was don before in Kam etc. I answer: This
speech is spoken of Sheth his pe^igre / not of Kains: we se the ho. gh.
disdaineth to number the years of Kains feed / which precisely he observes in
Sheths / this therefore and therefore urges me to interpret it profane: as
though Moses had said: Now (Sor^we to think) the Sons of God begone to pollute
the name of Jehovah by prophaine Invocation, and that by maryinge with the
house of Kain / the seed of the Serpent: good for nothing but Inventinge
temporary Science and connige.

The Iues hold that here Idolatry begone to be hatched: nor is it unlike: for
Solomon (the Perle of wit) associatinge profane weomen / how suddenly was he
sowl^ drawers to adore spiritual Imagerie.

Argument: Chap. 5. A Catologue of Adam and his Seed / from First unto the
flood / whereof we reed.
Division of the text.
THis chapter contains the Generation of the Faithful their Line from Elohim
his hand unto the flood. That is don:

1. First, by settinge down the Metaphisicall or supernatural Generation of
Adam, created according to the likeness of Elohim, Verse. 1. 2.

II. Secondly, by settinge down the physical or natural Generation of Adams
off-springe, in the remnant of the Chap.

ELVCIDATION.
VErse 1. etc. This is the book. Here is A Sepher / that is / an Enumeration
or Numerall of Adam. Discoueringe here Adams Catalogue / the ho. gh.
vouchsafes not to mention any one of Rams house: because the wicked Apostates
(Satan's seed) are but A stame in the churches Catalogue / as Heretics ^re A
bl^t to the Agapae or feasts of tone / Jude 12. The wicked shall not stand in
the assembly of the righteous.

E^ohim creates Adam (for both He and. She are termed Adam verse. 2.) in his
own similitude. What this Likeness or Image is we heard before / Chap. 1. and
2. (...)o^nus (...) distinguishes between Image and Lykenes this: that was
Lykenes that Adam lost (...) but still he kept the image. But Aphonsus de
Castro (in his book against Heresies) convinces that by Sa^^s speech / Col.
3. 10. where he wills men to be again made new (not after the Lykenes / but)
after the image of God: because man sy(...)ge* was ^epr(...)d of the jmage of
Elohim. Image and likeness therefore are all one / and not herein dis^^et or two
sondrie things.

verse. 3. Now Ada(...)ed. That which before was spoken in A word / is now
e(...)^^ed in particulars. The head of every household faithful is set down
and then their years. First their age in their first borne: sec. of their
Death. The Years* memorial of the just is blessed / but the name of the
wicked both rotte / Prou. 10. 7.

Enosh had kenan: derived I think not of (...) as was kain / but of kanan to
build A nest: and he helps out the Neste of cleave birds / as Ram did the
Cage of unclean and hateful byrds. He begets Mahalal^el / of Halal to praise
/ let him singe Hallelu^^ah for mercy received. He begets Iared, I thinck
derived of Iated to descend. And like enough that Religion went do^^eward /
because his Son Heno^h made flat separation.

Henoch / in Engl. Taught or dedicate: verily / as he was taught of God / so he
did dedicate himself wholly unto the Lord his service. A sharp prophet he was
(Jude 14. and 15.) for his help zeal god took him mira^ulously from Men. One
of the first goades that ever moved me to dedicate my self unto the work of the
Lord / was this Name.

Bar-kepha Syrian, bishop in Beth-raman, in his commentatie of Paradise / He
(also many Aunticuts) have taught that Henoch / was translated into Paradise /
from whence in the last age he shall ^om with Hel^as against Antichrist. If
first they would mean into Paradise above. 2. Cor 12. 4. (for the Other with
Heden his Container has the glorious trees lodged in the Earth. Ezekiel. 31. 16.
18.) secondly / if they meant that Other Persons should be sent of God endried
with like spirit / as our savior expounds El^as by John. Baptist. math. 11.
10. 14. the I could easily subscribe to it.

In the Name of Henoch there is an old book / containinge incredible things
/ as that Giants then had Angels (not Men) for Fathers etc. but rejected for
Apo^ryphal: Beda on ep. of Jude. I^de his epistle was sometimes because of
Henochs prophecy rejected / but unworthily. Some think Jude received that by
tradition / but that judgment makes for poper^^ and Iudaisme* (...) Bro^ghton
demes it Iudes collection from Moses speech: and indeed / there is no breaker
up of the Lord his word / but he raises often Long speech from few words /
and builds on A probable ground (though small) right statel^ edifices. But
(as in my Bibles breife) I deem he had This / as also that of Satan and Michael
s(...)ge / by immediate Revelation / as Paul had the sor^eters names Iannes and
Iambres. Sed (in l^citis) suum c^^q^^ Palatum, sit.

Henoch begets Mathu^helah / A Spoiler of death* who had borne unto him La^e^h
(Smitten) for he was smitten in his soul at the sight of Religions r(...)e.
Unto him the Lord gives Noah (Rest) for his father fore saw in the Spirit /
by him there should be Rest unto the church. Noah begets ^aphet (Perswadinge)
then Shem / A Name / for God put his name There / Deuteronomy. 12. 5. Shem is A Name /
and Sham is There. It signifies also Fame / and who more famous? Then he had
Cham sig. Indignation: and an Hare brain he was disdaminge his father.

Q^e^^on* Saying the ungodly marriages next spoken of are by some of these Men's
sons (for here until noah is only enumbred the First fruits) how comes it
about that More Sons of Noah then one are here nombred? Answ. First / because
Noah his Eldest (namely Iaphet) was not the Lord his first-fruites: secondly /
that by the Rehersall of these 3. an Entrance may be given to there seque^t
Triparti^e story: from which three the second world was to rise / as the first
fed Adam, kain and Sheth.

Old Adan (the figure of the New Adam) his 12. Stars 1. Sheth. 2. Enosh. 3.
Kenan. 4. Mahalaleel. 5. Iared. 6. Henoch. 7. Mathushelah. 8. Lameth. 9. Noah.
10. Iaphet. 11. Shem. 12. Cham.

Let Cham be Is^ariot and the Apostate
Star: he will prove no better anon.
For their Birthes / Deaths and Ages they lived in / s^ the following Table
gathered by Master Broughton and Master More.
ADAM created by Elohim he begets at 130. SHETH. He at 235. 105. ENOSH. He
begets at 325. 195. 90. KENAN. He at 395. 265. 160. 70. MAHALAT^EL. He begets
at 460. 330. 225. 135. 65. IARED. He at 622. 492. 387. 29^. 227. 162. HENOCH.
He at 687. 557. 452. 362. 292. 227. 65. Mathushelah. He at 874. 744. 639. 549.
479. 414. 252. 187. LAM^CH. In his 930 800. 695. 605. 535. 470. 308. 243. 56.
Adam dies. 987. 857. 752. 662. 592. 527. 365. 300. 113. Henoch is taken (...)
1042. 912. 80^. 717. 647. 582. 355. 168. Sheth dies. 1056. 821. ^31. 661. 596.
369. 182. NOAH Bone. In his 1140. 90^ 815. 745. 680. 453. 266. 84. E^o^sh
dies. 1235. Look 910. 840. 775. 548. 361. 179. Kenan dies. 1290. on the
Right 895. 830. 603. 416. 234. Mahalaleel dies. 1422. had for the Person 962.
735. 548. 366. Ia^ed dies. 1536. his Birth and Death. Then 846. 662. 480.
CXXY. begin. 1556. cast thy Ey unto the Left 869. 682. 500. 20. IAPHET borne
1558. hand, and in the same Line directly backwarde, thou shall 871. 684. 502.
22. 2. SHEM borne 1651. 964. 777. 595. 115. 95. 93. Lamech dies. 1656. have
his Age in all former years. Matushelah dies. 969. 600. 120. 100. 98. The
Del^g*

Nota. Adam his Pillar downward, it is the Age of the world* As for Himself,
tho^^ may se he dies in the 930 y. of the world: which was the 800. of
Sheth: the 695. of Enosh: the 605. of Kenan: the 535 of Mah. etc.

Argument, Chap. 6. Mixed marriage / causes Jehovah his jre: God with Noah
smites covenant entire.
Division of the Text.
THis chap. contains A Manifestation of Jehovah his Justice and Mercy unto
them of the old world, for 120. years before the Deluge.

I. His Justice appears in the first seven verses.

II. His Mercy in the Sequel of the chapter.

I. His Justice is made notable I. from the Mouinge cause. verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
set down in A certain Particular, in the first 4. verses: Then in an
universal, verse. 5. II. From the Lord his Resolute purpose, verse 6. 7.

1. The Particular mouinge cause, is, Mixed Marriage: set down first from the
circumstance off time, viz, when men and weomen begone to be multiplied, verse.
1. secondly, set down from the consideration of the persons maryinge. viz. God
his sons with Men's daughters, verse. 2. (The Lord his 120. years lenity set
down Obiter, for the clearinge of his iustite, verse. 3.) Thirdly, set down
from the consideration of the Lord-lyke mis begot fruit, yss^^ge from such
Mongrel-mariage, verse. 4.

2. The Universal ill is laid down, verse 5. First in that it is said, His
wickedness filled the earth: secondly, that is hearts thoughts were daly only
evil.

Iehouahs Resolution is, First to pull his Conseruinge hand from the Creature,
verse. 6. Where he repents him of that he ^ad dow: secondly he resolves to
send forth his destroyinge hand: first against Mankind: then against Inferour
Creatures, verse. 7.

II. The second General head, namely, the Manifestation of his mercy, is this:
In the burninge time of his Ire, he provides for the deliverance of his
church, wheroff Noah was the Arch-prophet by open calling. And this is don:
First by settinge down the cause off mercy ( Noah found favor in his sight,
verse. 8.) Then by layinge down certain circumstances egreginge his mercy
rowards Noah.

1. First in that the Lord gave Children unto him in that corrupt age, keeping
therewithal him and his from the multitudes Corruption and cruelty; insinua*
^^, verse. 9. 10. 11. 12.

2. Secondly, in his directinge Noah, how to escape the decreed Catholicall
deluge, in the residue off the Chap: First by enforminge his Ear, unto the
last verse: then / in that verse conforminge his heart to the former
information.

The Information contains A Recapitulation off vengeance decreed, verse. 13.
Then is set down the means ( the Arc) whereby Noah should be preserved. The
14. 15. 16. verse. Contain A Description off the Arc. Then the Decreed
vengeance being (by the way, verse. 17.) re-touched, therewithal is set down
the Use off the former Arc: Namely, that Noah and his three sons with their
4. wynes, together with cooples off inferior (earth and air) Creatures with
their natural sustenance, should be bestowed in the Arc: verse. 18. 19. 20. 21.

The Conformation off Noah's heart to the former instruction, it is set down in
the last verse: First at large, in these words: Noah therefore did according
to all that the Lord commanded him: Secondly, more succinctly in these words:
So did he.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. 2. 3. So when Men: The multiplication off men brings in with it
(through Satan's work) A multiplication off Syn: And syn multiplied cries unto
heaven for cuttinge off the Subject off Syn. The Iues dream here that some
Angels fell from heaven and so married / or (as Incub^) Had copulation with
humane kind. So dreamed he that thr^st forth the book off many lines in
Henochs name. The hebrew word Nephilim (translated Gyant^) coming of Naphal to
fall / that it may be caused them to stumble at their Fathers called the Sons
off god. The Sons off God (the title makes: their syn the greater) they be
off Sheths family / who match with the no^^ fair Atheistes off Rains house. As
these profane weomen are termed the daughters off Men: so David calls the
adversaries off the Church / Sons off Men, ps. 4. 2. The Irreligious are but
bare Men: the Religious off the Lord are more then Men: Not only dignified with
the title / God his Sons, 1. Ioh. 3. 1. But also with the name off Gods /
John. 10. 34. 35.

Well it was with the church while she stood aloof from the Deuels chapel /
but woe(...) here unto it / for miringe the holy seed with the profane. Se
Ezra, 9. 2. The Ophita) worshipped the Serpent for Christ / as though Christ
should ali^re Mankind to such preceptbreath / that so he might manifest himself
it savior / and the Kainits honored Kain for A Father and Judas Iscariot for
A brother: that which these ^eretikes do openly / all the Enemies of the church
by ioyninge in Satan his common work against it / they do enact in mystery.

The Lord saying / my spirit shall not always be sheathed, is (as I
understand it) as if he said: my spirit shall not ever show it self patient
as A sword slepinge in the scaberd: and therefore now I will send it forth to
threaten destruction by Noah unto the whole world not repentinge after 120. y.
His saying that Man his days should be 120. ye^res, many have const^ned it to
be an abridginge of Man his natural age but the whole stone ouerturneth that:
As Ierom in his Hebraicall traditions has well observed.

That the lord gave unto them 20 times (...) Years / oh the Real and Mystical
mercy of god unto Mankind, Oh blind They, that they no better used the Years
of the History: and oh wicked We, that the m^sticall acceptable years of the
lord are no better nombred of us. Teach me o lord so to number my weeks of
Years / as I may apply mine heart to wisdom: for herein lies the destinye of
our worlds downfall / but who will without mockinge believe the spirit that
should by Noah's ministry unwrap this web? Paul saw / and I doubt not many
shall se more then is to be unsealed for ever.

Verse. 4. There were Gigants. Nephel is an untimely birth: such are these
Nephilim: and an untimely birth is better then they. They may welbe called
Fallers / not as Pagnine, Va^^^las and others have said / because others fell
at the beholdinge / or / before them thorough fear or otherwise / but /
because like an untimely fruit from the Tree they drop from the loins of
Sheth^ people: fallinge from religion by fallinge into such marriage: fallers
ab-ortiue and the untimely brood of Apostates.

These Misshapen Tyrants were reputed of that old world for men of Renown: so
have been our spiritual mongrel Lords / God pull them soon down. As were
that ages Nephih^, so are our ages Anakim, start-vps in the Temple of god
exalting them selves as God: but Noah has read their destiny: They must down
with A vengeance.

Verse. 6. Then it repented Jehovah. Repentance follows an Oversight: but in
God who is wisdom it self there cannot properly fall an Oversight: therefore in
god there is not properly Repentance. This Anthio-popathi or uttering him self
as a man affecti^ned / is but his No^^ce like clipping of heavens language /
that so we Earth-babes may by such language (as by A Ladder) clyme toward the
knowledge of his nature opposite to transgression. But hereby let the faithful
learn / that nothing with God is more hateful / then the Church her mixture
with the world: wicked Preistes of this age regard not this that jumble Christ
and Belial / light and darkness together: though indeed they may have no
communion together / 2. Cor. 6.

Verse. 8. 9. But Noa^h found grace. Noah being A just man in his time / perfect
in comparison of others / he found favor. How is he proved just? He walked
with God / when others walked with the Deuel. Their walkinge with Satan was by
shaking off Religion and pollutinge Iehouahs name: His walkinge with GOd was by
vpholdinge religion and hallowinge the name of the Hiest. Civil Justice and
vprighenes without Religion / is as A crab with A red side: but coop led with
Religion / it is as apomegraned of Paradise.

The Lord shows grace to Noah 1. in forewarninge him of the worlds Deluge: 2.
in biddinge Noah to prepare for him and His: their safegarde / an Ark.
Concerning the Ark / he. 1. teaches him of what stuff: 2. of what form it
shall be In which ark / as he himself should be preserved / so also that which was
his: 1. his Children: 2. cooples of every creature / together with their
furniture. Unto every particular of which Injunction divine / the Divine
Prophet is conformable.

The Arks stuff is of Ghopher: the which word as Hebrews write is not once
again found in the Lord his Book. Some do turn it / vvood (...)red: some
Cedar, Pynetre, Lightvvood. What kind of wood soever it was / Light it was: and
there unto I am the rather induced / because in Genesis 19. 23. Gaph(...)
(Brimstone / A mounting mineral) it is hence diduced.

The Cubit common / is the lenght of A foot and an half. The Cubit here / I
take to be that of Geometry (as does O^igen against Celsus which contains 6.
common Cubits: and so is it here commoly received of the Hebrews. The Loftes
are but three (First / second / third) though others have taught more. Curiosiues
I pass by.

By this Ark I typically understand 1. the Excellency of the visible church
which preserves her childen and all their furniture. Whcih Church orderly
distributeth her creatures into several Classes or co^^es. The Philosophers
cold say: Tria sunt Omnia. And behold here the Roumes were hy / hyer / highest.
As the scripture teach A syn against the Father: A syn against the Son: A syn
against the ho. gh. so in the Church / some are more capable of the father his
Natural creation: some of the Son his spiritual regeneration: some of the
Spirits mysteris in contemplation: yet Omnia ab vno and ad vnum / yet all these
Guiftes from One God / and that unto one End: the praise of his name.

2. It may signify the same work in one singular Person / for though all
Violets have not one ^ue / yet they all smell sweet: and so Origin
tropilogically applies it: teaching this Arc so to be built in Man's heart /
and possessed with the threfold sense of scripture / Literal / Moral /
Allegorical / every affection hewed and squared for ad-aptinge A place for the
Lords Bibliotheca or Library / drawn from the Aposticall and Prophetical
Volumes.

Noah must do nothing in the Church Type / but according to Iehouahs
pattern: Nor must any man / were he as great as Noah / do any thing in the
Church her self / in hewinge / sqaringe / rejectinge / acceptinge / joining /
polishinge / placinge / off any thing discrepant to Analogy and proportion of
faith administered / 2. Tim. 1. 13. and 2. 15. Romans 12. 3. 1. Cor. 14. 40. This
work must be suerly pitched: not as did certain in Ezekiels time. Chapter 13. 9.
10. etc. After such dawbinge / the Ship will leake: nay / one bouncinge billowe
will splet the Back in pieces. Desperaetly fail they / that entertain such
Prophets for Pilots: Or hier such H^wers to frame A spiritual buildinge
against unmerciful tempests.

Verse. 22. Noah did. For the 120. y. thence unto the flood. Noah fynds himself
occupied in the allotted work: the spirit of Messiak preachinge after A sort /
by every stroke of his Are and hammer unto the cares of the wicked. What art
thou doing quoth one? What is the Old doatinge fool doing quoth another? He
and his blows on the timber do reply thus. The world shall be drowned: the
vnrepent damned: Repent, believe and enter with me into this Ark, as into the
Rock Jesus. Cant. 14. and so ye shall be saved. The wretches rebel / 1. Pet.
3. 20. they laffe in their Sle^e / return to their wine: build / plant / marry
till Vengeance take them nappinge.

As the days of Noe came suddenly unexpected / so likewise shall the coming
of the Son of man be. For as in the days preachinge the flood, they did eat and
drinck, marry and give in marriage unto the day that Noe entered into the Ark:
and knevve nothing till the flood came and took them all away: so also shall
the coming of the Son of Man be. Math. 14. 37. 38. 39. Let the Despisers Mock
on. Loosers ^^ust needs have their sayings.

Argument: Chap. 7. Jehovah calls: Noah and his obey / The floods of waters
cover all straightway.
Division of the text.
I. FIrst I observe the Lord his speech to Noah: verse. 1. 2. 3. 4.

II. Sec. the Obedience off Noah and the inferior Creatures: Thence unto the.
17. verse.

III. Thirdly, the execution off judgment upon the world: in the remnant off
the chap.

I. In the Lords speech obseruable, 1. his care off preserving, first Noah and
his family, drawn from the vprightnes off Noah, verse. 1. Then off preseriunge
inferior Creatures, drawn from the end: verse: To become seed upon the whole
earth, verse. 2. 3. Secondly, there is set down in Iehouahs speech, A seven
days forewar^^nge off the Deluge: verse. 4.

II. The Obedience of aged Noah and the other Creatures, is laid down, thence
unto the 17. verse. And this is don, 1. in A General term laid down, verse.
5. Then by rippinge up the Obedience off both sorts off Creatures: sealed up
by Jehovah shutting the door upon them: in the remnant off the verses.

III. The Execution off the Lord his Judgment is set down: 1. In the waters
preuaylinge: verse. 17. 18. 19. 20. secondly, in the destruction off all Flesh
(exceptinge that in the A^lie) and that by the said swelling waters: Thence to
the end.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. etc. And Jehovah said. The Patriarch his vprightnes / brings welfare
to his whole household: they must all into the Ark. Off more virtue is the
Obedience off our Noah Christ in whom the father Rests well pleased with all
such as hear him / Math. 17. 5. Cham the turkinge hypocrite (for if the
Church consist but off 8. Persons / two to One / but there is some hypocrite)
for the season he fares the better / for being at league with the Church.

For the cooples off beasts and birds much question many make. The Hebrew
readinge Se^uen and Seven off cleane-ones / I understand thereby 7. Males / 7.
Females: and so 7. coople. Of the unclean it barely redinge A Coople: I
thereby think one Male one Female / sufficient for their generation.

These that think there was Coition betwixt Man and woman as also between other
creatures in the Ark / I deem it A conjecture without book: for as Rabbi Sa.
Well says / it was the time off Universal tribulation: and therefore more like
they abstained from fleshly appetite / as did Man and beast in Niniuehs
humiliation. The speech verse. 7. Noah and his 3. sons: Then after them / the 4.
wives entringe the Ark apart / as separated from their husbands / it may
insinuate also their being so sundred within the Ark for that season. And had
not crooked Cham humbled himself in abstinence and prayer for the season (and
the Lord countenanced such obedience in the Niniuets out off the Covenant) I
could not think but the Lord would have pulled out the wretch. Verse 4 Seven
days hence. The Hebrews hold that these 7. days were Mathus^elah his Lament
season. In this year he died / but whither in this week I knoe not.

Verse. 11. In the 600, y. of Noah's life, in the second Month the 17. day of
the Month, in the body of that day

About this Month is no little Controversy because the Iues begone not the
year in all accounts alike. Their Ancient account / according to which they
begin their ^ection in Genesis / it begins the year with Tishri /
containinge part off our September and October. Their festival account is with
Nisan or Abib, appointed to be their first / Exodus 12. 2. and 13. 4: in regard
of the former / the seventh: and contains part of March and April so termed.
They hold the former Marese^an / of Joseph called Maisenane / to be the
Beginning off the year natural: because they think the world was then created.
But saying that season is Autumn tide that cannot be so / says the learned
Scaligerus and others. And why? They answer: In the third day / the Earth was
enjoined to bring forth every green thing / the worlds begininge therefore
with Nisan the spring season.

Not troublinge my brain with their divised scruples: and minutes of time / I
reason contrary-wise thus first it is granted by them all that Tishti is most
aunciently taken of the Hebrews for the first Month natural: and this does
Rabbi Eliezer hold fast / say Rasb. Iosue and his late disciples what they list
against this place. Secondly / seeing the Lord in Exodus 12. 2. says / that
thenforth Abib should be Nisan the prince off the Months / it is plain inoughe
that this Month became first accidentalle: as Lita well says / that Alexander
his first year 1. Math. 1. is called the first off the Greeks kingdom /
though the kyndom was before him etc. and if they must now begin a new account
/ for begininge the year with the springes Aequinoctial, it is evident enough
that they before begone their account from Autumnes Aequinoctiall: for with the
Aequality, off the one or the other they must begin: but it appears from
Exodus and all hebr^e antiquity / that Nisan came to be first but
Accidentally: therefore the natural year begone with Tishti. Thirdly / their
natural reason from the third days work / it proves not what they would: for I
would have them to tell me if so Apples can be flourishinge in their hue in the
Springes begininge? If they say noe / as they needs must then how comes it
about that Heuah in the sixth day did eat the alluringe Apple. It appears by
Paradise trees bearinge the^ pleasant fruit / that it was Autumn not Spring
season: and therefore the Iuish collection to me most probable: that Adam had at
first / not an expectation / but / A possession off harvest fruits to his
hand. Adam being allotted to eat such fruits as (...)not Abib yields: and
Paradise (as learned consent) being A work off the third Day: and it were but A
dream to fr^ that Gardens grouth from the order off the Earths first nature.
Fowrthly / the figure and the thing figured / the first Adam and the second do
^o correspond / for Jesus was borne in Tishti or September as Math. Beroal
dus, cron. lib. 4. Chap. 2. has proved / and with him begone our second /
figured and spiritual Creation. That the begininge off the natural year /
according to the Worlds creation / was with Autumn it seems so to me most
probable.

Now touching the time off this flood the second question arises. Does Moses
account here according to the Month natural or festival? The next Chap.
ver. 11. does open that: for the Dove there brings to Noah an Olive leaf /
and when puts out the Olive? Pliny says thus: Concipiunt Vites et Ole^
vergiliatum exortu, the ^ynes and Olives conceive in the rising off the stars
Ver(...). Now these stars placed by Caleyinus in the knee / by Seruius before
the knee / by Higin^s behind the end of Taurus: but by others I think more rigt
in the superhumerall of Taurus they are the Plejades or 7. stars that arise
above the earth in the spring time (for Taurus in the second month of the
Spring) it thereby appears that the waters reculed in the Vernall season:
yea in the 27. day of this second Month was the Earth dry and Noah called
forth. This same Month twelf-month before / and te^ days sooner of the Month /
he entered the Ark. Moses account of the Month here is therefore festival:
Omitting the Natural account as he was taught before the writing here of:
and kepinge fast the account enjoined by Jehovah, as A treasury full of
heavens wisdom. So briefly to both the questions.

Noah and his 7. being shut in with Iehouahs hand / happy were they off such A
dorekeper / the Mongrell seed / oh methinkes I se them ^on to the Mountains /
clyme trees / skuddle close in their Cabins: but the waters off Iehouahs w^^th
preuailinge 15. cubits hier then the Mountains (I hope Ogge was not above that
pitch) it quickly set my mountinge Mates wet shod.

Verse. 23 So he destroyed. All beasts and birds perishinge with Man from the
face off the earth / what because off the water-creatures / I mean such as
live in the waters? No doubt they were preserved in their kinds: and therefore
Noach never bid ^o take any of them into the Arc. Therefore the earth animals
perished rather then those of the water / because says Al^ha. they lived of
the Earth accursed: and indeed the Earth not water was expressly cursed. These
Aquatils are therefore in time to me / such of Mankind of god Elect / as the
Lord in the multitude of waters (that is people Reu. 17. 15.) preserves /
though not with in the Visible church of God.

Verse. 24. And the waters prevailed. Many seking to darken the Lord his work
/ they have imputed this Inundation to natural influence of stars in A watery
sign. To these fools I say thus: Let this Deluge begin either in (...) or
Aries before him / or Ge mini after him / yet not any of these three howses
cold naturally afford such an Effect. Secondly they ought to learn that the
Philosopher lib 2 Meteor does teach them / that when the Sea ^uerflowes one
place of the Earth / then another place of the earth is uncovered that before
was covered: but here all the earth at one instant is covered and that above
the hiest mountains. Thirdly if there should after the world was aged 1656. p.
be A natural influence bringing forth such an ouerfloe / how haps it there
beuige since that flood above three times so many years that yet there has
not been so much as one other such Trigon? This natural conclusion is not
unlike to Harueys planet conjunction. Nay I e contra affirm rather this: as
the Sun was eclipsed what time the Son of god suffered and that contrary to
nature / for that feast was kept in the full Moon / the sight whereof caused
Dio^isius Areopagita then in another contry to say / Either the God of nature
suffers, or the worlds f^a^e is dissol^ed: so at this same time the Order of
Nature suffered / and for plaguinge the Rebels / god who at first bounded the
waters / he now lateth the bridle raynes in the neck / enjoining them by
another Laws to ouerflowe all.

An hundred and fifty days the waters euereased. The cup of his wrath was
filled to the b^^mme: Three full Jubilees of days proclameth his vengeaune on
Transgression.

Argument. Chap. VIII. THe waters cease / Noe does from Ark retire / and
sacrificing / stays God His Ire.
Division of the text.
I. FIrst / Jehovah withdraws His Anger toward the earth: unto verse. 15.

II. Set. he fully reuealeth his Reconcilement to mankind: thence unto the end.

1. The pullinge back his Anger is declared, 1. in Hope administered to Noah of
the Earths drynes: unto Verse. 13. sec. in the dryinge of the earth indeed.
Verse. 13. 14:

1. In that Hope administered to Noah is obseruable, 1. the Cawse: 2: the
Effect. The Cawse of his Hope is drawn from the waters abat^^^ through the
wind sent forth of God, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. The effect off that hope is, 1.
Noah opens the Arc, Verse. 6. sec: he sends forth messengers to e^pie the
Earths state. The messengers are two: the first A Raven, verse. 7. the second A
Dove: thence unto verse. 13.

2. The second Index off Iehouahs wrath appeased, is the Earths dryness: 1.
super-ficially, enlarged with the time off Noah's age, verse. 13. sec. in A more
solid and effectual manner, amplified with his time, verse. 14.

So much for the abatement off Iehouahs anger.
II. The Reveal off his reconcilement with Mankind, it is explayned, 1. in
his powr^full call off Noah, unto verse. 21. secondly, in Iehouahs well
acceptinge Noah's sacrifice, verse. 21. 22.

1. The Calling lies, verse. 15. 16. 17. where commission is given to Noah. 1.
for him selff and his families Exeat the Arc: sec. off the other Creatures.

The Power off that Calling appears in Noah and the residue, 1. In their
Egresse, verse. 18. 19. sec. in Noah his sacrifice, verse. 20.

2. The well acceptinge off Noah's sacrifice (it being A principal effect off
his effectual calling) it is uttered in the effect it had, 1. in Iehouahs
Nostrills ( he therein smelled a Rest) 2. in theffect it had, in his heart: and
that is twofolde: 1. in his commiseratinge the Earth: 2. the living Creature:
He would no more do so, verse. 21. sealed up with A sign off love which should
appear in future Regiment off Nature, verse. 22.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. etc. Now God. The Lord remembers Noah (not that ever he forgot him
and this his recordating his Churches surging estate / is manifested unto the
Patriark and his household by sendinge forth the wind to broe the Earth. The
wynd (as cha. 1.) consistinge off dry Euaporations crossed in their ascension /
and so violently mor^^ge the Air ( I^circo A Plinio ventus defin ^^. flactus
^^rts. lib. 2. C. 43.) it here by Jehovah is appointed to be serviceable to the
Church. Four Angels / Ren. 7. 1. de hold back the wynds from drym^e by
ouerflowinge spiritual humors / to the worlds destruction. Only / whom the
Angel off the East seals / to them the wo^ds benefit (which is to dry and
purify) it is not restrained.

In the 17 day off Tisr^ the Arc rested on the top off Ararat: And in the
first day off T^beth the Mountains tops bared. Forty days affter (toward the
middle off Adar) he sends forth the Ra^^n, but findinge no testplot he
returned. This b^rd off the Gentiles was much looked unto as A foul ommons:
their divination taken either by his Flight or Rokinge. They drive their
^ong-ones far from them: For about a Pillage hardly will be more then A coople.
^o^g lived they are / and tyr Atlike live by spoil: deuouringe quick and dead.
Under the sia^en sent forth at the end off 40. Days as the Deuel affter 40.
days came to sifte Jesus / Math. 4. 2. Though he found no footing in him /
under him (I say) understand the unclean spirited) the Ranen was unclean
(^euit. 11. 15) Who never bring good news to the church: Yet he that is the
fa^^our off all men 1. Tim. 4. 10. Vouchsafes to thielter them cepayring unto
him tired in sackcloth: and so for the season he spared Ahab. 1. King. 21. 2^.
etc.

The Dove secondly is sent forth. She is A ^^rd sociable true to he hereicall
Male / void off Gall / detestinge caryon / feeding on pure things harmeles: in
time off Hawks flight the ^^r^eth by the waters side / ^rpu^ge therein as in
^o glass the ^^wkes soaringe / that so^ thereby she man avoid his pitch. Unto
them the faithful is assi^^lated: Caut. 1. 14. and 2. 14. Psalm. 68. 13. And
herein the Done plaieth the part off an O^angelicall Minister / who unto the
church brings good tydinges in his time appointed: going also and not
returninge: that is / perseuering in the discharge off their commission.

The unclean Ranen flewe to and f^oe but not received into the ^^k as was the
Done. Christ to the savior off all men but specially off them that beleyue.
Cyprian applies the doves truie votage unto the trute number off Father. Son
and Ho. gh. used in Baptism: Epist. ad (...).

(...) / A Prophetess off the Gentiles and no less excellent then Balaam, and
like mough not long after him / as she recites hitherto* The Creation off the
world / off Man / woman / together with their transgression by the serpent and
the ha^^nge down off this general over throe by water: so she / omitting the
^auen does also truly / in her fifth age off the world recount these three
outgates off the (...) effects before uttered. I wonder wh(...) ^ophetesse off
so old standinge / to (...) and the residue off the Old testaments (...) she
foretellinge the birth off Messiah truly his life manner off death etc. As no
holy Canonical prophet to common capa^^t^ more pla^^^^ I wonder (I say) why
her Prophecies are no more looked unto nor regarded Sure I am there is more
dra^^ty in her (...) con^^nge the things she never by life reasoned unto then
in many Christian writers that have liurd sp^ce the accomplish^^ent ^^st the
bodies substance. Think others what then will / the Lord off Marcheston in
Scotland he uttered not the least part off judgment probable / in the
suffiringe Sibylls verses to his work On the Revelation.

Verse. 13. In the 601. y. in the first day of the first Month etc. And in the
Second Month in the 27. day of the Month, the earth was dry. Then God s^^ke
to Noah saying: Go forth of the Ark. If the Year off the Sun existinge off
Mo^eths equal was that whereby the account is here to be made / and so Ios.
Scaligerus would have it / then there was so much difference off time / betwixt
No^h his entering into / and coming out off the Ark / as bitwixt 17. and 27.
But if the Israelites accounted by the ^^are off the Moon / the other
exceeding this 11. days / commonly called the Epactae / then the same day off
17. was (affter the Years revolution / the 27. and so the Day Noah came out it
should be the same wherein he entered as the ordinary Gloss, Lyra, Hugo and
others would have it.

Verse. 15. 16. Then God spoke to Noah saying go forth ^re. 18. Then No^h came
forth. When the Lord ^ids go in and sit close we must do so / Act. 1. 13. and
20. 8: if he bid Go forth and show your selves we must do so: Act. 2. and 5.
20. Cant. 2. 14.

Whereas before the Lord ^ad (...) to enter in and his house / whereupon Noah
and his sons entered first / then Noah's wife and the other w^oman with her: so
here / Noah is ^^d to com forth with his wife etc. Learned have concluded from
the form of speech / that the first commandment ins^^uates A dis-junction of
Noah and his wife for the time they / were to be within / and the latter A
con-joyning off them together again in his their going out. Howsoever the
son off speech afforde this / sure I am (^^^^fore) that the t^me might well
^id them be ^^^ from embracing^ Eccles. 3. 5: It being A tyl^^ off Elohims
indignattion.

Verse. 20. They Noah ^^ilt an Alter. Noah first sekinge the kingdom of God as
the Righteousness thereoff Lo the tempora^^^ things are East upon h^^ Our Noah
Jesus ^^^^^^ge out off the womb off our Nature^ in which womb off our humanie
nature there have been ^. times so many unclean creatures as there have been
clean he steppinge forth and offringe by himself A pure and undefiled
sacrifice to the heavenly father / lo it is so sweet and all sufficiently
sweet in his Noses^^^ls / as he cannot but pronounce himselff well pleased
with all such ^e com unto him by that Ne^^ and Living way. Unto them shall
spring and harvest / winter and Somer be blessed. By Tetragran^maton I. H. V.
H shall not only the Year generally / but also in every off his 4. quarters
particularly be blessed.

That he blesses the year in his parts but with this Limitation off time / so
long as the earth remains, he would thereby intimate that this Corrupt earth
shall not ever endure. No / the heavens and the earth shall war old as A
garment and be chainged: oh heretics and all sorts off wicked / where then is
^^ar Glory? but we look for new heavens (...) new earth which shall continue
before (...) Isa. 66. 12. After the old is melted 2. pet. 3. 10. shall this new
world be wherein shall dwell righteousness / verse. 13. the first (...) off which
kingdom is begone with us here Heb. 12. 26. etc. I note this the rather because
diverse off our A^rians Iuish do teach / that this new holy earth wherein
Rightrousnes only shall reign etc. it shall be before the Latter Day.

That the Lord lays A Law here upon Nature for affordings again Kaijts
Summer / Core^h winter / Katsi^ Harvest / Zeragn sowinge time: it is because
Man's former transgression had dissolved the bonds off Nature / and therefore
not only promised to be restored Generally / but also in the full 4. parts off
the Years division: Somer opposed to winter / and Autumn to the Spring. And
thus / for any thing I can perceive / the Lord was the first quadripartitor
off the year.

Unto Kaijts season give these three Months Tamuz. Ab. Elul.
Unto Coreph Tebeth. shebat. Adat.
Unto Katsir Tisri. Marchesuan. Casleu.
And unto Zeragn do give Nisan or Abib. Ijar. Siuan.

THese that by the Moons course do divide the year into 13. Moons / they do
join A second Adar to the former / but that is off vulgar so^e not so easly
comprehended / as is this division by 12. Months or Signs.

Unto the somer is given these 3. Signs. Ca^cer the Crabfish. Leo the Lion.
Virgo the Virgin.
Unto winter Capricornus the Goat-man. Aquarius the Waterman. Pisces the two
fishes.
Unto Autumn Libra the Balance. Scorpio the scorpion. Sagittarius the Archer.
And to the Springe-time. Aries the Ram. Taurus the Bull. Gemini the Twyns.

Question. why mention you these 12 Iodiacall signs saying they are but
Astrologicall fictions? Ansvv. Because / as I am not unacquainted how
uncertainly men account the Judicial Months / so I propound the Suns signs
for an instance how to begin and finish the Month: least otherwise they should
think Nisan to begin with the first day off March: Ajir with April etc. And
here again the / I cannot speak off our Months names but straight I utter an
Idol.

Objection. Therefore you are an Idolatrer. Answ. You conclude like A Brownist.
for if the mentioninge off an Idol do simply make the mentioner an Idolatrer
/ then Luke Act. 17. 16. 22. and 28. 11. for mentioning Mars, Castor and (...),
he also is an Idolatrer. Q^ Are they Idols? Ansvv. Judge: Mars was A ^uffianly
liar / robber / fighter / etc. who dead / the Gentiles canonized him for the
God off war / calling the planet next above the Sun by / his name. Castor
and Poll^x were 2. brethren / as Poets faigne they were hatched off 2. eggs /
which their great God I^piter in the likeness off A swan procured on Leda,
Castor ready to die / his brother Pollux thorough entreatie obtained off Jupiter,
that he might enterchainge his Immortality with his brothers mortality. Here
upon they because 2. stares in the firmament: the while Castor shines / pollux
is set: when Poll^x rises Castor sets Me presidents I could give You in
the book off God.

Ques. Is it then lawful to take the names off Idols in our lips? Yes / in
this respect that we either weaken them, or at least not strengthen them by our
speech. And therefore as Luke named them 1. for distinction sake: 2. for
discoueringe the Gentiles prophanati^ off the Creature: so did I in ^^^former
speech and therefore I wish our Christian Astrologers to repent their
prophaninge off the hea^^s-face / not so much for drawinge therein Creatures
that are by some reasonable resemblance: as for painting on that Glo^e the
figures of foolerie^ / things that no where are / and therefore their
resembla^ce in falsehood.

As for Preachers to seek the ^dominge off their sermons with these old wives
tales / f^ upon it: nor let any Christian hear it without spittinge thereat /
as at A ^o^de. The fountain is opened to the house off David for washinge away
such filth / not for the wateringe that off to gi^^.

The Order of the Mo^ths in the Bible lies thus:
1. Abib, March 2. Ijar, April. 3. Si^an, May. 4. Tammus, June. 5. Ab, July. 6.
Elul, August. 7. Tishri, Sept. 8. Marches. Oct. 9. Caslou, Nou. 10. Tebeth,
Dec. 11. Shebat, Ian. 12. Adar, Febr.
The Iuis^ natural ^ecompt and the Romans of old, thus:
1. Tishri, Sept. 2. Marches. Oct. 3. Casl^u, Nou. 4. Tebeth, Oct. 5. Shebat,
Ianu. 6. Adar, Febr. 7. Abib. March. 8. Ijar, Apr. 9. Siuan, May. 10. Tamus,
June. 11. Ab, July. 12. Elul, Aug.
WIth the first new Moon / fall it before or affter the springs A^quinoctiall
/ does Abi^ or Nis^n begin: and so the test successively.

The Aequinoctiall is that time which equals the Night and Day in their how^es:
and this falls out in the begininge off N^s^n, as also ^n the begininge off
Tis^^: the first called the Aequinoctiall vernall, the other the Aequinoctiall
Autumnall.

Argument: Chap. IX. Noah is blessed: A Covenant is smit / He falls: One mocks /
but two do cover it.
Division of the text.
I. THis Chap, contains / i. A Gracious Oration off Jehovah to Noah, begone in
the last chap. and here continued unto Verse. 18.

II. Secondly, an Historical Epilogue off Noah and his sons: from ^^^nce
unto the end.

I. This part off Iehouahs oration contains: 1. A law peculiar to the
Creature with the equity thereoff: In the first 7. verses: sec. A law
peculiar to the Creator: thence unto verse. 18.

1. The Law peculiar to the Creature, it is imposed affirmatively, 1. upon
Mankind: verse. 1. who was appointed in Noah and his Sons to Multiply and
fill the earth: 2. upon the other Creatures (Sensitive and Degetatiue) who are
to be serviciable unto Man: verse. 2. 3.

Secondly: That Law is imposed Negatiuily: 1. on Mankind expressly (who is
prohibited eatinge flesh with the blood) verse 4. sec. on the Creature by
necessary Consequent: namely, Not to shed blood: with the penalty off Death
on both sor^s transgressinge. A reason thereoff being given to man: 1. because
he was created in the jmage off God, verse 5. 6. sec. because he was appointed
to Multiply (not to Mortify) his kind: verse. 7.

2. The law peculiar to the Creator is, A Gracious bond off peace freely offered
by Jehovah to Mankind in Noah and his Family: as also unto the other Creatures
(by whom man was to be served) in the first fruits thereoff com out off the
Arc.

This Bond off peace (or Covenant) is generally propounded, 1. to Noah: verse.
8. 9. secondly, to the other Creatures: verse. 10. Then more particularly
explayned in it selff and the Adjuncts: unto verse. 18. The Covenant it selff is
set down verse. 11. consisting on these two heads: 1. There should be no more
such A Massacre off the creatures: 2. no more destruction off the whole earth
by water.

The Adjuncts off this Covenant are, 1. the Sign off the Covenant: viz. the
Bow set in the Cloud: verse. 12. 13. Secondly, the Lord his carefulnes to
observe the Covenant: And that is expressed, 1. by the promisinge his watchful
ey for eyinge the Cloud-bowe: verse. 14. 15. 16. sec. by the serious manner off
sealinge up this law: verse. 17.

So much for Iehouahs Oration.
II. The Historical Epilogue contains: j. An Introduction j. to A notable
Accident in Noah: and this, 1. by A summinge off his natural seed and the
largenes thereoff, verse. 18. 19. Next, by layinge down his entrance into A new
Science (viz. off planting vynes) verse. 20.

II. After this Introduction, secondly is set down the Accident it self: he
became dronk: enlarged by these circumstances, In the midst off his Tent (and
that) uncovered.

III. Then the Demeanor off the Church upon this Accident: That is to be
considered, 1. in Noah's sons: 2. in himselff. In his Sons A twofold
demeanor. Cham (the youngest) first Se his nakedness: secondly, he tells it to
his ^. brethren without / Verse. 22. Then A Contrary carriage in Shem and
Iaphet: who first, would not se it: secondly do cover it: Verse. 23. The
Demeanor of Noah himself upon due knowledge what was don / is: he first
curses Cham in his son Canaan / Verse. 24. 25. secondly / he 1. blesses
Shem: and then prophecieth A blessinge unto Iaphet (subiectinge Cham unto both
of them) Verse. 26. 27.

IIII. Lastly / it contains an Enumeration of Noah's age: first from the flood
unto his death: it was 353. y. Verse. 28: secondly, off his whole life, Verse.
29. it was 950. p. And (then) he died.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. etc. And God blessed Noah. in the former chapter and 18. Verse. Noah and
his people and creatures com forth: he sacrifices: God is appeased. Now (upon
that reconcilement) arises Open Conference (for the former in chapter 8. ver. 21.
was secret / in Iehouahs heart) and that containinge plenty off Evangelical
promises. j. Noah and his Sons are blessed unto multipl^^cation: ^. he
s^^teth peace with Noah's house: A sign of which peace is the Rainbowe.

This Covenant the Lord remembers unto the Iues / Isa. 54. 9. etc. promisinge
therewithal / that the church succedinge (which should consist of Jew and
Gentile it should be la^d and beautified with Ca^^uncles, E^eralds shininge and
precious stones: but first must be tossed with A tempest or it be seated on
Ar^rats top. This Rainbowe we se / Revel. 4. 3. in color like to an (...)de:
precious gre^e making the face off the beholder gre^e / for ever florisheth
the Covenant off peace in the cup of the Saints: for peace dwells in her
palaces. Though A Mother forget her child yet the Lord remembers Zion, She is
written in the pa^^e of his hand: Her walls are ^ier in his sight: Isa. 49. 15.
16.

Some contend that this Rainbowe was not before this time existinge / stumblinge
at the speech I have put the Bow etc. as though it were not put there before:
but they should rather say: not put so before: that is / though before / yet not
for such A Sign before. Secondly / the Hebrew word is aptly / I have given the
bow for A sign.

The Subject of this Bow is A Raynie or waterish cloud: the Efficient Cawse
is the Sun / placed adverse to such A Cloud. The diverse colors fall out by
the Suns irradiation or stretching out his beams on that cloud / the parts
off that cloud being diversely or variably affected. As the cloud is in the
midst and either utter side diversely qualified / so by the Suns radiation (as
Zanchiu^ de oper. Lib. 3. cap. 3. well notes) there is three special colors
effected: Read / Citrine / Grene. The two latter colors (which are the
undermost) are watrish / and therefore off ancient di^^nes termed but one /
the red color another: affirming therewithal that the watrish color preaches
the judgment of the old-world passed: the other color Red and fiery / the
final destruction of this world by fire. The body of the Bow turned from us
and the tippes toward us it gives the church to learn that the Arrow (the
lord dwellinge in Zion) flies from the Church into the heart of the kings
adversary. Judah reconciled / is such A bow bent: and Ephrims hand is filled
with shaftes that shall fly out as lightninge: Zech. 9. 3. 14.

1. There is A second kind of Rain-bowe and that is off the Moon as the former
off the Sun, but more rare. His Color is white / as most convenient to nights
darkness. A color well ^ittinge the Church, who borrows her light of the Son,
as the Moon off the Sun.

Verse. 18. Now ^he Sons Noah etc. That we should be out of all doubt / that
Noah had no Son borne in the Ark / he here again nombreth them: describing
Cham (for the history sake followinge) by his Son Canaan. Be(...) the
Babilonian in his 1. book off Antiquities, he tells A tale of Giants before
the flood / amongst whom he says there was One A greater worshipper of God
and wiser then all the rest / by name Noah: who had three Sons / Shem, Iaphet,
Cham: his wife Tidea the Great: theyrs, Pandora, Noela and Noegla. This Noah
(says he) by beholdinge the stars / did foresee destruction to com: and
therefore 78. y. before the flood / he made A ship like an Ark etc. Afterward
Lib. 2. the flood passed / only these 8. being in Armenia they were the seed
of the world. Then lib. 3. he tells how Noah inuentinge wynemakinge / he was
unawares ouercom with it: who lyinge naked in the secret part / was charmed to
inability of procreation / by Cham: whom (he says) was A notable sorcerer /
for which he was termed Zoroastes. Because off this his wickedness he was ^ast
out by Ianus or Noah: and thensforth called Chemesenua, in the Scythian Ara^nt
language / Infamous shameless. This Chaldeahs cursed Babylon / though clippinge
the kings coin is forced to testify some truth of the scriptures.

Verse. 22. And when Cham. The wretch boylinge in disdain / he rons to his
brethren uncharitably vtteringe his fathers Nakedness: but they blushinge wise
go backwards and cover him with their Mantle. Oh Cham thou have verily played
the Traitor unto the Figure as Judas Iscariot unto Noah figured. Such A trick
brought Judas unto the Ra^e / and think thou Cham to escape without A Curse?

Ambrose (de Noe et Arca, chapter 31.) he says that Shem and Iaphet would not se
their Fathers nakedness / least saying it their reverence toward him should have
been the less. And true it is / that lookinge upon the weaknesses off the Lord
his prophets / men have their affection off Love and Reverence thereby
infirmed. This lesson as no doubt they had learned / so also / that it was
their duty to cover their Fathers weakness: and here upon Solomon grounded his
proverb 10. 12. Hatred stirs up contention, but love covers all
trespasses. Oh blessed Shem and Iaphet, for you take Noah's part: As the eleauen
set foot unto Jesus* They therefore / Ioh. 17. got a blessinge when Judas had
no place in his prayer: and shall not you Shem and Iaphet obtain A blessinge
for countenancinge the Prophet / whom the Seed of the serpent would root up?

Verse. 24. Then Noah. He awakes as A Giant but refreshed with wine. The Spirit
off prophecy is upon him. This appears first in denouncinge off Justice and
Judgment upon Cham: sec. in propoundinge mercy to Shem and Iaphet. The Curse
upon Cham is directly powered out on Canaan his Son and youngest Son: for elder
then he were Cush, Mitzraim, Put, chapter 10. 6. and none off these were borne
before the flood nor in the year off the flood / for only 8. persons went in
and 8. only came out. All these then borne after the flood / and Canaan here
spoke off the youngest this Accident must therefore be no little time affter the
flood.

Cursed is Canaan (not be Canaan) is as if he had said: I will tell the Cham,
as thou my youngest Son a^t cursed to me: so will thy youngest Son prove cursed
to the. Judgment will fall proportionable to thy Syn. Thou have labored to
root out my credet because of weakness: but others shall make thy Canaanitish
seed Gnebed Gnabadim A Servant off Servants: that is / A very slave. Such was
the vnslaughtered Canaanitish seed unto Israel. Of Canaan came the Eleauen
cursed Nations / chapter 10. 15. 16. 17. 8. 18. Gregorius Magnus, says: Omne
peccatum est vnde^^tium every Syn is an eleauenth thing (because Syn
transgresses the Decalogue) upon which consideration says he / Peter hastened
the choice off A twelfte into Iscariots ro^^e: but most sure I am that Canaan
in his 11. branches was cursed / and Cham in his Canaan.

Revel. 17. 11. we read off A Beast in number mystical both the 7. and the 8.
goinge to destruction: Cham his figure was both A 7. and an 8. in number and
appointed also to go into perdition. The New world begone only with 8. persons:
Cham bring the youngest (at least off men) he so was the Eight: But by Moses in
way off Catalogue he is made the Seventh and Iaphet the eyghte: But in the
declaration off this curse he is pulled out into the Sixth place (the other two
placed affter him) that so his head may receive A wound / as does the sixth
head off the Beast Reu. 13. 3. W^epe with John, or Mystery will not be
unsealed.

Verse. 26. He said moreover. Judgment pronounced / he now utters A blessinge
first to Shem then to Iaphet. God is blessed for the God of Shem: and indeed.
Shems people be* became the first Peculiar Nation and Preisthood to God / as
appears afterward chapter 11. 10. etc. His Servant was Canaan what time Canaans
land was subdued unto Israel: but yet A troblous s^ruant puckinge Israel in the
Eyes and the sides. Romes Vicar writes himself Se. ant of Se^^a^t (Canaans
name) pet but A troblous servant to the Lord his Israel.

Verse. 27. God pe^suade Iaphet. Iaphet and Persuade is all one in the Hebrew:
Iaphet Elo^^im le Iaphet. Iaphet. Eloh^^ persuade. whereunto should El^him
persuade or allure him? To dwell in Shems tabernacle. Herein he prophecieth
that the Gentiles of Iaphet chapter 10. 5. should for A season be without the
visible church but at last should be allured by the sweet voice of t^^ Gospel
to com home with the Prodigal Son and to dwell in his Tent. But that he says
^ent not Temple, the holy ghost would give to understand / that the spiritual
estate of Isreal's Tent in the wilderness and beginings of their ruled om in
Canaan / that was the estate which should befall the Gentiles by returning home
upon the first breach of the partition wall. The Temples estate shall bring
unto the Church another gates g^oue th^^ the first. That estate properly is the
enjoye of that stablished city Above which Ab^a^^^ tooked for / Heb. 11. 10. In
the mean time / the Mystycall Canaan is also to be his servant. The Deuels
seed even in prickinge the godly shall unawares do service to the Godly / both
off Jew and Gentile.

Verse. 29. So all the days. Twelve full Jubilees before the stood / and seven
^^b. after Noah l^^ed till within 2. p. of Abraham's birthe Vajamoth, and he
died. Walck man as long as he can / Death in the end arrests him. Nothing
more certain then to die: but nothing more uncertain then when to die. The
s^erty of death preaches ^y to the world: the uncertainty of death it
preaches: Always die to the world / least thou be once damned with the
world.

Argument. Chap. X. Iaphet / Cham / Shem here Moses does declare their Seed:
as eke the Names of Old they bare.
Division of the Text.
I. FIrst / the Generation of Noah immediate / Verse. 1.

II. Set. his Generation mediate: and that is: first of Iaphet / Verse. ^ 3 4 5.
secondly / of Cham: thence unto Verse. 21. thirdly of Sh^m: thence unto the 32
Ver. these three particulars summed up in one. Ver, 32.

More particularly take it thus.
^^AH. (...) IAPHI* 1. Gomer. 1. Askenas. 2. ^iphath. 3. Toga^^ah.
2. Magog. 3 Madaj. 4. Ianan 1. Elisha. 2. Tarshish. 3. Kittim. 4. Dodanim.
5. Tubal. 6. Meshech. 7. Thir^s.
CHAM. 1. Ch^^sh. 1. Seba. 2. Chauilah. 3. Sabatha. 4. ^egma Shebah. Dedan.
5. sabtecha.
2. Mitzra^^^. 1. Ludim. 2. Auamun 3. ^ehabim. 4. Nephtuchin^ 5. Patrus^^. 6.
Ehasluchim. 7. Caphiou^^. 8. Philisti^^.
3 (...) 4. Canaan. 1. Lidan. 2. Heth. 3. Iebu^^. 4. Emon. 5. Eirgalh^ 6. ^inj.
7. Arki. 8. Suli. 9. Arnadi. 10. Zema^^. 11. Hamath^.

^^EM. 1. ^am. 2. Ashur. 3. A^pharad -- 1. Selah - 1. Heb^^ 1. Pele^. 1.
Elmod^^. 2. Shalaph. 3. Hazarmaneth 4. Iarach. 5. Hadaram. 6. Vzal. 7. Diklah.
8. Obal. 9. Abimael. 10. Sheba. 11. Ophir. 12. Chauila^. 13. Ioba^.
2. Iohtan.
4. ^ud. 5. ^ram 1. Vz. 2. Chus. 3. Gether. 4. Mash.



IAPHET has Xi^^j. CHAM has XXX. SHEM has XXVI.
All LXX.
Clemens Alexandrinus in his 1. book Stro maton, he (and so many others) write
that the Languages and fannl^es were 72.

For the helping out with this 2. some brings the two cities Accad and Calneh:
but how improperly / lo^ the learned judge. Some introduce Nimrod and A city:
they may as well bring in 8. cities. If Nimrod were at the towers buildinge /
the languages are 70. besides Hebers tongue. But saying Nimrod had A kingdom
here, Micah. 5. 6. I se not yet how he was at this first Tew^^^ buildings:

ELVCIDATION.
BEtwixt ^^phet and Shem is Cham placed: not because he was most excellent
(except us Eu^ll) form Medi^ ^ittat^^ consist^ viti^^^, but / be^^^^s what was
said before / for that he was to be beseiged un A coople of Nations that should
spring from them. B^^el in Sh^^ar, for there was A Babel in ^Egipt which now
is called ^an / it was begone by Nymbro^ / Be^^^ lib. 4. ^^^q. and said to
reign first there* 50. y. from the (...) of the second world which Babel
afterward (having kept Shems people 70. ^ ca^tine) was beseiged and taken ^^
the uncircumcised Madaj^ the Medes spr^^^ of Iapher / and Elam / of whom cain.
the Perllans: Isa. 21. 2. Van. 5. 28. 31.

(...) in the first age acquired A possession: ^^e bod^ ^ell ro^ed in the
waters / who ^in: (...) succedeth Cham ((...) and indignation) (...) ^(...)an
Antichrist. This we se ^^ (...) under the age of the new testament. First /
Ministers have acquired possessions / the(...) secondly then being so possessed
with the grieve things of the ^^th they grow ^or and dis^am^^ll: hot toward
such as should reprove their lewd Apostacy from Churches (...): (...)full
toward all that Unto not with ^^ (...) dowe unto Hamon. For (...) their glory
then hill with Kain and those they cannot slay they mock disda^^fully with
Cham. But let them go on / the flood and the (...) of God denounced by his
Prophets ^^ shall over take them.

Verse. 11. Out of that land came Assure. By Assure understand Belus or Ninus the
first (...) there and the founder of Nineveh. This (...) the (...) o^^ of (...)
or Ass^^a / all (...) this the (...) the other the Chaldy (...) with whom it
is frequent to turn. Sh^^ into Thau. He not able to bear Satur^^s or (...)
glory without more ado as Malecontent departs the coast / and rea^^t^ by
N^^meth ^ Monument off (...) Vestre off empire thus boiled in the breasts ^^
(...) sons. N^^rod of Merod defre^^on or Rebellion / either of them fit for
such A Rebel to God and them: Ashur ^ Goinge, and he g^^s out off Shinar to
hunt out Dominion else where.

Verse. 21. Shem is last in Speech but first in car^moniall act religions.
Iaphet is Omega in Religion: but Alpha ^oz ^ull enjoyinge the ^^inge off Shems
shadows, The first is ^^ shadow the second all image / Heb. 10. 1. but where
is the trainy it self / to whom this is an ^mage and the former A shadow?
That shall be seen and felt palpably when all Israel shall be saved / Romans 11. even
when Shem and Iaphet / Jew and Gentile shall dwell in one Tabernacle. Christ
being the Co^^erstone unto these two walls down com Kam, Cham, Epimanes, the
threfold coard off iniquity for the^^ it shall be cas^^ broken. In the mean time
them also ^^phet must be seige Babel until E^phrates her pleasant waters be
d^ed up / that ^^ the (...) ^echers of the East here is wisdom but who marks
it?) may have ^ way prepared for entrance and fackinge Kains Chano^ / Reu. 16.
12. The wisemen came from the East / Math 2. to (...) the parents off Christ
with Necessaries for their voyage: the Medes and Per^^ans came out off the East
for delivering Judah out of Babels captivity and shall these Eastern kings
^itred up on the Angel of the East. ^^ne. 7. 2. 3. bring detriment unto
Christ's Kingdom? I will ne^^^ bele^^e it (...) I (...) go dhis spirit
assistinge me.

If it be red / The elder brother off Iaphes, it must be understood that Show
was Elder / not ^^mply but in respect off SIehouahs perferment: with whom it
was ordinary to prefer the younger. But the verse is to be read thus: Unto
Shem (the father off all Hebers sons, brother to laph^^ the Elder) A seed
spronge: And so it is clear that Iaphet was eldest.

Verse. 25. Unto (...) also were borne. Off this man was Abraham / Joseph / and
the Israelites termed Hebrews: Yea the holy ghost ^^ the 21. verse. before
calling Shem the Father off all the Sons off Heber (though Never the sort off
Selah the son off Kepharad / the Son off Shem) he would have us to acknowledge
Heber for us common seed. Rebe^ in engl. is A passer over, and indeed he
passed over the Rebellions way of the Schismatikes Rom Shem. These that think
Abram was called Hebrew for pass^^ over the River / have no^ only these
scriptures against them / but also Augustine, Deciuit, de^ ^^b. 16. Cap. 11.
and Retract. 1. 2. cap. 16. Ierom in his (...) questions on Benests / c^m
alijs. Augustine was once off mind that then were called Rebrues off the name
Abram by some chaynge off ^etter (in consens. Enang.) But th^e chaynge (if^ he
had obseruerued that the Hebr^^ (...) G^t^er, Gnebre^^e; No^ Eber / Ebrewe)
must have been to harshe.

As the People / so was their Tongue hereof called Hebrew: because ^e^er had
this tongue in his house / what time the other families were dispersed and
divided by other ^^^leris and Languages. ^eleg (of palag to divide) he has his
name from the Earths division. Here ^or time falls out the buildinge off
Babels Tower / the Cause of tongues division: As tongues of Earths division.

Verse. 31. These are ^e sons of Shem, according to their fa^ine^, according
to their tongues. It therefore was not the meaning of Moses / to set down
only Noah his three sons their several families at the time of the Earths
division: but also / as verse. 5. and 20. to give us to knoe / of how many
distinct tongues the earth then became.

Argument: Chap. XI. Babel buildinge / the builders tongues are chaingde. Then
scatered. Shems petigre is raingde.
Division of the text.
I. FIrst A dissolution of NOachs familes is to be observed.

II. Secondly / an edification of Shem his Tabernacle.

I. In the Dissolution, contained in the first ten verses, we are to consider.

1. The Action of the Families, Verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. secondly of Jehovah. thence
unto the 10. Verse. The Action of the Families utters: 1. A S^^me from Shem,
Verse. 1. 2. in that Being off one Language (verse. 1.) they travel into the land
off Shinar, Verse. 2. Secondly, their Action vtters theyrs Consultation for
buildinge A Tower to them selves, 1. for gettinge A Name sec. for preventinge A
disperson, Verse. 3. 4.

In the Action of Jehovah considerable. 1. His beholdinge their work Verse. 5.
secondly his coffeehouse therewith: manifested first in his Consultation,
verse. 6. 7. then in that consultations effect: whereas 1. he ^oth Babilonize
their language (whereof their work had the name Babel) 2. he disperseth them:
Ver. 8. 9.

II. For the Edification of Shems Tabernacle, that is to be considered in
Iohouahs fre-mercy, stretched from S^^m by the line of A^ph ^^d unto Abram.

For this do take Mr. Brou. his Table.
WORLD his age. NOAH. SHEM his years. FLOODS years. 1658. 602. 100. 2.
Arpha^ad (...) 1693. 637. 135. 37. 35. Selah b* 1^23. 667. 165. 67. 65. 30.
Heber b. of whom Abram after had the name of HE^BR^VV* 1757. 701. 199. 101.
99. 64. 34. Peleg b. now was the earth di^ided. 1^87. 731. 229. 131. 129. 94.
64. 30. Regnu b. 1819. 763. 261. 163. 161. 126. 96. 62. 32. Se^^g b. 1849. 793.
291. 193. 191. 156. 126. 92. 62. 30. Nah^ b. 1878. 822. 320. 222. 220. 185.
155. 121. 91. 59. 59. Terah b. 1996. 940. 438. 340. ^38. 303. 2^3. 239. 209.
177. 147. 118 ^eleg dies. 1997. 94^. 439. 341. 339. 304. 274. 210. 178. 148.
119. Naho^ dies. 2006. 950. 44^ 350. 348. 313. 283. 219. 187. 128. Noah dies.
2008. 450. 352. 350. 315. 285. 221. 189. 130. Abram b. 2018. 460. 362. 360.
325. 295. 231. 199. 140. 10. Sara b. 2026. 468. 3^0. 368. 333. 303. 239. 207.
148. 18. 8. Regnu d* 2049. 491. 393. 391. 356. 326. ^^0. 171. 41* 31. Serug* d,
20^^ 525. 427. 425. 390. 360. Terak dies 205. 75. 65 The Promise is given to
Abram, The father of all the faithful.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. Then the whole Earth, was off one lip. This Lip and Language was
not Syr^ak as some have foolishly taught / but ^leber^ sacred tongue spoke of
before: not distinguished by any proper name till Hebers time / because there
were no tongues nor any one tongue more then it / before this time of Babel.
That hitherto there was but one tongue / (...)anus that will not learn of
Cyrill / he may Learn off Sib^^la / Lib. 3.

Qui Turrim Assyriis in finibus edificarunt, Cum cunctis eadem vox esset etc.
And Lib. 8.

Collapsa Turri, discrimina ^^guae sumpserunt hominum, vatiato mune^e vocum.
That this One tongue was the Hebrew / not only Augustine as before / but also
^ero^ on Sopho^i. Chap. 3. he re^a^^ge the hebrew word ^^ge^, whereof comes
the Latin N^gae, he says that the hebrew tongue is the Matrix off all
tongues. And by Augustines speech / quae lingua non immerito credi(...) fuisse
Com^unis pr^^s humano generi it seems in that age it was commonly so held.
O^g^n hom. 11. on Nomb. Lyra on this place: (...) in genesis Lib. 2. Cap. 2. with
all off any judgment do so understand off the sacred tongue of Heber.

Beros^s Lib. 4. Antiq. affirms that upon the multiplication of Mankind /
N^nb^ot took his son Io^e Bel^s with A Colo^e off people and came into the
plain off Sena^: where he designed A City and founded A mighty Tower: but
soon after he adds: He builded A Tower but he finished it not: to (...)ge
therewith this we: for he w^^ suddenly translated off the Gods.

Out off Arme^ia into Shin^^, A loose tooth, and therefore not to be trusted to
/ prou. 25. 19. comes this Shismaticall band. The Mystical body off
wickedness / Zech^^i^h saw sent for this lastage into Sh^^ar / and that sealed
up ^^ ^n Ey^hah: Eh. 5. 5. etc. They Study to b^^d for A Name: the right ^adge
off A bad spirit: yet not A Schismatike or Heretic but he does it. And this
Name they co^et to have ( P^en) Before they be fratered g^alphenei (vppn the
face) of the Earth. The form of speech it causes me to think / that they
heard how Heber in calling his son / Peleg* had prophesied their d^^tion /
whereat they now mock: and the rather for that schismatikes are ordinarily
Mockers: 1. Tim. 4. 1. Jude. 18. 19.

They con^^ne and consult here abouts as though their were honestmen. They will
have A tower to heaven (stand apart / com not ^ere / they are holyer then thou:
Isa. 65. 5.) and this tower shall be made of Brick burned and wrought together
with s^yme. Let Schismatiks gather together with She^^s holy tongue (none brag
so off holy speech as these sprites) and use that tongue for fashioninge their
scriptures in the fire off false martyrdom / and da^be them together with
vntempred mortar and false application: and that for purchasing A Name in the
earth* mangre the heart off Hebe^: yet what shall they wyn? Hearken.

Verse. 5. But Jehovah came down. The Lord is A Bu^te in the way. Jehovah is
said to com down / not because He who is infinite is ver^ ^ subject to mouinge
from place to place (for so he should be f(...)te and comprehended in some place)
but in respect off his manifestation below^ in this or that accident which
before appeared not in that place. As they consi^^ted vnanim^ter say^^ge: Let
us br^lde: so Elohim (the Father* word and sprite) and yet here but One
Jehovah, they consult say^ge: Let us go down and confound them Language. Holy
Language abused it must be confounded: so that they shall neither speak nor
mind one thing: much less gather in one accord for praisinge the Father off
our Lord Jesus Christ.

What came Brovvnes work eue^ unto (A work off pride for (...)hinge A She^,
though it met with A shame) or the proud schismatic work of any unto /
though (as they brag much off it) their Language were but (...) / and that One
the pure language off Canaan or Heber? I was brought up in the bowels of proud
Presci^ians and Bro(...)stes: and therefore o^ the ineffable mercy off my God /
that has some and some drawn me from buylding with them for A Name* Yet he
could not do it / till he had left: me to some Shame. I praise and honor his
holy wisdom for shaminge me with men / that s^ with him I man have the Name off
living unto him* I disprayse not their Pure language they have / but the
applyinge of it to so proud A work: who think as did the Little horn ^a^. 8.
9. 10. That they cannot groe to be A visible people off Christ / except they
cast down off the host and off the stars to the ground / (...) upon them:
making many true star^^ (...)stians black and dark / with their vale off
Sophistry tinked under pure language in word and writing / that others off
heaven more truly then they so darkened / they may be ^he Church, the People off
God: That is according to their but: The only visible true Christian Church.

Their tongues s^it and chaynged / they cannot forward with the work / nor yet
avoid a dispers^on. The two things they drine at / Fame and Unity, is thus
suddenly turned into Shame and Dist^a^^on. G^maliel had learned / Act. 5. 38.
that the counsayl and work which is not off God / it will com to naught.

Verse. 10. These are the Genesis The former wicked work cast out with A
Parenthesis* now the Ro^gh* comes unto blessed Shem (the ^^m^e branch off
Noah: not begotten by any Father / nor borite off any Mother in the new world)
in whose Tabernacle (for the Tabernacle off the just must flourish / Prou. 14.
^^.) God sows the succedinge seed.

Verse. 31. Then Te^ah took Abram. This Abram married with ^^sea Saraj and
barren (as were the cheyfe Matriacks for t^achinge that the* church typed in
them brings spiritual fruit by virtue off God his word and pro^^s / not off
Nature) Terah his father takes them and Lo^ and so departs from Vr off the
Chaldays toward Canaan: but coming to Cha^ran (A city off Mesopotamia not
off Chalde^ for Chaldea was but a part off Mesoyotamia, P(...) lib. 2. cap.
27.) They there pitch Tent and dwell. Abram having had A glorious vision from
Jehovah before they came out off Chaldea* Act. 7. 2. It is like inoughe that he
instincted his Father unto this p^reg^nation: but the old* man labouringe to
much off Chaldeahs Solatrous disease (nor yet dare I call any off our Saviors
direct l^^e Idola^ter) he soon was wearied off trauaylinge toward blessed
Shem^ Shalem. Nay, Abram and Lot it seems they were not eagerly set on this
voyage / and therefore do take by their (...)es with T^rah.

All this not withstandinge I cannot nor man teach to be the time off the
peculiar Promise given to Abram, but A preparation to the Promise exhibited to
Abram after his Fathers death in Cha^ra^. whereoff in the next chapter.

Argument. Chap. XII. Abram is called / he ploddeth on amayne To Canaan / Egypt /
and back again.
Division fo the Text.
I. FIrst considerable Abrams effectual Calling from native Contry / Verse 1.
2. 3.

II. Secondly Abrams effectual obedience grounded thereon, in the residue off
the chapter: yea in the whole story off his life.

I. H^ Calling utters 1* the Caller, Jehovah: secondly the form of the
Calling it selff: and that lies 1. in A Commandment, Verse. 1. secondly in
an Evangelical promis it selff* Verse. 2. 3.

II. His Obedience (in this chap.)is manifested 1. in his ready passage to
Canaan, Verse. 4. 5. secondly, in his folowinge faithfulness: thence to the end.
His subsequent fidelity is twofolde according to time and Circumstance. First
it shows it selff strong: 2. weak.

1. The strength off his faith appears 1. in his Survayinge the land*
approved off the Lord, Verse. 6. and first clause off the 7. secondly in his
^earinge up off religious mouments: thence unto verse. 10.

2. The weakness off his faith, thence unto the end it offreth unto us 1. the
Cawse: 2. th* effect. The Cawse is twofolde: the first is A Famine, the second
his wifes Beauty. The former (as the flesh handled the matter) prickinge him
into Egypt: the second vrginge him to Deny his wife to the Egiptians: Verse.
10. 11. 12. 13. The Effect is also twofolde:

1. The Lord draws back from Abram (in leauinge him to so miserable an
Accident) Ver. 14. 15. 16. and this effect was seal to the Lords justice. The
other effect is, the Lord draws nere again to Abram, 1. by whippinge the
Egiptians: Verse. 17. secondly by Compellinge them to do good unto Abraham:
thence to the end: and this seals bp the Lord his fre-mercy.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. And Jehovah said to Abram. These that think the Calling and promise
here uttered to have been given unto Abram in Chaldea, they translate thus: For
the Lord had said to Abram. First / this their translation forces the Text:
for the Hebrew / Va^o^er Jehovah, is naturally / And I^houah said. So the
Septuag^t turns it into Greek: Kaj Eipe ky^^os to h^b^am and O^kelos in his
Chalday paraphr. V(...)ar etc and the Lord said. Hierom and every Ancient
Latin has Ae^d^^it Dominus. Though men be otherwise minded for the time of
the Calling / yet they should not have forced the Text.

The Hebrews knowinge this calling to follow ^eralis death (and that does
Ph^lo preci^^ly observe ioyninge Abrams 75. y. and Iaacobs 75. sowles together)
they finish their second section that bego^ chap. 6. verse. 9. with Terahs
death: and here they begin their think section because it is A new matter. And
indeed their Partition is apt: for in the First was considered Good and Bad
from Adam^: in the second / Good and Bad from No^h: and now in the third / Good
and Bad from Abram.

The first sort of people that labored to make this Promise to be given to
Abram before he came at Cha^ran they were drawn thereto by taking Abram to be
the Eldest of T(...) so^^es: but the contrary being now h(...) of all / there
is no reason why also they should not bele^^e this promise to be given after his
Fathers death. First this speech / Go from thy Fathers house / it ^ould not
well agree with the taking his father with him. Nay / it is said in the former
chap. that ^erah took Abram etc But the calling and promise bieng directly
Abrams, it is but A darkninge of this work to let Terah be head in the
Obedience / to whom the Lord never spoke about the matter. Secondly / Abrams
Obedience verse. 4. 5. with the circumstances / it plainly proves the matter to
fall after Terahs death. Thirdly / as steven Act. 7. 2. does plainly teach an
apparition glorious to Abram before he dwell in Cha^ran* so his Obedience verse.
4. and clause first / then he came out of the Chaldeans land and dwelled in
char^an / it answers to that Call. And whereas verse. 2. he reherseth this
^n^unction laid down here by Moses: unto it is answerable the second off
verse. 4. And affter ^is father was dead, God brought him out. Fourthly / off
Terah and Abrams former voyage ^t is said chapter 11. 31. that they made their
iornay for Canaan: but of Abrams peru^^at obedience it is said Hebr. 11. 8. he
went out not knovving vvhither: this calling therefore and promise here
mentioned cannot be referred to the former* That this calling is so to be
understood for the ^yme diverse Old and new Iuish and christian are so minded.
And indeed / the Promise here made should have lacked ^^ch life / if so it had
been given in his fathers life. But his father now dead / this Euangel preached
unto him and his / it commethe opport^^ely as if the Lord had said: Depart
hence to the ^and I will show the not dismayinge at the loss off thy father:
for I will be a father unto the and thine etc. As the time makes the Promise
more excellent: so also it makes Abrams Obedience more excellent: for if he
had followed the Lord together with Terah, it might have been A (...)e^^ion
whither Terah had not been better man. This P(...) iudaus in his book off
Abrams departure does pretily teach in his expounding the word Terah. Lusebius
Pamphilus also in his Crom^^^ does understand this promise to be guien in
chatian after Terah.

Verse. 4. So Abram departed etc. That this holy patriark at the time off his
Obedience is aged 75. y. this coniunceth all writers off error / who demed and
taught Abram to be begotten in his fathers 70. At this time was Terah newly
dead and aged 205. Extract 75 out off 205. and there remains 130. So old must
Terah be at Abrams birth. These therefore that teach him to be borne in his
fathers 70. they so not only rob the worlds age off 60. y. but also make Abram
at the receipt off the promise 135. old. That his father was 130. p. aged /
Beroaldus, and our English More and broughton they stand hereto as A thre-fold
coarde that cannot be broken.

Having received the Euangel (for this Promise was the substance off the
Ghospel / Galat. 3. 8. and that 430. y. before the LAW, Gal. 3. 17. he
trudgeth forward with his wife Saraj, his nephewe Lot, and all that he had for
why should the goods off the faithful be left in the house off A strainger?
prove. 5. 10^ and so he co^ameth to Canaan: but coming thither / God gave unto
him there not be^^podos, one foot off ground / Act. 7. 5. Many now will be
Abrams seed / but if they taste off these Alloes they will spit out all
religion. They will follow Christ / so long as he has Barley bread in the one
hand / and fish in the other: otherwise they will depart sorowing / as rather
willinge that the spiritual Forts and Byrds off the Air should make holes and
nestle in their heart / then the Son off Man should have any ro^me there /
whereon to rest his Head.

Verse. 6. The Plain Mor^h (in engl. Rebellinge) I understand to be the
Penta-polis plain of Sodom, Gomer, Zeboim, Admah, Bela, A pleasant plot /
Chap. 13. 10. called in Moses time the plain off Rebellion: as preachinge to
all folowers God his judgment powered forth on that pleasant place because off
Rebellion.

Verse. 6. 7. Abram ^ainginge the Region^ Jehovah meets him and bids him welcom^
with an Euangelical sermon: which the Ismaelites off our age do terms A cold
breakfast. For A Memo^all off the Lord his mercies / Abram buyldeth an Alter
and sacrifices / let the Canaanite take it as he will. Afterward verse. 8. 9.
He remoueth and builds anothr Alter (the faithful desire in all places to
leave Monuments off Religion behind them) but affter that he ^^itteth again.
Thus some and some the Lord wayneth his Ch^^dren. I now they suck on A
Lilly-white pappe / by and by it is smeated with foot or Alloes.

Verse. 10. etc. Then there came a Famine. Bring A little hardened against the
wether / he now must skirmish with Famine (a strong^ Tempter) with whom he
deals this: he th^^ Canaan and went down (as the Man did from Jerusalem to
Jericho) even down into Egypt. Faith kept him from lookinge back to Chalde^
and fathers house Heb. 11. 15. but in the mean time this affliction off famme
dazeled his eyes / that he hit not the best way. Having Famine behind him in
Canaan and want off God his fear in Pharaohs court before him / it cawseth him
and S^raj 1. to Consult: 2. to Do as they did.

If Abram saw it to be the practice off Kings then as it was in ^est^^^ spu^e
after / namely / not to lie with A woman till she had been for A year prepared
/ Hest. 2. 12. that would make him the rather to make this hazard: if not /
Yet I doubt not / let hasty Gen sorers off the Fathers actio^^ say what they
will / but Abram herein (as in another case. Romans 4. 18.) even beyond hope be
hoped to be helped off God in opportune season. In the mean time / he speaks
but Truth though not all the Truth / for he conceales she was his wife.

That he knew they would not company with his wife / except first they slew
him: thereby appears that bare Nature cheeks adultry: secondly / that
Natural men sekinge to avoid one syn they fly into another: yea many times
auoidinge the lesser they p^p into the greater.

verse. 17. But Jehovah plagued. The Heb. has gnal-debar (For the word) off
S^raj. Dabar will bear the common version / but properly ^ is A word or
Speech newly spoken / or A new thing uttered. So I take here: because no doubt
she did dal^ (...) the lord with A headingher case: which Word and Speech off
hers the lord granted / by plaguing the Court proportionably to the syn they
aimed at. This is that the wicked get by touching his Anointed ones and doing
his prophets any harm.

Verse 20. And Pharaoh gave com. Many are the Troubles off the Righteous / but
the Lord delivers them out off all. He will not suffer us to be tempted
beyond the strength he administreth. Paul had A perilous shiuer puckinge his
flesh: but he had this answer: My grace is sufficient for the, for my power is
perfected through weakness: 2. Cor. 12. 5.

But this I note in the king / that the good use he made off Courts cross /
it shall condemn Princes and people in these days: who are so far from being
humbled by such afflictions* as they rather will make it A Cause off stabbinge
poor Abram to the heart I could but pick out A particular Insta^ce from some
Brownists and prove that.

NOTA.
As Abram did go down into Aegipt, so did the people off Israel go down
thither in the time of A Famine. Coming thither / they soon (after A sort)
denied the spiritual wife off their powth / by shaping themselves to the Idol
worship off the contry. But God mynding to call that figuringe Son out off
Aegipt, he plaguinge that Pharaohs court and contry / the king was urged
thereby to send Israel out: and that not without much substance and treasure.
In that their Pilgrimage they might well have remembered Abrams story.

An Introduction to Mystical consideration.
SWeet Jesus, when the Body off thy Father was dead in the Carnal Rites
Ceremonial given first unto Israel, thou was appointed to show thy self in the
^esh A poor pilgrim in Canaan: and thou did so: having thy dun^ty accompanied
with Saraj and Lot. Both were knit unto the by sacred union off Marriage
mystical. Lot thy Flesh / Saraj thy Soul: both thy Brothers Children / and
both right dear unto the. But Queen mystris the Soul / as it is A substance
spiritual / so off the two it rather accords with thy Divine nature.

Into Canaan and the most pleasant plot off Palestina thou came to find the
seed that was promised: not the Seed that should Give but Receive the
blessinge. But thou found the Canaanite in the Land. Notwithstanding that /
thou builded one Alter in Jerusalem and another in Samatia: nor trod thou on
that ground where thou left not Monuments off the Preisthood committed unto the^

But A Dearth came in Palestina, Pinchinge famine cawsed the to seek A seed
elsewhere: for thy meat and drinck was the doing off his will that sent the. As
therefore in the begininge off thy grouth thou was forced with A Coople (Mary
and Joseph) to go down into Egypt Real for preservation off the body: so
mystically thou went from Canaan, where thou left thine own people Israel and
went down / yea came down into Egypt / even to us the unnatural Gentiles.
Fynding amongst us A desire rather off fleshly worship then off thy spiritual
presence: thou have unto the weak and those that are without the Law become in
thy ministry as one that were weak and without the Law.

Foolishly has the Kingly Court church off the Gentiles sought to be one with
thy Syprte but after A carnal manner / A fleshly woorship: but the Word off
Saraj has assended to Jehovah and received this Countenance: namely decause
off such Carnal gross conceit and affection their Churches womb is shut up
and the kingly Court barren.

It (...)meth sweet Jesus before thou return the second time to M^sticall
Canaan that thou cawse the Cities King off the Gentiles to restore Saraj with
Advantage. Israel came not out off Aegipt without spoil: nor wilt thou
return without spoil and much substance.

Oh vnworthly I,
That knowing Jesus to have left heavens glory and his own people to Com unto
my Canaan, that I do not only forsake all outward things for coming unto him
/ but also all my natural kindred / old Adam with his deceivable lusts for
feeding him in the Ma^sion off my soul. Fie filthy Canaanites what do you
harboring in my land / nay in the la^d promised to my Jesus, the Seed in
whom not only the Nations but Abram himselff is blessed? Oh my soul / let not
Jesus depart the / though he set his face as if he would go forward but
Cleopas and his fellow (Heart and Hand / Affe^tion and Action) lay hold and
constrayne him to vyde with the th^^ Night.

Hespera jam venit, nobis tu Christ maneto. Ceazed on us, has gross darkness,
abide with us o Christ.
Argument, Chap. 13. Abram from Egypt. Lot from him is rent / God speaks to
Abram: he remoues his Tent.
Division of the text.
I. FIrst (generally Considerable) Abrams Returnall from Egypt to his Second
Alter-place in Canaan: unto verse. 5.

II. A Schism with the Circumstances made by Lo^t from Abram: thence unto
verse. 14.

III. Thirdly, Iehouahs voice to Abram: thence to verse. 18.

IIII. Lastly, Abcame Remouall and pitching place ^ared with an Alter: verse. 18.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. 1. Then Abram went up from Aegipt, From the land off Promise to Aegipt,
is A downe-gate: but from Aegipt accursed unto Palestina blessed / is an
vp-gate. So the way unto the Temple was upward / Act. 3. 1. Luke 18. 10. Into
the way off Sinners A man way slide slepinge / the way is smooth as glass: but
the Promises off God will not be had without cl^ninge: for every good and
perfect gift is from above / Iam. 1. 17.

Verse. 2. etc. Abram went forth Light but he coms Heavy (so is the hebrew) with
substance back to Canaan: and so together with his Nephew ^ot unto the second
Alter-plot they go. It lay between ^ethel and Gna^ (the House off God and the
fountain) and there he praised the Name off, Jehovah for his Mercies. Abram
was not so burdned with riches / but he followed religions exercise.

Verse. 5. And Lot also etc. had sheep. This Man's substance is brought in with
another effect: he could not be rich and dwell nere Abram too. This appears
first in the Sheopheards mutual disquietnes, Abrams servants stood for their
M^. his right: he was Lord off the Land. Lot his servants thought their copper
as good coin: their Mr. was fellow companion in the travel. Thus Love and
Lordship cannot agree: the matter to brought before their Masters: for the
spirit off the Prophets (my(...) dico) must be subject to the prophets / 2.
Cor. 14. 32.

Verse. 8. Then said Abram, The holy Soul urges Peace from the Considecation
off brotherhood. They were brethren 1. by Nation: 2. by Cognation: 3. by
Profession: and this last is greater then the two former / or the fourth which
is off Nature. By Nation Cognation / Nature men may be brethren: and yet in the
End prove as mere strangers as Dives and Laza^^s. But whosoever are brethren
truly in the Truth off the sauinge Eua^gell though here they be unknown the
one unto the other and the E^e Rich the other poor: yet Abram and Lazarus, Jesus
and the penitent theyfe / they in the end com to one Paradise / and remain One
/ as the Father and the Son are One. This Argument therefore if it prevail not
with Man / it is because man is mad.

Verse. 9. The Chaldy Paraphrast expounds right hand and Left by Sowth and
North: nor is it unlike to be true. Here the Elder gives place for peace sake
to the younger: and the more worthy to the less worthy. So long as Peace in
holiness may be had (though with buyinge it) we are to follow it / as we mean
to se God: Heb. 12. 14. The church must do all her things in Love / 1. Cor.
16. 14. for without Love / all the residue is but A Brownistes Noise, but no
Christian Voice. Secondly / Abrams vprightnes appears in offringe A Louinge
Leave to Lot for de^parture to another place / if so he could not content
himselff with his fellowship. Had Abram been possessed with our Heretics Sprite
/ he would have cawsed Lot to have kept fellowship with him (though in
wickedness) or he would have thundered out A fiery excommunication. But we must let
the fools alone with their leaden Dagger drawn out at every Fly / and take
Abram as we find him / A man off another Sprite.

Verse. 10. So when Lot lift up his eyes. The desire off the heart moves the
Ey-lids to turn up / that so the Ey may particularly apply what the heart
does hunt after: for the Ey is to the heart* as the hand to the mouth. Job
being acquainted with the crooked affect off the heart / he therefore makes A
Covenant with his Eyes / Chapter 31. 1. His Ey suruayinge / the pleasant Edenlike
Plain is objected to his ey: that takes Lot and away he goes.

Abram stays in Canaan but Lot enhabited the Cities off the plain / not all at
one time / but about he goes all was so sweet that he knew not which was
sweetest and the best he would have / till he came to Sodoms gates and there he
pitcheth. Zvvinglius turns it thus: Abram dwelled in (Aertes) in the mountanish
place off Canaan: but Lot in (Kika^) the grounds or pla^nes, which are about
the Region of Jordan. First, the text is plain. Abram dwelled Berets* cenagnan,
vlot iashabh begnate hacicar, in the Land or Region (for Aerets will not bear
Mountanish but rather A low place) and Lot dwelled in the cities off the
plain: or if Cicar be not turned Plain / then say as it is in the first
sense: Off A great loaf off bread: and so indeed I thinck it rather fittinge
the Ho. gh. his meaning / saying this Plains Pentapo^is or 5. Cities abounded
with bread, And this Ezekiel precisely observes / Chapter 16. 49. Secondly / his
text is not only diverse to the Original / but also his and some others their
collection from hence / saying the Pentapo^is is neither compared with Abrams
situation in height nor depth: nor yet cut simply from Canaan as no part off it
/ but in A certain regard, namely / as the Lord had determined to cut it off
ye^ long for Synsake / ^^ if it had never been off Canaan: as Satan was Cut
off from heavens Light / and for syns cawse reserved to everlasting darkness.

But what is added? The men off Sodom were wicked. (...) hopinge A Heaven, he
hope to Hell gates. Thinkinge to have ^ased his he^rt / he found vexation of
heart daly / 2. pet. 218. Better felo^wship let never (...) expect / when for
worldly (...) he shall with (...) ^s forsake Paul: though sounder sprited then
Demas.

Verse. 14. Then Ieho^ah, said to Abram* ^ot hatting discomforted Abram, the
Lord himself coms to heal that soa^e: a^ when the blind man Ioh. 9. was left
alone / then Jesus d^^w nere to comfort him. ^ot li^t up his eyes the ^^th not
biddinge: so did not Abram till the Lord bi^ him look up and suru^y the
Coastee: and indeed our eyes are bough: with ^ pri^e and therefore not ours but
the Lords to command and use

That the Lord promises the Land to him and his seed for ever: first / the
possession there off stands on Condition as (...) diverse places is expressly
uttered: secondly / which the Iues still slumble at gnad^ gnolam ^t does not
ever signify perpetuity or eternity / out oftentimes (as here) some certain
determinate time: and so Samuel is said to bide before the lord forever / 1.
Sam 1. 22. so Deuteronomy. 15. 17: the servant serves for ever: the l^^e is in many
other places. And if the blood off Jesus remain not upon the ^ue^ for ever /
they shall once (...) that Gnolana his bounds ^eatched for their Law and
Sacrifice no further the^ Jesus his halfe-week. Dan. 9. 27. unto which time off
so ceasinge sacrifice / from their returnall first from Babylon to divide their
Temple / was but 70. seauens off years: namely 490. y. since the expirement
whereoff has ouerstood 1563. ^. They^ comp^ Gabriels weeks well. That they
may kno^ that their Gnolam / or Ola^ was finished ^^ him they have pierced /
the lord quickly manifest the fulfillinge off their Euangel spoken off ^ Zech.
12. 10. etc.

The Lord having bid Abram se, he also bids him walk, that so he may se the
largenes off his promise. And indeed those that are (...)^ed in Love* they only
are enabled to Comprehend with all Saints / the Breadth and (...) off God his
Love in Christ. Ephesians. 3. 18: for (...) Christ are all the Promises yea and
(...): (...)there to Abram or his seed spiritual.

Argument, off Chap. xiij. Elam triumphs: so Abram: Sodoms kind / Shalem does
bless: Abram shoes kyngly mind.
Division off the text.
I. FIrst obseruable Kedor-lagnomer off Gnelam his triumphan: battalles: unto
Verse. 13.

II. Secondly, Abrams Triumph over Kedor-lagnomer and his Fauou^us thence unto
Verse. 17.

III. Thirdly, the Gratitude off Sodoms king to Abram (parenthesed or
enterlaced with A Specialty off Melchisedek and Abram) unto Verse. 22.

IIII. Lastly, Abram his Magnificall Carriage: First toward Sodoms king:
secondly, toward his own coapartners: thence to the end.

ELVCIDATION.
Verse. etc. And in the days off Amraphel. This saying off Shinar (the land off
Babel) is off the Hebrews held to be Nimrod: but be ^e whom he shall be / HE
with Arioc king off Ellasa^, Kedor-lagnomer king off Gnelam, and Tidgnal king
off Goym, A king to whom many strag^ers it seems joined / they wage battle
with Beragn king off Sodom, Beishagn king off Gnamotah, Shinab king off Admah,
and Shemeber king off Tzeboijm, and the King off Belagn that is Tzognar.

The 5. kings off Pentapolis Plain / they having been subject 12. y. they in
the 13 y. do break Kedor-lagnomers yoke: being fat / they kick up the heel
like an untamed Heifer. But Genelam / or Elam: off g^. I have spoken before and
I express it but for direction to the Root / he bringes the 5. Rebels under.
Such honor had Elams City ( Elam was of Shem) for the season over Chams-like
people: chasing the filthy Kings before them: whereoff two tumbled into Siddj^s
(...)me pits: the rest escapinge to the Mountains. This don / they carry away
the spoil / and together with that / they took ^ot prisoner for he dwelled at
Sodom, who was Abrams brothers son.

Though Lot was served as he deserved / yet the holy Gh. ad oinge Abrams
brothers Son, he would insinuate their syn / that durst be so bold with Lot,
if but because he was off Abrams flesh. This in the next place they here off:
for God motioninge one that had escaped to ^on unto Abram, he good man /
having forgotten and for given his Nephews harsh carriage / he mustreth and
pursues with A sacramental band off 318. men and finally Recouereth Lot and
all his and the others their substance. Edom laffed at Iudahs captivity / but
Abram made his unworthy Kins-mans cause his own: for my life he was no English
Donatist.

Nothing is here said what Lot does / but puddle vvha^fe was his old syn^-hole
again. Some serve the Lord with full fredom off Spirit / as did Abram: some are
combred with worlds transitories / as here is Lot: the difference off Graces
and Guiftes are admirable. Abram thus triumphinge over Elam, as he A little
before over the 5 Rebels (such is the issue off warfare ouer-reatching Iehouahs
Commission: for they should have let Lot Alone) Sodoms King coms forth to
congratulate Abram. The Hebrews understand this to be Bera, who before hid
himself in A Pit and now coms out. And suerly I cannot think that Bera so
fell before in the pittes as thereby he perished: the rather because this work
was quick: and unlike that another king in Bera his rou^^e / should be so soon
established: and that in the heat off this broy^e.

Verse. 18. etc and Melchi-tzedek king off shalem brought forth bread and wine
In this and the two next verses lies A golden Parenthesis containinge Wisdom
infinite. The close couchinge off it in / and the sudden breakinge off it off
/ it offreth to the sad discrete Spirit manifold considerations.

1. He is Melec A King: and this his King ship is to be considered: 1. as he
is king off tzedek Righteousness: and off Shalem Peace: heb. 7. 2. Philo in his
second book off the ^awes Allegories he Philosophically says: Basileus de
echthron tyranno etc. A King is opposite to A Tyrant, because he introduces
Right and Equity into the common-vveal, but the other ^niquity. Such a one was
this king / and such should all Kings be. That he is king off Righteousness and
peace / he must be more thenn A Man: and yet (saying he is A King off Shalems
town) he must be but A Man. More them A Man he is secundum quid as he is A
type off him who is really King off Righteousness and Peace: and saying he is A
Type (and not the person typed) he must off necessitye be but A Man / and
neither the holy ghost. nor an Angel, as some fondly have taught. And as he must
be A Man / so an excellent Man / saying he bears the person of Jesus Christ
for kingdom and preisthood. To say he was A Cananitish king or off some
obscure stock / is as Low on the left hand as the former ^y on the right hand:
nor would the Kings round about him have suffered him to sit in peace* had not
they known him for an excellent Birth.

Greater then Abram he was / not only for Kingdom but also for Preisthood: and
what Man living should be greater then the Father off the promise? Shem had the
first honor off having God dwellinge in his Tent: and Yet he was alive. In
Shem God had put his Name sham there / and only there with the Hebrews /
diverse Greeks Latins and others I must fasten Melchisedek. who will knoe more
reason for this * let them read Mr. Broughton his Treatise off Melchisedek.

That this Shalem was not (as some teach) some other town thereby / but (...)
halem in after-age so called / old Onkelos is so minded in his Thargum and
ordinarily all after him.

The Psalmist sainge that the Tabernacle was in Shalem, ps. 76. 2. it leads
us both to Shems Tabernacle and to Ieru-shalems City for fyndinge out the
typical king off Righteousness and Peace: and not only Mele^ A King / but
also Cohen A Priest: and that to El^gnelion God most ^y. This King and Priest
off Shalem first both ^echem va(...). He brings forth Bread and wine: secondly
he blesses. To what end brought he / or cawsed he bread and wine to ^^ brought
out? Abram had no great need off Bread and drinck, for as he would not go
forth to watre without provision so he quickly recovered the substance before
carried away.

Choose whither Melchisedek brought it forth as A King or Priest or Both: it
thabowed forth A good thing to com / namely / the New testaments Eucharist
Bread and wine / Ministered by Jesus his ordinance unto Abrams household / not
Sodoms city. Against this my speech in the Bibles B^. some in Sc. opened their
Months / as if my speech had been Romish. But what say the Ancient? Clemens
in his 4. Strom. says: Melchisedek gave bread and wine sanctified, unto
nutriment, A type off the (...). And Chrisostom on the 110. 15. says* And why
says he according to the order of Melchisedek? because off the Mysteries,
first in that he also brought bread and wine to Abram etc. Augustine in the
109. question off both testaments mixt-wise / he has this: Now Melchisedek
shows the future mystery of the Lords incarnation and passion, while first
unto Abram as to the father off the faithful, he delivers the Eucharist both
off the Lord his body and blood, that so there might before-figured in the
Father, the truth which should fall out in the Son^. Chuonrad^s Pellicanus on
Genesis 14. says. That the bread and wine was A figure off the Souls
spiritual resection, which the mynds off the faithful receive off the New
testament in the sacrament of his body and blood, which our high Priest has
once don by offringe himself to God the father for us (Nemo ignorant) No one is
ignorant. Thus said they and mo then they: and so say I and more then I: and yet
as far from giving vayntage hereby to Error / as those that gainsay it.

But Mr. Calvin falls Tertullian and others for this. I knoe it. Mr. Calvin
had i^ wonderful large guifte for helpinge out the Grammatical sense / but no
man in Mysteries as his pen witnesses: what then / should the one gift destroy
the other and not rather amiably build together? This Mystery makes or
insin^ateth not any breach off faith: and suerly if this Bread and wine were
but A mere blank for the belly / Melchisedeks figuratio^ may be trust up in A
strait compass. But the Author to the Hebrews speaks not off this. I answer:
in not speakinge off it he speaks of it. For restinge them that he had / Chapter 5.
11. many things and hard to be uttered off Melchisedek, but they were to dull
to conceive / he herein sends / the sharp conceipted to further and deper
meditation. But how knot you says some / that this bread and wine were figures
etc. I answer by another question: how knoes thou this and that to be meant by
such particulars in Le^^ticus, Salomons song / the book off Revelation? if
thou answer: by proportion off faith and likeness off the thing Resemblinge and
Resembled (they being compared with the Analogy off faith and found agr^nige:
if that be thy answer for the former / let the same be my answer for the
Latter.

Whereas Tertullian says in his book against the Iues: Melchisedek Abrahae
re^ertentl de praelio panem et vinum obtulit. Melchisedek offered bread and
wine unto Abram returninge from the battle: this speech is made ^ perilous
thing: for say they / hoth does not signify to Offer and therefore he should
have ^d protulit he brought forth: not obtulit he offered. A piece of deep
learning: as if he should bring it forth for A show / and not offer it to
Abram. They themselves say / that he fed Abram with it / and I troe before he
eat off it / it was offered to him. Obs. Yea / but the word Offer implies A
sacrifice. Master John is deceived. The wisemen unto Christ obtule^unt ei
munera, they offered unto him guiftes / Math. 2. 11. Is any so blockish as to
think they sacrificed guiftes unto Jesus? The word Offer both in Latin and
english / it is used for Give or present A thing to one / v^thorit once
breaminge off sacrifice.

But I wonder why any think that Tertullians speech makes any thing for
Romish sacrifice? He says that Melchisedek offered to Abram: so say I / and
therefore not to god. The Romanistes say they offer by the Real body and blood
off Jesus unto God: Melchisedek offers to A Man inferior to himself:
Tertullia^s speech therefore does confine popish sacrifice. Would not men feign
stumble / that stumble at their own thrifte. The Fathers hereyn are so far
from being against us / as indeed they are with us. But raw heads delited in
green fancies / they must speak / though speak euel off the things they knoe
not. But if A man Read Justin Martyr his Dialogue with Trypho the Ine who
will not say that from this Greek father / the speech off Tertullian was
borrowed? not for the bare words though in the most alike (as that the
Uncircumcised blessed the Circumcised etc.) as for the Matter. And there Justin
has / Abram offered to Melchisedek tenths: and in another place / he gave
tenths. As Justin by Offer and Gave die mean one thing / namely / freely
bestoe / not sacrifice: so what Should let but Tertullian must much more mean
the same: seeing it had been (off the two) more fit for the lesser to have
sacrificed to the Greater / then the Greater to the Lesser. If men have not
learned that do and offe^o in Latin / and didomi and prosphero in Greeks
language are commonly in nere affinity / they must go and learn their
Vocabular or Dictionary better / and not controlle the things they understand
not: making the holy Fathers (in their fancy) as foolish as them selves.

So / some stumble at the Fathers for saying that Christ his Body and Blood is
in Verity, Nature, Substance in the sacramental Supper: Not consideringe that
they speak so not off his Natural but Sacramental body and blood. This
distinction Hierom will teach them on Ephesians. Chapter 1. where thus he writes.
Dupliciter sanguis Christi et ca^o intelligitur etc. The blood and flesh of
Christ is two vvays understood: either it is spiritual and divine, off which
Christ speaks. My flesh is verily meat. etc. or it is the flesh and blood
that was crucified. Fat were the ancients from Romes dream: for every off
them (for any thing I se) did with the sacred scriptures understand and teach A
body proper and improper. Augustine on John and Tra^ate 50. says this: Thou
have Christ present and to com: Presently faith present by Sign, present by
the Sacrament off Baptism, present by the meat and drink off the Alter etc. In
regard of his Majesty, of his providence, of his ineffable and invisible grace
it is fulfilled that is said: Behold Iam with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world. In regard off the Flesh which the WORD assumed,
in regard of that which was borne of the virgin etc. Ye shall not have him
always with you. Why? because he conuersed with his disciples 40. days
according to bodily presence and they being led by seeing not follovvinge, he
ascended into heaven and is not here. The blood and flesh off Christ thus
understood to be Natural and spiritual / Common and Sacramental / the knot
both off the sacred Canon / as also off Ecclesiastical writers / it is easily
without Romish sense avoided.

So / some cannot hear the word Sacrifice to be affirmed off the ^o. his supper
/ but straight they cry / Properie: not understanding that the word does admit
more senses the^ one. Not only it is sacrum-factun A sacred action as it is
given by Christ to his church / but also / as the Church offers their
solemnization there off to the eyes off their heavenly father. If we offered no
sacrifice to god / in vain had Peter called us A Preisthood / and John termed
us Preistes. But indeed / not only that Supper but also all religions duties
sanctified by faith they are A sacrifice off sweet smell in the Nosethrils off
our father.

Verse. 19. Therefore he blessed him. The lesser is blessed off the Greater /
Hebr. 7. 7. Abram therefore decimates off all he had: nor can I think that he
would tenth any off Sodoms substance / because that had been an oblation
polluted. His exceptinge afterward off that the young men had eaten / and what
others were to have for their labor / there being no exception off any thing
tythed / it urges me to think he only offered off his own: otherwise Sodoms
king should have had occasion to have said / that Abram was fre off other men's
goods. Melchisedek blesses Abram, and then he blesses the God off Abram, that
so Abram may k^oe that the Victory had by him the Creature, it was effected by
El the Creator. All the Victories off the Church must be attribute only unto
God the efficient cause / though enacted by Man / the Isntrumental Cause. The
faithful with Abram they must look for the sovereign blessing^ when first
they have ouercom. To him that overcomes etc. Revel. 2. and 3 As also /
having received A blessinge from God they ought to contribute off all they
have, Genesis 28. 22. Galat. 6. 6. 2. Cor. 8. ^.

But comparinge this with Hebr. 7. 9. 10. the Anabaptists reason thus against
Christ his taking flesh off Mary: Leui being Yet in the ioynes off Abram, he is
said to pay tents unto Melchisedek. If Jesus therefore should have had his
Nature in the loins off Mary, then with Mary he may be said to have sinned:
if his Being was in the loins off David, Abram Adam / then he may as truly
be said to have sinned in them / as Leui to have decimated in Abram: but that
Jesus any way sinned is false: therefore also false that he had his Nature or
Being in Mankind. Not regardinge what answer some have made hereto / I only
answer thus: The Si^ile is A ^issimile: wh^le they think they reason from the
Like / they reason from the Unlike: for their Argument concluded rightly if
Jesus had been, as was Leu^ / A natural birth / but Jesus was not conceived as
was Levi by Man / but by the Ho. Ghost his ouer-shadowing / and therefore A
birth supernatural. Yet saying our Seed was taken off him / though in A
supernatural sort / our syn was upon him / though not in him: yea he was made
Syn for us / as verily as we are made the righteousness off God. Nor could we
have com so nere him / if he has not first com so nere unto us.

Verse. 21 etc. Then the king off Sodom. ^o the ho. Gh. brought Melchiseked
suddenly in / so suddenly he remoues him / returninge again to Sodoms King:
who offers unto Abram the recovered substance / but refused off Abram for
himself / though not for others. He would not take it / not because it was
unlawful / but because it was vneryedient. If it had been unlawful / he would
not have insi^nated the guifte off any part there off to any off his family.
He took off Egipts King before / for then he was poor: but he takes not off
Sodoms King / because he was not poor There is A time to gather and A time to
cast away. Eccles. 3. 5. Yet his own Magnificency / it impedes not acceptance
off such substance in others ( blessed is he that judges vvisely off the
poor) for the Prudent discern wisely of Circumstances / that nothing either
in plenty or poverty may darken Iehouahs Glory / or justly discourage others
from fighting his spiritual battles.

Gnaner, Esheol, Mamie, they are brought in for as blessed Neighbors to Abram
/ as the Sodomits were accursed to Lot. Holy Abram and these 3. they dwelt
together in. The sit^ off Ki^iath-arbagn / or the City Arbagn: that is
appellatiuely / off Fovv^e. The Hebrews in the Commentary Breshith Ral ba /
they say that it had the name Arba or Four off Abram and his 3. Neighbors
there inhabitinge: as also because from thence Abr^m did pursue the 4. kings.
As also / for that the 4. patriarks Adam, Abram, Isaac, Iaakob, together with
the 4. Matrones Heuah, Saraj, Rebecca, ^eah were Buried there. But as the
situation is before called Ma^^te, I doubt not / off the proper name Ma^ire /
Abrams good Neighbor: so also / it is not unlike so be called the City Arbagh,
not off the Appellatiue 4. but off the proper name Arbagn who was the great
father off the Giants / Josh. 14. 15. called lastly Hebron off Calc^s fall /
appointed by Joshua to be A City off Refuge. First Mamie secondly Arba /
thirdly Hebron, fourthly A city off Refuge: the sober spirited may from hence
pick out A fowrefold Mystery. Gnane^ by transposition off letter / Nagnat, it
is A young man: Eshcol is A cluster of grayes: Ma(...), is turned Vision.

Here business does break me off.
The Sequel do expect,
What time or times, God gives the means*
Meane-tyme this Myte accept.

