THREE SERMONS UPON MARK, THE NINTH CHAPter, 22. 23. verses. CONTAINING
fifteen Doctrines, the particulars whereof appear in the next pages following.

By Robert Cleauer.

printer's device of Thomas Creed (McKerrow 339)

LONDON Printed by T C. for William Welbie, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swan. 1611.

THE DOCTRINES OF THE THREE Sermons upon Mark, the 9. chapter. 22. 23. verses.
SERMON I.
DOCT. I. THat Satan's malice is bent even against our bodies. 2 That Gods own
children with their faith have some mixture of unbelief. 3 That love makes men
to bear others burdens as if they were their own.
SERMON II.
DOCT. I. WHere Christ helps any one in mercy, he first helps his heart. 2
That no man has faith at command. 3 The faithful are strongest and happiest.
4 Faith and godly sorrow may well go together. 5 Christians must see and
acknowledge their graces. 6 Faith shows men their corruptions, and mooues them
to seek help against them.
SERMON III.
DOCT. 1. CHrist does all in due time. 2 Enemies of Gods Children shall be
rebuked. 3 Satan is desirous to bereave us of our senses and limbs. 4 A word
of Christ's mouth is sufficient to help us out of all distresses. 5 It is all
one with Christ, to drive the devil out, and to keep him out. 6 Satan never
seems more masterfull then when he is ouer-mastered.
The first Sermon.
MARK. 9. Verse 22. And often times he casts him into the fire, and into the
water, to destroy him: but if thou can do any thing, help us: and have
compassion upon us.

23 And JESUS said unto him, if shou can believe it, all things are possible
to him that belieueth.

24. And straight way the father of the child, crying with tears, said;
Lord, I believe, help my unbelief.


THe occasion of these words is declared in the beginning of this history:
which was this, that a certain man had a child possessed by the devil, which
had made him dumb and deaffe, and that from his childhood; in so much that he
could never speak nor hear in all his life: This man in the absence of
Christ, brought him to his Disciples, hearing that they had dispossessed
others, and therefore hoping to find the like success for himself: But when
they had made trial, they found themselves unable to cast the devil out of
his child: whereupon their adversaries were ready to insult and triumph over
them. In the mean season our Savior comes among them, ready to undertake
the cause of his poor Disciples against their enemies; the father of this
distressed child does forthwith hasten unto him, and enters into speech with
him: Now these words do contain part of that conference which passed betwixt
them; wherein we may note these three things:

1 1. First the petition of the man, with the reason of it: he besought our
Savior if he could do any thing, that he would have compassion on him and
his son, and minister comfort unto him, by giving deliverance unto his
child, from his miserable estate wherein he was: and to move him un to
greater commiseration, he relates unto him in what sort Satan did tyrannize
over him, casting him often times into the fire, to burn him, and into the water
to drown him. Verse 22.

2 2. Secondly, our Saviors answer, where we may observe, that as the man
came with an [ If] saying, If thou can do any thing: so he answers him
with the like; If thou can believe this: that is, if thou can be persuaded
of my power, that I am able to do this, thy son shall be helped (for that
must needs be supplied) and he yields a reason thereof, all things are
possible to the belieuer, verse. 23: and therefore this is is not impossible: as
if Christ Jesus should have said; Whereas thou make question whether I can
dispossess thy son or not, know this, that if there be any doubt, it is on
thy part, not on mine: if thou can believe, thou shall find, that neither
this, nor any other matter is too difficult for me: this our Savior speaks,
for the helping of his weak faith.

3 Thirdly, we may note the reply of this man upon Christ his speech; he
crying with tears, said, Lord I believe, help mine unbelief: verse. 24. Where
we see that he acknowledges the grace of God, that he did believe in part:
and withal, his own weakness, that he was troubled with unbelief: against
which, he desires Christ to help him; that is, to cure him of it, to give
him strength against it, and deliverance from it. And thus much for the order
and sense of the words; verse 22. And often times he casts him into the fire,
and into the water to destroy him:] whence observe this doctrine, that

Doct. 1. Satan's malice is bent even against men's bodies.
Satan is not only an enemy unto the souls of men, but also unto their
bodies.

He does not only seek their destruction spirituallie by drawing Gods wrath
upon them: but also corporally, by bringing afflictions and miseries upon them;
as here we may see by his cruel dealing toward this child: albeit he had
gotten an habitation in him, which was a thing wherein he much delighted Mark.
5. 8.
(as may appear by this, that he counted it a torment to be cast out, where
once he had taken possession;) yet he used great violence toward him, casting
him into the fire, and into the water, being content to relinquish and lose his
hold, so that the child might be destroyed. Mark. 5. 5.
The like we may read in this same Evangelist, in his first chapter, where
mention is made of one possessed, whom the devil caused to fly from, and to
eschew the company of men, and to live in the mountains, and in the graves,
and to knock himself with stones, and so to abuse that strength which he had
given him, to his own great hurt and torment. So also in his dealing with Job,
Job. 1.
and with his children and servants, we may observe how willing he is to take
liberty to hurt men's bodies, when it pleases the Lord to grant it unto him.

And for the further confirmation of this point,

Reason 1.
Let us first take experience for one reason, to convince us of the truth
hereof, and that in the limbs of Satan, who being led by his spirit, do
plainly manifest of what disposition their master is: now concerning them, it
is said, that the works of their father they will do; and of Satan, it is
said, John. 8. 44.
that he was a murderer from the beginning: whence it may be concluded, that
the more devilish men are, the more murderous and bloody minds they carry:
and therefore when the devil was entered into Judas, he presently fell to
practicing against his master: 1. John. 3. 12.
and Caine being of that evil one, slew his brother: 1. Sam. 18. 10. 11.
and when the evil spirit came upon Saul, he laid about him with his spear,
with full purpose to have berest David of his life: and so it is with
swaggerers and drunkards, and such like hellish persons, when they have no
enemies to fall out with, they draw their weapons on their friends, and many
times murder their own companions: which is an evident demonstration of the
cruel affection that is in Satan's members, even toward the bodies of men.

2
Again, this may be another reason of the point, that Satan carries a deadly
malice against all the creatures, Mark. 5.
(as we may see in his desire to enter into the swine) and therefore much more
unto mankind: and that not only against the Image of God renewed by the spirit
of Christ, but even against those remnants thereof that are remaining in the
nature of man: whence it is, that he is so violent against their bodies, and
seeks to torture them as well as their souls, as carrying some stamp and
impression of Gods workmanship in them.

This point serves,

Use.
First for the just reproof and condemnation of their folly and madness,
that will upon any occasion have recourse unto Satan, or to any means of his
invention, either for the relieuing of their estate, or the easing of their
bodies, or the helping of their children, or the like: howsoever such do in
word profess that they esteem of the devil as of an utter enemy unto
mankind, yet indeed they show the quite contrary, viz. that they rather judge
him to be a friend, than a foe: for they will run from God, and from their
dearest friends, to seek unto him; and prefer his service before the service
of any whosoever he be. Many will serve the Lord hollowly, and their masters
vntrustily, but the devil in good earnest, and without hypocrisy, wholly
applying themselves to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, they imagine that there
is too much rigor in Gods law, and too much severity in men's dealings, and
that Satan is the best and kindest master of all others: he will give them
full liberty to break the Sabbath; to be drunken, to be wanton and
lascivious, to filsh and steal, and to do any thing else whereunto their
sinful nature leads them: they may have any indulgence at his hands, without
check, or controulement: and hence it comes to pass that he has such
troops of followers, and that almost all the world are his servants and
vassals. But these men do little consider in the mean while, what a cruel
tyrant, and mortal adversary he is unto them, yea even to their bodies.

Object.
How can that be (will some say) seeing that such do live merrily, and enrich
themselves in the world, and come to places of great preferment? If to take the
courses before named be to serve the devil, surely (for ought we can see) he
seems to be a kinder master than he is taken for.

Answer. 5
Nay, he is a cruel tyrant notwithstanding all this, and that to the very
outward man, for (that we may give instance in some particulars) when Satan
gives liberty to any one to take his swing in swilling and drinking; does he
not by that means overthrow his estate, craze his brain, blemish his name,
and fill his body full of noy some diseases? and does not the devil then take
a scourge as it were into his hand, wherewith he pays them home that are
given over to that inordinate course of life? So when he gives allowance unto
men to follow their covetous humor, do they not pinch their bellies, and
deprive themselves o^t times of necessary food? do they not restrain their
eyes from sleep in the night, and vex themselves with many painful cares,
as what if such a chest should be broken open? what if thieves should get into
such a chamber? what if my servants should be unfaithful at home? What if they
should not look well to my cattle abroad? with a thousand such troublesome
thoughts, which do break off their rest, and impair their hearts, and by
degrees draw dangerous diseases upon them: it would be too much to
particularize in pleasures of diverse kinds, in gaming, in ambition, and such
like: wherein when the devil has once entangled men, he does keep them as it
were in Bridewell. But grant for the time, that he is kind unto sinful
persons in letting them have their fill of iniquity, yet he is withal
crafty, and seeks to ouer-reach them by subtlety: for he knows that his
power is limited, so that he cannot do what he would; and therefore he
labors by drawing men unto such courses as are displeasing unto the Lord, to
put them over into his hand, (who as he well knows) both can and will plague
and punish them, either in body, or in soul, or in both: so that by presenting
before their eyes the benefits that they shall reap by sin, he does but
offer unto them a sugared cup, which has deadly poison in the bottom of it:
or a goodly fair bait, which has a dangerous hook in the midsts of it. His
dealing herein, may not unfitly be compared unto the counsel which that false
prophet Balaam gave unto Balac, king of Moab: who knowing that he could not
prevail against the Israelites, so long as they continued in Gods favor, but
though he cursed them, yet the Lord would bless them: Numb. 24. Revel. 2. 14.
he advises that King (if ever he meant to do them a mischief) to use them
kindly, and friendly; to bid them to their wake, when they offered sacrifice
to their filthy Idol, and there to make them good cheer, and withal, to
offer unto them some of their fairest women; that so being drawn to sin
against God, he might execute some judgment upon them: and this devilish
counsel was that indeed, which caused Gods people to taste of his indignation.
In the same manner does Satan beguile the sons of men: he cannot bring upon
them that misery and mischief that he desires, and therefore he stirs
men up to provoke the Lord by their pride, and voluptuousnes, and worldlines,
or some such like corruptions, and then having made war betwixt the Lord and
them, he stands by and clappes his hands, to see him smiting and plaguing them
for their offenses.

Use. 2.
Secondly, considering that Satan is such a cruel enemy unto us, it should
teach us to give unto the Lord the honor and praise of our preservation: that
notwithstanding we have so many thousand mighty, and crafty, and malicious
adversaries, yet we live in safety, and do enjoy innumerable blessings of
God to our great comfort: that albeit the devil comes near us, yet he cannot
hurt us: and though this ravenous wolf be even in the midst of the flock,
yet he cannot spoil so much as one lamb among them: and that howsoever there
be multitudes of his Adherents, that have a deadly quarrel against piety,
and against the vpholders and maintainers thereof, so that no Lion is more
greedy of his prey, then they are of the blood of Gods servants, yet we enjoy
our health, and strength, and food, and families, and liberty of calling upon
the name of the Lord: for this wonderful favor of our good God, in
restraining the devil and his instruments from doing us mischief, we should
never cease to magnify his glorious name: evermore endeavoring to keep our
selves in his favor, that so he being with us, and standing for us, we may not
need to fear any of our adversaries that intend hurt and violence against us.

But if thou can do any thing,] In that this man makes a doubt whether
Christ can help his child, or not, and so manifests his infidelity, albeit he
was otherwise a godly man: this doctrine may be collected hence, that

Doct. 2. The faithful tainted with unbelief.
Gods own children with their faith, have some mixture of unbelief.

That this man was a believer, may appear by sundry circumstances of the
text: as namely, that he came unto Christ his disciples for help, and when he
found none at their hands, did not deprave, nor disgrace them, but went unto
our Savior, and that not only to have his son helped, but to have his own
unbelief cured, giving him this honor, to be the author and worker of grace
in the hearts of the sons of men: yet notwithstanding all this, he herein
manifested his infirmity, that he made question of Christ his power, whether
he could cast the devil out of his child or not.

The scripture is plentiful of testimonies for the confirmation of this point.
Genesis 12. Genesis 28. 2.
Abraham was the father of believers, and had a full parswasion in some
particulars: yet how weak did he show himself, when he exposed his wife to
evident peril of violating her chastity, by causing her to say that she was
his sister, that so his life might be spared, which otherwise might be
endangered (as he thought) by reason of her beauty? as if the Lord could not
as well protect him in Gerar, and in Egypt, as he had done in Canaan, and in
Mesopotamia! Genesis 16.
So also in another particular: the Lord promised that he should have a child
by Sarah, but he had waited long, and the promise was not yet fulfilled, and
now Sarah was altogether unlikely (in the ordinary course of nature) to bear
a child: in this case what does Abraham? at the persuasion of his wife, he
takes Hagar, that so Sarah might have a son by her: as if God had been in a
strait, and knew not how to be as good as his word, unless the promise might
bear this construction, that Sarah should have a child indeed, but by another,
this was great unbelief in him.

David likewise had commonly an excellent faith, 1. Sam. 24. and 26. 9.
in so much that when Saul his enemy was in his hands, so that he might have
slain him, and was urged by his men so to do, or to suffer them to do it,
yet he would in no wise yield unto them, to take away Saul's life; but resolved
to wait upon the Lord, who would take him away in due time, either by a
natural, or by a violent death, and advance him to the Kingdom in his steed:
yet after this good resolution, he manifested great frailty and weakness of
faith: 1. Sam. 27. 1.
for he said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: and
thereupon he fled unto the King of Gath, and there being in peril of his
life, bewrayed much infidelity before the king.

And the like corruption does our Savior often times reprehend in his Disciples,
Matthew. 8. 26. Luke 5.
Why did you fear, o ye of little faith? says he; and as these particular
examples do evidently prove the point in hand, so also does the general
example of the whole Church, of which the Prophet Isaiah speaks thus: Isaiah.
49. 14.
Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me; if they
had affirmed that God had rejected but one member of his Church; though it were
but one of the meanest, as it were the little finger, it had been a great
dishonor unto his Name; but that he should cast off his whole Church, was a
charge far more heinous and intolerable: and argued a great measure of
unbelief in Gods people, that either said it, or thought it. Yet the Lord does
not discourage them for this, but rather uses arguments to confirm and
strengthen them. Can a woman (says he) Verse. 15.
Verse. 15.
forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? though
they should forget, yet will not I forget thee. In which words the Lord tells
them for their comfort, that a mother, that has a child sucking on her
breasts, may sooner forsake it, and forget that she has such an one, than he
can relinquish them, and let his chosen ones slip out of his mind.

Reasons.
Now the reason why the remnants of infidelity do still remain in such as
are Gods faithful servants, are these.

1
First, because there is in the best a great defect of knowledge, as the
Apostle witnesses: 1. Cor. 13. 12. and certain it is, that we cannot believe
more than we know, though we may know more than we believe: and therefore our
knowledge being but weak and imperfect, our faith cannot be absolute and
perfect.

2
Secondly, there is no other grace of God, but is joined with imperfections,
and therefore faith cannot be perfect; for if it were, it would perfect all the
rest of the virtues that are in us: our humility would be without any pride:
our patience without any coffeehouse: our love without any manner of
bitterness, etc.

3
Thirdly, it is a good providence of God that it should be so; for otherwise
his wonderful mercy in bearing with us, and his mighty hand in upholding us,
would not so evidently be seen: we could not else so easily parceiue how
strong the Lord is, in fensing us against dangerous temptations; in delivering
us from violent corruptions: in arming us against boisterous persecutions; and
in upholding us in all manner of tribulations.

Use. 1.
Let this therefore first of all be an instruction unto us, to teach us to be
more sparing in our censures, when we find defects of faith, either in our
selves or others. The best of Gods servants (as has been sufficiently
proved) are subject to many doubtings, both concerning the promises of God,
and concerning his providence: and therefore when we find the like in our
selves or others, let us not thereupon conclude, that we are not of the number
of the faithful: for we may have a true justifying faith at that very instant,
when we are full of doubting touching some particular points; as may be seen
in the examples before alleged for the confirmation of this doctrine: and if
God should work all at once in us, there would be no more employment for him;
nor any further use of the means of our salvation. Let us not therefore
discourage our hearts, as if we had no faith, because we find defects in our
faith: or as if we had nothing else but infirmities, because we find some
infirmities in our selves: Christ deals more charitable than so with Peter:
for though he were afraid upon the sight of a great wave, after that Christ had
given him experience of his power, in making him able to walk upon the sea,
yet does he not call him unbeliever, or faithles person: but says unto him,
Math. 14. 21.
Why did thou fear, o thou of little faith? giving him his due, that he
had some faith; albeit he had not so much as he should have had.

Use. 2.
Secondly, is it so, that the best have some dregs of unbelief still
remaining in them? then let us be exceeding careful in looking to our own
hearts, for otherwise we may fall very dangerously. Let us not therefore
presume upon this, that we have faith, and therefore we shall always stand
upright: for though we have a wonderful excellent faith, as Abraham had, and
as David had, yet we may suddenly slip into scandalous offenses, as they did,
because we have infidelity as a dangerous traitor still harboring within us,
which has many ill companions attending upon it, and is ready still to show
it self in distempered passions, and inordinate courses, unless we do
marvelous carefully restrain and repress the motions thereof. Little though
Peter ever to deny and forswear his master, when he was so resolute, that
he stood upon it with our Savior, that though he should die with him, yet he
would never forsake him; yet we read what his unbelief brought him unto. We
are of the same nature that he was, let us therefore be admonished by his
example, that when we think that we stand, we take heed least we fall:
for though we be never so valorous in our own conceits, little do we know
into what cruelty, and into what bitterness of speech we may break forth, and
how exceeding cowardly we may show our selves in the causes of God: the
serious consideration whereof, should cause us evermore to have an eye unto our
unbelief, and to look narrowly thereunto: yea, to lay strong chains upon it,
and to keep it close prisoner: for otherwise, it will make some escape or
other, and coming abroad, will play such leaud tricks, as will bring shame
unto us, and dishonor unto God, and a blemish upon our holy profession.

Help us, and have compassion on us; that is, on me and my child: Whence
arises this doctrine, that

Doct. 3. Love makes men to bear others burde^s, as if they were their own.
True love will cause men to make their case for whom they pray to be their
own. It will make them to communicate with their estate, for whom they become
suitors unto the Lord, and to bear a burden with them in their afflictions: as
here we see in this man, who made his sons case and his own alike.

Thus does the Prophet Isaiah make himself a party, when he deals with the
Lord in the behalf of the Jews, against whom Gods wrath was kindled, Our
trespasses are many before thee (says he) Isa. 59. 12.
and our sins testify against us. And again, chapt. 64. 6. We have been
as an unclean thing, and our righteousness as filthy cloutes, etc. In the like
sort speaks the Prophet Jeremy; Ierem. 14. 7.
O Lord, though our iniquities testify against us (says he) deal with us
according to thy name: for our rebellions are many, we have sinned against
thee. So does Daniel also, Daniel. 9. 5.
We have sinned (says he) and have committed iniquity, and have done
wickedly; yea, we have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from
thy judgments. And lastly, (not to heap together more examples of this kind)
good Ezra manifests the like holy affection, as those before-named did; for
thus he prays, Ezra. 9. 6.
O my GOD, I am confounded, and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God:
for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heaven. In which examples we see, that those holy men of God, though
they were very innocent of any heinous crime, and in respect of those faults,
which they for whom they prayed were guilty of, altogether blameless, and
untainted, yet they took to heart the offenses committed by others, as if had
been principal men in the same.

Reasons.
The reasons why Gods children must be thus affected, are these.

1.
First, because this fellow-feeling of others miseries, is a very effectual
means to make them fervent and earnest in their suites and requests: as the
examples before alleged, do clearly manifest. Whereas on the contrary, if
men do not much care for others calamities, as if they did nothing at all, or
very little concern them; they will pray, but very coldlie and drowsilie for
them.

2
Secondly, as this sensiblenes of other men's distresses, will make Gods
servants fervent, so will it also make them constant in their prayers for them:
so that after many delays and repulses, they will still persevere in making
supplication for them: but on the other side, if men be not thus affected
toward them, they will quickly be discouraged, and soon let their suite fall
to the ground: as we may observe in the disciples of our Savior, who speaking
for the woman of Canaan, without any great sense and feeling of her misery,
were very cold and short in their request. Master (say they) send her away:
that is, dispatch her, that she may be gone, for she cries after us. Now when
Christ answered that Math. 15. 23.
he was not sent unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel, their prayer was
at an end, and they had no more to say for her: but the poor woman, being
thoroughly afflicted with the torment of her daughter, would not let the matter
pass so, but replyeth upon Christ Jesus, and answers every one of his
objections, till at length her request was granted.

3
Thirdly, this will cause their prayers to be effectual, and to find good
admittance and acceptance with the Lord: they cannot but be welcome unto him,
in regard they proceed from abundance of love, and of tender compassion in the
parties, which are graces wherewith the Lord is well pleased, yea, and much
delighted.

4
Fourthly, as others shall have the benefit of such prayers, so shall they
themselves that make them have the comfort thereof in a special manner: As
Jeremy, and Daniel, and such like holy men, who upon the granting of their
requests, had an hundred times more consolation, than ordinary people for whom
they prayed: and if it so fall out that our requests be not granted in the
particulars, yet shall we some way or other be proportionably recompensed by
the Lord.

5
Lastly, if no other reason would induce us, yet the example of our blessed
Savior should move us to this holy communicating with the miseries of our
brethren: for he took our persons upon him, and 2. Cor. 5. 21.
he that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God, through him. He became our surety, and took upon him
both the guiltiness and punishment of our sins: he did not only pity us,
and speak for us, but also dealt for us, and died for us: and therefore it
behooves us to Phil. 2. 5.
put on the same mind that was in Christ Jesus: and to be affected in the
like sort as he was. Use 1.
Which makes for the just reproof of those, who when they are petitioners
unto God for others, deal no otherwise then great men's Attendants commonly do,
for such as have before hand hired them to prefer their suites unto their
masters: or then corrupt Lawiers do for their Clients, when they have
received their fees: they think they shall loose nothing if matters go against
them: nor gain any thing if they succeed for them: and therefore they use not
much eagerness in the pursuit thereof, but deal coldlie and carelessly in the
causes which they undertake: So do a great many in their suites which they
put up unto God; yea, even then when they are to speak for their own
children, or other near friends: and that when they are in a most lamentable
taking, so that they might justly say as the woman of Canaan did of her
daughter, O Lord have mercy on me; my child, or my friend, is Matthew. 15.
miserably vexed with a devil: miserably haunted with pride, with
uncleanness, with voluptuousnes, etc: Yet Satan does as it were, bellow forth
at their mouths, and is ready to cast them (not into the water, or into the
fire, as was this man's child, but) even into hell fire, which never shall be
quenched: albeit (I say) the case stand thus with many men's children, or
friends: Nay further, though they have been brought to this pass by their
ill educating of them, or their giving of ill example unto them, yet when they
are to make supplication unto the Lord for them, they are marvelous remiss
and cold in the same: thereby showing, that their prayers proceed from their
lips, rather than from their hearts. Nay, in the case of Gods Church, whereof
they themselves are members, or at least profess themselves so to be, they
ask so carelessly and drowsily, as if it did nothing at all pertain unto them,
whether the Gospel have a free passage or not; whether Gods ordinances be
enjoyed in sincerity and purity or not; whether Gods servants continue in
their uprightness or not, etc. This is a fault sharply to be censured in such
as make profession of the truth, and we have all cause much to condemn our
selves for our great failing in this behalf: and to labor hereafter to put on
the bowels of tender compassion, that so we may make othres cases our own,
and mourn for their calamities, and for their transgressions, as if they were
our own.

2
Secondly, is it so, that christian love will cause men to partake with others
in their distresses, as if they were theirs? then here is matter of special
consolation unto all the Saints of God: for there is never a one of them, but
has sundry others to bear his burden, and to communicate with him in all his
sorrows and anguishes. And therefore, let them not be utterly dismayed, albeit
they cannot take their own case to heart as they would, and as they should: if
they be inwardly grieved that they are so senseless of the strokes of God upon
them, they may take this for their comfort, that God will pass by their
infirmity, and accept of the seruencie of others prayers in their behalf, who
are more earnest with God for them, than they can be for themselves. Thus much
concerning the man's petition: our Saviors answer follows.

The second Sermon.
VERSE 23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to the believer.


Here we must note, that when it is said, If thou can believe, etc: The
meaning is not, that Christ could not heal his child unless he did believe:
for man's disabilitie does nothing diminish Gods ability: but this is spoken by
our Savior to help the man's faith; he knew well enough that he did in part
believe, but he would have him search, and try his heart, and set his faith a
work before he would grant his request. Whence we may note this Doctrine,
that

Doct. 1. Christ begins with the heart.
Where Christ Jesus does help any one in mercy, he first helps his heart,
and lays the foundation of his work in his soul. This course he took with
Marthae and Marie, when he would gratify them with a special favor, in
restoring to life their dead brother, which was very dear unto them; John. 11.
He first of all labors to strengthen their faith in this point, that he was
able to raise him out of the grave again: yea, though he had been four
days dead.

In the like sort dealt the Lord with the Apostle Paul, Acts. 27.
when he and the rest that were with him, had been fourteen days tossed with
a sore and dangerous tempest, looking ever and anon, when they should be
drowned in the Sea, and all that while had eaten nothing, fear having taken
away their stomachs. In this extremity God sent his Angel unto Paul, not
giving him present deliverance, but telling him that he and the rest should be
delivered, that so their faith might be exercised by depending on his promise,
and the benefit might be more acceptable when it came. The like may be said
of Iehoshaphats case, when such huge armies of enemies came against him: 2.
Chron. 20. 14. 15.
it was then time (we would have thought) for the Lord to set upon his
adversaries, and to overthrow their forces: but he first of all sends king
Iehoshaphat, and the rest of the people, a Prophet to fit and prepare their
hearts, for such a wonderful victory, as afterward he gave them; and that
made it to be a far greater blessing, then otherwise it could have been.

Reasons.
And the reason why God does first help the heart, is,

1
First, because otherwise the benefit that he bestows, would be but
momentanie: for either the thing it self should be taken away, or else some
mischief ensue upon the having of it, so that it would cease to be a
blessing. Hence is it, that the Lord says unto Ahaz, and his people, after he
had promised them deliverance from their enemies; Isa. 7. 9.
If ye believe not, surely ye shall not be established. And therefore was
it, 1. Kings. 20.
that though wicked Ahab were saved from the sword of the king of Aram, at one
time, yet he got little by it: for having no grace in his heart, 1. Kings. 22.
he was wounded in fighting against the Aramites another time, so that his
Charretman carried him out of the host, unto Samaria, and death carried him
from thence unto hell, the proper place of such sinful rebels as he was.

2
Secondly, when men's hearts are well fitted for a blessing, it becomes a double
blessing unto them. For it does not alone help them for their present state,
but also for their eternal state: not only for this life, but for everlasting
life: not for the present alone, but for ever after, they being assured, that
God is always the same in grace and favor toward his children.

Use. 1.
Therefore if at any time we desire any blessing, or deliverance for our
selves, or our friends, out of dangers, or debts, or the like, let us entreat
the Lord first of all to apply his medicine to the due place. We see it
ordinary with skillful physicians in the curing of many diseases, that though
the sickness be in the head, or in any other part, yet they conueigh their
physic into the stomach. So let us beseech the Lord that he will deal with
us, or with such as are near unto us: that he will begin his cure in our
heart, which is the stomach of the soul: which being soundly healed, we shall
find, not only the fit stayed for the present, but the sickness prevented for
afterward.

2
Secondly, let the wisdom of Christ in his dealing with this man, serve for
our imitation: Are we minded to do our neighbors a good turn in outward
respects, for their body, or for their estate, or for his children? let us in
the first place labor as far as God has enabled us, to help their hearts;
to increase their repentance; to strengthen their faith in Gods promises and
providence, and to minister unto them spiritual refreshing as well as
corporal. And thus taking the same course with our friends in their
sicknesses, and in their distress, as our Savior did, we may the more
comfortably expect a full recompense of our work from the righteous Judge of
heaven and earth; and withal, we shall have this testimony unto our souls,
that we do not good things in a carnal manner, nor for fleshly respects, but
with an upright heart, and to a right end, desiring principally that God may be
glorified in the salvation of the parties, to whom our beauty and kindness is
extended.

3
Thirdly, seeing that the Lord uses to begin his work in the heart, where he
purposes to vouchsafe any outward blessing in mercy: Let this teach us not to
be impatient, nor to think it too long, ere God bestow any benefit upon us:
but let us rather look into our selves, and suspect our own preparation and
fitness to be partakers of any special favor from the Lord.

Will not our adversaries be pacified toward us, nor reconciled unto us? Let us
examine whether we have made peace with the Lord, and procured his loving
countenance to shine upon us: otherwise we may certainly conclude, that all
our enemies heat is but a spark of his displeasure against us. Are our
outward wants and necessities many and great, and of long continuance? let us
make trial whether they do not proceed from want of religion; from want of
sincerity before the Lord, and of a godly, and honest conversation before men:
have we great imbecilitie in our bodies, and do we find a sensible decay of
our health? let us search whether the weakness of our faith have not been
the cause of it, in that we have not conscionably used the means that God has
appointed for the confirming thereof: and whether we have not declined in the
course of our obedience, and been too well content to feel an inward decay of
Gods graces, for which Gods hand has lighted upon our outward man. And if we
deal thus, we shall be driven to accuse our selves, rather than to murmur
against God, and so fitting our selves for mercy, we shall find it at his
hands in due season, and that to our greater comfort, then if we had obtained
it sooner.

If thou can believe, and:] In that our Savior makes a doubt hereof, and
that not without cause, the doctrine is, that, Doct. 2. No man has faith at
command.
It is not in any man's own power to believe when he will, and what he will,
and as much as he will.

Faith is not at men's command: for if it had been, our Savior would never
have propounded this question: neither would the Disciples have left the child
uncured, which now was brought unto our Savior: for they were desirous to do
what they could for the honor of their master, for their own credit and
comfort, and for the stopping of the mouths of their bitter adversaries: Now
the cause why they could not cast out this devil was (as their Master told
them) their unbelief: not that they were unwilling to believe, but that they
were unable to believe, unless they should have used fasting and prayer for
the obtaining of faith, which they could not do. And if any desire a proof
of this point, let him read the 17. chapt. of Luke, where the Apostles hearing
our Savior deliver this lesson, that if our brother sin against us seven
times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again unto us, saying, it
repents me: we must forgive him: they take occasion thereby, to pray in
this sort: Luke 17. 5.
Lord increase our faith. Which is in effect, as if they had said; Lord, this
is a duty which is beyond our reach: our faith will not extend so far, and
therefore Lord, sithence thou requirest this at our hands, add unto that
measure of faith which thou have given us, that so we may be able to perform
it. Now if they could have believed as much as they would, what need had they
thus earnestly to desire an increase of their faith? Let this then be concluded
for a certain truth, that no man is able to attain to what measure of faith
it pleases him. Neither is this so only at men's first conversion, but
afterward also.

For their first conversion, there is no doubt but it proceeds wholly from
God, and is his mere gift, according to that of our Savior, John. 6.
None can come unto me, except the father draw him. And that of the Apostle,
Phil. 1. 19.
Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe in him, but
also suffer for his sake.

And as for the state of a Christian after his conversion, it is as plain,
that none can exercise his faith in any particular without Gods special
assistance: as may be seen in the example of Abraham, who though he had a very
excellent faith, yet when he came into a foreign country among a barbarous
people, it much failed him in that particular, that he could not rest upon Gods
power and providence for the preservation of his life, but chose rather to
expose his wife to danger, by saying that she was his sister. Otherwise he
thought, that though they were not so monstrously wicked (as many now a days
are) as to abuse his wife, he being alive, yet they would kill him, that so
they might freely take her unto themselves. Here we see carnal reason did
oppose it self against his faith, and in this particular ouerswaied him. And
so it was with Zachary, the husband of Elizabet (though ouerwise a true
believer) when he heard of the Angel that he should have a son in his old
age he was so entangled with carnal conceits, that he could not give credit
thereto: I am old (says he) Luke. 1. 18.
and my wife is old, and is it possible that such old people as we are should
have a child? And in the same case did Sarah fail, though she were the
Matriarch of holy women, Genesis 18. 12.
when she was told that she should bear a son, she laughed at it, as if it
were a ridiculous thing to believe any such matter: and as carnal reason does
hinder the faith of Gods servants, so also do distempered passions, as anger
and fear, and the like. As we may note in Moses, though an admirable man, and
such an one as in other cases had showed a care and worthy faith, yet being
vexed and troubled at the rebellious disposition of the people of Israel, he
manifested great unbelief: for when God promised him to feed all that people
for a month with flesh in the wilderness, he doubted how it could be: What
(^aith he) Nu^. 11. 21. 22
shall all the beasts be killed for hem? and shall all the fishes of the Sea
be gathered together, to make provision for them* As if God had ouershot
himself, in making them such a large promise, as he would not be able to stand
too.

Use 1.
Here then are they to be confuted, that never had any faith at all, and yet
think that they can believe whatsoever God tells them: yea, they make that
an argument of the strength of their faith, that they persuade themselves they
can believe at their pleasure: I dare undertake (say they) that I do believe,
and will believe; that I do repent, and will repent; (both which come to one
reckoning) and that as well as the proudest of them: and therein they say true
indeed, as well as the proudest; for the proud believe not at all, but have the
Lord himself Iam. 4.
to resist them, when he gives grace to the humble: Neither have such
boasters any faith at all; for if they knew what it meant, they would never so
presume upon their own strength.

Use. 2.
Secondly, let this teach us when we go about any service of God, not to rest
upon that old store of faith which we have, nor to be so confident thereof; as
to say, If now I were to hear the word, or to be partaker of the Sacrament, I
am sufficiently provided without any more ado: or if this or that cross
should fall upon me, I have undergone greater matters then that comes too; and
therefore I know I shall not shrink under it. Let us not (I say) thus build
upon our own strength, but let every one rather come to this, my faith is not
mine own, I cannot believe what and when I will, and therefore Lord make me to
believe whatsoever is needful, according as occasion shall be offered; if we
do not thus, we shall find by woeful experience, that though we have the
shield of faith, yet when we come into the field against our adversaries, we
shall not be able to use it, either to Gods glory, or our own safeguard.

All things are possible to him that believes.] If faith be set a work,
nothing is so hard and difficult, but it will go thorough therewith: whence
observe this doctrine, that

Doct. 3. The faithful are strongest and happiest.
Of all the men in the world godly believers are the most mighty and most
happy.

None have so great power, nor so good an estate, as the faithful, for they
conquer the world: that is, internal corruptions, and outward allurements:
according to that of the Apostle John, 1. John. 5. 4.
This is our victory, whereby we overcome the world, even our faith. Without
this it is impossible for men to get victory over themselves and over their
worldly lusts, be they never so great and mighty in the earth: nay the
mightier they are, the weaker in this conflict: the world has them in the
greatest servitude of all others: it puts them as it were into the dungeon, and
holds them fast in the stocks, and makes them the most miserable bondslaues
that are, unto pride, and sensuality, and all kind of voluptuousnes.

2 Again, as faith makes men conquerers over the world, so does it also over
the devil, for 1. Pet. 5. 9. Iam. 4. 7.
if we resist him steadfast in the faith, he will fly from us. And concerning
all other difficulties, let us read the 11. Chap. of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, where the wonderful and strange effects of faith are at large spoken
of; and there we shall easily perceive, that the most incredible things that
can be imagined, have by virtue thereof been effected, and accomplished.
Reasons.
And the reason hereof is,

1.
First, because faithful men do lay hold of God himself, and of his
all-sufficiencie; and therefore having the enioyment of his favor, what can be
wanting unto them?

2
Secondly, they build upon the truth of God: for faith is not every slight
imagination of a frenticke brain, but a settled persuasion, grounded on the
word of God: and therefore if the scriptures say simply and without exception,
that they shall have any thing, they rest upon it, without any wavering: but if
the scriptures promise with condition only, they do conditionally expect the
things so promised: and by this means their happiness is as large as Gods
promises; and their hopes are ratified by the truth of his word, Numb. 23. 23.
who is not as man that he should lie: and of whom it is said, Romans 3. 4.
Let God be free, and every man a liar.

Use. 1.
Seeing then that there is such efficacy in faith, and such happiness
depending thereon, let us prefer it before all earthly treasures, and count
all the glory of the world base in comparison of it: for a poor faithful
Christian, is better then a rich unbelieving king: And why? because all things
are possible unto him; he may have his hearts desire in any thing, so far as
his affection is ordered by Gods word: and this privilege have none in the
world, but only believers.

It is no where in the scripture said, All things are possible to the rich, to
the noble, to those that are strong, or to those that are courageous: nay such
do continually find, that their wills and desires are exceedingly crossed,
and that it is impossible for them to bring many of their enterprises to pass.

Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 4.
as great as he was, found by experience that al things are not possible to the
mighty Monarchs of the earth; and that when they begin to exalt themselves
into the place of God, as he did, the Lord can quickly cause a great King to
be in far worse case then the basest beggar, as indeed he was; being stripped
of his kingdom, of his wits, and of all earthly comforts, even on a sudden,
when he little feared any such matter. Sithence therefore the case stands thus,
that no worldly pre-eminence or excellency, can yield men that contentment,
which faith will do, what remains, but that we set the highest price upon
that which is of the greatest worth: and above all things seek for that, which
will make us most happy, when we have found it.

2
Secondly, if we desire friends that are able, and willing, and every way
sufficient to stand us in steed, let us endeavor to be in league with such as
have the greatest measure of faith, and to make them our chiefest friends, who
are most godly and most faithful people. Peter found the benefit hereof: Acts
12.
he had many mortal adversaries, as Herod, and the whole power of the
Romans, and the state of the Jews: and what friends had he to stand for him?
a poor company of men and women, that durst not show their heads, for fear
of their enemies; who yet by the force of their prayers, prevailed more for
him, then all the adverse power could against him: for when they spoke unto God
in his behalf, neither the prison, nor his chains, nor the soldiers, nor any
power whatsoever, could keep him any longer in hold: but the Lord sent his
Angel, and freed him out of the hands of such as hated him, and purposed the
next day to have taken his life from him.

And as the faith of Gods servants is very mighty for their friends
deliverance: so is it as effectual for the overthrow of their enemies: as may
be seen in Haman, who soared so high above the reach of the Jews, that in all
likelihood none of them could come near him: But when Hester and Mordecai, and
the rest of the faithful, joined together in fasting and prayer, their faith
pulled him down unto the ground, and laid all his honor in the very dust.
Whence it is evident and clear to those that have any understanding, how
needful and beneficial a thing it is, to have godly men on our side; and and
therefore if we would be esteemed truly wise, let us join our selves in most
inward friendship and familiarity with them.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, if nothing be impossible to believers, then is it not impossible for
them to master and subdue their strongest corruptions: and therefore let not
the faithful be discouraged, though they find themselves as yet very worldly
minded, very angry and passionate, very vainglorious, and ambitious, etc: If
they will set their faith a work, they shall get victory over these and the
like corrupt affections: and albeit they have prayed often against them, and
yet find small strength to overcome them, let them not give over the combatte,
for faith will have the better in the end. And the like may be said for all
manner of crosses: it will either make an utter riddance of them, or at least
furnish us with patience and ability to undergo them.

Verse. 24. And straightway the father of the child crying with tears, said,
etc: Hence this doctrine might be noted, that Doct. 4. See in Cleauers Sermon,
on Lament. 3. Doct. 1.
Faith and godly sorrow may well go together: for both of these are apparent
in this faithful man: and Gods children have oftentimes, and almost
continually occasion of this holy grief, in respect of themselves, and in
respect of Gods Church: in respect of corruptions, and of afflictions, either
private or public, or both. But I will not now insist upon this point.

Lord, I beleeue] Whence arises this Doctrine, that Doct. 5. Christians must
see and acknowledge their graces.
It is not unlawful, nor uncomely, for a Christian to make profession of his
own graces, though imperfect, if it be done in due time and manner.

He may speak of them unto God or unto men as occasion is offered. So did this
man here, Lord, I believe. So did David, Psalm. 86. 2.
Preserve thou my soul, for I am merciful. So did Ezekiah also, Isai. 38. 3.
I beseech thee o Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee in truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. The
scripture aboundes with examples of this kind. Reasons.
But let us consider of some reasons, as namely, that

1
First, this must be done, because it tendes to the magnifying of Gods name:
whereas the denial of his graces, makes for his dishonor, and argues a base
account thereof in the parties that have them.

2
Secondly, the acknowledgement of the virtues of Christ which we have, is an
effectual means to strengthen our faith, to comfort our hearts, and to enable
us with feruencie to call upon the Lord: whereas upon the omission of this
duty, all the contrary effects do follow.

Use. 1.
Here then are Gods dear children to be put in mind of an ordinary and
dangerous fault that is in them: which is, that in the time of temptation they
so far give place unto Satan, as to yield that they are hypocrites, and that
they have no saving grace of God in them. Indeed they cannot deny but they
have heretofore done many good things; but all (say they) was in vainglory,
or for some carnal respect or other: they must needs confess that they have
had many comfortable feelings, but now they fear al of them were mere
illusions. What a folly is this, and what indignity do we herein offer unto
the holy spirit of grace, whereby we are sealed unto the day of redemption? why
should we not rather be of Jobs resolution, viz: never to part with our
innocence and vprightnes while we live, but though men accuse us, and Satan
assault us, and our own consciences charge many heavy things upon us, yet to
stand to it unto the death, that our hearts are sincere and faithful with the
Lord our God: when by sound proofs and arguments taken from the word, we can
confirm so much unto our own souls? For in truth we have far better
reason to stand upon our spiritual right, the^ earthly men have to defend
their civil right. Now if some crafty and subtle adversary should come unto
a worldly wise man, and tell him, that all his writings and evidences are mere
counterfeites, and of no worth at al^: and that therefore he is but an Intruder
into that which he possesses, would not he (if he be able) maintain the
goodness of his evidences, and prove that the seals are authentical, that his
witnesses are sufficient, and that all things else do concur, which may make
for the proouing of his title and right, in the things which he holds? Much
more then should we stand to make good the Deeds that we have for our souls,
and for our assurance of the heavenly inheritance, which has been of old
purchased for us.

Use 2.
Let this therefore in the second place, serve for an instruction unto us, that
we never show our selves to be of such a cowardly heart, as when we have
spoken well, or done well, to deprave the same, by saying that we are no better
then hypocrites; or by confessing in word or writing, that we are faulty.
Nay, let us never forgo our righteousness, but justify our selves in our
righteous ways, and works, and acknowledge (with thankfulness and humility)
whatsoever good things the Lord has wrought in us, or by us; that so he may
have his due praise, and we such found comfort as belongs unto well-doers.

Help mine unbelief:] The last Doctrine which shall be collected from this
verse, is this, that

Doct. 6. Faith shows men their corruptions, and moves the^ to seek help
against them.
It is the property of grace to show men their corruptions, and to stir them
up to seek help against the same.

As in this man it does evidently appear, who as he had infidelity in him,
so having faith withal, had his infidelity discovered, and his heart moved to
seek unto Christ Jesus, for strength against it. The like may be observed in
the Prophet David, who finding his heart to be vexed, and turmoyled within him,
first of all falls to reason the matter with his own soul, saying; Psalm.
42. 5. 6.
Why art thou cast down my soul, and why do thou make a tumult within me?
(for so much the word implies) he having grace in his heart, perceived that
unbelief did as it were mutiny within him, and raise up rebellion against the
Lord: and therefore finding his own disabilitie, every way to encounter the
same, he in the next verse of that Psalm, puts up his complaint unto the Lord
against it; My God (says he) my soul is cast down within me, etc. As if he
should have said, Lord, I find my self too weak to prevail against this
corruption, and therefore grant me strength to get the better of it.

Again in another Psalm, to wit, the 77. Psalm. 77. 10.
he begins very lamentably, as one utterly out of heart, almost concluding
that the Lord had quite forsaken him, and cast him out of his service: but
afterward he recouereth himself, and concludes that it was his infirmity so
to imagine, and thereupon labors to confirm his faith by considering of the
times of old, and of the wonderful works of God, which he wrought for the
good of his people in former ages. So also in the 73. Psalm, Psalm. 73.
we may note how the Prophet takes notice of his great infirmity, in envying
at wicked men's prosperity, and in the end goes into the Sanctuary to get
help against it. Likewise in the prophecy of Isaiah, Isaiah. 63.
we may observe the like effect of grace in the people of God, viz: that they
do discern of the hardness of their own hearts, and complain unto the Lord
against it.

Reasons.
Now the reasons of this point are these;

1
First, because grace makes men judicious, and fills them full of knowledge,
and of heavenly understanding, whereby they are enabled to descrie what is
amiss within them. Gods gracious spirit wheresoever it comes, brings a light
in his hand, whereby all things that are noisome, or unhandsome in the house,
are plainly seen and discovered: so that thereby men are made able to judge
betwixt truth, and falsehood, and betwixt good and evil.

2
Secondly, as grace does inlighten the mind, so does it also sanctify the
affections of the parties in whom it is. So that seeing what is good, they
shall long for it, and earnestly desire it: and discerning what is evil, they
shall hate it, and fly from it. As it brings light with it, so it makes men to
be of a neat disposition, that they cannot endure any thing that is fulsome
and loathsome in their souls.

5
Thirdly, grace makes men industrious, and ready to put themselves into the
battle against their corruptions: Wheresoever faith is, it is working and
effectual. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

4
Fourthly, and lastly, it makes men full of courage and fortitude, so that
they will never endure to have sin reign in their mortal bodies, but will
maintain perpetual war against the same: for if they should suffer the fire
of grace to be quenched by the impure streams of sin and iniquity, Gods
spirit should be put to the worst, which is no less then blasphemy for any
one to imagine that it should ever come to pass: for it does work faith in
men's hearts, which is indefatigable and invincible: which in time of temptation,
will sue unto heaven, and search the word, and use all lawful means and
helps for the procuring of strength against sin: so that though there be
many enemies against it, yet will it not be set down by any of them; and
though it do now and then receive a wound, yet will it recover again, and
carry away the victory in the end.

Use. 1.
Hereby then (to draw to some use of this doctrine) we may make some trial of
the strength or weakness of our faith; according as we are more or less able
to see the sinfulnes of our nature, and to strive against it: so are we to
judge of the measure of Gods grace in us, to be more or less: and if we do not
particularly discern of the corruptions of the flesh, or do not loathe them,
and labor to be cured of them, but rather excuse and extenuate them, and hide
and cherish them, this is an infallible sign, that we have in us no saving
grace at all. Let all such therefore as would have the testimony of Gods
children, use their best endeavor to have their eyes opened, that they may
perceive the several evils that lurk within their hearts; and let them
withal get such an indignation against them, that they may (as this man did)
come unto Christ Jesus to be cured of them: which if they can do, their very
approaching unto him by prayer, and in the use of this ordinances, will cause
them every day to become more sharpe-sighted than other, so that they shall
(with the holy prophet Isaiah. Chap. 6.) cry out against their pollutions, and
so get pardon of them, and power over them.

2
Secondly, this makes for the confutation of such, as being urged to reform
themselves, are ready to say, that all things are so well with them, that they
need no amendment; they know not where to begin their reformation, because
they see nothing amiss: These kind of men are most busy against others, that
complain of their own wants, and seek to have them supplied from heaven; and
such they account and call Puritans, who indeed do most see and acknowledge and
bewail their own purity: but in truth they themselves do sarre better
deserve that name, for that they imagine they have attained such a measure of
purity, as that nothing can be added thereunto: they have knowledge enough,
faith enough, and repentance enough, and therefore they profess that they care
not for preaching, and that they had rather be without it, then be troubled
with it. Of such the wise man speaks thus, Prou. 30. 12.
There is a generation that is pure in their own conceit, and yet are not
washed from their filthiness: the world does even swarm with such ungracious
persons, upon whom the Son of righteousness did never yet shine, and therefore
they are utterly blind that they cannot see, or wilful, that they will not
reform their evil and corrupt ways and works: which is a sure and certain
note of gross infidelity, and of an utter want of all grace and goodness in
them.

Use. 3.
Thirdly, from this point does arise an use of singular consolation unto Gods
servants, that are troubled with the sight and sense of their corruptions, that
do find pride working in them, and unbelief stirring in their hearts, and
many uncharitable thoughts and motions still remaining in their souls: all the
while they apprehend the vileness and hurtfulnesse of them, and withal mourn
for them, and confess them, and seek unto the Lord for pardon of them, and
power against them, they need not be discouraged; nay they have just cause to
be comforted herein: as knowing that it is a certain mark, and undoubted note
of grace to be thus affected. They may be assured, that so long as they feel
their sickness, they are not dead; especially if withal they be hungry and
thirsty after spiritual things, and find an appetite unto the food of life,
and with much pains and diligence seek for the same; there is then no reason
in the world that they should make question of the goodness of their estate,
as having in them the special signs of true conversion, and sanctification.

The third Sermon.
VERSE. 25. When JESUS saw that the people came together, he rebuked the
unclean spirit, saying unto him; Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee
come out of him, and enter no more into him.

26. Then the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out, and he was as one
dead; in so much that many said, he is dead.


IN the former part of this story, is set down the earnest suite of the man
whose child was possessed, for the easing and relieuing of his distressed
son. In these words is declared how our Savior performed that which he
required, viz. that he cast the devil out of his child: Wherein we may note
two things, to wit the occasion of it: the manner of it.


First, for the occasion thereof, it was twofold, viz. 1. the good, and holy,
and gracious profession of the man, spoken of before; Lord, I believe, help
mine unbelief. Christ had told him, that if he could believe, all things were
possible to the believer: and for that he truly avouches that he did in
part believe, and when his faith was weak, he desires to have it
strengthened* and gives Christ Jesus that honor, as to pray unto hi^ to
strengthen it. This our Savior approves of, and ^is was one occasion of the
miracle. 2. An other was the concourse of the people, verse. 25. When Jesus saw
that the people came running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, etc.

The Disciples (as we have heard before) were not able to cast out this devil.
Hereupon, the multitude seeing the man to deal with Christ himself about the
same matter, they flocked together, to see what would come of it. Some of them
(no doubt) with a good mind, that if a miracle were wrought in their sight,
they might rejoice at it, and have their faith confirmed by it. Other some, to
the end that they might insult over our Savior Christ, if the miracle had
been either not wrought at all, or but only protracted for a time; He
therefore to prevent discouragment in the better sort, and insultation in the
rest, presently sets upon the work. Thus much for the occasion. The manner
follows, where we may observe, 1. what Christ spoke unto the devil. 2. what
the devil did unto the child.

For the former, it is said, that he 1. rebuked the unclean spirit: and 2.
discharged him of the place where he was, commanding him to come forth, and to
return no more, verse. 25.

Concerning the devils dealing with the child, it is said, 1. that he did
rent and tear him grieuouslie, (being vexed and tormented, because he must
leave his former hold) in so much, that many thought the child had been dead:
2. he came out of him, even as Christ had charged him. And thus much for the
order and meaning of the Text.

Verse. 25. When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked
the unclean spirit.]

Now he saw there was a fit opportunity, because there would be most use
of it: if he had done it sooner, the people would not so well have perceived
and marked it, with all the circumstances thereof: if he had deferred it
longer, some of them would have departed, (it may be) others would have been
dismayed: and a third sort would have gloried and triumphed; as if now he that
had done so many miracles, had been at a stand, and met with an unclean
spirit, that was too strong for him, and would not go out at his bidding. Now
in that Christ does take this occasion of doing this miraculous work, the
Doctrine is, Doct. 1. Christ does all seasonablie.
that Christ does all his works in the fittest season.

This Doctrine is evident in sundry places of the Gospel after John, as chapt.
2. when the Mother of Christ would have him to turn water into wine at her
appointment: he answers, John. 2. 4.
mine hour is not yet come: though in all probability, he wrought that
miracle within the space of an hour after: yet he says, mine hour is not
yet come: meaning the very instant wherein that work was to be done. Which
gives us to understand, that he will not fail an hairs breadth of the very
moment wherein every good thing should be done. Again, John 7. when his
brethren would have had him hasten to the feast of Tabernacle at Jerusalem, he
says, John. 7. 8.
I will not go up yet, for my time is not yet fulfilled. And likewise in the
11. chapt. of that Gospel, after that he knew Lazarus was dead, he made no
great have unto him, but stayed till he had been dead four days: telling
his Disciples, John. 71. 15.
that he was glad that he was not there no sooner: whereas Lazarus sisters,
Marie and Martha, were even discouraged at his long stay. But he in his
wisdom chose that time above any other, because if he had raised Lazarus
being newly departed, it had not been so admirable, it being now a common
case, and a thing that Christ had done for others: but when he had been dead
four days, and was laid in his grave, so that Martha was unwilling that
Christ should meddle with him: now to restore him from death to life, was a
thing very remarkable; and therefore took he this season for the effecting of
this miracle. Reason.
Now the reason of this point is,

1
First, because he respects his own glory and his peoples good: therefore
is he willing to find out the fittest time for every business.

2
Secondly, as that is the end which he proposes, so is he full of all heavenly
wisdom, and therefore knows the very precise time, when every work ought to
be done; yea he does predestinate the seasons wherein all things shall be
accomplished: men oftentimes meet with an opportunity at unawares, and
therefore it is almost past before they can take hold of it, but God has
eternally fore-appointed it; in which regard, he does all things in the fulness
of time: even when that time is come which he had preordained in his secret
counsel.

3
Thirdly, he is of power and ability to do every thing in the fit season
thereof. Men are driven to defer matters, albeit they see opportunity for
the doing of them, because their strength will not then serve them to go
thorough with that which they desire: but the Lord is of all sufficiency, for
the performance of whatsoever pleases him; so that he needs not make delays
when the time serves him.

Use. 1.
Is it so then (as it has been plainly proved) that Christ does every thing
in due time? Let us hence learn to imitate our Savior, that we may be able to
yield a good and sound reason why we do this or that now, rather than at any
other time. For that which Solomon says of words, that a word spoken in due
season, is like apples of gold, with pictures of silver (that is very
beautiful;) holds as true of actions, whose grace it is to be done in that
time which is best befitting them. There are times for the exercises of
religion, and there are times for the works of our vocation, and both must be
rightly discerned and wisely followed. There are times to mourn and to be
sorrowful: and it is a great fault for men to rejoice, Isa. 22.
when the Lord calls them to heaviness, and to tears. Again, there are
times to be merry and glad, (in a good and holy manner,) and it is an offense
for Christians, not to be cheerful with those that they converse with, when
God gives them occasion of rejoicing.

2
Secondly, let this teach us to commit and submit our selves, our estate, and
all that we have, to Gods wisdom: neither let us murmr, nor grow
discontented at the delays that he makes, but wait his leisure, and be
content that he should take his own time; assuring our selves, that he will
not fail one moment, when we are ready for any blessing and benefit: but the
longer he deferres, the more it shall tend to his own glory and our good.
Many would have their harvest before it be ripe, but God is wiser then they
are, and therefore he causes them to spend many prayers and tears, before
they obtain their hearts desire. If Gods own children might have deliverance
for themselves, or for others, so soon as they desire, it would prove to be
as an untimely birth, which is even dead before it come into the world: and
therefore the Lord puts them off from time to time, that their comfort in
the end might be more full and complete. In which regard, we should with
patience depend upon him, till such time as he please to have mercy upon us:
How we may be able to wait on God. 1
which that we may be able to do, observe me this direction following.

1
First, let let us do our best endeavor to repress carnal reason: for
otherwise that time which seems best unto God, will oftentimes seem worst
unto us.

When he thinks it too soon for us to obtain such and such blessings, we
shall think it high time that we had them: and when he judges it a fit season
for us, or any of his people to be delivered, we shall imagine it to be too
late. Zachary yielding to his carnal reason, Luke. 1.
thought that God had past his time for giving him a son, and therefore though
an Angel from heaven brought him that message, he would not give credit unto
it: if he had heard such tidings twenty years before, he would have thought
there had been some likelihood in the matter: so in other cases, how dangerous
a thing would it have been to consult with flesh and blood concerning the time
of accomplishing things? who would have judged it wisdom in God to suffer his
people so far to be endangered in Egypt, and after to be condemned by the
Persian king? Exodus 3. Hester. 3. and 4. 7.
to suffer Peter to be so straightly imprisoned, Daniel to be cast into the lions
den, and the three children into the fiery furnace? if a man should have
consulted with his own wisdom, he would have thought the Lord too slack in
freeing his servants, and that their cases were even desperate and quite past
recovery: yet he did but stay the fittest time for their deliverance: which
being once come, the Lord set them at liberty, notwithstanding all the
difficulties and extremities wherein they were.

2
Secondly, let us labor for faith, by virtue whereof we may repress all our
fleshly affections, which will be ready to oppose themselves against the Lords
wise proceedings; as may be seen in Jacob, Genesis 37. 34. 35.
whose affection of grief was immoderately stirred, when he imagined that his
son Joseph was devoured by some wild beast: how much more (think we) would
it have troubled him, if he had known how his sons had dealt with him, and
how Joseph was dealt with in the land of Egypt, when Psalm. 106. 18.
his feet were held fast in the stocks, and he was laid in yrons? yet all this
was for his good, and for the benefit of Jacob and all his household, that he
should be thus afflicted until his appointed time came, when the Lord would
have him delivered and advanced: therefore let us curb and restrain our
boisterous affections, laboring evermore to bring them into subjection unto
Gods most sacred and blessed will, and resolving that his time is always the
best time for every thing that falls out under the Sun.

He rebuked the unclean spirit] Hence we may note this doctrine, that

Doct. 2. Enemies of Gods children shall be rebuked.
The greatest and most mighty oppressors of Gods children, shall be rebuked by
Christ Jesus.

Satan in this child kept his hold, and did deride whatsoever power of men
came against him: yea if all the forces in the world had attempted to cast him
out, he would have kept possession in despite of them all: yet our Savior sets
on him, and rebukes him, and that effectually. So that let those tyrants that
vex and molest Gods people be never so mighty, they shall hear of their
wretched dealings, and that to the torment of their hearts: as it fared with
the devil in this place, who knows how many commanders he had commanded
(being a worldly governor, Ephesians. 6. 22.) and how many rulers he had ruled:
yet now (we see) he is controlled and restrained by our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus
has the Lord dealt heretofore with the enemies of his Church, as it is said of
the Israelites, Psalm. 105. 14.
He suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved kings for their sakes. And
agreeable to this point is the prophecy of Isaiah, who speaks thus
concerning Christ, Isaiah. 11. 4.
With righteousness shall he judge the Poor, and with equity shall he reprove
for the meek of the earth: that is, for such as are low and mean, and such
as will not return rebuke for rebuke, neither are of ability to withstand
their adversaries, their quarrel will he take in hand: and though the whole
earth should join together against them, yet will he smite them, and either
rebuke their hearts graciously unto their conversion, or else strike them in
wrath and displeasure to their utter confusion.

Reason.
The reason why oppressors shall be thus dealt with, is,

1.
First, because they oppose themselves against Christ himself: He that
oppresses the poor (says Solomon,) Prou, 14. 31.
reproves him that made him: even him that is the father of the fatherless,
and the protector of such as are poor and needy: and therefore because his
government is contemned, it is equal that he should reprove such offenders.

2
Secondly, he has as great authority over the mightiest as over the meanest;
over the highest Prince, as over the basest vassal: and therefore he that in
equity may and will proceed against the meanest, may and will also do the
like against the mightiest.

3
Thirdly, as he has authority, so is he also furnished with ability: so that
he will not only use words of rebuke as many times men do: but they who are
rebuked by him, shall feel that his reproves do pierce their souls, as the
devil himself did in this place: they shall find that his words are not as
weak reeds, but as sharp darts, that will enter deep, and tarry long, even
till such time as it pleases him to pluck them forth of their wounds.
Therefore it is that the Prophet says, Psalm. 76. 16.
At thy rebuke o God of Jacob, both the Charret and horse are fallen a sleep.
The stout-harted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep, and all the men of
strength have not found their hands. Where we see what force the Lords voice
does carry with it: for it makes the principal men of war, and the most
valiant Captains to tremble and quake, and to be utterly daunted, and
dismayed: yea, if he do but rebuke the mountains, they shall smoke.

Use. 1.
This Doctrine serves first of all, for admonition unto those that have power
and might in their hands, that they do not use the same to wring and pinch
the Servants of God; nor to grind the faces of the poor. For if they once
abuse their places, they forfeit them unto the Lord, who will call them to a
strickt reckoning, for perverting justice, and judgment, and for using that
authority which he has bestowed upon them, to a wrong end and purpose.

Therefore let all such as have any superiority, either in public or in
private, carry themselves humbly, and Christianlie; not contemning any one,
lest they be contemned of the Lord: nor wronging the meanest under their
charge, least they be censured by him that judges all men indifferently;
without any respect of persons.

2
Secondly, here is another use of instruction, that seeing the Lord will check
and control the most violent and furious enemies of his children, therefore
when we are injured and oppressed by such manner of men, we should contain our
selves within the compass of patience, and modesty, committing and commending
our selves and our causes unto God, who will in due time right us, and plague
our enemies. Whereas if we grow as boisterous and injurious as our
adversaries, and go about to render unto them like for like, we shall loose
our peace with God; we shall draw his afflicting hand upon us; and shall more
exasperate and imbitter the affections of men against us.

Let us therefore commend our selves, and all our matters, unto him that
judges righteouslie: even as David did, Psalm 38. verse. 12. 13.

They that seek after my life (says he) lay snares, and they that go about
to do me evil, talk wicked things, and imagine deceit continually. But what
did he in this cafe? I as a deaf man heard not, and am as a dumb man which
opens not his mouth. When he was railed upon and abused, yea when he was
pursued for his life, he was as if he had not heard the matter, even as if he
had been deaf, or if he were sensible of some things, yet he was as a dumb
man, and opened not his mouth in any reproachful or reuengefull manner: and
what was the reason hereof? he himself tells us, verse. 15. On thee o Lord
do I wait; thou will hear me, my Lord, my God.

Yea our Lord Jesus Christ, who is greater than all, when he was wronged by the
devil himself, durst not (as Jude says) blame him with cursed speaking: but
said, the Lord rebuked thee. Though Christ were the best that was, yet would
not he use railing terms against Satan, the worst that was: for if he had,
he had nothing hurt the devil thereby: and therefore he took a better course,
delivering him over unto Gods hands, and desiring him to rebuke him; which was
the most terrible thing that could have been done against Satan. These
examples let us imitate when we have to deal with wicked persons, never use
any reuiling words against them, but refer the matter unto the Lord,
beseeching him to pass a righteous sentence: not absolutely desiring to have
them punished, as our Savior did, and we may concerning Satan, but rather
wishing that they may be so rebuked in this world, as that they may escape that
eternal rebuke, which the devil cannot avoid.

Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, etc.] Here we must understand,
that when our Savior calls the devil dumb and deaf spirit, the meaning is
not that some devils can speak and hear, and others not; but he is thus
termed, in regard of the effects which he wrought in this child, in making him
dumb and deaf. Which (as it seems) was his manner of dealing, wheresoever
he took possession of any. Where we may observe what is the nature of
Satan: for all the devils are of the same disposition, if it lie in their
power, from which, let us note this Doctrine; that,

Doct. 3. Satan is desirous to bereave us of our senses and limbs.
If the Lord did not restrain Satan, he would (in his malice) deprive us of
our senses, and of the use of our natural parts. Such is his quarrel against
mankind, and such is that natural force which is given unto him, that if he
were not curbed by a divine hand, he would not only bereave us of eternal
salvation, but also take from us the use of our eyes, and of our ears, and of
our other senses and limbs.

In this regard, it is said in other places of Christ Jesus, Matthew. 12. 22.
Luke. 11. 14.
that he cast out a devil of one that was blind and dumb; to show what
work Satan makes, where he has liberty to do according to his will in
such particulars. Reasons.
And the reasons moving him thus to deal; are these.

1
First, that enmity that he carries not only toward the souls, but also
toward the bodies of men, stirs him up hereunto: his quarrel toward us is
so great, that he would not only shut us out of heaven, and exclude us from
all spiritual comforts, but also make us miserable upon the face of the earth;
and for that end, strike us with blindness, or lamenesse, or deafness, or
the like; that our life might be utterly void of all manner of pleasures, and
contentments. This reason was touched in one of the former doctrines. See Sermon.
1. Doct. 1.


2
Secondly, his malice against God is such, that he would not have him to have
any service from men: he malignes that they should have eyes to see any thing,
or ears to hear any thing, whereby they might be stirred up to yield praises
and obedience unto the Lord, and therefore his desire is to deprive them of
those senses.

3
Lastly, he knows that these natural powers and faculties are very
necessary helps to further men unto eternal life: Romans 10. Psalm. 19.
he is not ignorant that faith comes by hearing, and that knowledge and
holiness is much increased by seeing and observing the works of God, and some
of the ordinances of God; and therefore carrying a deadly hatred against the
salvation of men, he endeavors to take from them all those natural instruments,
whereby they might be furthered unto everlasting happiness.

Use. 1.
The consideration whereof should in the first place stir us up to continual
thankfulness: for were not the Lords merciful and provident hand still
stretched out for our protection and defense, Satan would make us fearful
spectacles of much woe and misery, and cause us to spend all our days in
heaviness and pensiveness, in regard of the evils by him inflicted on us. We
should not have an eye to look upon the glorious frame and fabric of the
heavens and the earth; nor upon the beauty and excellency of any of the
creatures: we should not (might the devil have his will) enjoy our ears, to
hear the voice of the Lord sounding forth comfort unto us: neither should we
have the use of our taste, to refresh our selves with any of the good and
sweet creatures of God appointed for that end, he would cause our tongues to
cleave unto the roof of our mouths, so that we should not be able to utter
forth the praises of the Lord, nor to speak of his wonderful works, or of
his holy word before the sons of men: In a word, there is none of the parts of
our bodies, which is now useful and comfortable unto us, but he would much
afflict us therein, and utterly deprive us of all benefit thereof, which
should cause us to be very thankful for our senses and members, while we do
enjoy them, and wholly to consecrate them unto the Lord, who vouchaseth us the
comfortable use of them, and no way to abuse them in the service of Satan,
least God in his justice grant him liberty altogether to bereave us of any of
them.

Use. ^
Secondly, since the devil is evermore ready to do us a mischief, let this
teach us always to keep in favor with God; for otherwise we see in what
peril we stand; if he do but turn Satan loose upon us, he will quickly
make us blind, or lame, or dumb, or deaf, or strike us in some grievous and
fearful manner or other: he watches his opportunity, and if he see an
advantage, he will suddenly be upon us, ere we be aware: and therefore let us
above all things be careful to keep our peace with God, who is our keeper and
preserver, that Psalm. 91.
delivers us from the snare of the hunter, that covers us under his wings,
and keeps us safe under his feathers.

3
Thirdly, is it so, that Satan is marvelous malicious against our bodies?
then let us look heedfully to our souls, for he carries far greater spite
against them: and then he is in his proper element, when he deals against our
inward man, he labors to deprive us of our natural powers, of hearing, and
seeing, and speaking, etc: But especially he seeks to keep us from hearing
religiously, from seeing spiritually, and from speaking profitably: the former
privation of the natural faculties befalls but a few: but this latter
ouertaketh all the unregenerate men of the world, and the regenerate also in a
great part; all men are very deaf, where they should hear, and blind in
things that they should see; and have their mouths shut up, where they are
required principally to speak: In which regard, the prophet Isaiah speaking of
the conversion of men, says; Then shall the eyes of the blind be lightened,
and the ears of the deaf be opened. Which is to be understood spiritually,
not literally: the meditation of which point, viz: that Satan does so
mightily prevail against the souls of the multitude, should make us very
wary, least he circumuent us; and cause us continually to cry unto the Lord
for grace and favor, and for strength and assistance, that the devil may not
blind the eyes of our mind, nor shut up our ears from listening unto holy
things, nor cause us to be as it were tongue-tyed, when we should speak of
such things as make for his glory.

I charge thee come out of him.] From which words, together with that which
follows, to wit, that the spirit came out, this doctrine arises, that,

Doct. 4. A word of Christ's mouth is sufficient to help us out of all
distresses.
A word of the mouth of Christ is sufficient to help against any miseries, and
to set us free from any enemies.

This good man and his child were both sorely distressed by reason of this
unclean spirit: yet when our Savior does but speak the word, their enemy is
vanquished and expelled; their misery accomplished and ended.

This power does the leaper in the Gospel ascribe unto him, Master, if thou will (says he) Math. 8. 2. 3.
thou can make me clean; and so it came to pass: for he putting forth his
hand, and touching him, saying, I will, be thou clean: his leprosy was
immediately cleansed. And the like does the Centurion; Verse. 8.
Lord speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

And in the Gospel according to the Evangelist Mark, Mark. 5. 9.
we read how our Savior with his only word, did presently cast forth an
whole army of devils: so that though there be ten thousand of them uniting
their forces together, he is as able to expel them all, as if there were but
one alone. And as it is in these cases that have been named, so it is in all
other distresses whatsoever: the very beck of God is sufficient to free us
from them all, as is at large showed in the hundredth and seventh Psalm.

Reasons.
The reasons of this point are two.

1
First, by the word of the Lord were all the creatures made; Psalm. 33.
even the good Angels, and those that are now evil Angels: If then Gods
power were such in making all Creatures, it is every whit as great for the
delivering of his servants.

Secondly, Heb. 1. 3.
All things are supported by the Word of his power. Now if all the Creatures
have their preservation from him, what difficulty is it for him to deliver
some few of them?

Use 1.
Here then is matter of great comfort for all such as do unfeignedly and from
their hearts fear the Lord; for they have the word of Christ for them, which
can easily either preserve them from misery, or rid them of it, if it fall
upon them. If a good earthly father could by his word alone preserve his
Children from peril, from the prison, from death it self, would he be
silent and dumb, and not open his mouth in their behalf? None can imagine
that a father can be so deuoide of natural affection: and shall we think
that the Lord is less pitiful then men? does he forbid cruelty in them,
and shall we conceive that it may be found in himself? Be it far from us:
nay, though there be never so many adversaries that combine themselves, and
never so many mischiefs be intended against us: albeit the world be full of
clouds, and of storms, and all things seem to threaten an utter overthrow
unto us, yet let us satisfy and pacify our hearts with this, that one word of
Christ is sufficient to help us out of all dangers and difficulties. And
withal, let us assure our selves, that the Lord will speak, and that
effectually in due time, so that all the outrage and fury of men shall be
suppressed, and all troubles and calamities that lie upon us shall be suddenly
dispersed. God needs not any long time for the effecting of it: As we see in
Esters days, when all the Church of God seemed ouernight to be the most
miserable people in the world; and yet the next day they were indeed (and so
were esteemed) the happiest people under the Sun; So that well was he then
that might be a Jew. Let this therefore be our consolation, that though our
ruins and decays be never so many, and great, and grievous, yet if God do
but say the word, all shall be repaired and recovered.

And as it is for outward miseries, so does it hold as strongly for spiritual
distresses, and for the enemies of our souls, that if our Lord and Savior do
but utter his voice against them, we shall quickly prevail over them: though
Satan have a deadly quarrel against us, and our own pride and covetousness,
and wrath, be far too strong for us, yet if the Lord please to work in us by
the mighty word of his grace, we shall easily tread these spiritual enemies
of ours under our feet, and get the victory over them all. Yea though we were
utter adversaries unto God, as Paul, and the Gayler were, yet if he do but
speak unto our consciences from heaven, we shall speedily alter our courses,
and become faithful and serviceable unto his majesty.

Secondly, here is matter of terror for all impious and irreligious persons:
for if the word of God be so mighty for the succor of his children, it is
every whit as powerful for the overthrow of his adversaries: and do they
think that they shall be able to stand when the Lord of hoastes comes against
them? do blasphemers, and Sabbath Breakers, and raylers, and filthy persons,
imagine that they shall still carry out matters as they have done, when their
Creator comes to plague and punish them? if they do, they greatly deceive
themselves, for he needs not to muster an army against them: but his very
will and purpose is sufficient to procure their confusion and utter destruction.

Come out of him, and enter no more into him. Whence note this doctrine, that,
It is all one with Christ to drive the devil out, and to keep him out, he can
do the latter, as well as the former.

Verse. 26. Then the spirit [cried,] and [rent him sore.] Whence observe, that,
Satan never seems more masterfull, than when he is ouer-mastered. These. 2.
points were no^ pro^ecuted for want of time.


FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Th. C. for William VVelbie, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Swanne. 1611.


