THE SYN, AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST:

Made manifest from those grounds of Faith, which have been taught and received
by the Faithful in England, and that for those 40. y. together under the
prosperovs reign of my Sovereign Lady and Queen ELISHABET.

Which may serve for a rayning in of the heady, and yet for a spur to
slothful Spirits:

By HENOCH CLAPHAM.

Eccles. 7. 18. Be not just overmuch, nor make thy self much wise: wherefore
sholdst thou seek to be desolate? 19. Be not wicked overmuch, nor be thou
foolish: why sholdst thou die in thy vn-tyme? At AMSTERDAM: 1598.

To his faithful Brethren (a poor Remnant of the ever visible Catholic and
Apostolic Church) Abraham Crottendine, John Ioope, Hugh Armourer, Christopher
Symkins, Thomas Farrat, Abraham Wakefeild etc. Grace Mercy and peace be
multiplied from God the father / through the Mediation of Ie. Chr. his Son, by
the instillation of his adopting spirit into their spirits, Amen.
REformists in England carried of erst with true zeal for reparing the walls of
Ierushalem, the praise of the whole earth: they in the heat of their labor
ouer-caried in some speech (as, Such and such ecclesiastical functions,
ordinatio^s, administrations etc. they are merely Antichristian, badges of the
beast) others their zealous hearers hereupon (and in the forefront of such,
Mr. Rob. Brovv^e) taking such assertions for sound Theological arioms, do
conclude thus: Then not only that, but all flov^ing from that, it must also be
merely Antichristian: for a bitter fountain can send fo^th no svve^t vvate^s,
as is the root such is the branches. Whereupon fearing the judgment denounced
against the Beast his people Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. they separate not only from
visible evil, but also from visible good * as all Antichristian. Having thus
confusedly separated from Confusion* it remains they begin all anewe,
whereunto Minister^ must be no ministers until they have a new Ordination
from such separists, alleging all former election, and ordination to be
merely Antichristian from the abuse of such scriptures, Math. 7. 16. 2 Cor. 14.
15. 16. with 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. etc. whereupon (which Donatus d^iest not attempt,
nor yet Rob. Br.) Ia^men (abusing Nomb. 8. 10. thereto) must Iay on hands, and
so contrary to the Gospel his Canon Heb. 7. 7. they would without all
contradiction have the Greater to be blessed of the Iesser: for their public
gathering together unto this action it causes them not cease being lay men, no
move then their hands publicly baptising or administering the Io. his Supper
does cause them therein to be any more then lay people. Others go on further
saing, Is it possible to receive laufull baptism, a laufull foundation of
faith from the Ministers and apostaci^ of Antichrist, alleging thereunto the
former scriptures: and so se^ke out new baptism, new foundation of faith,
rejecting freely and voluntarily the former: so (...) I fear that horible syn,
which I make the argument of the sequel.

You have learned I hope, that the Adversary 2 These. 2. 4. is not only adverse
unto many good things, but also to the very foundation of the Gospel. The
word there is Anti-^eimenos which is adverse* foundationed. Nor can that Head
or Body be such, that is not an holder or cliuer to another foundation then
that Jesus Christ laid. When John has taught Every man to have syn in him,
then, that he which synneth is of the Devell, we do not thereon infer.
Therefore every man of the devell: because we expound synneth or commits syn
by Syn raigninge essentiallie in the committer, as in the Devel who synneth
from the beginning: so, neither though every soul is in somthings against
Christ, do we therefore say, Every soul is Antichristian: but only that
soul in whose membtrs syn domineers: nor only that, but also is one in the
foundation of faith opposite to Christ: for Antichrist is Civil or spiritual,
and it is the spiritual whereof all the controversy is: who is Keimenos
(foundationed) Anti, as much as ok (...), full-but to Christ his foundation: and
therefore not for separable Accidents called the Man of syn: which in english
valueth. A lump of syn, or essence of syn. The not being Cathechized in this
one poor beginning of Christ, it has caused Many ^eachers to lay false
grounds, where^n others buildinge, there is no end of wandering. Some ^onninge
not only into Mr Br. first course, but also further* and worse then that
further: yea so far, as diverse I fear have committed the horible syn against
the holy Ghost, Heb. 6. and 10. That I labor to prove in the sequel, which I
incommend unto your Brotherhood for a ^igne to the Catholic Church of my
souls syncerity: as also for a means to keep you waking and watchful to the
holy way god has placed you in. So much for that: now to the Argument.

Proposition.
All such as voluntarily forsake the grounds and true beginings of Christ and
therewithal the fellowship spiritual they have with the people of god therein,
all such do syn that fearful and horrible syn against the holy Ghost, which is
spoken of in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap. 6. and 10.

FOr the manifestation hereof let us hear the scriptures speak. In Heb. 6. it is
thus: Leaving the doctrine of the beginning of Christ, let us be lead on to
perfection, not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead works and
of faith toward God, of the doctrine of Washings and Imposition of hands, and
of the Resurrection from the dead and of Eternal Judgment -- For it is
impossible that they which were once lightened and have tasted of the heavenly
guifte, and were made partakers of the ho. gh. and have tasted of the good word
of God, and of the powers of the world to com, If they fall away should be
renewed again by Because with Esa^ they may with tears seek repentance but
not find it: Heb 12. 17.
Repentance: seeing they crucify agai^o themselves the Son of God and make a
Mock of him: Falling away from the former light, they for that are said to
crucify again Christ and to deride him after a sort with those which bid
him save himself if he will save others. And indeed what do such Apostate
schismatic spirits less, when they put Christ to begin their new birth
again as of yore, and that from the very foundation. In the 10. chap. the
substance of this doctrine is called Faith (verse 22.) because the whole lump is
seasoned by the first fruits Faith: and (in ver. 23.) called Hope, because it
ministered Hope of salvation. And herein (ver. 24. 25.) they had Fellowship with
the faithful. In which term Fellowship is plainly implied Charity sanctified
in the body mystical of Jesus: for as that Body is the 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Pet 2.
4. 5.
Temple of the ho. gh. so in the same fellowship is Love and all actions of
Love only sanctified to salvation. This causes Luke to say, Act. 2. 47. The
Lord added unto the Church (*he speaks only of the visible church) from day to
day such as should be saved. And hereto accords the types Cyprian (...) large
proves this in h^s B. of Prelates (...) plicity.
Noah's (...), the House wherein the Paschal lamb was slain, Rahabs house, out
of which places whosoever were found when the LOrd came to judgment, lo,
without all mercy they perished as strangers to the common wealth of Israel.
And this is it the Spirit teaches in those words: Not for saking the
fellowship that we have among our selves (as the manner of some is) but let us
exhort^ one another and that so much the more, because we se the day draws
nere: for if we syn voluntarily (understanding the former doble syn spoken of)
after we have received the knowledge of the truth there remains No
Intercession, as anon.
no more Sacrifice for sins, but a fearful expectation of judgment and
violent fire which shall devour the adversary. The collection of the whole is
this: Those that once have been illuminate and tasted of God his good word so
far, as they have been interessed with the ground and principles of the
Gospel, therewithal enjoying fellowship with Noah and his few sowles in the
Arc (notwithstanding some unclean creatures within) if now they voluntarily
reject the word of Noah they once believed, and so willingly leap out of the
churches bosom, it is impossible to us ward but they drown, unable to be
recovered by our prayers or their unseasonable repentance. Yea only we can
expect the convayance of such souls to be 1 Pet. 3. 19 20.
pent till last judgment, in the prison infernal where now the sowles are who
mocked Christ his spirit preaching of old in Noah for 120. y. together.

Blessed 1 Ioh. ^^.
John having taught that Christ Jesus is our sole reconciliation: that the
same death effects in us love toward God and our brother, anon he teaches
that we have assurance of sins remission in our sowles and in our brethren,
by being stirred up by his spirit to pray in faith (called Chapter 5. 14.
parrhesia) a trust leaning on a promise: but therewithal he intimates a
certain kind of syn, for the which a brother has no promise to pray: Ver. 16.
There is a syn to death, I say not that he should ask (forgivenes) for that.
And what is this but what is taught to the Hebrews, There remains no
sacrifice for such. 1 Timothy 2. 1. etc.
Prayers, supplications, intercessions we are commanded to offer up for all
sorts of people (for that Ps. 51. 17.
David foresawe to be ghospels sacrifice: and thus says A glorious ancient of
the Gospel: Justin Martyr with Trypho^ the Iuc.
supplications and thanksgiuings are the sole perfect sacrifices pleasing God
and that Christian hearts have learned only to offer them) but for those that
syn this syn to death, I say not (says John) thou art to pray for that. *
greek is, teleiaj mo^aj.
Some have taught this syn to be final desperatio^: the^ John's speech might
implie prayer for a penitent person dead, but no prayer for him we se to die
impenitent: and this Rome likes well. Others grant the syn seable in this
life (and so both the former scriptures imply) and hereof two judgments: the
better sort add unto all is said unto the Hebrews, a willing malicious
persecuting the known truth, because it is the truth. This I can hardly
believe to be in any but the deuell himself. But if it can be I say it does
not simply cause this syn to be but more to be: for such a syn we shall not be
able to prove in many ages, whereas the holy writ affirms that in the latter
days (begone in thapostles time) Math. 24. 24. 1 Timothy 4 1. etc. 2 Ep. 3. 1. etc.
Jude 4. etc. Revel. 8. 10. 11. and 9 1. etc.
many should depart from the faith, having seared consciences, teaching
doctrines of deuels with Iannes and Iambres, ordained of old to destruction
etc. and therefore this syn no such Rar'auis black swa^ as many have made it
thorough too much pity, which has brought with it much detriment unto the
lords city. The worser sort (the Brownists: though I knoe not that he was ever
so stupid) has babled, that every syn which brought the body under Death by
Moses his law, that is this syn John speaks of. A collection of bloody
cruelty, rather beseming Bull the hangman, then any that would be demed
disciples to Jesus. But such was the old condemned heresy of Nouarianus. Our
saviors practice with the Ioh. 8.
woman taken in the act of adultery, it argued another spirit: and so did the
censure of excommunication practiced by Corinth against the incestuous
fornicator: which being for humbling the flesh (therefore before not humbled)
and recovering the spirit yet steeping under the ashes of senslesnes must needs
(together with the pronunciation) admit prayer for him, as for a brother not
utterly but almost gone in a spiritual trance. But because they would scorn
to be thought to learn any thing of Clapham (though secretly sometimes the
greatest of them are forced to lean toward me) let them learn of S. Paul two
excommunications: the first (whereof 1 Cor. 5) existing for a season viz, Till
the flesh be humbled: the second enduring to death, chap. 16. 22. called in
Syriak phrase Mareethan is interposd for sound sake.
Maran-atha: in English The Lord comes, And this is of like value with the
Hebrews Cherem or creature accursed, Josh. 7. 11. 13. And this is the syn the
Author to the hebrews teaches, as also John, terming it a syn to death
(because excommunicate to the narall death) for whom he will not say, pray:
for whom (to the hebrews) the church cannot sacrifice: for whom S. Paul
appointeeth the denunciation, The Lord comes: whereto S. Jude (borowinge
Jude. 1^.
Henorhs prophetie) adds, Behold the Lord comes to judgment: because such
sinners are ever to hear of Judgment, no more of the Gospel which they
willingly have torn up by the roots, and despitefullie rejected. And so (and
no otherwise I think.) those scriptures can of us be reconciled.

When thapostle speaks of an Heretic gone from the truth (For of an Heretic
never possessed therewith he cannot speak) he commands us to Tit. 3. 10. 11.
Reject him after o^ce or twice admonition, adding a reason. Knovving that he
that is such is ^xestraptaj: (...) it i^ his mind (...).
turned over, and sins (on autokatakritos) being damned of him self. Will an
Heretic tell us he damnes himself? Noe: how the^ do we knoe he is damned of
himself? no otherwise but because he is obstinate in some principle contrary to
that of the Gospel he once believed. So in this general willinge apostacy
from the rudiments of Christ, such will not (upon our dealing with them)
acknowledge they syn against Conscience (nor do I think their Conscience in
the present state does ever condemn them) but comparinge it with the former
waking estate, this present state is accounted, condemned: yea for ever to be
dispared of: nor marvel we that such as from heart and mouth voluntarily
vomited up faith and fellowship, they should be unto us a people dispaired of,
more then an arm or leg of the body droppinge down rotten ripe of itself,
is deprived of all physik as Ministringe no hope of recovery. And therefore
this syn not committed of Peter, The story written by Gribal du^ y. 1548.
published by Hen. Pantaleon.
nor yet of Frances Spiera Lawyer of Citadella. For howsoever with the mouth
(thorough fear of man) they denied Christ and true faith, yet the heart never
gave consent fully to the mouth: much less did they voluntarily shake of both
faith and fellowship Romans 10. 10.
With the heart man beleiueth unto Righteousness and with the mouth man
confesses unto salvation. After the heart has once retained the saving
foundation of faith, and the mouth has once by confession thereof brought the
body under Isa. 49. 22.
the standerd of the Church, marching there in equipage with yon ge and old of
the saved of the Gentiles, what one reason have we to expect Re-repentance of
such, Re-regeneration of such after once they voluntarily have cast and
cashierd themselves from the faith and fellowship of Jesus? A man may live
lacking an arm, or leg, or hand: but let him loose his head or heart, life
is gone, and no more so good as a mayined man. Jude therefore denominates such
Trees twice dead (once before their spiritual birth: then now by a willinge
break-neck downfall twofold, from faith and fellowship wherein they had been
planted) yea, he calls them trees pulled up by the M^th. 15. 13
roots (according to that of our savior, Every plant my heavenly father has
not planted it shall be pulled up by the roots as if thereby we should think (at
least fear) that they are not destinate to a lyfe-plot in the vine Jesus: but
so shred of from head and body Ioh. 15. 6. Heb 6. 8. (...). 4. 2.
they are to expect in the next place to be burned ^n fire, having the ernest
thereof before hand, seated (...). And such was Alexander the Coppersmith his
syn (it seems it was he) who by Paul rejected in the first ep. to Timothi,
against him in the second ep. he thus imprecates: The Lord revvard him
according to his works. After which sort Jeremy imprecateth chapter 18. 21. and
so does David diverse times. Under the Maran-atha the heretic Cerinthus it
seems lay, (...) in his Eccles. ^ist. book. 4. chapter 14.
an therefore S. John coming into the Bath where he found him, he retired
saying: Let us away least the Bath tumble down. So it is said he retired
also vnbathed, Epiphanius in ker. 30.
fyndinge Hebion in the Bath. In like state it seems Marcion stood, who
metinge Polycarpus the Angel of (...), and saying, Acknowledge thou us: unto
him the holy Pastor replies, I acknowledge I knoe the for the first begotten of
Satan. But what need more testimony that such are to be imprecated against,
rather then precated for, when we see Peter Act. (...).
upon evidence of Simon Magus his evil imprecate thus: Thy money perish with
the: which in english valueth, Thou and thy money go together into
destruction. Objection. He saw him eternally reprobate. Answer. It Is false: for
he wills Simon to pray (for himself would not) if so it were possible that
the thought of his heart might be forgiven. But Simon desiringe the Apostles to
pray for him, the ho. Gh. shuts up the history without one tittle sounding
they did so. Yea the ecclesiastical histories do mention that upon Simons
persistance in evil, attempting afterward in (...) to fly from the Capitol,
Peter should fall down and imprecate against the seducer, until he fell down
and broke his neck. What should I say, does not our savior say of such, that
not the old v^rleane spirit alone, but Math. 12. 45.
accompanied with 7. worse. he reenters such, and therefore utterly unlike to
be again dispossessed? I conclude therefore, that Such as give their fre-vvill
to Satan for being torn up from the foundation of Christian faith and
fellowship therein, they commit that fearful and horible syn against the ho
Gh. Heb. 6. and 10. Hearken to the rest.

Assumption.
But all such of our English people as once were in teressed with the
substance of faith received in England, and since that have forsook that
ground of Belief together with all spiritual fellowship therein, Even all
such have forsaken the true beginnings of Christ and fellowship they had with
the people of God therein:

Conclusion.
Therefore all such have sinned that fearful and horrible syn against the Ho.
Gh. heb. 6. and 10.

IF the Assumption be true, no question is to be made of the Conclusion, it
growing naturally from the Antecedent: but the Assumption is true in the
judgment of all learned Protestants (English, Scottish, Dutch, French etc.)
therefore unto all such the Conclusion must be true: for they all do teach and
profess the learned in England to deliver a true foundation of faith: and
therefore by the voice of such, all such our English Apostates and Sthismatikes
have sinned that fearful and horible syn. That the foraigne churches have
departed from England (some in the manner of gathering the Church and all of them
in the form of disciplines exercise uttered in Math. 18. 15. 16. 17. etc.) yet
they all profes one and the same foundation and substance of the Gospel:
charitablie hopinge (as they ought, say malicious Donatist what he can) that
notwithstanding men in ignorance and infirmity (but woe to him that sins
against light revealed) do build stubble, straw, ^ Cor. 3. 11. 12. etc. This
scripture held fast, it ouerturne^ all o^ (...) ^ons And this founda tion I can
prove ever ^o have prevailed against Helgates, and so consequently the Churh
^uervisible.
timber: yet kepinge the foundation in a moritified estate, such shall be saved
in their own persons (with the loss of their tras^ labor) saved as private
poor Christians, obtaining no glory for such ministry: yet as by the fire,
hardly saved though saved. And towching this sense, I have Ambrose many in
Theodorets time: as also Calvin, Seb. Munster, Hemingius, Beza and others: nor
can the scripture (comparing it with that goes before) be understood of any
thing but diversities of doctrine, good and bad.

The beginnings of faith wherein the Hebrews had been catechized, are syx:
Repentance, Faith, Baptismes, Imposition of hands, Resurrection, Eternal
judgment. Under Repentance is contained mortification and Uiuification,
according to that: fly euel do good: called Repentance from dead works. Under
Faith is comprehended not only a general consent unto the history of god his
word and works, but also Coloss. 2. 2 ^ Tim. 1. 15. Romans 5. 1.
a particular plerophorie or full assurance of our reconcilation with God, who
through Christ Jesus God and Man (and therefore fit to interceed between God
and Man) is pacified toward us for syn: as also through the veil of his flesh
( Genesis 3. 15. Galat. 4. 4. Heb. 2. 16. and ^0. ^0.
the seed of woman: our first fruits without which our lump could not be
sanctified) he has made a new and living way into the Holy of holyes, the
hiest heavens, sitting there at the right hand of Majesty, till all his enemies
be made his foot stool. Under Baptismes is intimate purifications under the
law, and water-washing sacramentally under the Gospel: sealing unto old and
young so baptized, the purification of their sowles from syn, Heb. 9. 10. 1 Pet.
1. 18. 19. Reu. 7. 14.
only by the price of Jesus his blood, wherein the garments of the saints are
made white: Nomb. 8. 10. compared with Nehem. 10. 29 and so in all general
actions, the Elders of the Tribes are alone used, much more in this Se our
Conclusion 6.
through which blood we alone conquer and triumph over all hellish powers.
Under Imposition of hands is insinuate Reu. 12. 11.
the laying prophetical and sacramental hands on the heads of men before the
Law (so did Iaakob with Ephraim and Manasseh) on Animals and men under the law
(so did Moses with Joshua: and the* Elders of the trybes on the Leuits: and the
Leuits on Animals sacrificed) on the heads of diverse under the Gospel: as
our savior blessing infants (like mough before baptized) brought by beleiuers
unto him: his imposing hands (as did also the Apostles) in giving the visible
guiftes of the spirit: used of Presbyters in creating ad enstalling persons
into ministerial functions: somtymes to the Gatheringe Ministry, but ever on
Ministry tied to some certain congregation: signifyinge and sealing hereby
unto such sowles beleiuinge, Szegedi^* Fenner etc.
no less the^ the presence of God with them in such their Christian calling.
This Mr Calvin consideringe, he therefore truly calls it Institut b. 4. c. 19.
sect. 28.
such a sacrament as has a faithful siigne of spiritual grace. And for a
sacrament in no larger sense, Against Parmenian the Donatist q. 2. chapter 12.
Augustine (having spoke of Baptism) says thus: Either of them is a sacrament
and by sure consecration both of them is given to man: that, when he is
baptized: this when he is ordained: therefore in the Catholicall church it is
held unlawful to reiterate the^. Yet neither of the^ number it elsewhere with
the few and easy sacraments of the new testament, because (as before) it has
been common unto all the ages of the Church: yet this must be no reason why not
to teach and repute it for a glorious sacrament: wherewithal a blessing from
the Heb. 7. 7.
Greater is convaid unto the Lesser. Under Resurrection is contained, Ephesians. 2.
1. 5. and. 5. 14. Rev. 20. 6.
first our rising here from spiritual death unto the life of Christ in his
body the Church: secondly our resurrection after the bodies natural death,
and that unto eternal life: for the resurrection of the wicked is but a rising
to the second Death. The last is, eternal judgment: first, to the eternal
glory of the faithful (contrary to cursed They hold the glory but for 1000
years.
Chiliasts) secondly to the eternal confusion and never dyinge worm of the
unfaithful: contrary to the blind pitiful colection of who hold all (Deuell
and all) shall be finally saved.
Origenists. And those are the doctrines he calls the (Themelion) foundation,
as also beginning of Christ. Which must be the rather observed, because some put
no difference between the foundation of faith (which here made the hebrews a
true visible people of God, and other accidental doctrines which tend but to
the perfection of the same foundation: the contrary unto which foundation can
only in propriety of scripture he termed 2 Thessalonians. 2 4. 1 Ioh. 2. 18. 19. Reu.
1^. 11.
Anti-keimenon, Antichristian, opposite to foundation, opposite to Christ. The
not retaining of which distinction has caused too many libells be dispersed,
and railings against such as Gather truly (though weakly) with Christ: ^ and
himself teaches, that he who gathers with him, that works not against him.

But are every of those several heads the knowledge and belief of them, of
absolute necessity unto salvation? (For infants of the faithful their Genesis
17. 10 11. Leuit. 2. 12. Romans 11. 1^. Act. 2. 39 and 16. 31. according to Genesis
17. 27.
lump is to be considered in their first fruits) I answer: it is impossible
for any soul to com any way to true life, but by passing thorough him who is
the Way Truth and Life. Nor can one go into the sheepfold but by the Door and
the Porter. Nor can this be don but by Repentance and Faith. Besides, faith is
exercised in beleiuing the promise of Resurrection and eternal judgment: and
quiet it cannot be till the promises be sealed in Baptism, the door sacrament
into the Church. Which caused the Eunuch upon a little information to cry, what
lets I may not be baptized? As also when Peter's hearers cried out, what shall
we do to be saved? him to make this answer, amend your lives and be baptized:
and no sooner they confessed faith in Jesus, but straight way they were
baptized. Yet this I suffix: Faith apprehending the word of promise, it truly
justifies with God and his Church before the Seal com: seeing the seal is not
the Begetter but Romans 4. 10. 11. Col. 2. 11. 12. Mark. 16. 16
Confirmer of that faith whereby we apprehend righteousness in Christ Jesus: and
so holy writ teaches both of Circumcision and Baptism. I conclude then, the
two first and last of the 6. principles to be absolutely neccessary unto
salvation. As for Baptism it is required unto salvation conditionally, that
is, if it may before death be had: nor ought it be deferred within the Church
beyond the 8. day (called the Lord his day, the day of Convention) and in
converting without the Church, beleiuers for them and theyres ought presently
to be baptized with the Eunuch, Paul, laylour, and Lydia. As for imposition it
is also symply necessary t^ such as to whom it suiteth, for the end where to
it serves: that is, not to seal salvation, but to assure the soul of GOD his
helping hand in the work whereto the party* is allotted. Not symplie necessary
in the This Ministry not held the To manist is but badly ansvvered.
Gathering and prophetical ministry: and therefore we se before, and under
and after the law (within and without the True visible church) diverse stirred
up to call people unto God and his Christ, who never had any hand of man so
put upon them. But it is symply necessary to a ministry designed to a
particular Church: and therefore the Tabernacle ministry ( Priests and
Leuits) and the new testaments ministry ( Presbyters and Deacons) they never
were installed without it.

The principles then that are of absolute necessity unto salvation, may
therefore be deduced into two heads: the first knowledge of the true Christ: for
otherwise our Math. 24* 23. 24. 28. Job. 39. 30. 3. 32. 33. Galat. 3. 1.
Savior tells us we shall have many kinds of Christ's preached by
pseudo-prophets, to whose factions we are not to go forth: but only to repair
for our fedinge where his spiritual eyed Eagles do gather to his carcass or
body slain in word and sacraments: as Paul afterward described him crucified
unto the Galatians. The second point is, the true apprehension of Christ whom
knowledge propounds: and this is only by Romans 10. 14. 15. Gal. 3. 2.
Faith, a guifte of the spirit within, but wrought by external ministry of
preaching, even the preaching of faith (And so Romans 8. 32.
having given unto us his Son, how shall he not with him give unto us all
things also?) Which apprehendinge faith is unto others (live the beleiuer no
longer after, then the good theif on the cross) manifested by the fruit of the
lips: and in living longer it vtters it self conformable in some good measure to
do the commandments of him who has frelie saved him: otherwise, James
terms it a Deuels faith, a dead faith a mere delusion. For the exellentie of
true faith, it Synecdo^hicallie is put for the whole doctrine of the Gospel (
Jude. 3. Gal. 3. 2. 1 Timothy 4. 1. and alibj) nor marvel, because all obedience
without it, is but a Crab-fish crallinge backward, and a Pharisaicall painted
sepulcre: for without this faith it is impossible to please God. It is to all
our actions Leuit. 2. (...)
as salt under the law was to all sacrifices, the ^erie sauourer and purifiez:
and this Peter makes the cause of no difference between Iue and Gentile, the
purification of the heart by faith, Act. 15. 9: which faith not mingled with
the word when the Israelites heard it, was cause of their downfall in the
desert, Heb. 4. 1. 2. When therefore an Ancient considered that the Just li^es
by faith etc. He speaks thus pathetically: Chrysostom in ^ homely offai^
hope, (...) All^dged by Centueie
Faith is the original of righteousness, the head of holiness, the beginning of
devotion, the foundation of religion, -- this excludes doubts, holds sure
things, seals up the promises. He that holds this is happy: forsaking it he
is miserable. Yea says another before him: Cyprian (...). 3. to Qui^, chapter 4^.
To the beleiuer all things are possible. And how shall it be otherwise, when
first it unites us with Christ, and the^ from him by the conduit of faith, all
holiness and divine giuings are (as out of a treasury) derived unto us. Where
therefore the Law proclamd, Do and live: the Gospel before, in and since the
Law freely cries: Believe and live. Objection. But we are urged to works also
in the new church. Answer. But not to merit thereby ( Iam. ^. (...).
for he that shall keep the whole law and but fail in one point is guilty of
all) then what merit-monger can hold up hand and cry, vuguilty my Lord? If he
be judged by God and the contrie he will be found guilty) but such works are
Certificates from the spirit of Christ unto his Church, that so such a one may
be acknowledged a member of the Catholicall body and communicate with the
Church her spiritual treasure: and therefore to the faithful no Cawse but a
Sign or Index of justification: which causes one to say: Fulgentius to
Monimus b. 1
GOD crowns the righteousness in his Sayints which he gave unto them Gratis,
kept Gratis perfected Gratis. Whereunto a successor adds: Anshelm, of the
measute of the cross.
If a Man should serve God a thousand years and that most fervently, he should
not merit (ex condigno) of condignity to be half a day in the kingdom of
heaven. And in another place thus: Galat. c. 2.
Works are of grace, but not grace by works: because that (Grace) is first,
whereby other things are valued. Therefore no one by any means can be
justified by works, but by faith which by grace goes before. All which
substance of faith, with many golden and colored sylk appendices of the Lo.
his Tabernacles religion, thowsands in England do teach as truly and learnedly
as ever was taught since the first age after Christ. From and by whose
ministry, diverse of our people coming over hither, did seem verily and with
much comfort to have received the same grounds at least, couetinge with ernest
affection to walk with such (and only with such) as were willing to build upon
the same foundation in the syncerity of Jesus (although with infirmity in faith
and manners) for they had learned of none to find here Angelical perfection.
But since all this, diverse (if their own lips have spoken truly of their
own hearts) they have ( Ekousios) frankly and voluntarily vnconstrayned
outwardly, giving up themselves to the spirit of fundamental Apostacy and
Schism, breaking the former bonds of obedience and casting the coards far away
for Anti* christian: joining themselves freely, some with A^rius and Samosatenus,
making their Christ a meare creature and bare man. Some joining to a Christ that
took not the seed of woman (ouerturning the Gospel preached first in
Paradise) and this because they cannot and will not without a natural reason
believe that super-naturall work: and so they are one with the heretical body
of Valentinus, Manes and Eutiches. Others with Apollinaris do make a mixed
confounded Christ. All of them condemned generally of the Catholicall Church
above a 1000 Y. ago in sondrie councels. Herewith they believe frewill to
holiness in the unregenerate, addinge justification before god by works: both
points ordinarily more Al those ^aresies not only resisted by several
faithful vvriters, but also Anathe matized in sundry provincial and general
counsel^.
gross then some Papists dare be seen in: in a word flat Pelagians. Unto the
former they add rebaptisation with Donatus and cut Children of from Baptism
with bloody Herod. Making the Maiestrate (with Seruettus) a mere Scar-crowe
without the church: with such a rabble of inventions raked out of the donghill
of all heresies, as if not 7. deuels, but 7. score deuels were entered into
them: Therefore appearingly to us ward they have sinned that fearful and
horrible syn against the ho: ghost.

But the Brounist This root of bitterne^ must be pulled up or it ^vill defi^ many.
teaching that neither Clapham nor England teach the Gospel of Jesus, it
fodeth on ignorant sowles with more boldness to reject all such faith and
fellowship for Antichristian. First I say to such Teachers, that it were better
for them to have a millstone hoong*on their neck, and they with Sherajahs
scroule and stone violently thrown into the midst of Euphrates, then such
speech scandalous should be uttered, whereby silly-ones are turned out of the
way. Secondly, Doctors of the gospel yet they knoe the gospel.
what will they say is the substance of the gospel (for in the adjuncts the
wisest shall ever be to seek in something)? I knoe they insinuate to the simple
(and this their whole practice will witness to their faces) that to teach the
former principles without subjection to the outward Churchgovernment of Christ,
it is no Gospel. And wherein exists this? In the ministry of Pastors,
Doctors, Elders, Deacons, Widows with their form of installments etc. I
answer: the very term Outward (if they were not forgetful of Logic, that
is, of Reasons rule*) it w^ld teach them: That which is outward, yea so
outward, as somtymes seperable from his subject, that is not essential or of
the Ghospells substance: but such is that outward government. This may appear
from S. Paul who says the Gospel was preached unto Abraham, Galat. 3. 8. as
also the gospel (ver. 17.) was preached to that Patriarch 430. Y. before the
law, and yet no speech of outward church government. John Baptist preached
the Gospel, yet ignorant (as also the Disciples in their first sermons) of
this outward church government. Nay, our savior before time of Ascensio^ (
Act. 1. 2. 3.) cannot be thought to have spoke a word of the Ecclesiastical
functions: so did Peter and others in their sermons after his ascension, when I
^roe they preached Gospel, and yet no word of those matters. If all the
former preachings was the Gospel ( and Form^ (...) esse.
the form gives being to a thing) the^ those fanaticall spirits of ignorance
or malice blaspheame the gospel. Being driven from that sconse, they will
say: but thexternall church order revealed, every such soul as will not be
adjudged Antichristian (that is, against Christ) must be only subject to the
outward Church Order prescribed by Christ. I answer: First, their concluding of
every soul Antichristian which in any thing is contrary or against Christ,
it is a gross abuse of the word used in scripture: For so every soul should be
Antichristian. Apostle is in english, Messenger: Evangelist, a Good
tydings-man: shall we therefore say, Every messenger is an Apostle, and every
one that tells us good news is an Evangelist? The very word Antichristian)
falsely applied, it has kindled the fire which Satan will never suffer to be
quenched. So^ers of that seed had need repent in sack and (...)
In the large sense of the words, we may so say: but coming to examine these
terms by the art of Theology, we say the words are restrained to such and
such: so also, bringing the word Antichristian to be examined by the Apostles,
we shall find that such a soul must be Anti-keimenos opposite in the
foundation: and so, nothing so large as blind Zeloist^ do urge it. Secondly, I
answer: every soul is bound to give obedience unto every piece of god his
will revealed. Then they add: But thexternall government has been by some of
their own teachers as also by us been preached, therefore now none of their
Parish people visible Christians: nor can the preachers be said to preach the
gospel. Answer to the first conclusion. First, if they can prove every soul
there to have sufficiently heard that doctrine, and yet to be Contumax (which
no reasonable soul can believe) then they say something. Secondly, the same
word is exercised even now in England (when the Sun of Brownisme shines in
Netherlande) shall we think it begets not faith in some now, as well as of yore,
and must those also be no visible Christians? Thirdly, the Author to the
^ebrues fynding the people he writ unto in a manner Dunces* who for the time
might have been Doctors, though he fo^res them with the irremissable syn which
might steal upon them through negligence, yet He would not pronounce them cut
of from God. The Apostle teaches another Rule, Philip. ^ the second
Conclusion. As for that they preach, if it contained not the substance of the
Gospel, how haps any soul has been saved or been brought into the state of
salvation thereby* Death begets not life: Mat. ^. (...) Iam. ^. (...)
falsehood begets not truth: and so no Brownist could ever by that preaching
have been interessed with, iustifyinge faith. Faith is got by hearing: or have
they heard some Angel from heaven: or did the first of them get their justifying
faith by readinge? objection. But there is no promise made of good to such
preaching, although God somtymes extraordinarily do bless it to good. Answer.
It Is false: for it has been the only ordinary way of begetting sowles to god
for those 40. y, together under the reign of our sovereign Queen: nor did
ever other Doctrine in any age before beget true faith: and therefore a promise
of blessinge i^ lynked with that ground of faith, be the preacher thereof
otherwise and for other causes highly reproueable. Besides that evident effect,
Gold is as verily gold in the snowte of a swyne as upon the finger of
Zorobabel. Augustine teaches this largely, Against (...) b. 7. ch 8. the like
ple^tifully unto Cres co the Gra^maria^.
tellinge the Donatists, that the 4. Rivers of Paradise (though appointed for
watring it, yet) they verily ron down into Egypt: so equally minded was he
toward the schismatiks his soul lothed. But all must be no Gospel with
those, which their adversary preaches.

But to make the Ground of Brounisme less colorable to the allegiants: their
Suns light has given afalse shine, and thus it is: First they tell us, that in
raising up this Church-ministerie laymen may ordain by Laying on hands and
consecrating the party to such business. That this is but a dream, I have
all 1 Timothy ^. 22 Tit. 15. Act. 6. 6. ^ 14. 23. cheirote^e santes, signi fying
ordination by hans: seeing scripture never speaks of Election by lifting up
hands.
rules in scripture and consent of all Ancients, and all Churches in this age
against them. Are they not like to have a sound platform of external
church order that begin in such disorder? Sec they tell us of a Doctor
exercised in the Church her peculiar exercises, and that in delivering doctrine,
upon whom (in the second place) the Pastor must iump in with his exhortation
(distinguishing Doctor and Pastor only by Doctrine and Exhortation which rather
ought to be reconciled by 1 Cor. 14. 26.) having for this only a poor sermon
written on Romans 12. 3. etc. misapplyinge verse. 7. thertof as also the end of
verse 8. for (...) cleon is the Male gender (he that is merciful) and so they
censure others for lack of Chr. ministry yer they knoe ^is ministry
Men-widowes: here against I have the concordance of scripture and the voice of
all Churches: who acknowledge no Doctor, peculiarly, distinct) but him of the
Schools: much less did ever any dream of menwidowes in one age or other.
Thirdly (taking for granted, (which is false to me who can prove a visible
Church in all ages) that all our synagogues were builded by Antichrist to
Idolatry and therefore symply unlawful for a christian therein to pray or
teach. Besides the first may not be granted, I judge their doctrine Iuish: and
after a sort to be a denial of Christ com in the flesh, and opposite to those
scriptures, John 4. 21. 23. 1 Timothy 2. 8. and 4. 4. Coloss. 2. 20. etc. Isa. 23.
17. 18 Micah 4. 13. with others: and hear against has been the practice of
the Church ever since such was builded. Fourthly, they teach a man after the
first excommunication, he is to be held an enemy. And to this end, where Mr
Barrowe had in his description of the Church placed that of the Apostle (2 Thessalonians. 3. 15.) after excommunication, they in reprintinge it last year (but
subtly giving it tholde date, as if he had been of their mind: although both
he, Mr Penry, Mr Greenwood would have shamed to stand in this and others their
co^demnations) Against the 9. comma^ndement.
they do place that Apostolical Canon before (...)), because they would quickly
rid their hand* of brotherly admonishments: as for all scripture and (...)
the Catholic church it is ever against them. As they begin their discipline so
they finish it in Censures vn-ruly: neither beginning nor ending with any
harmony of scripture or consent of any church. To omit other inventions of
theyrs if now Corah, Dathan and Abiram do seek for offices by a law of their
own making: trobling the Chatholicall Church with their start-vp inventions,
though they schismed not from the universal body ( which they have) the
universal church of Israel is bound in pain of death upon the insight of
their insurrection to depart from their te^ts, against whom already a
devouring fire is gone out from Iehouahs presence. So far are they from being
fit to sit as Judges on all others: or fit to prescribe rules of direction
to all Churches. But let them (if they can) afforde us thinterpretation of any
one Riddle in the Gospel, which they did not synd out by psowing with Samson
his heifer in England.

Hearing thus that the grounds of Brownisme will nothing sheilter the Reuolts
that use them, let us hear what Daut^ says of such as are adverse to the
Church: They that hate Zion Psalm. 129. 5^ etc.
(the place where god has put his name There: called by Ezekiel. chapter vlt.
Iehouah-there, because the eternal should in habit there for ever) they shall be
ashamed and turned backward (ashamed to return, they shall apostate) They
shall be as the grass on the house tops (despising fellowship with the lord his
poor people in a low estate, it may be because of some weeds, they therefore
cry: Isa. 65. 50*
stand apart, com not nere to me, for I am holier them thou: and so they ^ount
up alofte, swelling in the bladder of their pride, as grass on the house tops)
which vvithereth before it com forth (these are says Isaiah a smoke in the
lords wrath: they shall be suddenly destroyed, even when the mockers, eat and
drink, saying peace unto his own soul: as every of those hateful spirits
braggeth they never had such rest in their sowles: but woe to those that are at
rest in Zion, much more at rest out of Zion) whereof the Movver fills not his
band (the Man of god may hope to reap such for the Lord his barn, but god his
judgment ceazing on the proud Pharisees, the ministers hope shall be frustrate)
neither shall the glainer fill his lap (nor shall any of the Church that
hope good of them, be otherwise then disapointed) they that pass by (Christian
pilgrims who here have no biding city) neither shall say, The blessing of the
LOrd v^on you, we bless you in the name of the Lord: like unto that
commandment of John, 2 Ioh. 10.
Bid him not God speed (...), if he bring another Gospel (that is, another
found^tion of faith) were he says the Apostle Paul an Angel from heaven, let
him be Gal. 1. 8. 9.
A nathema, accursed: but those voluntary Reuolts from the former faith and
fellowship, do also teach another Gospel, therefore to us ward accursed. Nay
some as large conscienced as others strait, do justify people of all religions
(as did the heretic Eusebiu^. b. 5. c. 12. o^ eccl. hist.
Apelles) abusing (as the Deuell did with Jesus) the scripture thereto, saying:
Every spirit that confesses Ies. Chr. to be com in the flesh, is of God: and
so the Devil which confessed him to be the Son of David in a truer sense then
the Anabaptist does) he is also of god, and they may (as already they have)
enter into communion with him. Such doctrine plainli arguinge persons,
willingly selling themselves to all prophanity and Atheism: as having the
eyes of Conscience bored out, and the senses made void of felinge, by the
searing of an hot iron, the just smoking vengeance of the invisible Jehovah.

Question. Those that unto us have sinned that voluntary twofolde syn, are they
not to be received again into fellowship upon external humiliation? answer.
If they but went bachward in the time of persecution, Nouatianus for ever
refused them: yet seeing the word Willingly has lead us to another collection,
I answer: if such a one who once seemed voluntarily so to have sinned, shall
return with apparent contrition, such cannot be denied but received: not now
as having our verily committed the former twofold syn, but deming by such
contrition that the soul so fell and schismed, either before there was such
solid assurance of the Ghospells foundation as seemed, or because there was some
outward coaction (hid unto us) which lackinge to the perfecting the syn, now
the rather such a one is again recovered. But all the years passed, not one
person has for such syn been humbled, therefore unto us ward their recouertes
the more to be dispaird of. Leuit. 14. 42.
If by outward humiliation such scrape of the former leprosy, let them with
new mortar and stone be repaired: but if after reparation the plague arise
again, 44. 45.
then it is a frettinge leprosy, they but scorners of repentance and no more to
be received. Socrates eccles. hist. book. 3. chapter 11.
Ekebolius a Christian Sophist fallinge from the church under the bloody reign
of Apostate Iulia^, he after themperours death retorued into the synagogues
porch at time of Conuention, and there lying prostrate he cries: Tread me under
foot, for I am the unsavory salt. If he saw himself no better for unwilling
backsliding, what will those spirits se and acknowledge themselves to be if once
they have granted the heart t^ repent? mean time (as our savior says) we
knoe, If salt have lost his sauionr (it appears not by any reason) where
Math. 15. 13.
with it self can (again) be salted: but indeed, it is thensforth good for
nothing but to be cast out and to be conculcate of men.

Question. What course is to be taken for avoiding this syn, and by what means
should one be overtaken therewith? Answer. This syn steals upon a soul two
ways: either by too much remisnes and sluggishnes, which causes the Lord to
say, Luke. 21. 36. heb. 3. 12 13. 1 Pet. 4. 7
Watch, be sober, exhort one another: or else coms by abundance of Gall,
untempered heat, ouerflowinge zeal, an ouerweenige of wit and holiness: and
this causes the spirit not only to tell us before that such will be so badly
qualifyed (2 Timothy 3: 2. 3. 4) though with face of men and weomens hair they
will cover all till they sting, but also to will us Prove. 26. 16
fynding honey to eat but sufficient, lest being ouerfull we vomit it up: as
also to enjoin us Romans 1^. ^.
not to presume to understand above that is meet to understand, but to
understand acording to sobriety. Which not observed ^eawseth a man eccl. 7. 18.
to be wise and righteous overmuch, that is, in his own conceit: and so
unawares causes him be desolated of the spirit Pro. 13. 9.
and his candle put out. The He brues were in the way toward it through
neglect of being led forward unto perfection: and in that pad are swarms of
sowles in England, who after a whiles waking do sit down as willinge there to
stand till moss groe on their heels, and they as rotten at the Core, as the
vulgar Queen Maryes protestant. Once zeal abounded: now Zechariah may again
say, Zech 1. 11
All the world sits still and is at rest: and if it will be no better, Let
them Rest till they Rust: Revel (...) 11.
Let the filthy be more filthy, and the unrighteous be vnrighterous still. In
the second tract were once all those spirits who urged me to pen this tractate,
although some of them since, by ronning themselves out of breath, are now deadly
cold as those who have quenched their spirits. There is an error on the right
hand (as when a Bow bends till it breaks) and an error on the left hand: as
when with Solomon his sluggard one cries. Prou. 24. 33. 34.
A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding the hands to sleep, so
(spiritual) beggary as a truailer and armed man coms upon him. Pro. 28. 14
Blessed therefore the man that always fears: seeing with fear and trembling
he is to work out his salvation. And yet not so, but he is to Psa. 2. 11.
rejoice in his tremblinge.

If I have well said, wisdom will be justified of her children: if not let the
righteous sinite me, it shabe a benefit. The love of Christian faith and
fellowship, oh my God thou knoes it urged me to write this. Water it therefore
O Lord to the sowles of the Readers. Let them consider what I have said, and do
thou give them understanding in all things.

The Epilogue to his forsaid brethren and the rest of that congregation.
A Certain Ancient says: Vincentius in his (...). of ^aer. chapter ^7.
Newly speaking, speak not new things: because indeed unto such as once are
stablished in the ground of faith, things uttered according to Analogy of
faith, they are but sienes of the same stock, as was Sheth begotten in the
image of his father. But the Ronnagates of Ephraijm (nay, Epraijms worse) they
ever cry, We must groe in faith: and this they do, not by growing in, but by
flitting from the faith. Let their fall cause you with holy fear to regard
your standing: least also ye fall after the same sort of unbelief. Those two
years last passed, God has for your sustentations only used my weak unworthy
ministry. Of what nature the fodder is, let the sheopherds of the LOrd his
Meads judge: 1 ^or. 14. 32.
for the spirits of the prophets must be subject unto the prophets: and why
should I with the conuenticle Companions turn aside, as if there were no
prophet but my self? I can find prophets in all Ages to witness the substance
and foundation of all I teach unto you: and even for that, both I and you do
owe much praise to the hiest. Ior. 6. 16.
Stand in the ways and behold and ask for thold way, which is the good way. If
the old way be the good way of god contained in the Bibles Canon, then what are
the vvays wherein sowles must stand while they enquire for that good way? Is it
any thing, but the voices of the faithful in all ages who have trod forth the
way of life before us? And this is it causes Christ to direct his Love no
otherwise but by bidding her Cant. 1. 7.
If she were ignorant to get her forth by the steps of the flocks who had trod
the tract before her. And for this cawse also is it that the Church is called,
1 Timothy 3. 15.
The pillar and ground of truth. Many cold be contented I drew such a Card
of antiquity for clearing the life of faithful in Succession, who yet with
Job have been ouerron with an outward scab (soul untouched of Satan) but they
should knoe it unreasonable to bid the Israelite make brick, and then deny him
straw. And yet you and I have gone a warfare Except what once was
administered by six out of England.
at our own charges: though ever we cannot all things but the lord knoeth,
what is necessary. Mean time, as we are debtors to all so let us (as we may)
Eccl. 11. 1.
cast our bread on all waters (or sorts of people) for after many days we
shall find it. * So Ieroin understands it: comparing it with (...). 1^. 15
And so besuchinge you to hold fast least another take the crown, I desire the
Lord his saving spirit to dwell for ever in our spirits: So be it.

To his beloved Tho. whicks and Ri. Carter, (...) saving guiftes of the Spirit,
Amen.
NOt knowing if so we shall live to behold one another face again in this
life, let me supply the wast paper with those few lines. Returninge Toward
thend of our Lo. (...). 1597.
from the funerals of my excellent gracious friend Mistress Anne Ogle, I was
motioned to conflict with your neighbor Romanist prisoners. But considering I
had no orderly calling so to do, you knoe how unwilling I was. Yet afterward
perceiving a nere friend of mine his foot snarled in their grin (which amazd me
more then all Romish learning could) I not only was willinge, but also made
challendg: yet under handwriting, that so any beholder thereof, they might
more orderly judge. The Doctor agreed. Under his hand (for shaking my
ministry) he put down this I ^esis: All true Ministers of the Ghospel are
only raised up within the present established church of Rome. Hereto I opposed,
drawing his argument into form: urging him to prove the First proposition: and
Minor, the second proposition: the third is, Conclusion: for an argume^ in
form (called aso (...) Syllogismo) it existeth o^ 3. propositions.
Mayor: All such Ministers are only raised up in the established church of
Christ (for that I denied) secondly, That Romes Church ever was or is that
only church: which also I denied. To the Minor (but skipping over the word
Only) he said something. And thereto I excepted: first by calling into question
(and not unworthily) if ever Romes Church, was truly established. Secondly
(though that should appear) I denied the present church of Rome to retain the
Ancient Apostolic faith. And here I propounded their Pighiu^ chap. 6. of
(...). 1. of ecclesiastical hierarchi c. Also the Moguntine council
hallowing water, wax, Bells for driving away deuels etc. Episcop Roffensis
against Luther. Biel in exposition of Mass, Lection. 56. D.
Purgatory fire for cleansing away sin: their constituting Sts. departed
Roman. breuiarie, of Peter and Paul Pope Sixtus his prayer to many saiuts.
Prayer to S. Blaze. etc.
Mediators: whereunto I now add, Sauiors: Vigueriue in his theological
institut. (chapter 16.) approved of (...).
their postinge over one man's works for supplying another lack: which they
term works of Super-erogation, and the church her treasure, set of sale in
leaden Bulls in their year of Iubile: with a Fifte doctrine I now remember not:
for I left the writings behind in Marshland. Hereat the Doctor sterued,
calling me falsifier etc. denying their church to teach those doctrines. As
for the Major proposition (though in 3. sundry writs I provoked him) which
first in order should have been handled (in Nature or Art) you knoe in never one
of his papers, he would so much as look that way, he perceiving it (I doubt not)
to be an Iron too hot for his fingring. And so Clapham remains untouched and
interessed with a ministry of the gospel: although my god knows I knoe my
self most unworthy: and cold be glad thereof to be disburdened.

It now remains to be examined if so I charged their church falsely. And
therein I refer my words to be compared with all Romish writers, many before,
but specially since their cursing cursed Held in our Lords y. 1545. Tride^t (in
English) a triple toothed instrument, such as Poets attribute to the Sea-god
Council of Trident: Neptunes thre-tynd forke for hurling one sea of error
upon another. But I knoe he knoes the charge most true: only till he had
trapped some sowles and fettered them fast, he would not have such trumpery
discovered. This was it which caused him speak so plausibly, Viz, The common
service book could never beget faith (and yet themselves make most of it their
own) that faith is begotten only by preaching (and yet themselves first
introduced domb priests) that they have the office of Elders (but yet none that
in the same Congregation assisteth a Pastor) as also that of Deacons (although
none to wait on the Loue-tables, nor occupied about the poor) such covert
speech he used, till one was foulie snarled. Yea, such was his fetch in
bellowing out against my Biblio-thecaes where I speak of Chr. his presence in
the supper) chapter 14.
14. chap. sainge first there were no such words in Hierom: then being let se
them, crying forth I had not truly translated them: afterward saing I had
misalleadged them: as if I had collected two real bodies of Christ, whereas
therewith Hierom and Augustine I only collect two manner of presences, not
substances. And yet being in place together, his impudentlie (you knoe)
affirming I had never see^ Ierom.
vnblushing forehead made me abashed, and that to his ytching eared auditorie
stood against me for victus, victa, victum.

But such seeing, I knoe they will not se when they knoe an Ancient to make
against them: as for example: A Romish mate (at table of our right Woo. friend)
he in a bravery (knowing none there able in that to convict him) would prove
that the Beasts number Reu. 13. 18
666. it cold not arise (as protestants would) from the word Latinus. He
accomptinge, 666. would not arise, and did not some hearer say he had
sufficiently confuted? I do not think but he well knew that ancient Episcop
of Lions in our Lo. y. 180. in his 2. b. 25. chapter
Ireneus said yes, and yet himself of the Latin empire. But you must knoe that
the father (as also John) did write in Greek, and so the word not Latinus but
Lateinos: from whence results the number thus: L 30. A 1. T. 300. Greek
Epsilon. La^cinos is in English a Latin.
E 5. I 10. N 50. O 70. S 200 And so the Cock crewe before the victory. The
same number artseth from Ecclesia Italica thus. E 5. C 20. C 20. L 30. greek
Eta. Ecclesia Italica, is, Italique Chur.
E 8 S 200. I 10. A 1. -- I 10. T 300. A 1. L 30. I 10. C 20. A 1. Their Paris
Genebrard he labors to disgrace such calculation, by propounding the name
Luter. But not fynding the number in Greek, he turns it into hebrew
Character, but yet it will not reatch: he bumbasts it therefore with another L,
so making it Martin Luther will not yield the 666. except they doble rib him.
Lulter for tentoring out 666. But if the Malice of France would have the number
out of an hebrew word, let him count In english, Romish.
Romijth: R 200. O 6. M 40. I 10. I 10. TH 400: and so the Beast (at least for
one of the Lamb-like horns) of the Latin, Italian, Romish Church.

All this but by the way for curbing of peuis spirits in their willinge wilful
ignorance. But a judgment just enough, specially upon such, as once initiated
with the foundamentall truth have since that vncoustrained, yea freely forsaken
the faith and fellowship they had thereyn. Our English Harding (who once wished
his voice as Osney bells for ringing out Romes trumperie) he afterward
(neglecting his standing) fell and became Read our Ieuels conflicts with that
Apostate
a patroene to all their drudgerie: eue^ to their very Stews. Those that of
curiosity will (as did Heuah) confer with the Serpent, it is just with God to
leave such to the power of the Tempter. The wyseman wills us, prou. 19. 27.
not to hear the instruction which causes to err from the words of
knowledge. And our Savior John. 10, 5.
denies that his sheep will follow or acknowledge a strangers voice. If God
shall take me away before I publikly handle the vn-masking of Antichrist ex
professo, let the former tractate remain a goade in your sides for kepinge you
watchful to your ways. Which if (and I hope all good) then, though a 1000.
fall on the right hand by ouer-lashing zeal, and a 1000. on the left hand by
Laodiceaes lukewarmnes, ye shall stand to the praise of the Eternal, and your
own never dyinge happiness. And so with my hearty salute to every our
christian friends, I leave you and them to the merciful guardure of the hiest.

To the Apostaticall, schismatic, Factious.
THe faithful believe that Jesus his kingdom excels that of Moses in this,
that once established Heb. 12. 27 28. Psalm 45. 6. Mark. 13 22. Luke 17. 23.
it is never removed: though false prophets cry, Lo here, Lo there, as if for
many hundreds of years it had been vanished, and now begone to peep up head in
the desert: and therefore have learned not to go out of the Catholic Arc.
Thou who in an ouerweninge of thine own wit and holiness thinks al fools and
filthy saving thy Pharisaicall self, knoe O painted tomb, whose out side is
fairest ^uk. 1^. 20. 21. psalm.
but the kingdom of god rather within) that wheresoever thou goes in that
estate, the dreadful vengeauce of God pursues the: for the prou. 30. 17
Ey which mocketh the father and despises the Mothers instruction, the
vally-rauens shall pick it out and the young Eagles eat it. Till O ye Factious,
ye have ripened further matter against you, I for the present conclude thus
with the prophet: Isa. 30. 11.
Behold all ye have kindled a fire and are hemmed in with the sparks: Walk in
the light of your fire and in the sparks ye have kindled: this shall ye have of
mine hand: Ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Who would save some (...)
as by pulling them out of the fire. HE. CLAPHAM.

Escapes in printinge.
Leaf ij, backside, line 22. for Sowles read Selves. In iij, in the margin for
Mare ethan is etc read Mare-atha: n is etc. In Bij, in the margins top on the
leafes backside, read Centurie 5. in chapter of faith.



GOD PRESERVE OUR QVENE.

