A GODLY FORM OF HOVSEHOLDE GOVERNMENT: FOR THE ORDERING OF PRIVATE FAMILIES,
according to the direction of Gods word.

Whereunto is adjoined in a more particular manner, The several duties of the
Husband toward his Wife: and the Wifes duty toward her Husband. The Parents
duty toward their Children: and the Childrens toward their Parents. The
Masters duty toward his Servants: and also the Servants duty toward their
Masters.

Gathered by R. C.

ISIDORE. Thou profitest much when thou read, if thou practisest that which
thou read.

BARNARDE. What avails it thee to read often in books the holy name of thy
Savior, except thou study and endeavor to have godliness in thy behavior?

CYPRIAN. It profits a man (says he) nothing at all, to profess virtue in
words, and to overthrow the truth in his deeds.

AT LONDON Printed by Felix Kingston, for Thomas Man. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MASTER ROBERT BVRGAINE, OF ROXALL, ONE OF her
Majesty's Justices of peace, in the County of Warwick: to the right
Worshipful Master John Diue, of Ridlington Park, in the County of Rutland:
and to the Worshipful Master Edmund Temple, of Temple-hall, in the County of
Leicester, Esquires, as also to their religious and virtuous wives, R. C.
wishes with heart and mind, grace from God the father by Jesus Christ, and
constancy in the truth of the Gospel, to the end, and in the end.
Having collected and finished this Treatise ensuing, and devising very
carefully with my self to whom I might dedicate the same: at length I
resolved, that none were meeter to undertake the patronage thereof, then some
such meetest persons, as did already, (in some good measure) practice within
their several Charges, the several points and duties contained therein, and
so would further prosecute those other necessary parts, which they have yet in
some part pretermitted. Whereupon, calling to mind the holy exercises daily
used and exercised in all your houses: I was moved for two causes, to make you
all jointly Patrones hereof. First, for that I acknowledge my self beholden
and indebted unto you all diversely, since my first acquaintance with you, and
therefore (least I should deserve the blame of unthankfulness for benefits
received) I am bold under your names, to offer to the whole Church of God,
these my simple collections. Secondly, for that as you are all joined and
linked in kindred by reason of marriage: so also you are, and have been a long
time inseperably knit in a zealous and sincere profession of Gods word and
religion. And for so much as I may not (for many respects) accomplish what good
I willingly would: yet least I should be thought to spend the remainder of my
years in an idle condition, or to hide my tallent in a napkin: I have been no
less careful, then willing, to labor otherways to do what I may to glorify
God, and profit his Church. Neither will these my labors be utterly
unprofitable, if my purpose therein be rightly conferred with the purport of my
writings. For such Householders, as pretend to be great protestants, and sound
professors of the Gospel, may long enough talk of discipline, and still
complain of the want of Church-gouernment, but all in vain, and to no
purpose, unless they will begin this most necessary discipline in reforming
their own houses, according to the direction handled in this Treatise, and so
to suffer the holy religion of God, to take place amongst their families at
home, otherwise they shall travel much, and profit little. For although there
be never so good laws in Cities: never so pure order in Churches, yet if
masters of families, do not practice at home catechizing, and discipline in
their houses, and join their helping hands to Magistrates, and Ministers: they
may in truth, (but unjustly, as many have done) complain that their children
and servants are disordered, and corrupted abroad, when in truth, they were
disordered, and are still corrupted, and mard at home. And therefore it cannot
be, neither is it to be hoped for, that either the father of his children, or
the husband of his wife, or the master of his servants should look for that
obedience, that reverence, that faithfulness, and that dutifulness, which
they of right ought to have, and the other in conscience, and of bounden duty
are bound to perform, unless they do now at length endeavor to see these
orders and duties hereafter mentioned, to be practiced within their several
Households. For if Parents and Householders shall perform no further duty to
their children and servants, then to provide for them, meat, drink, and
apparel, and to pay them their wages: then Papists, Atheists, yea, Turks, and
Infidels, do yield this duty as well as they. And seeing all men be careful,
that their horses and bullocks, should have sufficient fodder and prouender, to
the end they may have their labor in lieu and recompense thereof, it does
consequently follow, that therefore a christian Householder ought to have over
his children and servants, a much more christian care, then he has over his
dumb and insensible beasts, that so he may take a singular comfort from the
daily contemplation of their increase in spiritual graces. Oh what a sweet
and comfortable thing shall this be to the soul and conscience of such an
Householder, as when he has been so diligent and careful in the trayning and
bringing up of his children and servants, in the obedience and ways of the
Lord, that he may rightly deserve to have this worthy report and
commendation given unto him, from the mouth and pen of the godly: namely,
that he has a church in his house: that is, a company of sound and faithful
Christians, such as fear God indeed: As the like report was given by the
Apostle, to those godly Housekeepers, Aquilla, and Priscilla his wife: Romans
16.5. 1. Cor. 16.19. As also to Philemon.

Phil. 2.
Therefore all Parents and Householders, are (in the Lord) to be exhorted, that
they would be careful to bring up their children and family, so as they
either (by some good tokens) may see them the children of God, and heirs of
the covenant, or at least, they may be comforted in their own consciences,
notwithstanding their children and servants (for some cause unknown to them)
do refuse their counsel and instruction, seeing they to the uttermost of their
power and ability, have used all good means to bring them up well, and have
rightly offered them to the Lord.

Now if parents and masters have just cause to bewail and lament, when (thus
traveling in good education and information) they cannot yet see good effects,
and godly fruits, in their children and servants: how much more cause of
grief may they have, when they have used and bestowed no labor at all (either
by themselves, or others for them) to bring them up in the nurture and fear of
the Lord? And yet, alas, many will be grieved for the one, that will not be
any thing moved for the other. Wherefore let all parents and masters of
families know, and learn, that if they will convey God his blessings to their
posterities, then they must do, and perform the duties belonging thereunto:
yea let them (if they be loath to convey God his judgments to their children)
carefully avoid the means unto it.

And surely, Luke 2.2^.
as it is a blessed thing in the hour of death, with Simeon to depart in
peace, leaving their wives, children and servants, members of Christ, spouses
to Christ, children to God, and servants to the Lord: so in the extremity of
death, no one thing will be more grievous unto Parents and Householders, then
(the Lord having given them the charge of so many souls to be furthered to
salvation) that their own tormented consciences shall press them, who in as
much as they could have helped their children and servants forward to their
damnation, and so (which is more fearful) they shall have them spewing and
foming out on their faces, continual curses in hell, accusing them for ever to
be murderers of their souls, and cut throats of their salvation.

Is it any marvel, if Householders many times find small obedience, and less
dutifulness, and faithfulness, at the hands of their children and servants,
seeing they omit and leave undone the performance of these so christian duties
toward them herein expressed, and enjoined of the Lord? For so does God often
leave manifest tokens of his wrath, in punishing disobedience, with
disobedience.

How can any master of a Household, whosoever he be, look to have his
family trusty and faithful unto him, and yet he himself is faithless to
God? Does he marvel, that his children and servants fear not him, whereas he
himself fears not the Lord? Will he maintain his authority over those under
his charge, and he himself does not yield obedience unto the authority of
God his Creator?

Moreover, it is manifest, that the goodman of the house, by planting Gods
religion in his family, shall not a little advance and set forward his own
private profit and commodity. For wicked and ungodly servants, are, for the
most part, loyterers pickers, and deceitful: whereas on the other side, godly
servants are just and faithful, whom in his absence he may trust to do such
business and work as he wills them to do. Genesis 30.30. and 39.5. etc.


If masters of families be careful and desirous (as in conscience they ought)
that their wives, children and servants, should reform themselves, and
endeavor to practice such duties as do appertain and belong unto them, then
they must likewise be diligent and careful to reform themselves, both
inwardly and outwardly, in such points and duties, as hitherto they have left
undone: otherwise, they may justly say unto the^: Physician, Luke 4.23. and
22.32. Romans 2.21.
heal your self: or, why do you will us to do that, which you do not
practice your self? For as one candle cannot light another, if it self be
out: even so a master of a Household shall not reform those of his charge,
and inflame them with the love of God and godliness, if he himself be void of
the same.

Let every master of a Household therefore, say and perform with Joshua: I and
my family will serve the Lord: Joshua. 24.15. And likewise let every christian
^adie, Mistress, and Dame, say with Hester: I and my maids will do the like:
Hest. 4.16. And so no doubt, God will pour his blessings on them, and theirs,
in this life, and everlasting happiness on them in the life to come.

Touching the book it self, I will not say any thing to the commendatio^
thereof, but only this: That I am assured, that (if such duties as are
mentioned therein, were duly and carefully practiced of al such as are named
in it) the^ (no doubt) virtue and godly religion would greatly flourish, to the
advancement of God his glory: and also sin and wickedness would then
decrease and fall down, to the utter subversion and overthrow of Satan's
kingdom.

This Treatise I confess is not garnished with eloquence, not full of great
cunning, nor beautified with flower: of man's wisdom, neither yet does it
discourse or treat of high or dark things, neither is it stuffed with subtle
questions, and arguments: nor indicted with Rhetorical and eloquent style, as
those commonly be, which are propounded and set forth to the world, rather for
boasting, and vainglory sake, then for any desire to edify, and to do
others good. This book is plain, The profit of this book.
and without any great gayness, but yet so full of good, necessary, and
wholesome instructions, that whosoever reads, and ma^keth it with a right
disposed mind, and willing to practice it, without respect to any other thing,
then God, the reformation of his life, and the salvation of his own soul,
(which is the only mark that christians must level at) he may reap
singular profit thereby.

Good books as ladders to climb up to heaven.
And undoubtedly it may well be said, that unto true christians, good and holy
books are as ladders to climb up to heaven: as sparks to kindle the heat of
the spirit, when it is quenched, or waxed cold in them, and as proppes to stay
up their faith, that it may increase.

Praying therefore your worships, to accept of my dutiful good will, and to
pardon my boldness, I cease to add any further thing: beseeching God of his
endless mercy for his Christ's sake, to strengthen you still in that good and
happy course of his word, and all other good learning: to furnish you all
abundantly, with all spiritual and heavenly knowledge, to the careful
practizing of the same, in the fruits of your most holy and blessed callings,
to the advancement of the glory of our God, and to your own everlasting
comfort in Christ Jesus. So be it.

Your worships in all Christian dutifulness, most willing. R. C.

A GODLY FORM OF Household Government, carefully to be practiced of all
Christian Householders.
A Householde is as it were a little common wealth, by the good government
whereof, Gods glory may be advanced, the common wealth which stands of
several families, benefited, and all that live in that family may receive much
comfort and commodity.

But this government of a family is not very common in the world, The rule of
good government is wisdom. Prou. 24.3.4.
for it is not a thing that men can stumble on by chance, but wisdom must
lead us unto it. Though wisdom (says Solomon) is an house builded, and with
understanding it is established* and by knowledge shall the Chambers thereof
be filled with all precious pleasant riches: that is, shall obtain all kind
of blessings. See also Pro. 28.2. by which two places it is manifest, that such
families as are not ordered by hap-hazard, or as it falls, but by Wisdom,
Not carnal wisdom.
Discretion, and Counsel, do prosper in inward and outward goods, and endure
long. When we speak of Wisdom, we do not mean that this government can be
in all points executed by natural reason and Wisdom: for man's wisdom
reaches but unto one point, and that the least of that, which
familie-gouernment tends unto.

But the Wisdom that we speak of is not natural, but fetched from the
fountain of all wisdom, But learned out of the word.
GOD himself, who by his word shines unto us pure light to walk by, not in
the Church alone, nor in the public society of men only, but even within the
secret of our own walls, and toward such as be abiding under the same roof.
And if we desire to walk with God, as Enoch did, we must set up this light
for our selves to live by at home: Genesis 5.24. Psalm. 119.3.
For then we do no iniquity, when we walk in his way. Where no wisdom is
used in governing families, Wisdom is great wealth. Without wisdom
whatsoever a man takes in hand, turns to his own hurt.
there al goes to wrack, and there many enormities are to be found, as woeful
breaches between man and wife, gracelesnesse and unthriftiness of children,
lewdness of servants, and foul scapes. And where carnal policy rules, and
not the wisdom which is from above, there all that is done tends to the
ease, pleasure, and profit of this life, which is the end and felicity of a
brute beast, and not of a man.

Now that there is a good kind of governing of a family, which they who follow
wisely, may be said to govern well, appears out of the first Epistle to
Timothy 3. verse. 4, 5. One that guides his own house well, etc. and after,
He that knows not to govern his own house. etc. Psalm. 101.2.
Whereby it is evident, that there is a way or ordering the family aright, I^
is out of doubt that the wise and skillful government of a house is found out
by prudence, is defended by Science, and conserved by experience.
and there is a misgouerning of it.

To set down this good Government exactly, is a hard matter. Here only we
will note some things which do appertain unto that government which we speak
of. And to do it more orderly to the better understanding, we must consider,
that (as may also be gathered out of that place of Timothy) that there are two
sorts in every perfect family.

1 The Governors. Whereof a family consists.
2 Those that must be ruled.
And these two sorts have special duties belonging to the^, the one sort
toward the other. In the careful performance whereof, from the one to the
other, consists the good government of a family.

The Governors of a family, be such as have authority in the family by Gods
ordinance, The first sort are such as have authority in the family.
as the father and mother, master and mistress.

To whom, as God has given authority over their Children and servants, Who
must use their authority. If the governor be charged with weighty affairs,
he may appoint one to govern his house, as Abraham and Putiphat did. Genesis 24
2. and Genesis 59.4.
so he would have them to use it to the wise government of them, not only for
their own private profit, credit, or pleasure, but also for the good of those
whom they are to govern: for by a wise government, much good comes to the
parties governed. If masters then or parents do not govern, but let servants
and children do as they list, they do not only disobey God, and disadvantage
themselves, but also hurt those whom they should rule: for when any have such
liberty to do as they list, it makes them grow out of order, to the provoking
of Gods displeasure, and curse against themselves, whereas if they had been
held in by the bridle of Government, they might be brought to walk, so as
the blessing of God should follow them in their courses.

A property of good government. 1. Timo. 3.4.
All government of a family must be in comeliness or decency, that is, it
must be such as is meet and convenient both for the governor, and for the
person governed. And therefore it is impossible for a man to understand to
govern the common wealth, that does not know to rule his own house, or order
his own person, so that he that knows not to govern, deserves not to
reign.

Lordlinesse is unmeet in a householde government, and yet familiarity with
such as are under government, breeds contempt. Again for the persons
governed, all in the family are not to be governed alike.

There is one rule to govern the wife by, another for children, another for
servants. One rule for young ones, another for old folks.

The government of a family tends unto two things especially. First, The
marks that family government aymeth at.
christian holiness, and secondly the things of this life. By the first God
is glorified, by the second, this present life is sustained, in such sort as
God sees good for us.

Howsoever, where humane policy is the rule of household Government, there
men only have an eye to the things of this life: yet they which fetch their
wisdom to rule by out of the word, shall understand, that their government
must not only be civil, but righteous also: that is, they must seek to have
Holiness found in their habitation, whereby God may be glorified, as well as
riches, whereby they may be comforted. This has been the course of holy men in
former ages.

Abraham flitted often from place to place, Genesis 12, 78. and 13.18. and 1^.33
and 22.9.
yet he built an Altar wheresoever he became, yea, and trained up his family
in the fear of God. He did not seek excuse in his unsettled estate, to let
pass the care of holiness. Job. 1.5.
Holy Job was not contented to worship God himself alone, but sanctified his
sons, that is, prepared them to worship God with him. Jacob at his return
from Padam-Aram, purged his family, Iosu. 24.15. Hest. 4.16. Prou. 31.26. etc.
and set up Gods worship there, Joshua says, though others should forsake the
Lord, yet he and his family would cleave unto him, and serve him. The
virtuous woman opens her mouth in wisdom, and teaches mercy unto her
servants. Many of the faithful, when they themselves believed in Christ,
labored to bring their families to the faith also. Act. 10. and 16.14.15^ Ephe.
6.4.
Parents also are commanded to bring up their Children in the instruction and
information of the Lord. By all which places it is evident, that Religion must
be stirring in Christian families, and that good government looks to bring
godly behavior into families, as well as thrift and good husbandry.

For want of this care, many parents leave their children fair faces and foul
minds proper bodies, and deformed souls: full coffers, and empty hearts, for
want of this, God may dwell in Churches if he will, but he has no abode
allowed him in private families: for will God be where he may not rule, but
must be an underling and stand and look on* when profit and pleasure shall be
served, and set aloft? yet the Spirit of God says, that God will come and
dwell with them that love him, and keep his commandments. Where therefore
Holiness is not sought for in families, 1. Ion. 3.24, and 4, 12, 13.
there God has no friends, nor lovers, nor walkers with him, howsoever they
will sometime come visit him in the Church.

Besides, the ill success that such walkers have, who make their houses
temples to Mammon and riches, should teach us to have a principal respect to
God in Christianity, Math 6, 24.
ruling our houses. Many thrive not, but put that which they get in a
bottomless bag. For God who has none or the lowest regard in their courses,
and household affairs, Hag. 1, 6.
withholdeth his blessings from them: and then in vain do men rise early, and
go late to bed, and eat the bread of carfulness. Others thrive, Psalm. 127.2
but it is a woeful thrift, that serves to harden the heart, and to bewitch ye
soul with love and liking of this world. Yet this is Gods just judgment upon
many, because they will needs serve their own commodity chiefly at home,
the Lord giving them up to themselves, they never serve him but coldly and for
custom sake at the Church, and God accepts no more of their worship they do
there, then they do love and like of his government in their houses.

The governors of families, The sorts of governors. Householders or
housekeepers are persons authorized over their house holds and charges
if (as it is in marriage) there be more then one, upon whom the charge of
government lies, though unequally, are, first the Chief governor, which is
the Husband, secondly a fellow helper, which is the Wife.

These both do owe duties to their family, and duty one to another.

The duties they owe to their family, both concerning godliness, and the
things of this life, The duty of the husband touching holiness, which he must
perform to them.

1 To see that tehy have the word ordinarily, the want whereof, is the greatest
plague that can be.


belong either to the husband especially, or to the wife especially. The duties
that belong to the husband touching holiness, are such as either he must 1.
Perform to them of his family. 2. Or require of them.


The duties which he must perform to them, are, first touching the public
ministry of the word, to provide that they may live under an ordinary
ministry of the word, or else to take order, that always upon the Sabbath,
and at other times when it may be, they resort to such places, where they may
have the word ministered unto them: Amos 8.11. Math. 9.36.37. Esa. 32, 1, 2, 3,
4 Romans 10, 14. Iam. 1, 86, 19, 21.
for else how shall they be brought into the sheepfolde of God (from which
naturally they go astray) but by hearing the voice of the chief shepherd,
speaking unto them by those whom he sends? how shall they believe, and so be
begotten again by the seed of the word, 1 Pet. 2, 2, Haba. 21. verse. Ephe. 4,
11, 12.
except they hear such as God sends for the begetting of men unto him? how
shall they be reconciled unto God, but by hearing his messengers, Iam. 1, 21.
into whose mouths he has put the word of reconciliation? how shall they
grow in faith, and increase in grace, but by receiving with meekness the
ingrafted word, which is able to save their souls.

Seeing then the word preached, is the means to beget men to a new life, and
to nourish them in it: a great duty lies upon the governors of families, to
provide by some means that they may have it. For where the word is not
preached, there the Lords Sabbath cannot be hallowed as it ought.

Now the Lord would not only have Masters of families to keep holy the
sabbath themselves, in all the parts of his worship, public and private, All
superiors ought to be careful that their inferiors do keep holy that day,
as well as themselves,
but also that every one should in his several place and room, carefully
take order, that so many as be committed to his charge, should sanctify the
Lords day as well as himself: which though it be true in all other
commandments, (namely that whatsoever we are bound to do our selves, we must
be means to further other in doing the same, because the love of God and of
our neighbor, spreads it self over all the commandments: and therefore
though it be not expressed, it is necessarily understood, yet in the fourth
commandment, it is so much the more required, because besides the analogy and
proportion between it and the other commandments which does enforce it, the
very words themselves do bind us thereunto. For when it is said, Thou and thy
son, and thy daughter, thy man servant, and thy maid, though it speaks by
name only of resting upon the Sabbath, yet because the end of that is, that
the day might be sanctified, look how many reasons there be to bind the
inferiors to rest, and the superiors to provide that they do so indeed, so
many are there to compel them to sanctify the day in their own persons, and
in so many as belong unto them. Therefore when first of all it is generally
said in this fourth commandment, Deuteronomy. 5.12.14.15.
Remember the Sabbath day, that thou keep it holy: and afterward, The
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord the God: that is, which must be
dedicated unto his service, and in the end you must therefore rest, that you
might serve him in it as he requires, and then names the several parties
that should rest: his meaning is, to declare the right end of their resting,
and so speaking by name to the governors, saying: Thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy man servant, and the maid, the stranger that is within thy
gates, to show unto them, that it is not sufficient for them to look, that
they under their government should rest; unless they sanctify the day of rest
also, which they must be so much careful of, by how much the sanctification of
the day is greater, then the ceasing to work upon it, as the end whereunto
this is but referred: and therefore if it be a sin in them at any time, not
to have a sufficient regard unto them, that they do not work, then it must
needs be a greater sin, if that through their negligence they deo not
sanctify and keep holy this day of rest.

So that here the Lord God requires, that in all places there should be such
good laws and others publicly in the commonwealth, They ought not to leave
it to their discretion as a thing indifferent, but to compel them thereunto.
and privately in men's houses established, and diligently executed, as whereby
not only the rulers, but also all in subjection, should be compelled to
sanctify the Lords day, and that they should be sure they do it indeed. And
as he must not leave it indifferent to them, to choose whether they will work
or rest, and so think it sufficient that they do not lay any work upon them,
so it is not enough yt they hinder them, not from serving God upon that day,
unless they procure all the means unto them, whereby God might be worshipped
of them, and see that they worship God in them, as well as themselves. Therefore
the Masters of families must provide as much as lies in them, that the word
be publicly preached where they dwell, not for themselves alone, but for their
children and servants sake, that they might keep holy the day together with
them: and they must not only come themselves to the place of common prayer and
divine service, but bring these also with them, and so spend the rest of the
day in all private godly exercises themselves, and cause others to do so also.

And here, least this might seem too heavy unto us, and that it might not be
grievous to take so great a charge upon us, we must remember, that as we have
great help by our inferiors in many things, so the Lord would have us to
help them in the chief and principal: and as he has made the^ our servants,
so we should make them his servants: and when they have served us six days, we
might cause them to serve him upon the seventh: and as the Lord has preferred
us above them with their service, so he would humble us with this charge and
care over them, or rather exalt us, in that he would have us to be as it were
the overseers of his work, and not only serve him our selves, but also see
his service done by others, committed to our charge: which if we do not,
wherein shall the Christian governors of households, differ from the infidels
and heathen, and what greater thing shall we do for our servants, then they?
Nay, what shall we do more for them, then for the bruit beasts and cattle
that work under us, to whom we give rest and ease from labor upon the Sabbath,
if we cause them not to sanctify the day of rest, in which they shall differ
from all other, not only beasts, but men.

Deuteronomy. 11, 20. So have the servants of God done in times past in their several
families.
And this is the meaning of that Law which Moses gave to the Israelites,
Commanding them to write the word of God upon the posts of their houses, and
upon their gates. Whereby all under government, were taught what should be
required of them so long as they lived in those houses, namely, to serve God:
and all governors were taught, what especially to look after in all them that
went in and out of their gates, and lived under the roof of their houses, even
to serve the Lord in all parts of his worship, for which end he has given
them such authority over them. According to which commandment, the worthy
Captain of Gods people Iehoshuah, made this protestation before all the Elders
of Israel, a little before his death, exhorting them to do the like: Josh.
24.15.
I and mine house will serve the Lord, promising not only for himself, but
for all his, which though it was too hard to do, yet because he knew how many
means the Lord had given him to bring it to pass, which also God would bless
(as all godly exhortations, admonitions, and chastisements, whereby if they did
not profit, he had authority to thrust them out of his house, and to rid
himself of them) all which he was purposed to put in practice: therefore he
was bold thus to speak of himself, thereby showing what all men should
propound to themselves, and may attain unto. The like whereof David speaks
of him self, in that worthy Psalm. 101. which is left as a pattern for all
Christian governors to rule by, wherein he shows, how he would rule not
only himself, but his household, nay the whole Kingdom, by having an eye to
the^ that were good, to reward them: and to them that were bad, to punish them,
that so not only himself, but all his, might serve the Lord. After the same
manner in the time of the Captivity, when the noble Queen Hester willed all
the dispersed Jews to keep holy three days together, in fasting and prayer,
that so they might entreat the Lord, for that final destruction and utter
rasing of them out, which Haman the cursed Amalekite and sworn enemy of Gods
people, had determined to bring upon them speedily, that it (we say) might be
prevented in time: she said, That she and her maids would do the like. Hest.
4.16. Whereby no doubt, she insinuated unto them, that in every Household, her
meaning was, that it should be thoroughly kept on all sides, not only the
Rulers, and some few, but all others, even unto the Maid-seruants.

Now this is that, to wit, that the Sabbath, and the day of Fast, are both of
one nature, and it is that which the word does sufficiently bear witness
unto: therefore if this has been the practice of the Church, upon that day to
fast, not only of the chief alone, but with their families: then must we
needs be persuaded, that upon the Lords day, we ought our selves, and our
households to serve the Lord, and to say with Joshua, I and mine house will serve
the Lord* and with Ester, J and my servants will do the like. And how could
that have been verified of the religious Captain Cornelius, Act. 10.2.
which is written of him, that he was a devout man, and one that feared God
with all his household? Unless he had not only frequented the common
assemblies upon the Sabbath days, but had also acquainted his servants
therewith. Therefore as the Lord himself speaks of Abraham, who is the
father of all believers, I know that he will command his sons, Genesis 18.19.
and his household after him: that they keep the way of the Lord, to do
rightcousnesse and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that he
has spoken unto him. So it must be practiced of all them, that will be the
children of this faithful Abraham, and enjoy the same promises, that he and
his posterity did, even that they cause their children and their servants, to
keep holy the Sabbath, wherein consists the true worship of the Lord, that
so they might walk in that way, which has the promises of this life, and the
life to come.

So then by all this, it may most evidently appear, both by the words of the
Commandment, and by the practice of the best men in the old and new
Testament, that this duty is laid upon all householders, diligently to ouersee
the ways of their families, that they serve God, as in all other duties, so
especially in sanctifying the Sabbath, as they will answer to the contrary at
their peril, to him that has put them in authority, and as they will give an
account for their souls, which otherwise might perish through their default.

But in our time, it is for the most part, wholly neglected.
Which though it be so severely enjoined to all men, and under so great a pain
laid upon the^, yet it is so generally neglected of the greatest part, that we
may rather complain of it justly with grief, then have any hope of the
speedy reformation of it: for besides that, a great many have no care to
sanctify the day themselves, and therefore cannot with any conscience require
it of their servants and children, but either set them to work, or to play,
and to do any thing upon that day, saving that which they should, and do
encourage them thereunto, by their own ill example and words. There be others
also, who though they seem to have some care to keep holy the day themselves,
(and have in deed) yet either through ignorance, or negligence, do not once
look to their household, whether they come to Church or no, and sit there
attentively, and continue there, with profit to the ending, nor how they spend
the rest of the day: but being demanded where their servants were, how chance
they came not to Church, etc. they answer securely, (and as they think
sufficiently) as though it were a thing merely impertinent unto them, that
they cannot tell, they do not hinder them from the Church, they may come if
they will, they are of age to look to themselves, and they are past boys now,
and I cannot tell what, etc.

But they must consider besides, that which has bin already spoken,
concerning this matter, that they do too foolishly, and grossly imagine to stop
(as it were) the mouth of the Lord, with that simple answer in his business,
which they will not receive at their servants hands in their own. For in the
six days, when their servants are in their own business, they will not let
them come and go at their own pleasure, and content themselves with a bare
imagination, that they be at their works, but will be sure of it, and
therefore set them to it, look upon them in the doing of it, and call them to
an account for it, which if it be well done in themselves, because they know
otherwise they will be negligent, how must it not needs then be a great
unkindness, and unthankfulness in them unto God, that upon this day (which is but
one among seven) his service should be so slenderly looked unto, that there is
no such diligence used toward their servants, that they might perform it?

And how must it not needs be a great injury to their servants (who are
naturally, and for the most part more negligent and careless in Gods service, by
reason of their corruption, then they can be in the service of men) to be
deprived of that benefit of their governors (which is the chiefest, and for
which cause especially they are committed to their government) namely, to be
furthered by them in the service of God: but use them more like beasts then
men, even that they might be serviceable unto them, and then care not whether
they serve God or the devil.

We know that servants look to be preferred by their masters, (and so there is
good reason, when they have served them faithfully) but what kind of reward
is this; that when they have bestowed some earthly benefit upon the^, (by
having no care to make them serve the Lord, and sanctify his Sabboths) do in
the end not only make them lose the everlasting reward, but preserve them to
eternal destruction.

Especially in great households, where there are many servants.
Moreover, there are a company of idle Seruing-men, who being brought up idely
all the six days, and in them having nothing at all to do, and are never
almost looked after upon the seventh day, are as idle, and as little regarded,
as upon the other: and as they never almost do any good days work to their
masters (for they have nothing to do) so much less do they spend any Sabbath
in the Lords service, but they especially are left to go and come at their will.

Others that have any office of great charge and attendance (as the Cooks,
Butlers, and such like, in great houses) seldom or never come to the Church,
and that but by pieces, either when half is done, or else they are ready to
depart before half be ended, and so both hinder the Lord from that service,
which he should have by them, and them from that blessing which they should
inherit this way, and both cause the name of God to be ill spoken of, and pull
upon themselves and them, that curse which belongs to the continual
polluting of the Sabbath. And how can they look, that that service, and that
meat and drink should do them good, which is thus prepared, and bought (as
it were) with the continual danger of the souls of their servants, besides
the dishonor of the name of God?

When David had inconsideratly desired to drink of the water of Bethleem,
three mighty men brake into the host of the Philistines, and drew water, and
brought it to him, but he would not drink thereof, but powered it for an
offering to the Lord, and said: 2. Sam. 23.15.16.
Oh Lord be it far from me, that I should do thus: is not this the blood of
the men that went in ieopardie of their lives? How much less then ought men to
eat and drink that, for which their servants do venture the lives of their
souls? And besides, if we justly find fault with them, who do never or
seldom preach to the people committed to their charge, and so cause their
souls to starve, and die eternally: how can they be blameles, who seldom or
never bring their servants to the preaching of the word? And must they not
needs be culpable of the same judgment before God, seeing it is all one with
the servants, whether they live in the places where the word of God is not
preached at all: or if it be, yet they come not unto it.



And we know (where there is a great care to serve and please God by prayer)
the Lord will give to them such wisdom, that they shall be able to redeem,
if not the whole, yet at least a great part of the day, which otherwise will be
misspent: namely, by letting pass many needelesse things, preparing so much
before, as conveniently may be, rising so much the more early in the morning,
and by the interchangeable help of other servants: especially when they will
for these causes be contented with so much the less, though not in quantity,
(for the relief of others) yet less exquisite and curious dressing, which
especially takes up the time: and so we are sure, and they that will try it
in the fear of God, and a care to serve him, and in a love to the souls of
their brethren, shall find it to be true by experience, yt many might keep
holy the Sabbath, which do not now at all: others might keep it more the^ they
do. Which if yet it be thought impossible (because we gonot about to practice
it) let us but observe ye which we shall see done in the house, when the servant
is very desirous to go to a Fair, and the master is as willing to let him go,
you would wonder to see how things shall be dispatched up suddenly, and in good
order, they shall be absent many hours, and yet not greatly missed, if any
thing be otherwise then is usual, it is borne with, because it is a day of
making provision for themselves, and that day is not every day. So the^, if the
masters were persuaded of the Lords day, as they ought to be, even that it is
the time of making provision for the soul, and were as careful for the souls
of their servants, as they are for their bodies, and did esteem it more for
their worship and credit, that their servants were religious, then that they
were costly, and well set out in apparel, they would be better contented to
spare the^, during the time of that Market, where they may buy without money,
all the graces of Gods spirit, and the riches of the Kingdom of heaven:
whereby they should not onley save their own souls, but be made more fit
to do duties to their masters of conscience.

The governors of families should take order that their whole household might
come to Church together.
Therefore (to end this point) it is the duty of all household governors, to
cause the whole family to be in a readiness to attend upon them, to and fro the
Church, and that it be not left at every man's discretion, to come when he will,
but that they should go together. And indeed this has been the orderly
coming of Gods people in times past, to the place of his worship, that they
have not come scattered and alone, but many together, and by companies; whereof
the Prophet speaks, When J remembered these things, Psalm. 42.4.
I powered out my very heart, because I had gone with the multitude, and led
them into the house of God, with the voice of singing, and praise, as a
multitude that keeps a feast. In which place, the man of God complaining,
that he was banished from the holy assemblies, says, that his grief was
increased by remembering his former estate, when he used to go with a great
company to the Temple, even as to a feast: whereby he declares what was the
manner of their going, even as men go to a market, or to a feast, not only
with joy, but also by companies, and so many of one house as go, will go
together: so they did not only go to the house of God cheerfully, but many
of them together, even as to the market, and feast of their souls. By which
practice of theirs, as the doing of many are condemned, so it appears, that
the men of our time, are led by another spirit, then they were, and are
otherwise persuaded of the worship and place they go unto: for all the people,
nay, the several households come not together, but scattered, and one dropping
after another, in a confused manner.

First, comes the man, then a quarter of an hour after, his wife, and after
her, we cannot tell how long, especially the maid servants, who must needs be
as long after her, as the men-seruantes are after him. Whereby it comes to
pass, that either half the service of God is done, before all be met, or else
if the Minister tarry till there be a sufficient congregation, the first
comers may be weary, and sometimes cold, with tarrying, before the other
shall be warm in their seats.

Now if it be demanded of the masters, why they alone make such haste, and
leave all the rest behind them; and they answer, truly, because the time is
come, wherein usually public prayer begins: can they be persuaded, that it
is time for themselves to come (as it is indeed) and yet no time for the rest
to come with him? Has he no longer time to tarry, and have they time to
tarry so long after him? as though there were one Law for him, and another for
them: or rather, that the same Law of the Sabbath, which moves him of
conscience to do that which he does, did not as forcibly bind them all, as
himself: nay, did not bind him to look to them, that they should keep holy
the day, as well as himself: which if he grant to be true, and yet is not
able to bring it to pass (where the Lord has given him so great authority
for his own sake) partly through the frowardness of his wife, and partly
through the obstinacy of the rest in the family, his case is to be pitied,
and he is rather to be governed, then to govern, and he might do well, to set
up one of them in his steed, 1. Cor. 6.4.
seeing he does suffer himself wilfully so to be abused, and is contented to
be ouerruled by them in the chiefest thing.

Therefore that he might bring this matter happily to pass, as he must go
before them by his own example, and be ready be times, even first of all, so
he must earnestly call upon them for this duty, and exhort them unto it, and
the slower that they are, and the more they draw back. the more forward must
he be, and by his practice and words, draw them forwards also: for this is that
readiness which David observed in the people of his time: I rejoiced when they
said unto me, Psalm. 122.1.
we will go into the house of the Lord, or let us go into the house of the
Lord: (for they are words of exhorting, and encouraging one another
thereunto:) Even as the Prophet Esaias also foretells, that this shall be the
zeal of Gods people, in the time of the Gospel, that they shall go together to
serve God, and therefore call upon one another for the same purpose, saying: It
shall be in the last days, Esaias. 2.2, 3.
that the Mountain of the house of the Lord, shall be prepared in the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it, and many people shall go and say: Come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob.

And truly this want of zeal in us, to Gods worship, and love to the
salvation of our brethren, (bewraying it self, in the neglect of this duty,
to call upon one another) is the cause of this slownesse. For the husband he
going first out of the doors, says to his wife, make haste, and come as soon
as you can: she coming at her leisure, gives the same charge to her servants:
dispatch, and tarry not long behind; but here is no saying: Come let us go,
let us go together, and if it be once said, it is not pursued, that it might
be performed.

In going to market, and to a feast, what earnest calling upon will there be of
one another, and it would seem strange, to behold the household go divided,
and it were a thing that would much be marked, and every one that knew us, and
whither we were going, it should be the first question they would ask us: how
chances this, that you come alone? where is your husband, your wife, or your
children? why come you not together? So no doubt, the dispersed and broken
coming together of households to the Church, is a thing greatly observed of
the Lord God, and of his Angels, which are present at their assemblies: 1.
Cor. 11.10.
and it is that which grieueth the rest of the Church, and as soon as they see
one come in alone, they are ready with grief, to ask, where are the rest?
what means this party to come alone? Therefore let all governors be
persuaded, that it is their bounden duty, thus to look to their families, and
to be sure that they sanctify the Lords day, as well as themselves, and
therefore that they not only thus bring them to the public ministry, but
also look unto them, that they spend the rest of the day, in all holy
exercises, so much as may be: examining them, in that which they have heard,
and causing them to confer about it themselves, and to appoint some to read
the scripture unto them, and all of them to sing Psalms, and generally,
whatsoever you have seen before, you ought to do your selves, to call upon
them for the same, and to take such order, that you be sure they do it. And let
them be sorry, that they have neglected this duty so long heretofore, and
thereby have charged so many sins of their household upon themselves: and now
at the last, in Gods holy fear, let the^ begin to put this in practice, least
they do further provoke the most patient Lord, to their endless destruction.
And, though it be a thing so rare in the world, as it is, and men altogether so
unacquainted with it, as they be, nay, so loathsome and tedious to flesh and
blood, that they are afraid once to begin with it: yet let the bare
commandment of God prevail more with us, to take in hand, and to continue in
it, then all that can be said or thought against it, should weigh with us,
either to keep us from it, at the first, or afterward, The want of this care
in households, is the cause of much wickedness, rebellion, and disorder in
their families.
cause us to give it over. And, that all men might do it so much the rather,
let them be assured that the want of this especially, is the cause of so many
wicked and rebellious children, untrusty and disobedient servants, nay,
unfaithful and unkind wives every where: even for that their husbands, their
fathers, and their masters, do not call upon them to serve God, and see them
sanctify the Sabbath. It is a common and just complaint in all places, in the
mouth of every man, that servants and children will not be ruled, that they
cannot tell where to find a good servant, they know not whom to trust, but
they see not the greatest cause of it to be in themselves, and so go not about
to remedy it: for whiles they labor not to make their children the sons and
daughters of God by adoption, and to bring their servants within the household
of God, that they might be his servants by grace, and to make their wives the
chaste spouses of Jesus Christ, and so al of the^ to serve him, the lord justly
punishes the^, that they are disobedient unto the^. For how can they do
duties unto men, if they have not learned to do duties unto God, and so of
conscience for Gods sake to do duties unto men? Nay, must not the Lord needs
punish them with disobedience against themselves, that by their own
experience, they might know how grievous the neglect of his service is unto
himself, when he justly measures out unto them, with the same measure, that
they have met unto him before.

1. Tim. 4.8.
nay rather they must be assuredly persuaded, That godliness has the promises
of this life, Matt. 6.33.
as well as of the life to come, and if we first seek the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness, in our selves and others, that all needful things should be
cast unto us. Even as it is sai^ of Abraham, Genesis 18.19.
I know that he will command his sons and his household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord
may bring upon Abraham, that he has spoken unto him. So that thus to do, is
the very high way, not to keep us from, but to bring us unto the performance
of all the promises, if we give credit unto him; who as he only makes them in
the beginning of mere mercy, so must he only accomplish them in the end, by
his constant verity and truth. We confess indeed, if he be an ill servant,
this is the readiest way to be rid of him, whose room is better then his
company: for he thinks himself to be in a prison, nay, in hell all the
while, but in the end he shall perceive, that he is gone from the way to
Heaven, unto hell, if the Lord be not more merciful unto him: and why should
we be loath to depart from the service of them, that have no care to serve God?
or can we look that they should do any faithful service unto us, that are so
unfaithful in the service of God?

But as concerning the rest, if any be religious, this is the best mean to
retain and keep them: if they be but indifferent, this may win them: if
they be falling away, this may recover them: To have such good orders in our
houses, is not the next way to drive away our servants from us.
for what shall we think of all the godly fathers in times past? that when
they vowed diligently to look to their households, that they should serve God
with them, and did constantly perform it, that then they had no servants at
all? Was so great a man as Iehosua, without servants, when he promised before
so many witnesses, that he and his house would serve the Lord? Was David left
alone, and constrained to do all himself? when as being a mighty King, he
bound himself unto it, by that song which he made for the same purpose,
wherein he says. Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they
may dwell with me, Psalm. 101.6, 7.
he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me: there shall no deceitful
person dwell in mine house: he that tells lies shall not remain in my sight.
Had not Abraham a great household, Genesis 14.14.
when he was able of the sudden to carry forth with him, of the^ that were
borne and brought up in his house, three hundred and eighteen men in armor,
to rescue his brother Lot? Of whom notwithstanding, it is said: that he would
teach his household the way of the Lord. As it appears he did indeed, when by
his only persuasion at the word of God, ^hap. 18.12.
All the males were contented to be circumcised, and to receive that Sacrament,
unknown before, and painful, and also ignominious to the flesh, if they had
looked only to the outward sign: and must not that worthy Captain of an
hundred Italia^ soldiers, needs have a greater family the^ many of these that
cavil at this doctrine, of whom the spirit of truth reports, That he
feared God, Act. 10.2.
and all his household.

servants were more plentiful? Or must we needs confess, as the truth is
indeed,

Secondly, he must set an order in his house for the service of God, to wit,
that morning and evening, before meals, and after meals, prayers and thanks
may be made unto God, and so he acknowledged to be the author, not only of
all spiritual graces, that belong to a better life: but also of al temporal
blessings that belong to this life: for seeing that it is Gods good hand over
us, that does defend us and all our family in the night, from outward dangers,
and gives us freedom from fears, and terrors, and from Satan's rage, and
also gives us rest and comfortable sleep for the refreshing of our frail
bodies, is it not meet we should beg it at his hand by prayer, before we
prepare our selves to rest, and praise him for it, when we rise from it?
Again, seeing that every day we are subject to innumerable dangers, which we
know not of, and both wisdom and strength to follow good and honest callinges,
and also the blessing upon our labors to make us prosper by them, are from God
alone should we not begin the day with suit unto God for his gracious
protection, and for his merciful blessing of us? 1. Tim. 4.5.
And seeing meats and drinks are sanctified unto us on Gods part by the
word, and on ours by prayer, doubtless though God has by his word sanctified
them, they are unholy unto us, when we do not for our part sanctify them by
faithful prayer and thanksgiving. And this was David's practice. Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noonetide, will I pray and make a noise, and he
will hear my voice. If any say it is sufficient for the governor to charge
every one in his family to do it privately by himself: so might the Prince say,
it is enough to do as Darius did, to charge every one in all his dominions,
Dan. 6.26.
to worship no God, but Daniels God. Yet godly Princes thought it their duty,
to set up the worship of God in their dominions, and to take order that God
might be worshipped publicly and jointly, of al in their land. So did Job for
his household, Job. 1.5, 6
not only bid his children pray to God by themselves, but he appointed set
times of praying together, and sacrificing* and commanded his children to come
prepared thereunto. Again, if the master lay the matter upon the consciences
of such as be of his family, then if they be negligent, God shall have no
honor and worship in that family.

But we read of Abraham, that wheresoever he became, he built an altar to God,
Genesis 12.7.8. and 13.8. and 21.33. and 22.9.
where God should be worshipped jointly of his family. If God should measure
out his goodness to thee, as thou measurest honor and glory to him, in what a
case were thou? He does give a charge to his Angels to keep thee, he
comma^deth the earth to allow thee meat, for thy sustenance, but his
commandment is an effectual word, that makes them to do the thing, that he
charge them withal. Will thou now only bid thy servant or son, to serve
and honor God, and not see that he do it, and help him in it? Then thou do
not measure out unto God, as thou would have him measure to thee.

This duty then belongs to a christian head of a family, to worship God
with all his family, and to take order, that when he shall be absent, upon
necessary occasion, it may be done reverently and duly, by some one in his
family, that by reason of wit and age, may be meet for it. The neglect of this
duty, lets into families, many grievous enormities, and outward miseries,
while God in his justice, refuses to bless such, as by their carelessness in
serving of him, do show, that they take not him to be the author of all
welfare to soul or body, but think to do well enough without him, or else
think to have their turns served without requesting.

The third duty, Private instructing.
which the chief governor must perform to all in his family, is private
instruction, and dealing with the^ in matters of religion, for the building of
them up in true faith, and for the inuring and bringing of them to a conscience
toward God, that they may not only know, and profess religion, but also
feel and show the power of religion in their lives. This duty has these
specials belonging to it: First, a familiar and plain opening unto them, the
principles of religion, after the manner of a Catechism. This duty the holy
Ghost lays upon parents. Ephe. 6.4. Train them up in doctrine and holy
precepts, drawn out of the word. The like was commanded to parents in the old
law: Let these words, Due. 6.6, 7, 8, 9
which I command thee this day, be in thine heart, and whet them upon thy
children, and speak of them when thou sit in thy house, when thou walk
in the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, etc. So that it is
not enough to bring thy children to be catechized at the Church, but thou must
labor with them at home after a more plain and easier manner of instruction,
that so they may the better profit by the public teaching. Look Pro. 22.6.
Thou even by breeding thy children, have helped them into corruption, and a
damnable estate: how ought thou then, by all holy care and pains taken with
them, in teaching them the knowledge of God in Christ, help them out of it,
that they may not be firebrands of hell? And for servants, seeing they spend
their strength, and weary out their bodies, and bestow their days and years
in seeking their profit and ease: ought not thou then to seek the salvation
of their souls? Solomon says, the just man has regard to his beast, much
more should thou have regard to thy servant, who is made according to the
image of God with thee, and is redeemed with as dear a price, as thou art. And
thy care for him, should not stretch to his body alone, but especially to his
soul, that seeing his calling will not suffer him to use so many, and so often
means for the good of it, as were requisite, he might herein be helped by
thee.

The second special is, an acquainting them with the Scriptures, by reading
them daily in thy house, Reading the scriptures.
in their hearing, and directing them to mark, and make use of those things
which are plain and easy, according to their capacity. 2. Tim. 3.15.
So Timothy was trained up by his parents in the Scriptures, so hat he knew
them from a child: that is, was made acquainted with them, by reading them, and
being instructed in them, according to his capacity. This shall make them the
fitter to hear and profit by the public ministry. Whereas the neglect of
this duty makes them unable to hear and understand the Preacher, when he
cites examples, or quoteth texts, out of sundry places of scripture. The help
that their family might reap by it, should make them careful, in this
reading of the Scripture.

Thirdly, in looking that they profit by the public ministry of the word
and Sacraments, every one according to their capacity: and this duty
requires, that they should not only look that they do diligently frequent the
preaching of the word, and carefully come to the Sacraments in due time, but
also that they show the^ how, and put them in mind of preparing themselves to
the word and Sacraments, as Job did his sons. Prepare them to hear the word by
considering Gods ordinance, his promise, and their own necessity, etc. by
laying aside al such cares, thoughts and affections, as might hinder them from
a diligent hearing. To the Sacraments prepare them, by considering of Gods
institution, the ministry of his Sacraments, his mercy in Jesus Christ,
their faith, their repentance, and their wants, and so seeking assurance of
grace, of reconciliation, and comfort, to come to the Lords table.

Again, to further their profit, they must diligently examine them, what they
have learned, what use they can put such doctrine, and also help and direct
them, wherein they fail. Thus did our Savior Christ his disciples. Mat.
16.15.16.17.
Besides, they must call upon them, for the practice of that, which they learn
out of the word, that the word grow not to a common matter, of no further
use, but to talk of, upon the Sabbath day.

The fourth special duty, that belongs to instruction, is, that they teach
them how to make use of Gods works, either past, or present, as of examples of
his mercy and goodness, to be encouraged by them, to trust in him: by works of
his justice, to be moved to fear him, and so to sow the seeds of conscience
and religion in them. Thus did Abraham. Genes. 18.19. which care of his, moved
the Lord to reveal his purpose to him, of destroying the Sodomites.

The duties which they are to require of them, concerning godliness, be, to
use the public Ministry carefully: to be diligent and reverent in the
private worship of God: to submit themselves to private instruction of all
sorts and to make their use of it, to the building up of themselves in faith:
and lastly, to practice all holy and christian duties, which being comprised
briefly in the ten Commandments, are more largely laid open, by the public
ministry of the word, and by private Catechizing.

But after what manner must they require these duties? We answer, not only by
telling of them, what they must do, and calling upon them, for the doing of it,
and by gentle admonition, when they be backward, but also by correcting them,
if they shall be negligent and contemptuous in the practice of them.

This correcting is either by Rebuking, or Chastising
them, according to the quality of the fault, and the condition of the party,
that is so to be dealt with.

Leuit. 19.17. 2. Tim. 4.2.
A rebuke, is a pronouncing of some misbehauiour, or known wickedness of any,
with condemning of the same by the word of God, whereby they may have shame,
that others might fear.

Pro. 27.5. and 29.19.
Correction is a sharp thing, and therefore not easily borne of our nature,
which is full of self-love, and through the corruption of nature, it is turned
into an occasion of great frowardnes, sturdines, and naughtines, where it is
not wisely dealt in. Now the better to minister correction, with more hope of
doing good by it, we must consider:

First, the end of correcting.

Secondly, the matters which must be corrected.

Thirdly, the manner of correcting.

1. The end in correcting, must not be to wrecke and revenge thine anger, or
malice, or to revenge thy self for an injury done, nor yet alone ly the
preventing of the like hurt, by the like fault afterward: but in zeal of Gods
glory, who is dishonored by the lewdnes of the offender, and in love to the
party. Thou must seek by wise correction, to reclaim him from such evil, as
brings danger to him, and make him more careful of his duty afterward.
Herein they fail, who in correcting have no respect, but to their own
commodity.

2. For the matters that deserve correction, this is a rule, that there must
be no rebuking, much less chastising, but where there is a fault: for where
any is unjustly corrected, besides the injury, it hurts him, by hardening him
against just correction, for he will think that it is the rash hastines of his
governor, that puts him to smart, and not his own desert.

By fault I mean, not only the committing of that which was forbidden, but
also the omitting of that good which was commanded. But every such fault is
not to be censured with correction: sometime ignorance, or mistaking,
oversight, and desire to please in one thing, makes inferiors to offend in
others. Except there be contempt, or willing negligence, or retchlesse
oversight, a gentle admonition may serve. And indeed, Superiors must take
heed of coming to the greatest remedies of correction too soon, for so they
may soon mar the party by ouer-sharpe dealing, which by a wise proceeding
by degrees, might have been gained. Furthermore, Governors must know yet more
expressly, what to correct. Some never correct, but for their own matters,
never regarding the faults committed against God. But the godly Governor, that
aims at Gods glory, and seeks the Lord, and not himself, he is most
grieved for disorders in his family, that tend to Gods dishonor, and such he
corrects most carefully. And as for defaults of his family, that are against
himself, he looks more to Gods dishonor by them, then to his own hurt or
loss, and in zeal of God is drawn to correct, and not of self-love. He
therefore counts these things worthy of correction, if any delight in the
ignorance of God, be careless to approve himself, as one that wholly depends
on him, loves him, fears him, reuerenceth him, labors to approve al his
ways, before him. If any be given to Idolatry and superstition, and cares
not in every part for the worship of God, to follow his revealed will: or if in
the parts commanded, he appear negligent and cold, or to put them to any
other use, then is commanded: or to be given to images, superstitious
monuments, customs, occasions, or such like: if any dishonor the name of God,
either in the vnreuerent using, or abusing, or perverting, and not using with
that preparation before, feeling at the present time, and fruit after, which is
prescribed, his titles, word, Sacraments, works. And if any profane his
Sabbath, by vain pastimes, and gaming, as Cards, Dice, dancing, etc. going to
plays, or give not himself to the exercises appointed on that day, out of the
word: If any neglect special duties toward their equals, superior, or
inferior in years, gifts, authority; as Magistrates, Ministers, Masters,
Parents, servants, children, or people: If any declare not a conscience to fly
evil, anger, malice, conte^tion, quarelling, fighting, or any hurting of the
person of man, either in soul or body, not being careful to succor the
same, according to his calling: If any be found unchaste, in body, words,
countenance, or gesture; intemperate in diet, in apparel dissolute, not caring
to maintain the contrary holiness in himself and others: If any care not
for the goods of another man, but by falsehood, flattery, and oppression,
diminish the same: If he be negligent in increasing of his own, by honest and
lawful means: If he mispend it, in Cards, Dice, gaming, etc. If any care not
to maintain the good names of others but be given to unnecessary blasing of
other men's infirmities, by lying, slaundering, backbyting, taunting: If any
show himself careless, to restrain the motions and entisements unto sin, and
the lusts of the same: then they shall use the means following, to redress
them.

The manner of correcting, must likewise be looked unto: for to fail in that,
makes correction hurtful oftentimes, but always unavailable. For this point
then, we must know, that correction must be Ministered in Wisdom, Ministered
in Patience fit.


Ephe. 5.15.16.17.
Wisdom is that, by which we observe comeliness in every action: that is to
say, by which we observe what we do, how, in what place, at what time, before
whom: that al things may be done in a convenient place, time and manner.

Wisdom will 1. Find out the right party that committed the fault, that he
that is innocent be not unjustly burdened. 2. Consider of what sort and
nature the fault is. 3. Weigh circumstances of ages, discretion, and occasions,
that moved ye party, and whether it be customarie, or a slip, by oversight. 4.
Look to the mind of the doer, whether negligence, frowardnes, or simplicity,
and want of wisdom, brought him to it.


And according to these things, wisdom will teach a man to measure out
correction, or to be sparing in it. Besides, wisdom will not correct, before
the fault be evident, or that she be able to wind the offender out of all
shifting holes. For when the offender is not thoroughly co^uinced, he shifteth
off the shame of the fault, and of the correction, which is a part of the
purgation, to cure his disease: and besides, he will be bold to open his mouth
against his Ruler, and seek to bring him into hatred, or contempt, with the
rest of the inferiors, for correcting unjustly. Wisdom therefore will wink
at a fault a while, and make as though she saw it not, that she may have a
fitter opportunity to correct: yea toward some of a good nature, wisdom will
show, that she sees a fault: but yet for love of the party, and desire to
have him amend of his own accord, she will pass over the evil. Moreover,
wisdom will never reproach the offender, by reuiling, or tau^ting him with
the fault, but minister correction in love, and desire to have his sore cured,
and his credit salued. For the casting of faults in their teeth, and disgracing
them, especially before others, which is common in the world, makes them lay
off shame of offending, by little and little: whereas, if they saw thee
careful of their credit, they would have more regard to it themselves.

Lastly, wisdom will avoid partiality, and deal with all, in the same
case, after the same manner. Patience is also needful, that through anger, or
hastines, a man do not fight nor chide, Patience is a steadfastness, in
suffering the evils, that come to us by any work, so that they can not
discourage us. Phil. 4.5.
before he has made the fault manifest to the offender, that if it may be,
his conscience may be touched for it. Again, by patience, one must hear what
the offender can say in his defense, and not disdain to hear him, modestly
alleging for himself, and when his defense is made by equity, to allow, or
disallow the same. So did Job, chap. 13. verse. 13. and Balaam did not disdain
to hear the defense of his beast. Numb. 22.30. etc.

This patience also will keep a man from bitterness, which might sooner make
the party angry, then draw him to amendme^t: which thing the Apostle would
have avoided in superiors, Coloss. 2.21. Ephesians. 6.4.9.
toward those that be under them. For want of this, many are at a word and a
blow: many first correct, and then tell the fault: many lay on load, or rail,
and revile, braule, and scolde, without measure.

Lastly, this patience will keep thee from anger, (a needful thing in a
correcter) for he that comes to reform with anger, shall hardly keep a
measure in rebuking, or chastising.

Now for the several kinds of correction, the first is Rebuking, which is a
sharp reproof for a fault committed, measured according to the nature of the
fault: as Jacob, Genesis 30.2. Job 2.10. Our Savior Christ to Peter, Mat. 16.
verse. 23. and to James and John. Luke 9. verse. 55. Elie 1. Sam. 2.23. etc.
rebuked his sons, but not according to the quality of their fault, which
turned to his, and their ruin. The profit of this, wisely done, is declared by
Solomon, Prouer. 23.15. The rod and rebuke, give wisdom: but the child let
alone, shameth his mother.

This reproof may have some threatening of chastisement joined with it, if need
be* to the end to make it sincke the deeper with them. Pro. 19.19. Be thou
very angry when thou pardonest a fault, saying, that thou for sparing him now,
wilt punish him the sorer, if he transgress again. But threatenings must not
be vain words, without effect, but always if amendment follow not, thou
must perform what was threatened, least thou become light and vain in the
offenders eyes.

Chastisement is, when with a sharp rebuke, punishment is also laid upon the
offender, according to discretion.

If any man think fighting unmeet for Christians, or be loath to foil their
hands, least they should get themselves an ill name; let them know, that Gods
ordinance is not a matter of an ill report, but only amongst fools, that know
not what is good and meet. Now, that household chastisement is agreeable to
Gods will, is evident out of the Proverbs, where the wisdom of God does very
often commend it to us, as chap. 13.24. He that spares the rod, hates his
son: but he that loves him chasteneth him betime. Where he requires, that
it be not deferred till it be too late, that is, till the offender be hardened
in ill: but given in time, before he be past recovery. He says it is a fruit
of true and pure love, to correct in due time, and very love in parents and
care of their chidren, must draw them to it.

Thirdly, he says, Parents never knew what true love of children meant, but
embrace fondness, and foolish pity in stead of it, who do spare to correct,
when correction is deserved.

Fourthly, that this fondness and foolish affection, is indeed hatred, and
not love: the reason why it is to be counted hatred, is set down, Prou.
19.18. Chastise thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare him,
to his destruction. Where he plainly says, that fond pitying and sparing of
children, is to work the destruction of them: and is it not a token of great
hatred, to be a means of another destruction? Elsewhere he shows the
necessity of correction, and the good which it does: Pro. 22.15. Foolishnes is
bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall remove it far
from him. As if he should say, much folly and lewdnes is couched in a child's
heart, which if it be not purged, will burst forth into foul enormities, and
therefore a purgation is but needful, and what may that be, but the rod of
correction?

The same is commanded, Pro. 29.17. Correct thy son: where also he shows,
what benefit comes thereby to the parents: He shall give thee rest, yea he
will give pleasures to thy soul: that is, thou shall be free from sorrow,
heaviness, and many troubles, which many parents have with ungracious children:
and on the other side, thou shall have much comfort and delight by them. Great
benefit also comes thereby to the children, as he shows in the 15. verse;
The rod and correction give wisdom. And chap. 23.13.14. whereas the neglect
of it, brings hurt to the child, and to the parents, as follows: A child
set at liberty, makes his mother ashamed. And for servants, the Wiseman does
closely show, how they must be dealt with all, where he says, Pro. 29.21. He
which brings up his servant delicately from his youth, at length will be
deprived of his children. And a little before, verse 19. he says: A servant
will not be chastised with words: though he understand, yet he will not answer,
or regard.

These Scriptures show, that God has put the rod of correction in the hands of
the Governors of the family, by punishment to save them from destruction;
which if the bridle were let loose unto them, they would run unto. Where men
and women are content to go contrary to their own nature, and to undergo ill
reports, to obey the ordinance of God, there God will give a blessing, that is,
a well ordered family, wherein all shall be of good hope.

The wives duty, touching christian holiness.
These be the duties, that the chief of the family owes to them of his
family, within doors, as touching godliness. The wife also, which is a
fellowe-helper, To be a fellow helper, is to yield help to her husband,
especial at home, in all the matters o^ the family. 1. Tim. 5.15. Tit. 2.5.
Genesis 18.67.1.
has some things belonging to her, to further godliness in her family: as
for example: In her self to give example to her Household, of all ready
submission to all good and christian orders, to order her Household affairs so
carefully, that no exercise of religion be hindered, or put out of place, at
such time as they should be done. And in her husbands absence, to see good
orders observed, as he has appointed: to watch over the manners and behavior
of such as be in her house, and to help her husband in spying out evils that
are breeding, that by his wisdom, they be prevented or cured. Solomon says
of the virtuous woman, that she ouerseeth the ways of her household. Pro.
31.27, verse. 26.
And a little before, she opens her mouth with wisdom, and the Law of grace
is in her tongue. And S. Paul requires, that wives, specially the elder, be
teachers of good things, and to instruct the younger. They may also do much
good, in framing the tender years of their children unto good, while they be
under their hands, for even as a child cockered, and made a wanton by the
mother, will be more intractable, when the father shall seek to bend him to
good: so on the other side, a child wisely trained up by the mother in the
young years, will be the easilier brought to goodness, by the Fathers godly
care. We read, that Timothy was made acquainted with the scripture from a
little child, by means of his godly Mother, and Grandmother; a good pattern
for christians: And mark the proof, God recompe^ced their godly care
exceedingly: for Timothy proved a rare young man, of excellent graces, to the
great joy and comfort of his Parents. She may also pour good licour in to
their tender vessels, the savor whereof, shall stick in them a long while
after: I mean, they may sow in their minds, the seeds of religion and
godliness. These and such like duties, if the wife perform constantly, she
shall bring no small help to her husband, for the godly and religious ordering
of his house. And thus much of that part of household government, which
concerns godliness.

Now of the other part, The 2. thing whereat household government aymeth.
which pertaines to the things or this life, wherein is to be considered, what
is the duty of the husband, and of the wife, to Take order for Provision. Take
order for Health.


They must take order for provision, Many are careful to live, but very
careless to live well.
for necessaries to the maintenance of themselves, and al within their charge:
these necessaries are food and raiment, and also for the health of such as be
in their families, both to preserve it, by rest and recreation if need be, and
to restore it, if it be hindered, by good looking to such as are fallen into
sickness.

Provision.
That the Governors of the family must make honest provision for themselves,
and their charge, and not live upon the Church alms, nor by begging,
purloyning, or borrowing, and cousoning, is most evident by that saying of
Saint Paul to Timothy. 1. Timo. 5.8.
He that provides not for his own, and especially for them of his house, has
denied the faith, and is worse then an infidel. Pro. 12.10.
And Solomon says, The just man regards the life of his beast, much more of
his servants and children.

And as the Spirit of God charge us with this duty, so he sets us about
such things, whereby this may be compassed, and forewarneth us of those
things, whereby it may be hindered.

What things be needful for the making of provision.
The things that he teaches us for the making of this provision, are first,
That every one should have some honest and good calling, and should walk
diligently in it: that it may bring in honest gain, whereby necessaries for
the family may be prepared.

A calling. Genes. 3.19. Calling is our appointed charge and manner of life, in
some honest work, wherein we are daily to labor, as we may best profit
therein. 1. Cor. 7.17.20. Ephesians. 4.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.
That every man must apply himself to some study and calling, is so known,
that it needs no proof. In the sweat of thy brows thou shall eat thy
bread, etc. which condemns all such as live of the labors of other men, and
themselves take no pains nor travail, do no good in the world, benefit not
human society any way, but devour the good creatures of the earth, which
indeed belong to them that take all the pains. In this rank, do a number of
Gentles in the world march: devising gay toys, which might well be spared,
unprofitable burdens of the earth, that fill up number like Ciphers, who glory
in their shame: that is, in their ease, pleasures, and bravery, whereof (if
they knew whereto a man was borne) they would be ashamed.

These be they, for whose maintenance in their iollitie, a number are feign to
toil very hardly, fare thinlie, and spend their strength to the very skin and
bones, and yet can get but a slender recompense, through their unmerciful
exactions; but enough of them: to return. The good governor of a house must
be none of these, but he must have a calling that is good, honest, and
lawful, not only gainefull to himself, but also holy and profitable to the
society of mankind: for thus much does S. Paul comprehend, within ye compass
of his words: Ephe. 4.28. But let him labor the thing that is good.

It is not enough to have a calling though it be never so good, but it must be
followed, so as it may bring in maintenance for thee, and thine, such as is
meet for thy own estate.

2 The manner of following a calling.
But how must it be followed, first, with diligence, for as Solomon says. Pro.
18.9. He that carries himself slouthfully or loosely in his business, is the
brother of a great waster: that is, he is another waster, and does as much as
an unthrift or spend good. To diligence belongs the blessing. Pro. 13.4.
Pro. 10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich. and Chap. 12.11. He that
tilleth his land, shall be satisfied with meat. Yea, and a large blessing: The
soul of the diligent shall be fatted: that is, he shall have abundantly. And
least that any should say, that in some calling, Diligence, is that, by which
we execute as well as we can, the labor of our calling. 2. These. 3.10. Romans
12.11.
a man may well thrive, but not in mine: It is said, Pro. 14.23. In all labor,
that is diligent, following thy calling, there is abundance. Moreover, this
diligence will bring a man to renown. Pro. 22.29. Thou see, that a diligent
man in his business, stands before Kings. etc.

Of the enemies to diligence.
The better to kindle the affection unto this diligence in following thy
calling: consider what is said by the spirit of God, of those evils, that are
enemies unto it.

Sloth. Slothfulness is a weariness or tediousnes, in any godly,
spiritual, or civil exercises which one ought for Gods sake to do, for the
benefit of the common wealth, or for the sustentation of themselves, and their
families.
Many a man is idle and slouthful, because labor and toil is irksome and
painful to him, as Pro. 20.4. The slouthful will not plow because of winter: but
what is his reward? it follows, therefore shall he beg in summer, and have
nothing. Poverty is the fruit of slothfulness. Pro. 10.4. A slothful hand
makes poor. And least any man should think that he could keep away poverty,
at least a great while: it is said in Pro. 24.34. that it comes violently,
and with great power, and swiftly upon such a man, and he shall not withstand
it: Thy poue^tie comes as a light traveler, and thy necessity as an armed
man. In the same place also the means whereby it comes, is expressed. Verse.
30. He through folly nelected his ground, and left it unfenced, and untilled,
and so it yielded him no increase: which being there spoken of husbandry, may
be drawn to a general, that to let such things lie idle and unused, which
should bring in commodity, is the high way to poverty.

The slothful is further described to be a great wisher, and woulder, but no
great householder. Sloth, gluttony, and prodigality, are the true paths that
conduct and lead men to poverty.
Pro 13.4. The sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught. And Proverbs. All
the day long he wishes, but his desire is not accomplished, which wastes him
with sorrow. Besides, he persuades himself, that he has some sufficient stay
or let to withhold him from diligent labor, and so dare not go forward: as
the Wiseman says, Prouer. 15.19. Pro. 26.13.14.15.16.
The way of the slothful is a hedge of thorns. And in another place he says,
Pro. 22.13. A lion is in the way. But in truth it is ease and lazines, that
lets him. As the door turns upon the hinges, Pro. 26.16.
so does the slothful in his bed. And to show, that such a man is in a down
hill to beggerie, Solomon says, that he thinks himself very wise in his
doing: Pro. 24.30.31.32.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason. What hope is there of saving of him, that the beggar catch him not, who
pleases himself in his sloth, which does summon him to beggerie? That also is
not to be omitted, that such a sluggard (who suffers his ground to be
ouer-growne with thorns and nettles, stones, or thistles) serves in the world
for an example to make other men wary. Under this is that same luskishnes
which makes men love their ease and sleep, which brings forth the same
fruit that sloth does. The sleeper shall be clothed with rags, Pro. 23.21. And
therefore the Wiseman laboreth to draw men from it. Pro. 20.13. Love not
sleep, least thou come to poverty: open thine eyes, and thou shall be
satisfied with bread.

2. Idle company keeping.
Another enemy to diligence, is, following of vain and idle company. For
though a man be eager minded toward his business, yet by vain and idle
company, he shall be drawn away to other delights, and lose his good hours,
and let go the occasion of doing some things in the fit season. Therefore
Solomon says, Pro. 12.11. The man that follows the idle, is destitute of
understanding. And again, that he shall come to no better pass, then the idle
man. Pro. 28.19. He that follows the idle, shall be filled with poverty.
This harm gets he by haunting vain company, and lewd persons. For as sweet
waters, are corrupted and spoiled with lewd persons, when they run into waters
which are salt, bitter, or unwholesome, and so loose the virtue thereof. Even so
he that joins himself in friendship, and does couple himself in
familiarity, with wicked and ungodly men, None can walk in simplicity before
God, that delights in the company of the ungodly.
becomes wicked and ungodly himself, and is stained and blemished with their
vices, although heretofore he had bin inclined to virtue and godliness. For,
A little leaven (says the Apostle) does leaven the whole lump. 1. Cor 5.6.

Pastime also carries many from their callings, 3. Pastime.
and likewise from thrift. Pro. 21.17. He that loves pastime, shall be a
poor man. Lewd pastime causes naked purses.
Which being a punishment threatened of God against that evil, though a man
would be wary of loosing much at play, Thrift consists not in gold, but in
grace.
yet the Lord might some other way bring him to poverty, and so punish him,
for his corrupt delight in that thing, which the Scripture has so branded.

Lastly, unto true diligence, 4. Great reckoning.
Solomon opposes and sets talking and great reckoning, of what they will
do. Pro. 14.23. In all labor there is abundance, but the talk of the lips,
brings only want. For commonly such as make great account of their doings,
when it comes to doing, can find no fit time to begin.

Now, to finish this point of diligence to be used in our calling, mark the
good husbandry which the spirit of God teaches. Prou. 27.23. Be diligent to
know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds, for riches remain
not always. Where he wills men not to trust all to servants, for the care of
their cattle and other commodities, but to look diligently to them themselves:
the reason is, for that their riches be not so glewed to them, but that if they
be not carefully looked unto, they will take their leave and be gone. And so
we see, it often comes to pass, that they which do their business by others,
have other to thrive for them.

But here peradventure, some husbands and wives will say: Ye speak much of
good husbandry, and good huswiferie; but how would you have them to be good
husbands, and good huswiues, that have not wherewith to be a good husband, or
good huswife on? Whereunto we answer, that good husbandry and good huswifery,
consists not so much in having much or little, as in the wise, careful,
discreet, and good forecasting of that, which God in mercy has enabled and
enriched them with, to see every thing well ordered, and employed to a good end
and use. For we by experience do see, that some husbands, and wives, can so
husbandly and huswifely dispose, set forth, and make a fairer show of a little,
and cause it to stretch further, then many can do with much, and can do as much
with twenty Nobles, as some can do with twenty or thirty pounds.

As a calling must be followed with diligence, so also there is wisdom,
skill, and discretion to be used in it. For as in lifting of a great weight, a
mighty strong man, wanting cunning, can not move that, though he strain and
bruise himself much, which a weak man will do with a slight. So dealing in
any calling, some man shall toil exceedingly much, and yet for want of wit and
discretion, not do half the good, that another shall with more ease: Prou.
13.23. He that has a trade, let him learn to be cunning in it, and able to
go through with it, Prou. 16.20. And to the end he may walk on surer ground,
let him not disdain to ask advise and counsel, for the praise of contriuing
matters well, by his own wit, is not so great, as is the loss and ignominy,
when for want of counsel, a man enters a wrong course. Besides, Solomon does
commend this wisdom unto us often, to take heed of hastiness, headiness,
and self-will, and to beware of ouer-weening in our own reach. Prou. 15.22.
Without counsel, thoughts, that is, intents and purposes, come to naught: but
in the multitude of counsel, there is stedfastnes. And 20.18. Establish thy
thoughts by counsel, and by counsel make war. Whereas on the other side,
haste brings waste. Whosoever is hasty, that is, that rashly goes about his
business without counsel, comes surely to poverty. Pro. 21.5. That is
notable in the 29.20. See thou a man hasty in his matter, there is more hope
of a Fool, then of him. The same is said of the conceited man, See thou a
man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a Fool then of him. Pro.
26.12. When the Spirit of God does so carefully commend this thing to us, we
must needs thereby see, that it is a matter of great necessity, and of
excellent use, for as the Proverb is, two eyes see more then one. And many
times, men see more clearelie in other men's matters, then in their own. In
this case also, it is good to look to the examples of others, and our own
experience in such like cases, for much light comes into a wise man's mind by
this window. And to the end, that thou may make thy use of experience and
examples, when occasion shall serve, it is good to mark things, which shall
fall out, the beginnings, proceedings, and events of matters, and keep them in
mind to stand thee in stead: for he that never makes any thing, it is all
one, as if he had never seen or heard them, and such a one must always be
running for counsel, in every light matter, or else may take a wrong course,
except he can stumble on the right way by good hap. This observation and
pondering of events, with the causes that went before, is the ripener of wit.
But idlemindednesse, and careless letting pass of matters, makes an
emptiness in the head, of such good things, as make one man excel an other.

Thirdly, in following thy calling, let not justice, Justice is a virtue, that
yields to every man his own.
and upright dealing be forgotten, but order thy dealings by the^. If there
were no other, yet this reason should weigh with thee, that so thou might
look to reap good dealing at other men's hands, as it is said. Pro. 25.21. He
that follows after righteousness, and mercy, shall find life,
righteousness and glory. Where as such as measure out hard measure to others,
they have the like measured to them again: according to the saying of our
Savior Christ, besides the riches gotten by ill means, have a heavy destiny
uttered against the^. The gathering of riches by a deceitful tongue, is
vanity, tossed to and fro of them that seek death. Pro. 21.6.

As justice and equal dealing toward all men must be looked unto, so God will
have us not to omit mercifulness, Mercifulness is a passion of the mind,
toward those that undeservedly, and shamefully are afflicted, proceeding from
those that be affected with pity and compassion.
and friendly dealing to the poor. Be not then so tied to thy business, that
thou can never look out to the necessities of others, nor spare time to
serve his occasions. Among many ways of helping the poor, which are
commanded, this is one, to go or ride for the^, to save them from wrong, or to
further them in their right, to be their mouth to plead for them, when by fear
and simplicity they cannot plead for themselves. And toward them especially a
sparing hand is forbidden, and that with a sore item. Psalm. 16 3. Gal. 6.10.
Heb. 6.10. and 13.16. 1. John. ^.^6. Prou. 22.9.
Prou. 25.13. He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall
also cry and not be heard. And liberality is persuaded with a sweet promise,
and especially to the Saints, and faithful. Pro. 19.17. He that has mercy
upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that
which he has given.

If any fear, that if he tie himself so short, as never to pass the bounds
of equity, and besides open his hand so wide to the poor, he shall never live
and thrive of his calling, let him remember what is written, Prou. 16.3. Commit
thy works to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed. And let that promise
encourage him to follow the Lord* whither soever he calls, notwithstanding
any fear or misdoubt. Besides, let him have that in mind, which is in Pro.
28.22. against covetousness, and posting to be rich: A man with a wicked eye
hastes to be rich, and knows not that poverty shall come unto him. And
again in the 20. verse, He that makes haste to be rich, shall not be
innocent. Whereto agrees that of S. Paul, 1. Tim. 6.9 10. He that will be rich,
falls into tentation and snares, etc. Prou. 13.11. and 20.21.

Contentation is a Virtue, whereby a man is well pleased with that estate
whe^ein he is placed. 1. Tim. 6.6.7. Phil. 4.1^.12. Matthew. 6.11. Heb. 13.5.
Hereunto men must join Contentation, with that allowance, which God, as a wise
Father, that knows what is best makes unto them: for a restless, and
discontented mind, breeds haste-making to riches, dries up the rivers of
liberality, and sets the conscience upon the rack, and stretches it
beyond the bounds of equity and just dealing, when hope of gain is offered.
Wherefore Solomon to prevent these evils in men, and to make them to like of
their present estate, he tells the^, that Better is a little with
righteousness, then great revenues without equity. Pro. 16.8. and 15.16.17.
Psalm. 37.16. And in the 20. chapter, there is a double reason set down of
this: first, that store gotten with wrong, breeds a sore trouble, Esa. 33.1.
Pro. 22.22.23. Eccles. 5.7. and 4.1.
sometime of mind and conscience, and sometimes outward, while the right owner
of the goods, suffers him not to go so quietly away with them: or God
stirs thee up an enemy, mightier then thy self, that shall pull from thee,
as thou did from another. The second is, that such have the hatred of many,
for that which they purloine, or get by wrong and oppression, which a good man
would not have, for so small commodity. Hitherto we have showed what thou must
look unto in following thy calling. Now follow other things, not unworthy to
be thought upon, of him that would provide for his family well. To spare, that
thou may have to spend in honesty and necessity for Gods sake, is well
done.
Though we would not have a man feign himself poor, and a niggard, when he
has abundance, as a number do, by whyning and complaining, without cause, who
are neither good to the common wealth, nor kind to themselves. Yet it is not
wisdom to carry a higher port and countenance in the world, A thing is
sooner spared then got^en.
then a man's ability will warrant: such shall be envied, so long as they do
bear it out by the hard-edge, Cut thy coat according to thy cloth, and eat
within thy teder.
they shall be laid at for charges: and if through necessity, in the end they
be feign to yield, they shall be scorned of their enuiers, and little pitied
of all others. Wherefore it is wisdom rather to bear a low sail, and to
keep within compass, and rather to come short of that thou might do
remembering that, which is, Pro. 12.9. He that is despised, and is his own man,
is better then he that boasts himself, and lacks bread.

Again, as they which love to pearke aloft and desire to be carried with a
full sail, by the wind Ambition is an unlawful or wicked desire of glory,
namely, when a man seeks to be above al other in honor, and seeks to
effect the same, by unnecessary and unjust actions, besides his vocation,
trusting to his own wisdom and strength.
of Ambition, and Vain glory is a certain disordinate desire to be well
thought of, well spoken of, praised, and glorified of men.
vain glory, rather then to have sea-roome, do oftentimes rush upon the rocks
of want, and there stick till they sincke, so they, which in fear of such
rocks, choose to ride with half or quarter sail, where they have not room at
will, are more safe from danger, and may more conveniently provide against a
tempest. Yea, they may so sail about them, that when God shall remove them
hence, they shall not be constrained to leave their children to the wide world,
which thing, nature binds a man thereunto.

An other rule may be drawn out of that, which is Pro. 10.5. A wise son
gathers in summer: but he that sleeps in harvest, is the son of confusion.
Where he teaches, that when a man spieth an opportunity of honest gain, and
commodity, he is to follow that, while the time serves, but he that for a
small matter, lets slip occasions, and reckons of this time, and that
time, this day, and that day, thinking then to have more fit opportunity, that
will bnng all to nothing.

A good neighbor (says one) is a good thing. Agreeable to this, Solomon
says. Pro. 17.17. A friend loves at all times. And 18.24, A friend is nearer
then a brother. As if he should say, there is many a friend that is more kind
then a brother, and more ready to do pleasure, then he that is more bound by
nature and duty. He says also Pro. 27.9. As ointment and perfume rejoice the
heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel. That is
also notable, which is, Verse. 17. Jron sharpeth Iron, so does a man the face
of his friend. To wit, because mutual communication of friends, one with an
other, quickneth the spirit, and cheareth the heart.

All these places contain motives, to give heed to this exhortation, Verse,
10. Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake not, neither enter into
thy brothers house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a neighbor that
is near, then a brother that is far off. In the end of the eighteenth
Chapter. Verse. 24. he shows how a man shall preserve this treasure which is
so good. A man that has friends, must show himself friendly. Hereto agrees
that of the heathen: he that would have a good neighbor, must be a good
neighbor. In ye 24.27. Verse. He seems to give a rule for the right order of
managing a man's Household affairs; saying: Prepare thy work without, and make
ready thy things in the field, and afterward thou may build thine house. As
though he should say, first look after such things as are needful and
necessary for housekeeping, as that thou may have provision, etc: and then,
when that is provided for, thou may fall a trimming up of thy house. But many
fools, begin first to deck their houses, before they lay for necessaries,
and are feign afterward to sell their ornaments with loss, to provide more
necessary matters. It is a good point of wisdom, to bear the want of that
longest, which may best be spared.

Sparing is good getting, and the greatest rent that one can have.
The last rule is, that a good governor of a family, for the better
maintenance of his family, must be frugall (or to speak english) a good
husband, that is sparing and saving, and so to order and moderate himself,
that if his goods and revenues be not sufficient for him and his charge, then
to make himself sufficient for his goods: and to dispose of himself according
to the old proverb: So to cut his coat according to his cloth, and to eat
within his own tether. Yet we would not have him pinching, or niggardly, and
so dried up for liberality, that nothing should be wroong from him for good
uses: that is, too far on the left hand, as prodigality is on the right. But
where there is no just cause to spend or lay out, and it might be as well
spared, there we would have him save, for his riches be the Lords goods, which
God has made him a steward of: when the Lord therefore wills him to open his
hand there let him not be straight handed: but where nothing but unruly lusts
and pomp, or vain glory, bid him draw, there is he to hold fast: for he is
an ill steward, that will lay out his masters goods where there is no need, or
where less would serve. There be many, who of a greedy and covetous mind, will
easily embrace this precept of sparing: but as they do it of a wrong purpose,
so they fail in the matters, wherein they should save and be sparing. Many
misers pinch their servants in their meat and drink, allowing them not
enough, or not good enough, and this they take to be frugalitie and thrift:
whereas to prancke, and prick up themselves in bravery, and that sometimes
above their calling, herein they are very lavish. This is no more to be counted
frugalitie, or good husbandry, then to rob a poor man, to give to the rich,
is true liberality. When therefore thou think of sparing let not the
greedy desire of gathering draw thee to it, but conscience of well using that
which God has lent thee. And this mind will draw thee to spare and save, only
there, where it may be well done, and not there, where in conscience thou
ought to spend. Now the better to further our selves in this honest
thriftinesse, or frugality, that is called of one, a great reuenew, the
occasions of needless expenses must be avoided. Love not mirth and pastime,
for they have often occasion of expenses. Again, they cause loss of time, and
neglect of business at home, yea, and often such do buy their pleasures with
loss in their goods, while retchlesse masters have either theeuish, or
careless servants. Therefore Solomon tells such their fortune Pro. 11.17. He
that loves mirth or pastime, will be a poor man.

Secondly, a sweet tooth, and a velvet mouth, that is, daintiness, or
choicenesse in diet, is an enemy to frugalitie, a needless charge, to delight
the taste for a moment, whereas wholesome meat and drink, would be more ease
for the purse, and healthful for the body. He that loves Wine and Oil, that
is, sweet delicats for his senses, will not be rich. Pro. 27.17.

In this rank do march gluttony, I mean cramming and pampering the body;
Gluttony is a vice, when any does cram and fill his body with overmuch meat.
and also drunkenness. These dull the mind and wit, darken reason, and make a
man become sottish. Besides, they stuff the body with gross humors, which
breed diseases, and diseases bring other charges for physic, or at least,
loss of time, and neglect of business, which do cost a man as much as his
diet, wherein he was excessive, so that these evils have double expenses.

To be brief in this point, God having read the destiny of the drunkard,
Drunkenness is a vice, when any does gull in overmuch drink.
and the glutton, namely, that many evils, and namely poverty, shall betide
them, Pro. 23.21.29.30.31. By some way or other, God will effect his judgment,
for no one piece of his word, shall fall to the ground.

A great backfriend to thrift, is good-fellowship, and company keeping: for it
has loss of time, and draws thee away from thy calling, and hinders the
due ouerseeing of good husbands affairs: it makes a man ouerslippe occasions
of doing good things in a due and fit season: besides, it draws home others
to thy house, or draws thee to other houses, as Tauernes, Alehouses, and such
like; the haunting whereof, is a thing of no good report: and it makes thee
lavish in spending, or else it is no good-fellowship, (as they say) and by
means thereof, thou shall feed the gluttons, and spend that upon others,
which belongs to thine own family: which Solomon says, Pro. 28.7. Is a
shame to thy father.

Thy company keeping, has many other enormities: He that touches pitch,
shall be defiled therewith. And as he is a party with them in their evils, so
shall he be also in their punishment. Pro. 13.20.
The companion of fools shall be afflicted. Wherefore avoid such, and rather
follow the wise: Pro. 11.13.32.
He that walks with the wise, shall be wise: who are they? even they that
have the lips of knowledge, whose words teach good things. But such whose
talk is nothing but froth, their words unsavory, and bring no good to the
hearer, though there be no outward evil in their lives, yet they must not be
admitted for companions, further then upon some urgent occasion, thou must
deal with them: Pro. 14.7. Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceiuest
not in him the lips of knowledge.

As to have a faithful friend, is a matter auailable to thrift; so by his
friends a man may be endammaged. There is a friendship, which is very costly,
and chargeable to maintain. He that desires familiarity with great men,
must have other things suitable; as costly apparel, well trimmed houses, often
inuitings to bankets, to recompense their kindness, he must follow their
humors, and not stick to neglect his affairs, to have their company when he
may. This will cost a man sweetly: but what shall he gain? A friendly
countenance before his face, and perhaps a dry flout behind his back,
especially if things go not well with him for the world: then oh it is pity,
a frank-hearted man, no bodies foe, but his own: and such like. Salo^on gives
thee warning of this kind of friendship, Pro. 23.1, 2, 3.

There is another man's friendship, which Solomon would have thee to avoid, as
hurtful unto thee, Pro. 22.24. Prou. 18.19.
Make no friendship with an angry man, neither go with the furious. The
choleric man though never so good a fellow, while he ^s pleased, yet is soon
turned to hate thee. And no heavier foe, then he that was a friend, which
Solomon declares: Verse. 20.
A brother offended, is harder to win, then a strong city, and their
contentio^s are like the bar of a palace. If a man could always keep in
with the angry man (which cannot be done without putting up many injuries)
yet may that be hurtful. For the Wiseman adds, L^^st thou learn his ways:
that is become like to him in furiousnes. And that is as hurtful on the other
side, for the furious man abounds in transgressions: Prou. 29.25.
which do often cost him the setting on, even from men, who being by his rage
hurt, or reproached, do watch their occasions to work him some woe. Whereupon
we say in a common proverb: The angry man never wants woe. There be also
Trencher-friends, who to win favor and good will, will smooth it in words,
fawn, and glauer, they will say as you say, and bring you tales of your
enemy, so to feed your humor, that he may wind within you: a beast that
biteth sorest of al tame beasts. For while a simple-hearted man suspecteth no
hurt, he watches his occasions to speed himself of a booty: a matter that
by the counsel of the holy Ghost often repeated in the Proverbs, is as carefully
to be avoided, as it is hurtful to a man's estate. If he can do none of these,
yet he has not lost his labor, for he had many a good welcome for his fair
talk. And by often resorting to thy house, he has furnished himself with
some thing to discredit thee, except thou have walked marvelous warily, which
a man can hardly do before flatterers.

To end this matter of friendship, have some near friends but not many. Choose
the best natured, and the best graced, that is, such as besides
single-hartednes, and plain simplicity, are by grace brought to have
conscience of their dealing. And least under a show of simplicity, wiliness
should be hid, try before you trust, and grow into familiarity not all at a
push, but by steps. Tell things of no great secrecy, as secrets to try their
taciturnitie. Be not over credulous upon sight of a little kindness, to
account them amongst thy nearest friends. Many have been wiped of their
commodities, by falsehood in fello^ship. Some have been betrayed by untrusty
friends, and brought into great troubles. Many opening their minds to b^^bs
that can keep nothing, have their purposes openly known, and scanned before
they can compass them, and so are oftentimes prevented through the malice of
their enuiers. Wherefore, except a man can find a faithful friend indeed, it
is good to remember the old saying: My secrets to my self. Whereto our common
proverb answers: Two may keep counsel, if one be away. The Wiseman
ascribes it to folly, to power out a man's secrets lightly: The fool powers
out all his mind, Pro. 29.11.
but the wise man keeps it in.

As hurt comes by some friends, so also by enemies many are sore annoyed.
What charges in lawing, and other troubles, be there in the world through
enmity? Wherefore it is good wisdom, by all good means to avoid breaches,
which breed enmity: and by all friendly, just, and wise dealing, to keep
peace and good will even with the meanest. The weakest enemy is not to be
contemned. It shall go hard, but at one time or other, he will work thee
some displeasure: at least his mouth shall always be open to speak ill, to
misconster thy actions, and to blaze abroad thy infirmities, and scapes. He
that would have no enemies, must make himself none, by unjust, unkind, or
unneighbourly dealing: but rather by courteousnes of speech, helpfulnes, and
good neighborhood, to win the love and liking of men: yet a man may be too
wise in this point. Many being loath to incur any man's displeasure, will not
seek to uphold right and equity, speak for the poor, stand out to
maintain Gods cause, when he is dishonored by open sin: as swearing, lying,
railing, and such like. Many to keep in withal, use all companies alike: for
avoiding a man's company, breeds a grudge. But the good will of men, is never
to be purchased with forsaking of duty. Such things as may justly be ill
taken, avoid for peace sake. Whereof the Wiseman notes some: as, meddling in
other men's matters: Prou. 26.17.
He that medleth with a strife, that belongs not to him, is as he that takes
a dog by the ears: that is, casts himself into dangers.

Prou. 29.9.10.
2. Be not hasty to go to law, no not in a right cause, but agree at home. For
besides that, a man does seldom escape without great loss, (in which respect
it is also to be avoided, as an enemy to thrift) thy neighbor is openly put
to reproach, becomes thy mortal enemy, and will always watch to do thee
hurt.

Pro. 20.22.24.25.
3. Sometime to seek revenge of a wrong, breeds greater malice in the author
of the wrong, and makes him double it, as a man spurreth his horse for
kicking, when he was spurred. Say not, I will recompense evil: but wait upon
the Lord, and he will save thee.

4. Often haunting of another man's house, may bring thee into mislike: wherefore
the Wiseman says, Prou. 25.17.
Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, least he be weary of thee, and
hate thee. If by careful avoiding of all just occasions, thou can not avoid
ill will (as the world loves none but her own) never seek to win favor, by
departing from duty. But commit thy self to God, and turn thy mind to make
use of thine enemy. Let enmity, which is always prying and seeking occasions
to hurt by word or deed, make thee to walk, not more closely, but more
uprightly: and then may thou defy thine enemy: Prou. 10.9.
For he that walks uprightly, walks boldly.

Another enemy to thrift, (which is also a breaker of peace and good will
among men) is much borrowing. He that is to borrow, does spend much time, and
let slip many occasions of doing his business in the due season: he must
repay in better measure the^ he borrowed, or else ill words, or ill will will
follow. If it be a matter of any value, which is borrowed, then as Solomon
says, Prou. 22.7.
The borrower is servant to the lender: that is beholding to him, and in his
danger. The thriftiest men love least to be beholden to others, and therefore
seldom seek, and often refuse, even when they be offered to receive benefits
at other men's hands. He that goes a borrowing, goes a sorrowing. And every
denial he receives, where he thinks he should speed, is the seed of grudge
in the mind of the denier, and of him who is denied. But of all borrowing, to
borrow upon usury is the dearest buying, and the rankest poison to thrift.
When David would wish a sore plague to his enemy, he prays that he may be
given into the usurers hands: Let the usurer eat him up. If the usurer be a
deuourer, woe be to them that come in his hands.

To avoid borrowing, a good husband must cut off all unnecessary expenses,
that he may have all necessaries in his house. To avoid borrowing of money,
take heed of suertiship, of dealing in bargains which you are not fully able
to compass, of dealing in many things, and having too many yrons in the fire
at once. Look how you can compass matters, before you enterprise them Provide
long before against any day of payment, and have not money to seek upon the
sudd^n: for that drives a man to borrowing, yea to usury, or to Robin Hoods
penyworths.

Besides, he must keep none in his house idle, or half set to work, none
more then needs must. Let every one have his charge, that will thoroughly
occupy him: also look that they do their tasks, every one in his place, and
have an often eye unto them, whether they have done as they should do. The
masters eye makes a fat horse: so also the mistress eye makes a friendly
dairie. Except you have rare servants, and such as truly fear God, and have
good consciences, trust them not further then you see them, except necessity
drive you.

Hitherto of the duties that be belonging to the chief ruler of the family,
that is, the husband, The wives duty, touching the things of this life.
touching honest provision for it. Now seeing that God has joined the wife to
her husband as an helper, she must help him in the provision for her family,
so much as lies in her power, and is meet for her to do. And indeed her
industry and wisdom may do so much herein, that though her husband should
be much wanting in his duty, yet she might hold in the goal. Thus many
have done, and so Solomon says, the wise woman will do: A wise woman builds
her house. But it is not every woman's case, Prou. 14.1.
because that all are not wise, as she that Solomon speaks of. This wise
woman is elsewhere called a gracious woman, Proverbs 11.16. And a virtuous
w^man, Prou. 12.4. because many graces and virtues meet together in her.

For she is to her Husband dutiful, Dutifulness or dutiful will, is that
which does shine in the declaration and performance of duties.
faithful, and loving. Those of her family, wise and prudent. In her business,
diligent and painful. To her neighbors, modest, humble, kind and quiet.


First, if she be not subject to her husband to let him rule all househo^d,
especially outward affairs: if she will make head against him, and seek to
have her own ways, there will b^ doing and undoing. Things will go backward,
the house will come to ruin: for God will not bless where his ordinance is not
obeyed. This is allowable, that she may in modest sort show her mind, and a
wise husband will not disdain to hear her advise, and follow it also, if it
be good. But when her way is not liked of, though it be the best way, she may
not thereupon set all at six and seven, with what should I labor and
travail: I see my husband takes such ways, that he will bring all to
nothing. This were nothing else, but when she seeeth the house falling, to help
to pull it down faster Solomon says, The wise woman builds her house; much
more then does she underprop it, and hold it up, that by her husbands
indiscreet dealing, it be not pulled down. She must not think her self freed
from duty, because he walks not in his duty, but hold her place, and
labor for her part, to uphold all, and so God will either bless the work of
her hands, to the maintenance of the house, or give her husband more wisdom
and care, or else give her a contented mind with a low estate, which is great
riches. One point of subjection, is to be content with such apparel and
outward port, as her husbands estate can allow her. They fail in this, who by
importunity and disquietnesse, wring from their husbands, more then he can
well cut out of his revenues, or gettings.

It is a part of unfaithfulness, 2. Faithful.
secretly to purloyne and powle from him, for to pranke up her children, or her
self, her house and chambers in bravery: and besides, it is a close
undermining of her house.

Love and peaceablenesse in the wife toward the husband, 3. Loving. Love is a
natural affection of the mind, inflaming all the powers of the Lover, with
willing duty toward the beloved.
is available for the weal of the family, for where they agree lovingly,
there they counting the good of the one, the benefit of the other, do jointly
watch against all such things in their family, as might endammage it. There
the servants knowing that in pleasing one, they shall please both: and
contrariwise, be careful in all things to* deal well: whereas division in the
governors, makes partaking in the servants, and then they care not for
pleasing, but only that side, which they affect. And such kind of service is
but smally beneficial to thriuing. It can hardly be auoyned, but there will
be some squaring and dibersitie between the man and his wife: but they must
labor to compose such matters privately and quickly, that they grow not to
breaches, for they be dangerous to thrift. Let there be therefore reasonings
secretly between themselves, of such matters as might breed a skarre: but let
them be soon ended after the occasion is offered, before the minds be much
exasperated. Let there be no hard words of either side, nor opening of old
matters. Let it be done privately between themselves, and not before
children, or servants: for they will not stick to carry tales, to please the
humors of the party to whom they are most affected. Besides, they will spy
your infirmities, and grow to a less regard of you, and they will blaze
abroad such matters to your discredit.

A good huswife is a great patrimony, ^ she is most honorable, that is most
honest and godly. A good sauer is as good as a good getter.
Now for her behavior toward her servants and children, if it be prudent and
with wisdom, it does much good in a house: but it contains many points.
That which her care for the most part tends unto, is saving. She that will be
a good sauer, must not be a slender huswife, but skillful in all points,
whereof she shall have use in her family. She must not let her maids have
their own ways, for want of sk^ll: but she must be able to direct and
prescribe, what and how, in every business. Where she has little skill, by
reason of her education, she must be careful by conferring, and marking to
learn skill, against she is to deal in such things, that she may be able to
direct her servants, and to find them out when they have done amiss. As a
word spoken in his place, is like apples of gold with pictures o^ si^uer, Prou.
15.11. even so is a business or work done in a fit and due time.
She must have a good forecast to contriue and dispatch things in due time, and
good order, that necessaries be not wanting when they should be used, and
confusion do not make more labor then is needful. She must be wise, to
mark the nature of her servants and children, to deal with them as their
natures require, for the training of them to her hand. All must not be dealt
withal one way: and yet many have no way but one to deal withal: and that is
chiding, and brauling, and that they fall out upon every occasion, which
wearieth servants, and makes often chaunges, discourageth children, and makes
both careless whether they do their duties or no^ yea it breeds stubbornnes,
frowardnes, and contempt in their minds. She must be wise, to mark and see
what needles burdens, unnecessary expenses and losses there do upon
occasions fall out within doors, and prevent such occasions afterward. She
must know the best ways of doing things to greatest use, with least charges.
Briefly, she must know which way to save a penny, and lay about her to save it,
for many a little makes a great deal. She must know what is meet for
servants, what for workmen, and what not: what is meet for ordinary, and what
is meet for strangers. Above all, she must know how to keep within her
compass, and yet to avoid the reproach of a pincher; she must know what
servants may do within the compass of so much time, and what is above their
strength. She must have a diligent eye to the behavior of her servants, what
meetings and greetings, what tickings and toyings, and what words and
countenances, there be between men and maids, least such matters being
neglected, there follow wantonness, yea folly within their houses, which is a
great blemish to the Governors. Painfulnes is a labor or endeavor unto
wearines, to bring any thing to pass.
In her business she must be diligent and painful. Hitherto belongs that,
Pro. 31.15. She rises before day: and verse 18. Her candle is not put out by
night. She borrows of the morning and the evening, for to dispatch her
business* When she is up, does she sit down and cap a stool? No, she
looks that her servants have their necessaries, that they may go soon to
their work: she sets her maids to work: and tasketh them, to keep them
occupied: yea, she suffers none to be idle in her house, but either doing
somewhat that is profitable, or else learning somewhat, that is meet for them.
She must not think to sit and command, but she must be a stirrer in every
place, to o^ersee whether duty be done of all hands, and that in good sort:
yea, and to quicken the d^^igence of her family, and that things may be well
done, she must be at an end of every great work: sometimes setting to her
hands to encourage the doer, sometimes gently teaching, sometimes commending,
sometimes speaking fair, but never brawling: sometimes showing what is a
miss, in gentle language, letting them see what loss comes by ill doing of
a thing. Sometimes friendly putting them in mind, how by sloth,
forgetfulness, or sluttishnesse, they shall get an ill name for their service,
and so become turne-awaies from every good house. She must lay a diligent eye
to her household-stuffe in every Room, that nothing be embezeled away, nothing
spoiled or lost for want of looking to, nothing mard by ill usage, nor nothing
worn out by more using then is needful, nothing out of place, for things
cast aside, are deemed to be stolen, and then there follows uncharitable
suspicions, which breeds much disquietnesse. And though nice Dames think it
an unseemly thing, for them to soil their hands about any householde matters,
and therefore if they do any thing, it is but pricking of a clout: yet the
virtuous woman (as Prou. 31.17.) Girdeth her loins with strength, and
strengthens her arms: that is, she sets her self painefully about some
work that is profitable, for she sells it afterward: verse 24. Yea, the
particular work is described. She seek^th wool and flax, etc. she puts
her hand to the wherue, and her hands handle the spindle: she makes Carpets.
The meaning is, that she gets some matter to work on, that she may
exercise her self and her family in, and it is not some idle toy, to make the
world gay withal, but some matter of good use: Her family is clothed with
double, and her Husband is known in the gate, he is so comely and trimly
apparelled by her diligence at home, that he is in regard among men, and
known where he goes.

Solomon speaks of. stretches out her hand to the poor and needy, Prou.
31.20. She gives not of her husbands, she gives of her own, she found away
to do good, without the hurt of her husband. S. Paul requires, 1. Tim. 2.10.
that women should array themselves with good works, the comeliest ornament in
the world, if women had spiritual eyes, Acts. 9.36.
to discern it. Dorcas in the Acts, teaches wives how to get this array, for
she made garments to cloth the naked and the poor. Thus might women find
how to set themselves a work, though they could live of their own. But such
as have but a mean allowance, God thereby shows, that he will have them
occupy themselves in some honest labor, to keep them from idleness: and the
evils that issue therefrom. They therefore must labor, if not to sell cloth,
as Salomons woman did, not to cloth the poor, as Dorcas did, yet to cloth
her family, that they may not care for the cold. Let her avoid such occasions
as may draw her from her calling. She must shake off sloth, and love of ease:
she must avoid gosseping, further then the law of good neighborhood does
require. S. Paul would have a woman a good home-keeper. The virtuous woman is
never so well, as when she is in the midst of her affairs. She that much
frequenteth meetings of gosseps, seldom comes better home: some count it a
disgrace to come much abroad, least they should be counted gosseps: which name
is become odious: but they must have tatlers come home to them, to bring them
news, and to hold them in a tale, least they should be thought to be idle
without a cause. They perceive not how time runs, nor how untowardly their
business goes forward, while they sit idle. They know not, that great
tale-bringers, be as great carriers, and that such make their gain of
carrying, and recarrying. The wise woman will be wary, whom she admits
into her house, to sit long there, knowing that their occupation is but to
mark and carry. Toward her neighbors she is not sour, but courteous, not
disdainefull to the basest, but affable, with modesty: no scorner, nor giber,
but bearing with infirmities, and making the best of things: not ready to
stomach them for every light matter, and so to look big: but passing by
offenses, for unities sake, not angry, but mild: not bold, but bashful: not
full of words, pouring out al in her mind, and babbling of her household
matters, that were more fitter to be concealed, but speaking upon good
occasion, and that with discretion. Let her hear and see, and say the best,
and yet let her soon break off talk, with such in whom she perceives no
wisdom, nor favor of grace. Let her not be light to believe reports, nor
ready to tell them again, Silence is a gravity, when she abstaineth and
holds her peace from speaking when it does not become her to speak.
to fill the time with talk: for silence is far better, then such unsavory
talk. Let her not be churlish, but helpefull in all things, to prevent
breaches, or else to make them up again, if by the waiwardnesse of othets
there be any made. Let her not be envious, but glad of the good of others, not
fond of every thing that she sees her neighbors have, but wisely considering
what is meet for her self, and what her state will bear. Let her not beg a
wish in apparel, but sober and modest: not nice nor coy, but handsome and
huswifelike: no talker of other men's matters, not given to speak ill of any,
for fear of the like measure, Matthew. 7.2.

1. The duty of the Husband toward his Wife.
THis duty cons^steth severally in these three points. First, that he live
with his wife discreetly, according unto knowledge. Secondly, that he be not
bitter, fierce, and cruel unto her. Thirdly, that he love, cherish, and
nourish his wife, even as his own body, and as Christ loved his Church, and
gave himself for it, to sanctify it. But before we shall speak of these
^hree points, we will a little touch the original and beginning of holy
Wedlock: what it is, when, where, how, and of whom it was instituted and
ordained.

What wedlock is.
Wedlock or Matrimony, is a lawful knot, and unto God an acceptable Math.
19.5.6.
yoking and joining together of Genes. 1.27. 1. Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5.31. Prou.
5.18.19, 20.
one man, and one woman, with the good consent of them both: to the end that
they may dwell together in friendship and honesty, one helping and comforting
the other, eschewing whoredom, and all uncleanness, bringing up their
children in the fear of God: or it is a coupling together of two persons into
one flesh, not to be broken, according unto the ordinance of God: so to
continue during the life of either of them: Genes. 2.24. Malach. 2.14. Romans 7.3.

Yoking and dwelling together what it is.
By yoking, joining, or coupling, is meant, not only outward dwelling together
of the married folks, as to be ordinarily in a dwelling place, for the better
performance of each other mutual duties: Mat. 1.18. 1. Cor. 7.10, 12, 13. 1.
Pet. 3.7. Ruth. 4.11, 12: but also an uniform agreement of mind, and a common
participation of body and goods: for as much as the Lord says, Ge^. 2.24.
that they two shall be one flesh: that is, one body. This is to be
remembered, that Matrimony or Wedlock must not only be a coupling together,
but also it must be such a coupling together as comes of God, and is not
contrary to his word and will. For there be some marriages made, whom God
coupleth not together, but carnal lust, beauty, riches, goods, and lands,
flattery, and friendship: in such marriages God is not thought upon, and
therefore they sin the more against him. These and such like marriages be
disliked and condemned in the Scripture: Genes. 6.1, 2. Ezech. 10.1, etc.
Matthew. 24.38, 39. God did appoint and ordain Matrimony himself in Paradise,
so that he is the author of the same, Genesis 2.20. Yea, and our Savior Christ
himself (who being the very natural son of God) was borne in wedlock
(although of a pure virgin) did honor and commend Matrimony, while he did
vouchsafe to show his first miracle (John 2.1.) at a marriage: whereby he did
declare, that the Lord is able to make the bitterness of marriage sweet, and the
scarcity thereof to abound with plenty. And the Apostle gives this excellent
title to marriage: saying, that it is Marriage honoura^^^. 1. First for the
Author, which is God. 2. For the time, which was during the ^t^^e of Adams
innocence. 3. For the place, which was paradise.
Honorable among all, Heb. 13.4. that is, among all estates, and all nations.
The institution of Matrimony, is an indissoluble bond and knot, whereby the
husband and wife are fastened together by the ordinance of God, and is (...).
2.24. Matthew. 19.^. Mark. 10.7. 1. Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5.31.
straighter then any other conjunction in the society of mankind. Insomuch,
that it is a less offense to forsake father and mother, and to leave them
succourles, (which notwithstanding ought by Gods commandment to be honored)
then it is to do the like toward his lawful married wife. Wherefore let them
look well what they do, that are ready for light and small causes to
separate man man and wife: seeing that Christ himself says, Matthew. 19.9. That
whosoever is separated from his wife, saving for whoredom, and marries
another, commits adultery.

This is a thing worthy to be remembered, both on the behalf of the Suter and
Woer, as also on her part that is woed: namely, that they deal plainly and
faithfully one with the other, and not guilefully, and craftily, go about to
deceive one the other, in body or goods: for so doing, they shall never use
one the other so lovingly, and commodiously, as they hoped and desired they
might, when the one has fraudulently, and deceitfully enticed and beguiled the
other, either in body or substance: for naturally we hate him, or her, that
does beguile us. Neither is there any thing that displeases a man or woman
more, then to lack and fail of the thing they both hoped and looked for. And
therefore it were convenient, and also much better, that both parties should
disclose the one to the other, such imperfections, infirmities, and wants, in
either of their bodies, as also the mediocritie and meannesse of their goods
and substance, as in truth it is: yea though it should be with the peril and
loss one of the other, rather then the one to obtain and get the other with
fraud, guile, and discord.

But before we shall come to speak of the causes of marriage, we purpose (God
so willing) briefly to show, how every one that entendeth to marry, should
choose him a meet, fit, and honest mate: for there lies much weight in the
wise election and choice of a wife. Genesis 2.18.
As he that will plant any thing, does first consider the nature of the
ground, in the which he minds to plant: even so much more ought a man to have
respect to the condition of the woman, out of whom he desires to plant
children, the fruits of honesty and welfare.

The first thing that is to be remembered of such a one as minds to marry,
is, Such as are of kindred in the flesh, may not contract matrimony.
that he do not choose his wife within such degrees of consanguinitie and
affinity, as are by Leuit. 18.6. etc.
Gods law forbidden. Secondly, Deuteronomy. 7.3. 2. Cor. 6.14.15. etc.
Religion and faith must be considered, least he make divorce of the true
faith, or bring it into peril. For although he think himself as wise as 1.
King. 11.4.
Solomon, and as strong as Judge. 16.17.18.
Sampson, yet may he be overcome as they were. Therefore great aduisement
before hand, is to be taken in this behalf, least afterward with much grief
and sorrow of heart, he do too late repent.

Now if any that has matched himself with a wife that is an infidel,
irreligious, or of a corrupt religion, and would put her away for this matter,
herein he deceives himself, 1. Cor. 7.12.13 etc. 1. Pet. 3.1.
as the Apostle manifestly proves: for we must put a difference between that
marriage that is made and done already, and it, that is yet to do. Wherefore
he that is snared and matched with such a wife, as is either froward, wayward,
or else is poisoned with superstition and popery: in such a case he must call
upon God; and live in his fear, in faithfulness, in patience, and with
discretion and godly counsel labor to win her from the same. For like as
that Husbandman does with great labor and diligence till that ground, which
he has once taken to farm, although it be never so full of faults: as if it
be dry, if it bring forth weeds, b^ambles, or briers: or though the same
ground cannot bear much wet; yet through good husbandry he wins fruit
thereof. Even so in like manner, he that has married a wife that is irreligious
or froward, if he shall use like diligence to instruct and order her mind, if
he diligently and courteously apply himself to weed out by little and little
the noisome weeds out of her mind, both by wholesome and godly precepts, and by
Christian conversation; it cannot be but in time he shall feel the pleasant
fruit thereof, to both their comforts: for as it is commonly said, a good
Jack makes a good Gill. Every one therefore that purposes to marry, ought
also to remember that there be three manner of riches in man. Three manner of
riches in man.
1. The riches of the mind. 2. The riches of the body. 3. The riches of
temporal substance. The best and the most precious are the riches of the
mind: as without which, the other two are more hurtful then profitable.

The riches of the mind, Riches of the mind.
are the fear of God, faith, Gods glory, knowledge of his will, soberness,
liberality, chastity, silence, humblenes, honesty, and such like virtues.
These virtues lie not still, neither hide themselves wheresoever they be, but
will break out diverse ways, so that they may well be spied and discerned. As
a traveler has marks in his way, that he may proceed aright: so likewise
the man or woman that intends to marry, have also marks in their ways, by
which they may make a right choice. There be certain signs of this fitnes
and godlin^s both in the man and in the woman. So that if the man be desirous
to know a godly woman, or the woman would know who is a godly man, then let
them observe and mark these six points. Six rules to be observed in the
choice of a good wife, or a good husband.
1. The report. 2. The looks. 3. The speech. 4. The apparel. 5. The
companions. 6. And lastly, the education and bringing up, which are like the
pulses that show whether a man be sick or whole, well or ill.

1. The report, 1. Report.
name, or fame, he or she has had, and yet have, and what opinion honest
folks have of them: because as the market goes, so the market-men will talk.
A good man and a good woman commonly have a good name, Prou. 10.7. and 22.1.
Preach. 7.3.
because a good name is one of the blessings which God promises to good men
and good women: Psalm. 112.6.
but a good name is not to be praised from the wicked: Luke 6.26. And therefore
our Savior Christ says, Woe be to you when all men speak well of you: that
is, when evil men praise and commend you: for that is a plain argument, that
you are ambitious, vainglorious, and of the world: For the world likes and
praises her own. Ioh. 15.19. Nevertheless, it is convenient that every
Christian should so live in the world, that though he cannot say as Christ
said, Ioh. 8.46. Which of you can rebuke me of sin? Yet in truth, he with a
good conscience may boldly say, Which of you can accuse me of lying, swearing,
whoring, dissembling, dishonestie, deceit, covetousness, or such like. Which
though no man can clear himself in thought before God of these, and other
notorious vices: yet every one before men should avouch it, and approve it in
their doings: and live so uprightly, holily, justly, and unblameably that none
could justly charge them with any open sin: Luke 1.6, 15. Job. 1.1. 1 Thessalonians.
2.10. and 3.13. Tit. 2.12. 1. Pet. 1.15.

2. The look.
2. The next sign is the look: for as Solomon says, Eccles. 8.1. The wisdom
of a man does make his face to shine: that is, procures him favor and good
liking: Pro. 17.24.
so also godliness is in the face of a man or woman: and so likewise folly and
wickedness may many times be seen and discerned by the face of a man or
woman. And therefore it is said in Esaias, Esaias. 3.9.
The trial of their countenance testifies against them. As though their
looks could speak: Psalm. 18.27. and 101.5. Job. 31.1.
and therefore we read of proud looks, and angry looks, and wanton
looks, because they bewray pride, and anger, and wantonness. It is truly said,
that a modest man dwells at the sign of a modest countenance, and an honest
woman dwells at the sign of an honest face: which may fitly be compared to
the gate of the Temple, that was called Beautiful: showing, Act. 3.2.
that if the entry be so beautiful, within is great beauty.

To show how a modest countenance, Under fair faces, are sometimes hidden
filthy minds.
and womanly shamefastness do commend a chaste wife: it is observed, that the
word Nuptiae, which does declare the manner of her marriage: for it imports a
covering, because virgins which should be married, when they came to their
husbands, for modesty and shamefastnes did cover their faces: as we read of
Rebecca, Genes. 24.65.
which when she saw Isaak, and knew that he should be her husband, she cast a
veil before her face: showing that modesty should be learned before marriage,
which is the dowry that God adds to her portion.

3. The third sign is her talk, or speech, 3. The talk.
or rather her silence: for a man or woman's talking, is the mirror and
messenger of the mind, in the which it may commonly be seen without, in what
case the man or woman is within, according to the common proverb. Such as the
man or woman is, To Adam first, and to Moses after.
such is their talk. Now silence is the best ornament of a woman, and
therefore the law was given to the man, rather then to the woman, to show that
he should be the teacher, and she the hearer, and therefore she is commanded
to learn of her husband: 1. Cor. 14.34, 35. As the Echo answers but one
word for many, Maids must speak like an Echo.
which are spoken to her, so a maids answer should be in a word: for she
which is full of talk, is not likely to prove a quiet wife. The eye and the
speech, are as the Glasses of the mind: For out of the abundance of the heart
(says our Savior) the mouth speaks: Matthew. 12.34.
as though by the speech, we might know what abounds in the heart, and
therefore he says: Matthew. 12.37.
By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned. That is, thou shall be justified to be wise, or thou shall be
condemned to be foolish: thou shall be justified to be sober, or thou shall be
condemned to be rash: thou shall be justified to be humble, or thou shall be
condemned to be proud: thou shall be justified to be loving, or thou shall be
condemned to be envious. Therefore Solomon says: Prou. 18.7.
A Fools lips are a snare to his own soul. Snares are made for other, but
this snare catches a man's self, because it bewrays his folly, and causes
his trouble, and brings him into discredit. Contrariwise, The heart of the
wise (says Solomon) guides his mouth wisely, Prou. 16.23.
and the words of his mouth have grace.

Now to show that this should be one mark in the choice of a wife, Solomon
describing a right wife, says: Prou. 31.26.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of grace is in her tongue:
for that she delights to talk of the word of God. A wife that can speak
this language, is better than she which has all the tongues. But as the open
vessels were counted unclean, Numb. 19.15.
so also account, that the open mouth has much uncleanness.

4. The fourth sign is the apparel: 4. Apparel. Luke 16.19. Mark. 1.6.
for as the pride of the Glutton is noted, in that he went in purple every day;
so also the humility of John is noted, in that he went in haire-cloth every
day. For doubtless by a man or a woman's apparel, excessive laughter, and
going, they may partly be discerned of what disposition they are of. It is
convenient that he that will be a suter to a woman, that he mark what apparel
she customably uses to wear, whether it be vain, whorish, wanton, light, or
comely, modest, and mannerly, and beseeming her estate and condition: to wit,
honest and sober raiment. For apparel does give often a certain and sure
testimony of pride, lightness, wantonness, inconstancy, unshamefastness,
filthiness or uncleanness, and other vices, or virtues, that be either in the
man or the woman. For a modest man or woman, are for the most part known by
their sober attire: 2. King. 1.8.
as the Prophet Eliah was known by his rough garment. So that we are to look
for no better within, then we see without, for every one seems better than
they be: if the face be vanity, the heart is pride. He that bids us
abstain from the show of evil, 1. These. 5.22.
would have us to abstain from those means, husbands, or wives, who have the
shows of evil: for it is hard to come in the fashion, and not to be in the
abuse. And therefore the Apostle says: Romans 12.2.
Fashion not your selves like unto this world: as though the fashions of men
did declare of what side they are.

5. Company.
5. The fifth sign is the company, by means whereof, much may be perceived: for
as whole and sound eyes, with beholding and looking on sore eyes, be annoyed
and hurt, even so good and honest folks be oftentimes stained and hurt with
the company of the wicked and ungodly, Men are commonly conditioned, even like
unto them that they keep company withal.
according to the common proverb: Such like is every one, as the company is
with whom they keep: for birds of a feather will hold together; and
fellows in sin, will be fellows in league: even as young Rehoboam chose
young companions: 1. King. 12.8. The tame beast will not keep with the wild,
Prou. 1.11. and 13.20.
nor the clean dwell with the leprous: If a man can be known by nothing else,
Psalm. 6.8. Numb. 16.26. Iosu. 23.12. 2. Chron. 19.2. 2. Cor. 6.14. Ephesians. 5.7.
then he may be known by his companions: for like will to like, as Solomon
says: Thieves call one another. Therefore when David left iniquity, he said:
Away from me all ye that work iniquity: showing, that a man never
abandoneth evil, until he abandon evil company: for no good is concluded in
this Parliament. Therefore choose such a companion of thy life, as has chosen
company like thee before: for they which did choose such as loved profane
companions before, in a short time were drawn to be profane too.

6. The last sign is education, 6. The bringing up. It skilleth more by whom,
and by what ways me^ be brought up, then of whom they be begotten.
which gives also great testimony, namely by whom, and how every one is
brought up, whether the man or the woman were conversant among virtuous or
vicious persons, and whether the parties have continued in the nurture of the
virtuous: and showed themselves obedient to them, under whom they were brought
up, or whether either of the parties have broken out of this discipline, and
followed his, or her own wilfulnes. For it is a small matter for either of
them to have dwelt among, or with virtuous and religious folk: but rather
herein lies the force and weight, how far, and how much, either or both the
parties have followed those, and profited under them, and were dutiful and
obedient unto them. For Judas was among, and accompanied with the Apostles,
brought up certain years under Christ, but for all this, he was never the
better: for he left not his wicked prancks, neither was he obedient.
Nevertheless, good education and discipline forms good manners: men and women
commonly savor most of those good or evil things, which in youth they
learned. To be good, it does much profit to be well brought up.
Therefore to prove good, honest, and virtuous, it imports and forces much,
from the infancy to be well governed, and christianly brought up for we
retain much more of the customs, wherewith we be bred, then of the
inclinations wherewith we be borne.

All these properties are not spied at three or four commings, and meetinges
of the party, for hypocrisy is spunne with a fine thread, and none are so
often deceived as lovers. He therefore which will know all his wives qualities:
or she that will perceive her husbands dispositions, and inclinations, before
either be married to them, had need to see one the other eating, and walking,
woorking, and playing, and talking, and laughing, and chiding too: or else it
may be, the one shall have with the other, less then he or she looked for, or
more then they wished for. Here is to be remembered, a thing adjoined to
marriage, and going before it: namely, Betrothing, being a solemn and
laudable custom of Gods children, as is proved, Deuteron. 20.7. and 22.23, 24.
This Betrothing, What betrothing is.
is a covenant between the parties to be married, before fit witnesses
appointed thereto: whereby they give their troth, that they will, and shall
marry together, except some lawful vnmeetenesse and disliking of each of
other, do hinder it in the mean time. The practice of it we see: Matthew. 1.18.
Luke 1.27. Where the Virgin Marie being betrothed to Joseph, yet they had not
met together, to wit, to accompany together according to the end of
marriage. This custom, noted and marked in diverse places of the Scripture,
has diverse good grounds to be observed, which prove, that there ought to be a
contract before marriage. And for the ter understanding of this point of
Betrothing, it shall not be amiss, in some plain and short manner, to make
known the holy doctrine hereof, with the doctrine also of marriage, and
marriage duties. First then we must know, that every marriage, that has bin
well and orderly used, either of the heathen (which were only enlightened with
the law of nature) or of the people of God, who also were to be directed by his
word, was perfected by two solemn actions: that is, by an apparent and open
contract and by public marriage, the true and unfeigned confirmation thereof.
Wherefore we will first speak of a contract (which is also called espousing,
affiancing, betrothing, or hand fasting) the^ of marriage it self. And for
betrothing, or espousals, we read in the writing of ancient Philosophers,
Histories, Orators, Poets and others, that they be of great antiquity, of
necessary use, and have been ordinarily practiced. Insomuch, as the users
thereof are highly commended, the neglecters and abusers hereof, sharply
rebuked and condemned. Which seeing they could not do, but upon knowledge and
judgment, it does manifestly declare, that they did it by natures law,
written and bred in their breasts. And therefore that even nature it self,
though in some matters stark blind, and in many of very dim sight: yet she
has in all ages bewraied the lawfulnes, the necessity, and the use of
espousals, to be the first step and degree, to a lawful and comfortable
marriage.

But to omit this law, and to come to the written word, let us further
consider what allowance we find in the same, and consequently what it is, not
only to marry, not only according to the direction of nature, but also in
the Lord. First it is certain, that the Lord approves them as his own sacred
ordinance: for we read in Exodus 21.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. how carefully he
provides by sundry and many straight commandments for the Maide-seruant that
is betrothed. First, that she shall not go out of her service, as the
Men-seruants do. Secondly, that her Master shall have no power to sell her to
a strange people. Thirdly, that being betrothed unto his son, he shall deal
with her as with his own daughter. Fourthly, if another wife be taken with
her, that neither her food, her raiment, nor recompense of her Virginity,
shall any whit at all be diminished. Fifthly, that whenever she goes out of
her service, she shall pay no money at al. None whereof the Lord would have done
(much less all of them) unless espowsalls had been his own ordinance,
instituted, ordained and commanded by himself to be used, even of the
Maid-seruant, that was bought and sold. Again it is written in Deuteronomy. 22.23,
etc. how the Lord by like commandment, provides for ye espowsed maid, being
inoffensiue, yet being guilty, he punishes with less punishment, then if
she had been indeed married. First then he commands, that if any man shall
abuse a betrothed virgin in the City, both shall be stoned to death, the
Maid because she cried not, the man because he has humbled his neighbors
wife. Where by the way, is to be remembered, how God calls the betrothed, a
wife. If then such wickedness by justice deserves death, and if betrothed
persons be truly to be termed man and wife, only in regard of the precedent
espowsals, we may then plainly see, how highly the Lord does esteem and
honor them: the breach whereof, he punishes with the punishment of adultery,
and the persons betrothed, he honors with the names of man and wife. If
indeed he had not ordained and allowed them, but that they had been of humane
institution alone, he would not have honored them with such titles, or have
imposed death by stones, for the breach of man's ordinance. Again, if a man
abuse a betrothed maid in the field, he says, that the man shall die, but
unto the maid thou shall do nothing, because there is in the maid no cause of
death.

Now imposing death upon this man, and not upon him that abuses a maid not
betrothed, the Lord does hereby evidently teach, that espowsals are a
principal degree in marriage. And therefore the unlawful breach thereof
deserves death. For what else should ye Lord grace the^, with such great
privileges, and punish the breach thereof, with severe punishment?

Further, the faithful in all ages instructed by these, and such
commandments, approved and practiced these espowsals, not only by
themselves, Judge. 14.1, etc.
but also by their children. Sampson liking and loving a woman of the
Philistines in Timnah, desired his Father and Mother to give her to him to
wife: and so they did: at which time Sampson made a feast, according to the
custom of the young men. Albeit, her father afterward would not suffer him to
marry her, but gave her to another: for which injury Sampson revenged
himself of the Philistines, by burning up the ricks of standing corn,
vineyardes, and Olives. For which the Philistines burnt both the Father and the
daughter. 1. Sam. 18.15.26.27. 2. Sam. 3.14.15.16.
So David begged Micholl of her father Saul, who gave her to him to wife, with
condition, that he would bring him a hundredth foreskinnes of the Philistines:
and therefore, when Saul was dead, he required her of Ishbosheth, Saules
son, who sent her unto him. Also Joseph and Marie the mother of Christ, were
betrothed, which God would never have permitted, if it had not been of his own
ordinance and agreeable to his own will, or if he might any manner of way, have
stained either Joseph's honesty, or Mary's virginity: Nay if he had not much
more graced and adorned both, then the want of espowsals could have done.

And to avoid tediousness in so plain a truth, 1. Cor. 7.36.37.38.
seeing the scripture gives power and authority to Parents, to give, and not
to give their children in marriage: saying, let him do what he will.

Again, he that gives her in marriage does well, and he that gives her not
to marriage does better: (whereof we shall speak more at large anon) there
must needs be before the public act of marriage, some special time
appointed: wherein both Parents, and parties, may testify and signify their
mutual liking and consents, unless they despise to marry in the Lord.

Wherefore, if the law of nature, the law of God, the practice of the Heathen,
the custom of Faithful, especially of the Parents of Christ: If the
punishment of the espowsall-breakers, and the rewards and privileges of the
espowsed. And finally, if the fatherly authority over children, do approve
and require the continual use of this ordinance of God, it must needs be
confessed to be both lawful and necessary: yea being the first principal
part of marriage it self, it must needs be honorable in his kind, as well as
marriage it self is. Now then, in the next place, let us see and learn, what
a contract is, to the end, that upon sound knowledge and right judgment, we
may always use it well, and never ill, for want of good understanding.

A Contract, is a voluntary promise of marriage, mutually made between one
man and one woman, both being meet and free to marry one another, and
therefore allowed so to do by their Parents. This short sentence, shows the
whole nature, quality, property, use, and abuse, with all other things, that
are to be observed or eschued in a right Contract, as shall appear by the
unfolding of every word contained therein: For as there is none vain and idle,
void of his proper signification, so every one has his proper weight,
serving for special and necessary use.

1. First, we call a Contract a promise, and so it is indeed, for what is a
promise but a speech which affirms or denies, to do this or that, with
pupose and words of testimony, to perform and accomplish, yt which is
affirmed, or not to do that which is denied? And what other thing is indeed a
marriage Contract, but this? so that it must be in nature, a true and right
promise: not the vow of a promise in time to come, but a present promise in
deed. For if one party do say, I will promise to marry thee: this is no
promise in deed, but a promise of a promise, and consequently no Contract, but
a promise of a Contract. And therefore tieth nor binds neither parties, nor
Parents to keep the same: for it is not in nature any contract at al. Again,
if a Contract be a promise, it is not only a purpose of the heart, nor a dumb
show, or doubtful signification of promise: but a plain promise uttered and
pronounced in a right form of speech: as when one says, I do promise to
marry thee, or I do espouse, affiance, or betroth my self to thee in
marriage, or such like: wherein al ambiguitie and doubtfulnesse of speech, is
to be eschued: that as the meaning of ye heart is simple and plain, so likewise
the words of the tongue, might be simple and plain, void of all deceit.

2. Secondly, we call a Contract a promise of marriage, because it is not a
promise of every thing, neither of honor, of inheritance, of riches, or of
any other thing else, saving only of marriage. Now we mean by marriage, not
only the parties married, but all conjugal and marriage duties and offices,
that peculiarly belong to this honorable estate, and are necessarily to be
performed mutually of both. For this promise, touching persons themselves* is
of such force and weight, that it tends to the alienation of the property of
bodies: for so it is written, the wife has not the power of her own body,
but the husband: 1. Cor. 7, 4.
and likewise also the husband has not the power over his own body, but the
wife. For although this is not perfectly done, till the act of marriage be
ended, yet this promise is the principal beginner and worker thereof, because
they that promise marriage, do necessarily thereby promise, that two shall
become one flesh, and that they will always give mutual benevolence one to
another.

Touching the peculiar duties of husbands and wives, which likewise are
promised by this Contract, we will here only recite them, leaving the
doctrine thereof, to another place and time.

1. The husband his duty is, first to love his wife, as his own flesh. 2.
Then to govern her in all duties, that properly concern the state of marriage,
in knowledge, in wisdom, judgment, and justice. Thirdly, to dwell with her.
Fourthly, to use her in all due benevolence, 1. Pet. 13.7. 1. Cor. 7.45.
honestly, soberly, and chastely.

1. The wife, her duty is, in all reverence and humility, to submit and
subject her self to her husband, in all such duties as properly belong to
marriage. Secondly, therein to be an help unto him, according to gods
ordinance. Thirdly, to obey his commandments in all things, which he may
command by the authority of an husband. Fourthly and lastly, to give him
mutual benevolence. As for the rest of mutual duties, as they may be all
comprehended under these, so there shall be a fitter occasion to speak thereof.

Thirdly, we call this promise of marriage, voluntary, because it must not
come from the lips alone, but from the wel-liking and consent of the heart:
for if it be only a verbal promise, without any will at all, (and so mere
hypocritical and dissembled) though it binds the party that promises, to
the performance of his promise, made before God and man: yet if the Parents
afterward shall certainly know this, and that there was no will, nor unfeigned
meaning at all in the party, neither yet is, but rather a loathing and
abhorring of his spouse betrothed, though he be not able to render just and
sufficient cause thereof, they may upon this occasion, either defer the day
of marriage the longer, to see if God will happily change the mind of the
party, or utterly break and frustrate the promise: if all good means and
occasions having been used, none will prevail: but that the party rather
grows worse and worse. For a Contract being a willing and a voluntary
consent, there is no cause why the Parents, and such as have authority and
power in such cases, when they shall undoubtedly know, that the promise was
altogether unwilling, and therefore made in mere hypocrisy and dissimulation,
neither can be by tract of time, or any other good means used, be bettered,
but rather (waxes worse and worse) may not break and frustrate the same.
For why did Rebeccaes Parents deny her to Isaac, neither would send her with
Abraham's servant to be married, Genesis 24, 57.58
before such time as they had asked her consent: yea, when as they said: We
will call the maid, and ask her consent: do they not plainly show, that
both the law of Nature, and the law of God, taught them, that this consent was
of great moment, and absolute necessity? And when the Apostle does command
men and women, to marry in the Lord, how can that marriage be in the Lord,
when the one party does not only, not love, but hate the other? And how can
such two become one flesh lawfully, when as there wants the union and
conjunction of the heart, the true natural mother of all marriage duties?
Wherefore this promise must be in this respect, at least, willing, and
voluntary. For albeit, it is not necessary, neither yet possible, that there
should be such great measure of true, holy, and sanctified love at that time,
as afterward (for that grows by little and little, according to the blessing
of God, and the faithful performance of other duties afterward, even to their
lives end) yet if it be voluntary and unfeigned, it is enough, and fully
sufficient, to make a true contract in the Lord. So, as no man ought to
separate those, whom God has thus joined. Secondly, we call it voluntary, in
respect of constraint and compulsion, contrary to a free consent: for if
either party be urged, constrained, or compelled, by great fear of their
Parents, or others, by threatening of loss of preferment, of health, of limme,
of life, or of any such other like, or by any other violent manner of dealing
whatsoever, to yield their promise clean contrary to ye motion of good liking
of their hearts. This kind of promise, as it does not bind the party to
keep it: so it ought to be frustrated and broken by the Parents themselves,
or by such masters as may and ought, to command and rule them in such cases.
If this were not so, how could the parties keep the commandments of God,
giving them direction whom to marry? First that they should marry only in
the Lord.

Again, that they should not be unequally yoked with the infidels, neither
whereof they can keep, if their parents might compel them or Contract and
marry It becomes rather the Parents to persuade their children by all good
means, to yield their consent, rather then to draw them by wicked slight
and cunning, drunkenness, or any other wicked and violent means. For as that
is not to marry in the Lord: so all such forced Contracts may be broken and
frustrated by the Magistrate, who is Gods Lieutenant, to redress such
intolerable enormities among the societies of men. For if Parents may deny
marriage to such as have not only by force and violence obtained the word and
body of their child, much more may the Magistrate deny marriage, where only
a verbal promise has been gotten by violent compulsion, and so for these
causes, and in this sense and meaning alone, we conclude, that Contract must
be voluntary.

Fourthly, it must be a mutual promise, that is, either party must make it
to other, not the man only, nor the woman only, but both the man and the
woman: though decency and order require the man to do it first, and then the
woman, because he is her head, and she his glory: and ought to lead and
guide her in all things, wherein the Lord has put a pre-eminence. For if this
promise be not mutually made of them both, but of one alone, it is no true and
perfect Contract. And therefore may be broken by Parents, and such as have
authority herein: because the party vnpromising, is not bound by word nor
deed, but is free, insomuch that such a Contract is rather so termed, then for
that it is any true Contract indeed. But if it be mutual, then it does
mutually and inuiolably bind both: so that in this regard, neither Parent,
Magistrate, nor any other, can or ought to break it. For this being fully
performed and accomplished, is one principal cause of making two one flesh, in
such sort as it is written. Therefore shall man leave his father and mother,
and shall be joined to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh, etc. Genes.
2.24. Also that the man has not power over his own body, nor the woman over
hers: and so to be short, hence arises all mutual benevolence between them.
And therefore a point of great weight and necessity, in no wise to be omitted
in Contract.

Fifthly, we say, it must be between one man and one woman: Where first it is
to be noted, that it may not, nor ought not, to be between any other
creatures, but mankind, nay neither among brute beasts, nor Angels. For God
has not ordained nor instituted marriage for them, neither can it be between
man and man, or woman and woman. If any such Contract be either voluntary, or
by fraud and deceit, by ignorance or error, it is no Contract at all, but a
mere wicked profanation of Gods ordinance, who gave only woman to man, not
woman to woman, nor man to man. Likewise, it cannot be between Angels good or
badde, and woman, because God has set no such ordinance in the nature of these
creatures. If therefore there has been any such matter, or shall be attempted
by Satan, with any woman (as some stories report) it is nothing else but a
mere illusion and deuillish practice, to draw and deceive superstitious
persons into the kingdom of darkness, and to intrappe them in the chains of
condemnation: against which, and all other diabolical illusions, we ought to
watch and pray continually.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that between one man, and one woman, and not
two men and one woman, or two women, not between two women and one man or more.
By which is condemned, as mere nullities and prophanations, all Contracts
whatsoever, made between more then two. Math. 19.5. Mar. 10.8 Ephesians. 5.31. 1.
Cor, 6.16.
For it is written: And they twain shall be one flesh: to which Mark adds:
So that they are no more twain, but one flesh. Wherefore, seeing that Christ
and his Apostles, expound the first institution of marriage, of two only, and
not of any more: it is certain, that the contract or promise thereof, ought to
be of two alone, and no more. So the holy Ghost saying; 1. Cor. 6.2.
Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband: and not,
let every one have his own wives, or own husbands: it is therefore plain and
questionless, that he would have a contract and marriage, to be only
between one and one. Again, saying: his own, and her own, does he not
plainly insinuate every other person, and persons, not to be their own, but
mere strangers, with whom they ought to have nothing ado, in respect of
marriage duties, especially considering, that the Greek word Idio, can import
no less. Now then, if there be at any time, or in any place, a promise
between more then two, as it is a wicked and mere profanation of the holy
ordinance of God: so it may and ought to be broken; yea, severely punished by
Parents and Magistrates. If against this, it be objected, that many of the
Patriarchs, and good men under the Law, had many wives, or at least more then
one: We answer, it was their secret sin, and great infirmity, though
proceeding from ignorance of the first institution, of marriage, of the Law and
the holy Prophets (or else they had warrant from God, which we have noted.) Of
the institution, because Christ interpreting it, Math. 19.8.
says: From the beginning it was not so: proouing, that Moses permitted
diuorcement of the first wife, and marriage of the second, not moved or
warranted by the authority of Gods institution, but by a fearful and
timorous consideration of the hardness of the peoples hearts, whom he ruled,
least they should have rebelled against him, if he had not so done. Of the
law, because there was by this means, great injury done to Gods truth, and to
the wives divorced: besides, the law it self well understood (as Christ
expounds it, Math. 5.32.) admits no diuorcement, except it be for
fornication, and that the Lord did disallow and hate all other kinds of
diuorcement, made without the cause of fornication: Deuteronomy. 24.4.
it is evident,. in that he condemns the second marriage, after the first
diuorcement, affirming that the woman so divorced, is defiled by her second
husband: which could not be true, if their marriage had been lawful and
warrantable, Hebr. 13.4. Mal. 2.14.15.16.
by the commandment of God, for where the marriage is lawful and honorable,
there the bed is undefiled. Of the Prophets, because the Lord has been
witness between thee and thy wife of thy youth, against whom thou have
transgressed: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant: and did
not he make one? yet had he abundance of the spirit: and wherefore one?
because he sought a godly seed: therefore keep your selves in your spirit,
and let none trespass against the wife of his youth. If thou hate her, put
her away (says the Lord of Israel) yet he covers the injury under his
garment (says the Lord of Hosts) therefore keep your selves in your spirit,
and transgress not. Then which words, what can be more plainly spoken
against this sin of having more wives then one? do condemn it, and if the
Prophets do so sharply censure and rebuke it? Why should any be so impudent
and wicked, as to justify it in word, or to approve it in thought? Rather as
here we teach, let us judge and believe, that every lawful Contract and
marriage, ought to be only between one man, and one woman. And the rest to be
so many breaches of Gods ordinances and commandments, which can not be but
hateful to him, and injurious to mankind: but especially to the Church of God,
which ought to arise of a holy and godly seed. Now if any Contract be made
between more then two, it is altogether void, and of none effect, and ought to
be broken by the parties, and punished by the Magistrate.

The sixth point, concerns the persons between whom the Contract is made, in
whom there is required two properties: meetnesse for marriage, and freedom or
liberty to marry one another. Touching the first, those especially are fit and
meet to marry, whom God does call to that honorable estate, and commands
them to use it as his lawful means, appointed and sanctified for procreation:
for so it appears by the first institution, wherein God gave the woman to the
man to be an helper meet for him, as in other things, so especially in this:
whom he blessed, Genesis 2.20.22. and 1.28.
saying: Bring forth fruit and multiply, etc. And that we may know more
particularly what sort of persons they be, the holy Ghost describes them to
be such, as to whom the gift of continency is denied, yet the gift of
procreation is vouchsafed and granted. For if marriage (as the Apostle says,
Hebrews. 13. verse. 4.) be honorable among all sorts of persons, 1. Cor. 7.8.9.
then amongst those that be strong. Again, it is written: I say to the
unmarried, and to widows, it is good for them if they abide even as I do: but
if they cannot abstain, let them marry: for it is better to marry, then to
burn. In which words we may plainly see, that he points out, as with his
finger, those that are called and commanded by God to marry: namely, such as
have not received the gift of abstinence and continency, which calling and
commandment is so much the straighter, and the more to be regarded and
followed, because the Apostle gave it to those persons that were molested, and
pressed with many and grievous persecutions (a season of all other most unfit
for any to marry in.) In as much, as beside the ordinary incommodities of
marriage estate, it cannot but bring with it many extraordinary grieuances and
troubles. Notwithstanding, if such persons be called and commanded then to
marry, when as there was most grievous persecutions, much more in the time of
peace and prosperity. By this then we see, that all persons which have not
received the gift of abstinence, but of procreation, are called and commanded
to marry, and therefore meet for marriage, and also may lawfully enter a
contract of the same.

But are none else meet for marriage? We answer, that no other is called,
commanded, or warranted by God, to make contract with any of these meet ones,
because they are unable to perform the principal duties of marriage. As for
children under age, they are altogether unfit to take upon them this honorable
estate, and therefore debarred by Gods commandment, from making any promise
or contract: if they have, it is but a mere profanation of this holy
ordinance, worthy great punishment, and also to be broken, if that being come
to years of discretion, and state of marriage, they do not by wisdom and
religion, supply all that was wanting in their former rash attempt, to the full
co^tentation of all that have interest in them. As for those that have received
the gift of continency, they are called and counseled to chastity, during
the whole time of that gift: for so says our Savior Christ ( All men cannot
receive this thing, save they to whom it is given, Matthew. 19.12.) And again,
he that is able to receive this, let him receive it. So the Apostle says, It
is good for them if they abide even as I do, 1. Cor. 7.7. Again, Art thou
loosed from a wife, seek not a wife: So likewise are those that are borne
chaste, or made chaste by men, or by themselves for the kingdom of heaven. But
you will say, what if any of these do make a contract, and marry? We answer
first if they be utterly unfit for marriage with one that is meet, their
contract is of no validity, and may be broken by superior authority: 1.
Cor. 7.27.
but if they both be fit for marriage, we say with the Apostle, Art thou
loosed from a wife, seek not a wife? but if thou take a wife, thou sinnest
not: and if a virgin marry, she sins not, etc. Last of all, as
consanguinitie and affinity do restrain and bind from this former contract
and marriage: so likewise do natural frigiditie and coldness, infancy,
incurable diseases, that deprive men of all fitnes for the use of marriage. So
as if any such, by fraud, ignorance, or any other sinister means be contracted
it is nothing, and the parties may be lawfully separated, because they were
never joined together in the Lord, but against the Lord. And here when we say,
meet and free to marry one with an other, there would be a wise and holy
regard had of the quality in years, of agreement in religion, of similitude
in nature, and manners in outward estate, condition and quality of person, and
such like necessary circumstances. For what is more unmeet, then for an old
person to promise to be contracted to a young one? for an Infidel to contract
with a believer? for a good nature and well mannered, with a crooked and
froward person? for a Prince with a beggar? For although all these do not
annihilate and make void the contract altogether, yet such contracts cannot
be in the Lord. And thus much shall suffice to have taught, touching the
fitnes of marriage.

Now concerning the freedom and liberty, it is clear, that those alone have
liberty and freedom to contract, who have liberty to marry. Now if we will
know who those be, they are diversely described and noted in Leuit 18. where
certain degrees, as well in affinity, as in consanguinitie, are expressly
forbidden: so that if such parties shall contract themselves together, their
contract is vain, and a mere nullitie, such as ought to be broken and
punished. Again, every one either betrothed or married, is bounden and tied
from contracting with any other: for that were nothing else but to promise
gross and beastly adultery. And the Apostle teaches, that the wife is bound
by the law, as long as her husband lives, so likewise is the betrothed wife:
insomuch, as if any of these shall contract themselves with another, it is a
mere nullitie, and wicked profanation of Gods ordinance, and ought upon
knowledge thereof, to be broken and punished. And thus we see what manner of
persons the Lord has called and commanded to marry, and who they be that are
meet and free to marry together, and who not.

The last point, is the consent and allowance of their Parents; which though it
be very material and necessary, yet it is not the sole form or formal cause
which makes a true contract. For if the parents should yield their consent to
their children, being neither meet nor free to be married together, it were
nothing, and such a contract, though warranted by parents consent, ought to be
broken by the parties themselves: and the Magistrate, and both parents and
children punished. For this cause we have not said simply and allowed, but
allowed so to do, because that consent of parents to such children as are
meet and fit to be married together, does not only make that contract good,
true, and inviolable: which wanting their consents, though in other respects
never so good, is a mere nullitie, and cannot be accomplished without the
manifest breaches of the institution, and guilt of adultery.

Now by Parents, we understand not only the natural Parents, but such as by
the law of nature and of GOD, supply their places: as Grandfathers, great
Grandfathers, Aunts, great Uncles and Aunts, Brethren, Sisters, Kinsmen, and
Kinswomen, Magistrates, and those to whose families the parties do especially
belong. For all these are honored in Scripture by the name of Parents. Neither
may we exempt out of this number, Gardians, Masters, and such to whom the
continual custody and tuition of any, is lawfully committed. For if such be
commanded to provide for them, as parties of their own families; there is no
reason why they should not especially be respected, as well in bestowing them
abroad out of their family, as they were in taking them into it: for if their
consent be necessary at their coming in, why should they go out without
their consent?

Further we say, their parents, and not his, or her parents, because parents
on both sides, ought necessarily to consent and allow their children to betroth
themselves. For this is the privilege, not of some parents, but of all, and in
that they be parents. Moreover we say, allowed, and not required, neither
commanded, nor yet exhorted or inducted so to do: because that albeit the
parents do neither call their children to this contract, neither command
them, neither require them, neither exhort them (all which notwithstanding they
ought to do) yet if they do but only allow them, and give their bare consent
that they shall contract themselves; it is enough for the tying of the knot,
and the substance of the contract. And to prove that this contract is
necessary, we need no more reasons, then that which the Apostle sets down,
saying of the father: 1. Cor. 7.30.
Let him do what he will: by which words, he puts it in the will and power
of his parents, whether to marry, or not to marry: saying, in doing either of
the twain, he sins not. Yet it is written in another place: Exodus 22.16.17
If her father refuse to give her to him, he shall pay money according to the
dowry of virgins. In which words, the Lord does give an absolute authority to
the father, to yield, or not to yield his consent, to give, or not to give his
daughter: for if he have power to deny it to his daughter, that is deflowred,
and so by the Apostles judgment, made one flesh with another; much more
lawfully may he deny his consent to her that is no manner of way bound, but is
every way free. 1. Cor. 6.16.
And if he have power to deny his consent in such a case, much more has he
power to give his consent.

Now his authority and power to deny his consent, is apparent by the express
commandment of God in that behalf, which says: Take heed to thy self,
Exodus 34.16.
that thou make no compact with the inhabitants of the land, and so take of
their daughters unto thy sons, etc. More plain: Neither shall thou make
marriages with them, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
neither give thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter to thy son. How
could those parents observe this commandment, unless God had given them
power to deny consent to their children? Or why does he rather forbid this to
the parents; then to the children, but to show that the power to give, or not
to give, was in the parents, and not in the children: especially considering
that children being the principal parts of their parents goods, are no less
in their power and authority to give and bestow, then the rest are. This was
so well known in the Church, and so usually practiced among the people of God,
that the greatest among them, who might seem to have greatest liberty in that
behalf, yet they durst not disobey this holy commandment of GOD. Judge. 15.
For Sampson, the strongest of all, though he loved a maid of the Philistines,
yet he durst not betroth himself unto her, before he had entreated his parents
to give her unto him. David a mighty valiant prince, begged Micholl at the
hands of Saul her father, and after his death being betrothed unto him, he
desired her of Ishbosheth her brother. Jacob agreed with Laban for his wives.
2. Sam. 3.14. Genesis 29.18. etc
And Abraham the father of the faithful, by his servant, entreated Rebeccaes
parents, to give her to wife to his son Isaac. All which testimonies and
examples, do plainly prove, the greatest interest, power, and authority, that
parents have in bestowing their children, and that their consent needed to the
six former points, whereof we have spoken, does make so sure a Contract, as
cannot be loosed and untied, by any authority under heaven. For here in this
that saying of Christ, (Matthew. 19.6.) is truly verified: Let no man put
asunder that which God has coupled together. But if this, or any of the former
be omitted, the Contract may be broken and disanulled. And least we should
be ignorant, or forget what those errors are, which disauow and lawfully
frustrate a Contract, these they be. be set at liberty by themselves, or by
any power whatsoever, because this contract, and every parcel thereof is in
the Lord. It being a sacred ordinance of God, as it cannot but have special
use and fruit among his Saints: so now it is time to declare and teach the
same.



thrice on three several days, to the end that every material defect might be
learned in time when it might be remedied, then after marriage accomplished,
when it is remediless.

Joseph was contracted before they were married, she was found to be with
child; (though without ill demeanor on her part) yet it made Joseph so
afraid, that he had intended in his heart privately to relinquish and forsake
her, and had so done indeed, unless Gods Angel had commanded the contrary.
Nevertheless, it was the Contract that discovered this truth, and so
preserved Mary's virginity, that the scripture might be fulfilled, which
says: A virgin shall conceive, etc. If this were not, men might upon knowledge
or ignorance, make two several contracts with several persons, and commit
fornication and adultery with other men's wives, either betrothed or married,
and so lose their honesty and chastity, to their great infamy and
hinderance. Last of all, it serves to condemn and avoid all private
contracts, and secret marriages, and contrarily, to justify and grace the
honorable estate of marriage, as well in the beginning, as in the end thereof,
that all things touching the same might be begun, continued and finished in
the Lord, according to his commandment, that his promised blessings might
ensue upon it accordingly.

This being done, the parents and parties are to be charged in the name of God,
as they will answer at the day of judgment, plainly to bewray and declare, if
they know any of the foresaid impediments in themselves, or in their children*
for which this Contract ought not to be made. If they say, they know none, or
if they declare none, then the consent of the parents is to be demanded: which
if they yield, then the consent of the parties is also to be required. And so
the parties are to be betrothed and affianced in these words, or such like.

I. N. do willingly promise to marry thee N. if God will, and I live,
whenever our parents shall think good and meet: till which time, I take thee
for my only betrothed wife, and thereto plight thee my troth. In the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: So be it. The same is to be done by
the woman, the name only changed, and all in the presence of the parents,
kinsfolks and friends. After this, the parents are to be admonished, to set
and appoint the day of marriage neither too near, nor too far off, but to
appoint a competent space of time, that it may be sufficient for the learning
and trial of all lets and impediments, whereby promised marriage might be
hindered, and yet give no occasion, by reason of the length thereof, to provoke
the parties to incontinencie. In the mean time, the parties affianced are to
be admonished to abstain from the use of marriage, and to behave themselves
wisely, chastely, lovingly, and soberly, till the day appointed do come. And so
with a Psalm and prayer, to conclude the holy action.

1. Because there might be some preparation for the things pertaining to
housekeeping, between that time, and the celebrating of marriages: but this is
not a chief cause.

2. Because the Lord would by this means make a difference betwixt brute
beasts and men, and betwixt the profane and his children. For they even as
beasts, do after a beast-like manner, being led by a natural instinct and
motion, fall together: but God will have this difference, whereby his children
should be severed from that brutish manner, in that they should have a
certain distance of time between the knitting of affection, and enjoying one
of another, and a more near joining of one unto another.

3. That they should in that time think on the causes why they are to marry,
and the duties of marriage: for many enter thereinto, not considering at all of
the great duties belonging to them in the same, nor think of the troubles and
afflictions that follow marriage. But the Lord would have these things thought
on, and a consideration to be had, both of the causes of marriage, and the
duties to be performed, and the troubles to be undergone. A good and careful
householder so orders and frames his household, so as it may manifestly
appear, that it is indeed the house of a faithful Christian, and that he
himself is as a pastor over his family, that he instructs it diligently
in the fear of GOD, and keeps it in good and godly discipline, by continual
exercise in godliness. So that in his house, you shall find the chaste wife,
the shamefaced, plain and modest wife, decked without, as she is within; no
painted nor masked thing, rendering true obedience to her husband, and having a
careful eye upon her family, servants, her children: the master, father, and
husband: the children and servants, every one likewise in his degree,
employing himself sincerely in his duty and office, approouing his doings as
before God.

Froward wicked qualities of the mind. 1. Cor. 5.10.11. and 6.9.
Now, like as in the mind there are such virtues, as we have before spoken of:
so are there in it also noisome wicked vices and detractions, as ungodliness,
despising of Gods word, unbelief, idolatry, superstition, ignorance, Gal.
5.19, 20, 21. 1. Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5.
churlishness, lying, falsehood, hypocrisy, unrighteousness, swearing,
backbyting, mistemperance, drunkenness, gluttony, covetousness, unchastity,
unshamefastness, misnourture, rashness, furiousness, wantonness, pride,
presumption, vainglory, chiding, brawling, and vnhandsomnesse. Who so now
chooses him a wife, or she a husband, that is infected and tangled with such
noisome vices, he seeks not a spouse, or she a husband, for a right,
peaceable, good, honest, and christian life; but an hell, a painfulnesse, and
destruction of all expedient, quiet, and virtuous living: but specially, there
is little good to be hoped for of him or her, whereas ungodliness and
contempt of the word remains. For like as the fear of GOD draws the whole
garland of virtues with it: so ungodliness and despising of Gods word, bring
all vice and abominations: yea, and shuts up the way to amendment. When
these points and rules are duly and warily observed on either part, they may
join together, and say as Laban and Bethuel said: This comes of the Lord,
therefore we will not speak against it. Oh how happy are those, in whom
faith, love and godliness are married together, before they marry themselves?
For none of these martial, carnal, and clowdie, and whining marriages can
say, that godliness was invited and bidden to their bridal, and therefore the
blessings which are promised to godliness, do fly from them.

2. The riches of the body.
2. After the riches of the mind, do the riches of the body follow next, as
is a comely, beautiful, or well favored body, health, a convenient age,
Beauty.
etc. A beautiful body is such one, as is of right form and shape, meet,
and of strength to bear children, and to keep and govern an house, even such
one as both the man and woman can find in their hearts unfeignedly to love
above all other, and to be content withal, etc. As concerning the beauty or
comelines of the body (where there is else no good property or quality
beside) Solomon says, Pro. 31.30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity:
but the woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. And Prou. 11.22. As
a Jewel of gold in a swines snoute; so is a fair woman which lacks
discretion: or is of uncomely behavior, and has not wit nor government to
behave her self. For beauty is a frail gift and a slipperous, and more
profitable to those that behold it, then to those that have it: for the
beautiful woman can take no great pleasure in beauty, but a little as it were
in a glass, and yet incontinently she forgets that she beheld and saw: and
yet it is many times both to her self, and to them that behold her beauty, a
provocation to much evil. She that is fair, waxes proud of it, and he that
does behold her, becomes subject unto filthy love, but in the mind (which
is judged to be the man) does consist the true lineaments and properties of
fairness, the which entice and provoke spiritual and heavenly love, being
mixed with nothing that is shameful, either to be done or spoken: and
therefore, there is no man so far without wit, that had not rather have her
which is foul and hard favored, but yet is honest and virtuous, then to have
her which is fair and dishonest, and also irreligious.

Happy, and twice happy is that man and that woman, that are coupled in
marriage, with a godly and virtuous mate and bedfellow, they are doubtless
greatly blessed of God. For House and riches are the inheritance of the
fathers, Pro. 11.22. and 19.14.
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord They therefore are not well in their
wits, but greatly deceive themselves, that make choice of wives, or husbands,
having regard only to their stature, comeliness of personage, or to their
beauty, and esteem not more the riches of the mind.

Health also must be considered in their choice; least otherwise great
inconvenience come thereby, and least the whole house be poisoned and infected.
But we speak here of contagious sicknesses, and not of such common infirmities
and usual diseases, that both men and women are subject unto. As of madness,
frenzy, french pocks, or such like: which every wise man and woman, does
utterly detest.

Nevertheless, where any married parties are now together, and be visited with
any such diseases, they must one comfort and suffer with the other, as they
that are in one body, etc.

Riches of temporal substance.
To have the goods of temporal substance, is to be borne of noble parents, or
to come of worshipful stock, to have lands, livings, riches, great offices,
gains, or occupyings, and such like. But the chiefest nobility, and most
worthy of commendation, is indeed to be noble in virtues, in good works,
manners, and conditions. But to be borne of gentilitie, and to use and behave
himself ungently, is eue^ as much, as to shame himself and his kindred.

Such therefore, as purpose to marry, ought carefully to foresee and look to
this matter, least being too greedy of honor, worship or wealth, intending to
have the gold, and catching the hot coals, do burn themselves without
recovery: Choose a wife for virtue only Pro. 19.14.
for a man may buy gold too dear (as we usually say.) For temporal goods sake,
the matter miscarieth, and is in danger.

There is sometime great riches, but with little honesty, and less good
conscience is it gathered together. And with the same riches, will not continue
always, prosperity, peace and quietness. Many so trust to their wealth, as
that they will not frame themselves to any lawful calling, neither will they
learn any: therefore also can they do nothing to profit either their country,
or the common wealth, but live idly, daintily, and with pride, riot, excess,
and dishonestie, do quickly waste that, which has bin long in gathering
together. Now, when there is always taking from the heap, and nothing laid
thereto, it wastes away in process of time, how great soever it has been.
Then follows poverty: yea, an intolerable, and impatient poverty. For they
that now lavish and spend prodigally altogether, have had no necessity
hitherto, but flowed in all wealth: therefore, after such a sunshine, there
comes ever an extreme heat, and thenceforth begin they to warm
themselves at the bare leaves: and to spare, when all is spent.

Such then, as in their choice, look to the multitude of goods, and regard not
how they were gotten, and whence they came, have customably such smoky hattes
set upon their heads, that all the water in the river, cannot wash away the
corruption thereof. For goods without God, honesty, and good conscience, is a
deadly poison, and the bodily devil himself: Yea, goods and riches in the
hand of an indiscreet and ignorant man, is as a sharp knife, in the hand of a
child, that does no good therewith, but wound and hurt himself. Wherefore
every man and every woman in their election, ought to have more respect to
virtue, godliness, discretion and knowledge, then to riches. Moreover, an hand
that is occupied, and wins, and gets his living godly, christianly, and
honestly, does far excel any riches that are won. For although the world
esteem the^ happy, which live in wealth and ease, and idleness: yet the holy
Ghost approves and allows the^ best, that live of the mean profit of their
labors. Psalm. 128.1.2.

Seek no match in marriage above thy degree.
And this also, is a very necessary point to be observed, that the man choose
such a woman, and the woman such a man, as that there be equality betwixt them
both, in blood and estate.

For by how much the greater and straighter the conjunction is of the husband
and the wife; so much the more ought every one provide to be indifferently
matched: Equality in marriage to be respected.
and truly this equality of marriage, is in two special things to be
considered: to wit, estate, and age. For as two horses, or two oxen, of
unequal stature, cannot be coupled under one self same yoke, so a noble
woman, matching with a man of base estate, or contrarily, a Gentleman with a
beggar, cannot be consorted and well matched under the bands of wedlock. But
yet when it happens, that a man marries a woman of so high a birth, he ought
(not forgetting that he is her husband) more to honor and esteem of her, then
of his equal, or of one of meaner parentage and not only to account her his
companion in love, and in his life, (but in diverse actions of public
appearance) hold her his superior. Which honor, is not yet accompanied with
reverence, as is that, which for manners sake, we are wont to do to others. And
she ought to consider, that no distinction or difference of birth and nobility
can be so great, but that the league, which both Gods ordinance and nature,
has ordained betwixt men and women, far exceeds it: for by nature woman
was made man's subject. But if a man shall take to wife an inferior or mean
woman, he also ought to weigh, that Matrimony makes equal many differences:
and further, that he has not taken her for a slave or servant, but for a
fellow and companion of his life. Of the choice of a wife.
And seeing that election or choice, is nothing else, but to take a thing meet
and convenient to the end it is prepared for, therefore every one that must
choose, ought to regard the end, and to know what thing is convenient for it.
So that it is needful, that he be wise and discreet, or else he cannot
dispose it, nor perceive what thing is convenient for it. Therefore, if a man
would advisedly consider, that he is to live with his wife continually, and she
with him, he would then be very circumspect in the choice of her, which choice,
makes either very much for his felicity and comfort, or else for his great
misery and discomfort. For by how much the more a thing is united and knit
unto man, so much the more it may help him, if it be good, or hinder him if it
be evil. Those damages and hurtes (which are inwardly in the body) are worse
then those which are without the body: and those of the soul, then those of
the body: and likewise men do judge of those things which are called good.

But peradventure it may seem unto some, that these things are not universally
true, for unto some, the loss of their goods is more then the loss of their
health. But this thing does not arise or happen of the goods or money it se^fe,
but because some man does persuade unto himself, that to loose his goods, is a
thing intolerable, and therefore the goods are not of more estimation, then is
life or health: but it is man's affection that does rule in this thing.

And therefore it seems less to some, to be driven out of his kingdom then
to other some to loose a small portion of his possessions. Some will revenge a
word most cruelly, and some other well beaten and buffeted, will not revenge it
at all. All these things do proceed and come of the soul, the which is most
inwardly joined and knit unto man, which has more power in him then the body,
yea, then man himself; if it be then of so great importance, what manner of
friend thou have to live commodiously, or incommodiously withal, the which
shall none otherwise dwell nor be in the self same chamber, bed nor house
with thee, but that thou may shake him off at thy pleasure: how much more
ought thou to take heed, when thou chusest thee a wife, the which must be
continually conversant with thee, at thy table, in thy chamber, in bed, in thy
secrets, and finally, in thy heart and breast? If thou go from home, thou
do commit thy house, thy family, thy goods, and thy children (of all other
things the most pleasant) unto her: she is the last that leaves thee at thy
departing, and the first that receives thee at thy returning: thou departest
from her with sweet imbracements and kisses, and with sweet kisses and
imbracements she receives thee at thy return home: unto her thou disclosest
thy joy and heaviness. So that it is an heavenly life to be conversant, and in
the company with those that a man delights in and loves. But it is a
calamity infernal, to be bound and forced to see those things that a man does
greatly hate and abhor, or to be in company with those that a man would not
be withal, and yet cannot be separated nor depart from them. Hereof comes,
as we do see in some marriages, so great ruins, so wicked and vile deeds, as
maimes, and murders committed by such desperate persons, as are loath to keep,
and yet cannot lawfully refuse, nor leave them: Therefore young folks ought
not to be too rash and hasty in their choice, but to have the good advise and
direction of their parents and trusty friends in this behalf, who have
better judgment, and are mote free from the motions of all affections, then
they are. And they must take heed, least following the light and corrupt
judgment of their own affections and minds, they change not a short
delectation and pleasure, into a continual sorrow and repentance. For we do
learn, by great and continual use and experience of things, that the secret
contractes made between those that be young do seldom prosper, whereas
contrariwise, those marriages that are made and stablished by the advice of
wise and religious parents, do prosper well.

But specially and before all things, such as purpose to marry, must
faithfully with feruentnesse, and steadfast belief, (without ceasing) make
their intercession and prayer unto God, A good wife is above all things to be
craved of God by prayer.
to whom all hearts are open and known, that he would not suffer them to go
amiss, but (as a tender father) help and direct them to make a right choice,
so as they may live honestly and prosperously, as good christians ought, to his
glory, and their own comfort. For this purpose, there is a notable example of
Eleazar, Abraham's servant, who being sent to get and make choice of a wife for
Isaac his masters son, begins his matter with prayer: Genesis 24.12. etc. So
did Isaac also, as appears in the same Chapter, verse 63. When any have
determined with themselves to marry, and have used all diligence thereto
required, rhey must desire of God by humble and earnest prayer, good and
prosperous success, in whose hand and power it is to give it, and doubtless
he will effect it, if they above all other things, shall have an undoubted
hope and confidence in him. For if they, after that they have settled
themselves, and have satisfied their appetites, shall then resort unto God by
prayer, desiring him that they may obtain the thing that they most desire, so
it would appear, that they would make him the Minister of their voluptuous
desires and pleasures, and so doing, their vows and prayers should become most
manifest blasphemy. And therefore a man should not come unto marriage, as unto
a profane thing, with a loose and unprepared mind, but with a quiet and well
purged mind, as to a thing most sacred and holy. For Matrimony does not
consist only in the conjunction of the body, neither yet in dancing, nor
banqueting (proceeding and brought unto us, with many other things from the
Gentiles) but it should rather beseem christians, most studiously to pray unto
God, that so weighty a thing as matrimony is, might have good and prosperous
success. For Matrimony is a thing sanctified of God, Heb. 13.4.
the which wills the matrimonial imbracements to be chaste, the bed to be
undefiled, and their progeny unspotted: and it is after ye mind of S. Paul,
Ephesians. 5.25.26, 27.
a sign of the great mystery, wherewith Christ does indissolubly unite
himself unto his Church. Therefore thou ought, so much as shall lie in
thee, to lift up thy mind, and to remember how great and worthy an image thou
do represent, and that thy wife shall be unto thee, as the Church, and thou
unto her as Christ: therefore thou should show thy self unto her, as Christ
showed himself unto his church. The love of Christ unto his church is
incredible, and thy love also to thy wife ought to be most effectual,
Society, and to live together, is the most surest and strongest knot, to knit
and join amity and love among men, and al other beasts. There can be no
greater society or company, then is between a man and his wife: whose house,
whose goods, whose chamber, etc. is common, their children are common, and they
themselves partakers of all good and evil success, of prosperity and
adversity: the which society and fellowship, were sufficient to stir and
provoke him that loves not his wife, to love and benevolence. And what company
or love shall a man look to have of him that loves not his wife? There are,
that in love and amity look for gain, as the vile Epicures do, unworthy to
be beloved, men which love themselves, and not their friends. And if we have a
regard unto commodity and profit, there is nothing that gives so much as does
a good wife, no not horses, oxen, servants or farmers: for a man's wife is the
fellow and comforter of all cares and thoughts, and does more faithful and
true service unto him, then either maid-seruant or man-seruant, the which do
serve men for fear, or else for wages: but thy wife will be led only by
love, and therefore she does every thing better then all other. And this does
God declare, saying: Let us make Adam a helper like unto himself: By the
Helper, is signified the utility and profit of the service, and by the
similitude and likeness, is signified love. For a servant and he that is
hired, are far unlike the master, and are taken well nigh for no men. A
servant in the stead and place of an horse, or of an ox, the which must be
beaten and enforced to their work, does serve his master. A hired servant, is
in the place of an hired horse, for when the hire is paid, the society and
fellowship dissolueth. The child is part of the father, and through a natural
pity, they love each other: but yet the wife is more annexed and joined to her
husband. The father does labor and takes pain for his children, but the
childten seldom labor or take pains for their fathers, and oftentimes are
sent to inhabit and dwell in other men's houses, whereby in a manner it
appears, that their straight and fast society does dissolve and break. But
the wife clean contrary, does continually take pains for her husband, who may
neither (as long as she lives) change house nor bed. If commodity and profit
be looked for, no commodity excels this: if thou shall love thy wife, thou
shall live most pleasantly, if not, thy life will be most miserable and
wretched. For there is nothing so sharp nor so bitter, as to hate the thing
that does favor and love thee, nor nothing more happy, as to love him that
hates thee. Therefore love, that thou may be loved.

Now we will in few words show the occasions of wedlock, why and wherefore it
was ordained, and for what purpose it should be contracted, that every man and
woman may the better understand to what thing they consent, when either of them
grants to marry the other.

Doubtless it cannot otherwise be, but that marriage, which was ordained of
such an excellent author, as of GOD himself, and in such a worthy place, as
Paradise; and of such an ancient time, as in the state of Adams and Eues
innocence, and after such a notable order, but that it must likewise have
special causes, for the ordinance of it. Therefore the holy Scripture does
declare chiefly three causes thereof. The first is, the procreation,
begetting, Three causes of marriage.
and bringing up of children: Genesis 1.27, 28. and 9.1. For in the children do
the parents live, (after a sort) even after death.

And, if they be well and virtuously brought up, God is greatly honored by
them, the common wealth is advanced: yea, their parents and all other fare the
better for them. For they are their parents comfort next unto God: their joy,
staff, and upholding of their age: and therefore Parents ought to begin
betimes, to plant virtue in their childrens breasts: for late sowing, brings
a late, or never, an apt harvest: young branches will bow as a man will have
them: But old trees will sooner break then bow, etc. But more of this shall
be said after, in the duty of parents.

Although marriage be a holy and sanctified ordinance, yet none may use the
benefit of it, Psalm. 51.5.
without some acknowledgement of original sin, in that adultery and
whoredom are wrought by this means: albeit this is not imputed to the
children of God, who use this means with as much chastity as may be, and so
long as the husband and wife do keep themselves together in the fear of God,
and in all modesty and sobriety.

If then in marriage it self, there is such mischiefs, what hellish mischief
is there in those lusts, which are not sanctified without these
considerations? So that marriage is not a mad and dissolute estate, neither are
husbands to turn their wives into whores, or wives their husbands into
whoremasters, by immoderate, intemperate, or excessive lust.

Many think they cannot sin in this behalf, if they pass not their own
wives: but they may make their marriage polluted and defiled, if they use it
without prayer and soberness: etc. 1 Thessalonians 4.4.5.

Therefore the husband is to forbear the company of his wife, when it is with
her, as it is common to women: etc. Ezechiel 18.6. Leuiticus 18.19.24.27.29.
and 29.18. This was one of the sins, for which the Lord rooted out the
Cananites out of their land.

The 1. cause.
The second occasion why Marriage was ordained, was, that the wife might be a
lawful remedy to avoid whoredom, Wedlock lawful for such as have not the
gift of chastity.
fornication, and all filthy unclean lusts. 1. Cor. 7.2.3. etc. Touching this
point, I will say no more: for it is handled at large by others already, and I
have elsewhere sufficiently discoursed of it.

The 3, cause.
The third and last cause was, for man's commodity, to the end to avoid the
inconvenience of solitariness, that the one may help and comfort the other,
Genesis 2.18.
in sickness, in affliction, and in all household cares, and troubles, as
education of children, and keeping the family in order. For this cause, old
men and old women may lawfully marry. So that a wife is called by GOD
himself, an Helper, Romans 7.23. 1. Cor. 7.8, 9, 39. 1. Tim. 5.14.
and not an impediment, or a necessary evil, as some unadvisedly do say. And
as other some say: It is better to bury a wife, then to marry one. Again, if
we could be without women, we should be without great troubles.

These and such like sayings, This is often found most true: that such as are
contemners of marriage, are most offenders against marriage, and live most
unchastly.
tending to the dispraise of women, some maliciously and indiscreetly, do
vomit out, contrary to the mind of the holy Ghost, who says, that she was
ordained as a Helper, and not a hinderer. And if they be otherwise, it is for
the most part, through the fault, and want of discretion, and lack of good
government in the husband. For married folks, for two eyes, have four: and
for two hands as many more: which being joined together, they may the more
easily dispatch their handy business, and household affairs.

For like as a man having one hand or one foot, if by any means he get
himself an other, may thereby the more easily lay hold on what he lists, or
go whither he will: even so, he that has married a wife, shall more easily
enjoy the healthful pleasures, and profitable commodities of this present
life. For in trouble, the one is a comfort to the other: in adversity, the one
a refreshing unto the other: yea, and in all their life, the one is a help and
succor to the other.

Most true it is, that women are as men are, reasonable creatures, and have
flexible wits, both to good and evil, the which with use, discretion, and
good counsel, may be altered and turned. And although there be some evil and
lewd women, yet that does no more prove the malice of their nature, then of
men, and therefore the more ridiculous and foolish are they, that have
inueighed against the whole sex for a few evil: and have not with like fury,
vituperated and dispraised all mankind, because part of them are thieves,
murderers, and such like wicked livers.

But the marriage and company of the husband and wife, is made amiable, sweet,
and comfortable, by these five means: by godliness, virtue, mutual
forbearing, mutual love, and by dutifulness performed busily and godly on
both sides.

1. Godliness of right, holds the chief place. For there is no stable and
steadfast friendship, unless it have his beginning from God: and therefore
must godliness needs shine before the rest. For when couples have determined
to obey God, all things afterward become more easy.

2. Virtue and honest conditions, breed mutual delight between man and wife.
For when virtue is exercised, it makes conversation of living more amiable.

3. Mutual forbearing, whereby we take in good worth one another conditions
and faults, is very needful. For in this weakness of nature there happen many
scapes, which will breed strife, if they be not covered by mutual forbearing.

4. Mutual love, having his beginning of godliness and true virtue, makes
the husband and wife not to be too sharp sighted in spying into one another
faults: but that many things either they mark not, or if they mark them, they
cover them with love. For Love covers the multitude of sins. 1. Pet. 4.8.
Prou. 10.12.

5. Duty performed godlily, carefully, and cheerfully on both sides, makes
the mariage-yoke light and sweet. For when man and wife mark one another, and
find like heedfulnesse and buxamnes in their duty; both their company is
made more pleasant, and they are the more stirred up on both sides to render
dutifulnes, that the one may requite the other alike. Where these five duties
be not, the company of their life is both loathsome and bitter, or rather more
sharp then death. Therefore the godly couples must do their endeavor, that
these virtues may be seen in their life continually for ever.

Now we will (through God his assistance) say something concerning the three
several points contained in this duty, and mentioned in the beginning hereof,
and so end this duty.

1. The first whereof is, That the husband must live with his wife according to
knowledge. This point of doctrine is most plainly proved by the Apostle Peter,
where he says: Ye husbands dwell with your wives, 1. Pet. 3.7.
as me^ of knowledge, giving honor unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel,
By honor is meant, that the Husband ought to sustain and relieve the wants of
his wife, to support, vph^ld, and bear with her infirmities, as the weaker
vessel.
even as they which are heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers
be not interrupted. Whereby he teaches the husband his duty, to wit, that
the more understanding and wisdom God has endued him with, the more wisely
and circumspectly he ought to behave himself, in bearing those
discommodities, which through his wives weakness, oftentimes cause some jar
and dislike one to the other. Nevertheless, though she be by nature weaker
then he, yet she is an excellent instrument for him, made to far more
excellent uses: whereupon it follows, tha^ she is not therefore to be
neglected because she is weak, but on the contrary part, she ought to be so
much the more cared for. Like as a vessel the weaker it is, the more it is to
be favored and spared, if we will have it to continue: even so a wife,
because of her infirmities, is so much the more to be borne withal of her
husband. 1. Pet. 3.7. And for so much as the husband and wife are equal, in
that which is the chiefest, that is to say, if that gracious and free benefit,
whereby they have everlasting life given them, which otherwise are unequal, as
touching the governance and conversation at home, and therefore she is not to
be despised, although she be weak. And besides, Besides the prayers had with
their family, they must pray privately. Gene. 25.21. 1. Cor. 7.3, 4, 5
all braulings and chidings must be eschued and cast away because they hinder
prayers, and the whole service of God, whereunto both the husband and the wife
are equally called.

Also for more c^onfirmation of this point, the Apostle Paul likewise says:
Let the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise also the wife
unto the husband: The wife has not power of her own body, but the husband:
and likewise also the husband has not the power of his own body, but the
wife. Defraude not one another, except it be with consent for a time, that ye
may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and again come together, that
Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. Which is, as if the Apostle
should say, The parties married, must with singular affection, entirely love
one the other, for that they are each in others power, as touching the body:
so that they may not defraud one another, except the one abstain from the
other by mutual consent that they may the better give themselves to prayer:
wherein notwithstanding, they must consider what is expedient, least by this
long breaking off, as it were from marriage, they be stirred up to incontinencie.

The second point, which is, that the husband should not be bitter, fierce, or
cruel unto his wife: which point is proved by the said Apostle, Collos. 3.19.
Anger in a husband is a vice.
saying: Husbands love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. First and
above all things, the husband must be circumspect to keep the band of love,
and beware that there never spring up the root of bitterness betwixt him and
his wife. If at any time there happen to arise any cause of unkindness betwixt
them, The root of bitterness to be weeded out with the spade of patience.
(as it is impossible always to be free from it) then he must be careful to
weed up the same with all lenity, gentleness and patience, and never suffer
himself nor his wife to sleep in displeasure. How and when the husband ought
to reprove.
Ephesians. 4.26. And if he shall have occasion to speak sharply, and sometimes to
reprove, he must beware that he do not the same in the presence of other: but
let him keep hi^ words until a convenient time, (which is the point of a wise
man) and then utter them in the spirit of meekness, and in the spirit of
perfect love, and he must not let sometimes to cover faults, Faults sometimes
must be covered with love.
and wink at them, if they be not too great and intolerable. Whatsoever loss
or mischance shall happen unto him, let him take it patiently, and bear it
cheerfully: yea, though the same should come partly through his wives
negligence, yet let it rather be a loving warning to take better heed in time
to come, then a cause of sorrow for that which is past, and can not be helped.

Every wise man by his own experience knows, Not to take unkindness for
every trifle.
that he is in this life subject to many inconveniences, and that of nature he
is prone to displeasure, and ready to take unkindness for every trifle, and
specially with his best friends; yea soonest with his loving wife, who is
lothest to displease him. Let him therefore beware of this cankered corruption,
and consider that he ought most of all, in love to bear with his wife,
according to Christ's example toward his Church, who gave himself for it, that
he might sanctify it, Fphes. 5.25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
and cleanse it by the washing of water through the word: That he might make it
unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, or any such
thing: but that it should be holy and without blame: So ought men to love their
wives as their own bodies: he that loves his wife, loves himself. For no
man yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it even as the
Lord does the Church. As if the Apostle had said: The husband is to the wife in
Gods stead.
The husbands duty is, to love their wives as themselves, of which love, the
love of Christ toward his Church is a lively pattern. And because many husbands
pretend the infirmities of their wives, to excuse their own hardness and
cruelty, the Apostle wills them, to mark what manner of Church Christ gave,
when he joined it to himself, and how he does not only not loathe all her
filth and uncleanness, but cease not to wipe the same away with his
cleanness; until he have wholly purged it, and made it holy. And seeing that
every man loves himself, even or nature: therefore (says the Apostle) the
husband shall strive against nature, if he love not his wife: which he
proves, first by the mystical knitting of Christ and the Church together, and
then by the ordinance of God, who says that the husband and wife are one: that
is, not to be divided.

Husbands may not be rigorous toward their wives, especially when they be new
married. Prou. 20.3.
The husband is always to remember, that he be not fierce, rigorous, hasty,
nor disordered with his wife: for then there will never be unity and concord
betwixt them If the wife do not learn to keep silence, and the husband to
have patience, otherwise it shall rather be the dwelling of fools, then the
house of friends* For where the husband wants wisdom t^ govern, and the
wife patience to suffer, they shall be forced (it is to be feared) in continuance
of time, to part house, or else every day to be iarring and brauling.

The Wife is not to be used or entreated as a Handmaide or seruan^, (...) as a
fellow. Pro. 8.7. and 14 9. and 15.5. and 18.2. and 27.22. Pro. 9.1, 9. and
19.25. Genes. 16.6.
Every married man ought also to remember this, that either his wife is wise and
religious, or else she is foolish and irreligious. If he be matched with a wife
that is sottish, foolish, and ignorant of God and his word, it will little
avail or profit him to reprehend or chide her: and if he be married to one
that is wise and religious, and knows her duty out of Gods word, then one
sharp and discreet word is sufficient: because that if a woman be not
corrected, by that which is wisely and discreetly said, she will never amend by
that which is threatened. When the wife shall be inflamed with ire, wrath,
malice, or envy, the husband ought to suffer her, and after the heat is
somewhat cooled, and the flame quenched, then mildly to admonish her: for if
she once begin to lose her shamefastness in the presence of her husband, then
it is likely that there will often follow braulings and quarrels betwixt them.
And as the husband ought at all times to shun braulings and quarellings with
his wife, so much more he ought to avoid the same, when they shall be newly
married. For if at the beginning she shall have cause to abhor and hate him,
then late or never will ^^e return to love him faithfully. Therefore at the
beginning of their marriage, the wise and discreet husband ought to use all good
means to win the good liking of his wife toward him: for if then their love
be fixed and truly settled one toward the other, The falling out of lovers, is
the renewing of love.
although afterward they come to some household words and grudgings, yet it
proceeds but of some new unkindness, and not of old rooted hatred, and
therefore the sooner remedied. For love and hatred be mortal enemies, and the
first of them that takes place in the heart, there it remains a dweller for
the most part all the days of life: in such wise, that the first love may
depart from the person, but yet never forgotten at the heart. But if the wife
from the beginning of marriage, do take the heart to loathe and abhor her
husband, then a miserable life will follow to them both. For although the
husband shall have power to his wife, to fear and obey him, yet he shall
never have strength to force her to love him.

Some husbands do boast themselves to be served, feared, and obeyed in their
houses, because the wife that abhors, does fear and serve her husband: but
she that indeed likes, does love him and cherish him. As the wife ought with
great care to endeavor by all good means, to labor to be in favor and grace
with her husband: so likewise the husban^ ought to fear to be in disgrace and
disliking with his wife: for if she do once determine to fix and settle her
eyes and liking upon another, then many inconveniences will ensue and follow.

The husband ought not to be satisfied that he has robbed his wife of her
virginity, but in that he has possession and use of her will: for it
suffices not that they be married, but that they be well ma^ried, and live
christianly together, and very well contented. And therefore the husband that is
not beloved of his wife, holds his goods in danger, his house in suspicion,
his credit in balance, and also sometime his life in peril, because it is
easy to believe that she desires not long life unto her husband, with whom
she passes a time so tedious and irksome. And if any unkindness or displeasure
should, happen to be at any time, betwixt the husband and his wife, yet neither
of them ought to impart, or to make it known unto any one of their neighbors:
for if they be such as wish them evil, they will rejoice at it: and if they
be such as wish them well, then they minister matter whereof to talk.

That husband that is matched and does encounter with a wife that is a dizard,
a fool, That man is miserable that is married unto a foolish woman.
a babbler, light of behavior, a glutton, a chider, slothful, a gadder abroad,
intractable, jealous, or dissolute, etc. it were better for him to be a slave
to some honest man, then a husband to such a wife.

The best rule that a man may hold and practice with his wife, to guard and
govern her, is to admonish her often, and to give her good instructions, to
reprehend her seldom, never to lay violent hands on her: but if she be good
and dutiful, to favor her, to the end she may continue so: and if she be
shrewish and wayward, mildly to suffer her, to the end that she wax not
worse. But some husbands be of so sour a nature, and so unpleasant in their
behavior, that they can hardly be loved, no not of their wives; their
countenance is so lowering, their company so currish, that they seem angry
even when they be best pleased: they can not speak fair, scarce will they
laugh when their wives laugh upon them: a man would say, they were borne in an
angry hour.

Husbands must provide things necessary for the house. A man's house will
continue by provision before hand, and by order in his expenses. Romans 12.17. 1.
Tim. 5.8. But where disorder is in a house, it cannot endure.
This is also a duty not to be forgotten, namely, that husbands be diligent
and careful to make provision for their houses, to clothe their wives
decently, to bring up their children virtuously, and to pay their servants
duly: because that in voluntary matters men may be negligent, but the
necessities of their house do neither suffer negligence or forgetfulness. The
duty of the husband is to get goods: and of the wife to gather them together,
and save them. The duty of the husband is, to travel abroad to seek living:
and the wives duty is to keep the house. The duty of the husband is, to get
money and provision: and of the wives, not vainly to spend it. The duty of the
husband is, to deal with many men: and of the wives, to talk with few. The
duty of the husband is, to be entermedling: and of the wife, to be solitary
and withdrawn. The duty of the man is, to be skillful in talk: and of the
wife, to boast of silence. The duty of the husband is, to be a giver: Spare in
time and spend in time, for sparing is a rich purse.
and of the wife, to be a sauer The duty of the man is, to apparel himself
as he may: and of the woman, as it becomes her. The duty of the husband is,
to be lord of all: and of the wife, to give account of all. The duty of the
husband is, to dispatch all things without door: and of the wife, to ouersee
and give order for all things within the house. Now, where the husband and wife
performs these duties in their house, we may call it a College of quietness:
the house wherein these are neglected, we may term it a hell.

It is to be noted, and noted again, that as the provision of household
depends only on the husband: The honor of the Husband, depends of the
Wife.
even so the honor of all depends only of the woman: in such sort, that
there is no honor within the house, longer then a man's wife is honorable. And
therefore the Apostle calls the woman, 1. Cor. 11.7.
The glory of the man. But here it must be noted and ^emembred, that we do
not entitle honorable to such, as be only beautiful, comely of face, of
gentilitie, of comely personage, and a good huswife: but only, of her that is
virtuous, honest of life, temperate, and advised in her speech.

3. The last point is, that the husband love, The third point.
cherish, and nourish his wife, even as his own body, and as Christ loved his
Church, and gave himself for to sanctify it. And this point is plainly proved
by the Apostle Paul, as is sufficiently declared in the second point.

There are few husbands or wives, that know in truth how they should love one
the other. If a man love his wife only for these respects, because she is
rich, beautiful, noble, or because she contenteth and pleases him, after the
sensual appetite of the flesh, and for such like causes; that is no true love
before God; for such love may be among harlots and whores, yea among brute
beasts. Cant. 4 9.10. 1. Cor. 9.5. 1. Pet. 3.7.
But a christian husband must love his wife, chiefly because she is his sister
in the profession of the sound and christian religion, and so an inheritour
with him of the kingdom of heaven. And he must also love her for her virtues;
as for her shamefastness, modesty, chastity, diligence, patience,
faithfulness, temperance, secrecy, obedience, and such like christian qualities
and graces of God: yea, although she be but hard favored, and of poor^
parentage.

But as we would that the man when he loves should remember his majesty, so
we would that when he rules, he forget not his love, nor to temper it with
majesty. And when he does think himself to be the head and the soul, and
the woman (as it were) the flesh and the body, he ought in like manner to
remember, that she is his fellow and companion of his goods and labors, and
that their children be common between them, bone of bones, and flesh of the
flesh of man. And thus there shall be in wedlock a certain sweet and
pleasant conversation, without the which it is no marriage, but a prison, a
hatred, and a perpetual torment of the mind. So that the husband must let his
wife perceive and know, that for the good opinion that he has of her, he does
love her simply, and faithfully, and not for any utility or pleasure. For who
so does not perceive, that he is beloved for his own sake, will not lightly
do the same to another: for the thing that is loved, loves again.

If money or nobility could perceive and understand that they were beloved,
they would, if they had any feeling at all of love, requite it with love: but
when the soul is loved, in as much as it may love, it gives love for love,
and loves again. The breaker of horses, that does ^se to ride and to pace
them, does handle the rough and sturdie colt with all craft, rigor, and
fiercenes that may be: but with the colt that is more tractable, he takes not
so great pain. A sharp and shrewd wife must be pleased and mitigated with
love, and ruled with majesty: and the more gently thou do use and show thy
self unto her that is meek and honest, the more benign and meek thou shall
find her. But she that is noble, and of a stout mind and stomach, the less
thou do look to be honored, the more she will obey and honor thee. But
yet the wise husband shall never set himself so far in love, that he forget
that he is a man, the ruler and governor of the house, and of his wife, and
that he is set (as it were) in a Station to watch and diligently to take heed
what is done in his house and to see who goes out and in. 1. Cor. 11.3. Ephesians.
5.23.
For although the husband by Gods ordinance, be the head over his wife, yet
he may not abuse or despise her, but must lovingly defend and keep her from
all injuries, and all evils, as his own body. For like as the head sees and
hears for the whole body, rules and guides the body, and gives it
strength of life: or as Christ does defend, teach and preserve his Church, and
is the Savior, comfort, eye, heart, wisdom, and guide thereof: even so must
the husband be head unto his wife in like manner, to show her like kindness, and
after the same fashion to guide her, and rule her wit^ discretion, for her good
and preservation: and not with force and wilfulness to entreat her, but to
be her defender, instructor, teacher, and comfort. So that when the husband
has obtained, that his wife does truly and heartily love him, there shall then
need neither precepts, nor laws: for love shall teach her more things, and more
effectually, then all the precepts of all the Philosophers. He ought therefore
to endeavor and more force himself, that his wife may love him, then that she
may fear him. When his wife shall offend or displease him, he may not hate
her, or quarrel with her, but patiently and mildly admonish her: Ephesians. 5.18.29.
For no man yet ever hated (says the Apostle) his own body, but cherishes
it, and makes much of it. So then, he that loves his wife, loves himself:
for thereby he enjoys peace and comfort, and help to himself in all his
affairs: therefore in the same verse, Paul counsels husbands to love their
wives, as their bodies. And after in the 33. verse, as though it were too
little to love them as their bodies, he says: Leuit. 10.10.
Let every one love his wife as himself. that is, as his body and soul too.
For if God commanded men to love their neighbors as themselves, much more are
they bound to love their wives as themselves, which are their next neighbors.
1. Sam. 1.8.
As Elkanah did not love his wife less for her barrenness, ^ut said: Am not I
better unto thee then ten sons? As though he favored her more, for that
which she thought her self despised. So a good husband will not take occasion
to love his wife less for her infirmities, but comfort her more for them, as
this man did, that she may bear with his infirmities too. Gal. 6.2.
And so the one to help to bear the others burden, and so they shall the
better fulfill the law of Christ. For as in a city, there is nothing more
unequal, the^ that every man should be like equal: so it is not convenient,
that in one house every man should be like and equal together. There is no
equality in that city, where the private man is equal with the Magistrate, the
people with the Senate, or the servants with the master, but rather a confusion
of all offices and authority.

The husband and the wife are Lords of the house, Genes. 1.28. Genes. 2.18.
unto whom the Lord said: Be ye Lords over the fish of the sea, and over the
foul of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth. And the
self same Creator said, that the woman should be a help unto the man.
Therefore the husband without any exception, is master over all the house, and
has as touching his family, more authority then a king in his kingdom. The
wife is ruler of all other things, but yet under her husband. There are
certain things in the house, that only do appertain to the authority of
the husband, wherewith it were a reproach for the wife, without the consent of
her husband, to meddle withal: as to receive strangers, or to marry their
daughter. But there are other things, in the which the husband gives over his
right unto his wife: as to rule and govern her maidens: to see to those things
that belong unto the kitchen, and to huswiferie, and to their household stuff:
other mean things, as to buy and sell certain necessary things, may be
ordered after the wit, wisdom, and fidelity of the woman. It cannot well be
rehearsed, how many vtilities and profits, the mutual concord and love of man
and wife, does bring to great things, both at home and abroad, nor how many
losses and incommodities, do grow of the dissension and discord between
them. For the household, when their master and their mistress, or dame, are
at debate, can no otherwise be in quiet, and at rest, then a city, whose
Rulers agree not; but when it sees them in concord and quietness then it
rejoices, trusting that they will be even so unto them, as it perceives then
to be among themselves: wherein surely, they are not deceived, for if the man
and his wife do lovingly and gently support and entreat one an other they
learn not to disdain: or for every light fault, to be angry with their
servants, or yet for any household words, to be vexed or angry one with the
other, but to set aside, all hasty and ^^^ell words and correction, with all
other things, that issue and proceed of a disdainful and a furious mind. And
the servants are not only merry therefore, but also they do their service
the more obediently and cheerfully, showing reverence unto the majesty, that
proceeds and increases of quietness and concord. For the husband does
defend his wives majesty, with love and benevolence: and the wife her
husbands, with honor and obedience. So that unity and concord, causes them
to be esteemed wise, honest, and virtuous, and they must needs be good, seeing
they have loved so long together. But there can be no long amity or
friendship, but between those that are good, the which do suffer and devour
up those things, for the which other men leave and forsake amity, and break
off charity. Neither does there grow of any other thing, so great reverence
and majesty, as of the opinion and estimation of another man's goodness and
wisdom, the which reverence, is not only honored within the doors, but
also shines and extends it self into the city, so that he is taken for an
honest man, and accounted to be loving and gentle, seeing that he loves his
wife so constantly, and also he is reputed for a wise man, considering that he
can so moderately handle so difficult and hard matters, and he is reckoned
worthy to rule a common wealth, that with such wisdom, discretion, and
iudg^ment, does rule and govern his own house, and that he may easily
conserve and keep his Citizens in peace and concord, that has so well
established the same in his own house and family. And on the other side, none
will think or believe, that he is able to be ruler, or to keep peace and
quietness in the town or City, who cannot live peaceably in his own house,
where he is not only a ruler, but a King, and Lord of all. And in
matrimonial debate and discord, the man is more to be blamed, then is the
woman, because that he being the chief Ruler and head, does not purge and
remedy her of that vice, the which engendered that discord, or else patiently
bear and suffer the same: for the blame of al discord, is commonly laid on him
that is chief, because he would not moderate nor stay the thing to come to
such a strife and discord, or else because he was not able to do it. In the
first, there appears manifest ma^ice, in the second impatience and weakness,
the which ought to be far from him that is esteemed ^o be most worthy, and
appointed to rule and govern others. And thus he comes into hatred, ^or as
much as he has left off to do his duty and ^ffice, when necessity required
it. That husband that loves not his wife, after that he has enioi^d her for a
season, but does wax feeble and cold, which is a thing most meet and convenient
for those that are kindled with bodily lust and leche^ie, who are very beasts,
and no men, having no ^easo^, but are drawn to those deeds, through the ^otion
of their senses, the which after the heat ^e a little past, will clean change
their opinion. Also there are other occasions, The causes why the husband
should love his wife.
that should move the husband to extend this love to his wife, in case he be
not duller then a stone. As for ^^at his wife has suffered so great travel and
la^our, that she has borne and brought him forth children, the heirs of his
name and substance, and the vpholders of his family: and that she has
forsaken her fathers goods and riches to follow him, and to suffer with him
both good and evil: and that she setting her whole mind now upon him, knows
no other father, nor yet any of all her kin. What one thing shall suffice, if
these and others cannot do it? who so will then obey nature, humanity and
wisdom, shall every day love his wife more and more. And the better he
knows her, the more he will trust her, and so open and disclose his love, and
show her greater signs and tokens of love, and benevolence, manifesting that
to be borne and nourished, through the experience of her virtue, and through
hope to be continued and kept, that in time to come she may be like her self,
and strive to overcome herself with virtue. As the husband ought thus to love
his wife tenderly, so from her as from a fountain, he must extend his love
also unto her parents and kinsfolks, The husband must love his wives
kinsfolks.
to the end that they may well know and perceive, how greatly the^ cousin does
aid and help them, and that she in like manner may understand, that his
benevolence and love to her is such, that it redoundeth among her friends and
parents, and of this he shall receive no little profit at home. And seeing he
loves his wives kinsmen for her sake, how much more ought he then to love her
children that she in like case may love his, if he have any, and thus the one
seeing the mutual love of the other, they shall knit and couple themselves in
good and steadfast love unto their lives end. The duties themselves, which are
to be performed of the husband and wife, are either pertaining to piety and
godliness, or else mutual several duties concerning the parties themselves
for piety and godliness.

1. The first common duty is prayer, that they pray together by themselves:
for as they are to pray with others in their families, for things which
concern their household: so there are certain things, which belonging to
themselves, are not to be mentioned in their families, but privately: as
namely, for a godly posterity, and that in the birth, the children be comely,
and not monstrous in coming forth, like monsters which might be a grief unto
them, or an occasion, that the wicked should speak evil of the Gospel, etc.
And further, they are to pray, that they may have comfort by them, in their
well carriage and good behauour: as likewise for their household, and for
diverse other affairs, which they cannot so commodiously pray for, in their
public families. As Isaac and Rebecca, besides the prayers in their house,
which they used with Abraham's family, did also pray together privately: as in
Genes. 25.21. it is said: Isaac prayed before his wife: for so the words
signify, that they might have children.

2. A second duty of piety is, that they admonish one another, as the husband
is to admonish the wife, so also to teach her, and the wife to admonish the
husband, and in her place admonishing, bringing sufficient reason, is to be
heard. For even as the Master is to counsel the servant, and likewise to
hear the good counsel of his servant, as Naaman. 2. King. 5.13.14. heard his
servant, which counseled him to wash in Jorden, according to the saying of the
Prophet. So in like manner, the husbands duty is to counsel, and to admonish
his wife yet so, as when he fails in duty, he is to hear her good counsel
and admonition, either concerning heavenly matters, or earthly affairs: she
notwithstanding considering her estate and condition under him, and in
humility confessing her self to be the weaker vessel. 1. Pet. 3.7.

Their mutual and several duties pertaining to themselves, are: first, the
holy familiarity which ought to be betwixt man and wife: whereby they have a
more familiar usage one of another, and do more familiarly behave themselves in
a comely sort one to another, then any other parties whatsoever: Genes. 26.8.9.
in regard whereof Abimelech King of Gerar (after that Isaac had said of
Rebecca his wife, she is my Sister) seeing Isaac playing and sporting with
her familiarly, knowing that familiarity which ought to be between the
husband and the wife, and knowing that Isaake was a godly religious man, and
therefore would not use that kind of behavior, to any other woman, save to
his wife, discerned thereby, and concluded certainly, that she was his wife,
howsoever he has denied it before. Noting, that a woman is not to be familiar
after that sort with any other man, save her husband, and contrary, the husband
ought not use this familiarity with any other woman, which he does with his
wife. And therefore Pro. 5.19. we see that the wife should be to him, as the
loving Hind: namely, delightful, and one in whom he may delight: that as the
Heart delights in the Hind: so the wife should be a delight unto her husband:
and so in like manner, she ought to take delight in him.

2. Again, there, is another mutual duty pertaining to themselves: to wit,
that near conjunction, even in regard of their bodies, for an holy procreation
of children; in respect whereof, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 7.4.
the husband has not power over his own body, but the wife, etc. Only when
it is with the wife (as is common to women Ezech. 18.6.) or that she be sick
of her disease, he is not then to have the use of her body, etc.

Such as do aspire and purpose to enter into the holy estate of matrimony,
Duties common both to the husband and the wife.
are to begin in prayer and holiness to God. And having attained to that
estate, ought to use the benefit of marriage, as an holy ordinance of God, in
all godliness and purity, 1. Cor. 7.2.
for a remedy against the weakness of the flesh, and not for the provocation
and lust to intemperancie.

True it is, that honesty of marriage grounded upon Gods ordinance, does cover
ye shame of incontinencie: yet not so, as that married folks should defile and
pollute that holy estate, by admitting all things, but that they should so use
it, as there might be no excess in dissolution, neither any intemperancie
contrary to the holiness thereof, so that to abuse it in lascivious excess,
is fornication.

Genes. 1.18.
When God created the woman, he said: It is not good that man should be alone,
I will make him a help meet for him. But whatsoever is said of the woman, that
she should be a help to the man, must also be put in practice, and excercised
by the husband toward his wife, according to the doctrine of the Apostle Saint
Paul, 1. Cor. 7 all. whether in avoiding fornication, whether in procuring
generation, and the education and bringing up of children, whether in
maintayning a family, or for the service of God, and salvation of souls.

Hereby it evidently appears, that the duty common both to the husband and
wife, imports, that the one should aid and help the other.

First, that they may lead their lives in chastity and holiness. Next, to
avoid fornication. So that the duty of the husband and the wife, consists
in this, that they live together in all chastity and pureness, and that they
take great heed, and beware of breaking the bond, and infringing, and violating
the faith of marriage, by fornication or adultery, which is a detestable
sin, in the sight both of GOD and man. If such as wanting the remedy of
marriage, by committing fornication, do incur an offense worthy everlasting
damnation? What may those deserve, who having a remedy for their infirmity,
do nevertheless ouerflow in adultrie? yet is it not enough, only to abstain
from this abomination, unless we also forbear from every thing, that may
seem to tend thereunto, or to contain any beginning, appearance, allurement,
or occasion of evil. First, because, that by the law, all this is forbidden,
even in these express words: Exodus 20.14.
Thou shall not commit adultrie. For the word adultrie, comprehends al
prouocations, gestures, speeches: yea, even unchaste looks. And therefore says
Jesus Christ, Math. 5.18.
He that looks upon another man's wife, to lust after her, has already
committed adultrie with her in his heart. Next, that we may prevent all
occasions of jealousy, a most dangerous disease, and of great difficulty to
cure. For where either the husband or the wife, is tainted with jealousy, they
believe every word that they hear spoken touching their passion, albeit it
bear no appearance of truth. And therefore christian husbands and wives, must
so bear themselves, that they incur no suspicion of evil. But rather they
ought to practice this, as well to avoid occasion of offense, as for fear,
least jealousy should convert marriage into a most miserable and wretched
estate.

The care and burden to maintain their family is common to them both: yet
so, as properly the husband is to get it, and to bring it in, and the wife to
order and dispose it. Howbeit the duty of the wife, or of the husband, does
not so exempt either of them, but that she also according to her ability and
power, must help her husband to get it, and he likewise in his discretion,
direct her in the dispensation thereof. Exodus 20.14.
He that does not orderly govern his house, shall inherit the wind (says
Solomon.) And order consists in this, that the husband follow his business,
trafique, or calling, without any molestation of ye wife, who ought not to
meddle or control him therein, but with great discretion and gentelnesse, as
also the husband is not to deal, but soberly and in great discretion with
affairs, that are proper to the wife. The man is jealous of his authority and
reputation, and the woman inclined to suspect her self to be despised.
Wherefore, as the husband cannot well abide, that his wife shoud show her self
more skillful and wise in his business then himself: so cannot the wife
suffer, that her husband should despise and account her a fool, by meddling
with her small household affairs.

As the duty therefore of the husband and wife, consists in looking to that
which is aforesaid, to the end their marriage may be quiet, and themselves live
together in love: even so an idle and unthrifty husband, and a prodigal and
slothful wife, are two ready ways to destruction. The husband that has such
a wife, casts his labors into a bottomless sack: and the wife that is
matched with such a husband, draws a Carte heavy laden, through a sandy way
without a horse.

Such a husband, especially, if idleness draw him to love and haunt
Alehouses and tauernes, is cruel to his wife and children: and such a wife
confounds her husband, and brings reproach and poverty to her whole
family. The remedy for the husband, that has such a wife is patience, with
discreet admonition and prayer to God: as also the help for the wife that has
such a husband, is tolleration, gentle exhortation, and cheerful and loving
entertainment of her husband, whereby to induce him willingly to keep home.

They are also to be mutual helpers, each to other, in matters concerning their
own salvation, and the service of God. First if one of them (as says the
Apostle) be an unbeliever, the other must labor to draw his party to the
knowledge of the truth. Saint Paul exhorting the husband and wife, of contrary
religions, not to part, but to dwell together adds a notable reason, saying:
What know thou o man, whether thou shall save thy wife: 1. Cor. 7.16.
or thou o woman, whether thou shall save thy husband? Therein declaring, that
the faithful person, in duty is to labor and endeavor to win his party to
the knowledge of the truth, and so to save her.

Saint Peter exhorts wives to be subject to their husbands, albeit
unbelievers, and such as not obey the word, that so without speech, By their
holy and virtuous conversation, 1. Pet. 3.1.
they may win them.

Secondly, if both be believers, their duty is, to confirm and strengthen
each other, in the time of persecution, that they constantly follow Jesus
Christ. They are also each to help and comfort other, if either of them happen
to fall into any fault or sin. They ought also each to persuade other to
charity, to relieve the poor, diligently to frequent sermons, to use prayers
and supplications, and praise and thanksgiuings to the Lord, to comfort each
other in the time of afflictions, to be short either to exhort other, to walk
in the fear of God, and in all duties and exercises beseeming the children of
God. 2. King. 4.10.
In this manner did that holy woman Elizeus Hostess exhort her husband to
prepare a chamber for the P^ophet to lodge in. Saint Paul also says, 1. Cor.
14.35.
that women desirous to learn, should question with their husbands at home.
Whereby he shows, that the husband ought to be so instructed, as he may be
ready to instruct his wife at home. And therefore the husband (after the
example of the Be) should every where gather every good instruction, that he
might be able to impart it to his wife, and by having communication, acquaint
her therewith.

There are other duties, which be common both to the husband and the wife, as
among the rest, such as proceed of the union and conjunction of marriage,
whereof it is said, They are one flesh: Genes. 2.24. Math. 19.5. And of this
union, proceeds the mutual love betwixt them. For no man (says the Apostle)
hates his own flesh, but loves and cherishes it. Ephesians. 5.15. Titus. 24.
But for as much as the foundation of this mutual love, is the unity of
marriage, whereby the husband and the wife, are made one flesh the husband as
the head, the wife as the body.

It follows, that this love must be steadfast, not variable, and that the
union of marriage continue, notwithstanding whatsoever befall, either the
husband or the wife. Notwithstanding, whatsoever complexions (we say) natures
and infirmities may appear, whatsoever sickness, loss of goods, injuries,
griefs, or other inconveniences that may arise, yet so long as the foundation
of love, that is the union of marriage does continue, so long must love and
affection remain. Math. 5.44.
God commands us, to love our neighbors as our selves, because they be of
our flesh. Albeit therefore, that he contemn, hate, offend, or wrong us:
albeit he be our enemy, and in respect of himself, deserves not that we
should love him, yet because he is of our flesh, the foundation of love
remains, we must love him. How much rather ought they to put this in
practice, who by the bond of marriage, are made one flesh? The rather, because
the union between man and wife, is without comparison more straight, and
binds them each to love other, much more then the conjunction, wehreby man is
united unto his neighbor,

But this is the mischief, that in many, their love is not grounded upon the
union of marriage but upon beauty, riches, and other carnal and worldly
considerations, subject to change, alterarion and loss.

This corruption that respects beauty, is old, and noted to be among the
causes of the flood. Genes. 6.2.
The sons of God (says Moses) seeing the daughters of men were fair, lusted
after them, and took them in marriage. But indeed, it is money that makes
love, and riches engender affection, witness the experience of our days. Yet
such love, resembles only a fire of straw, which is but a blaze, and is soon
out, unless it be continued with great wood, or other like substance. Love
growing of beauty, riches, lust, or any other like slight, uncertain, and
frail grounds, is soon lost and vanished, unless it be maintained with the
consideration of this union, of two in one flesh, and the virtues thereto
adjoined: and therefore must every man think upon this union in marriage, that
he may enjoy, nourish, and continue the love, that thereof proceeds, the
rather, because such love is the nurse of concord, that makes marriage happy.
As contrariwise, the want of this love, is the fountain of strife,
quarrelling, debate, and other like afflictions, that convert the paradise of
marriage into a hell. For dissension between man and wife, is the trouble and
overthrow of the household.

They that will avoid such strife, must therefore love each other: and
especially, they must have care hereof, when they are first married: For a
vessel made of two pieces, and glewed together, may at the first be easily
broken, but in time, grows strong: so is it also with two persons, that are
glewed or joined together, by the bond of marriage.

This love, the mother of peace, will engender a care and duty, each to
support other, and so to practice the same, which Saint Paul requires in all
believers: that is, To be gentle one to another, friendly, and each to forgive
other, even as God has forgiven us through Christ, Let the husband think,
that he has married a daughter of Adam, with all her infirmities: and likewise
let the woman think, that she has not married an Angel, but a child of Adam,
with his corruption. And so let them both resolve to bear that, that cannot be
soon amended. Let not the body complain of the head, albeit it have but one
eye: neither the head of the body, albeit it be crooked or misshapen. Such
defaults, do never break union and love between the head and the body: neither
must the infirmities of the husband or the wife, infringe the love that
proceeds of the union and conjunction of marriage. If the husband be given
to brawling, or the wife to chiding, let them both beware of giving any
occasion.

The bell has a loud sound, and therefore he that will not hear it, must
beware how he pulls the rope and shake it: so if the one will begin to chide
without a cause, let the other be either deaf and so not hear it, or dumb,
and so make no answer. So that where the husband is deaf, and the wife
blind, marriage is quiet and free from dissension. Whereby is meant, that the
wife must wink at many infirmities of her husband, as if she saw them not, and
the husband put up many shrewde speeches of his wife, as if he heard them not.
Neither can it be any reproach to the husband and wife, so steadfastly united, to
practice this duty, considering that David protests, that he used the like
patience and discretion among his enemies: They that seek after my life, lay
snares, and they that go about to do me evil, Psalm. 38.12.
talk wicked things, and imagine deceit continually: But I as a deaf man,
heard not, and am as a dumb man, which opens not his mouth. Thus I am as a
man that hears not, and ^n whose mouth are no reproves.

This union between man and wife, does also engender that duty which the holy
Ghost notes, saying: Matthew. 19.5. Ephesians. 5.31.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother; and cleave to his
wife. As also the wife in the like respect, is bound to the like duty toward
her husband. Not that marriage exempteth any from their due honor and
obedience to parents, but to declare that the union between man and wife, is
greater, then between the children and the parents. And indeed, the true
love of the husband to the wife, and of the wife to the husband, surmounteth
all love of children to their parents.

The husband and the wife, have their secret counsels and communication of
matters concerning their profit and commodity. The wife is more obedient to
her husband, and the husband more desirous to please his wife, then their
parents: yea, and at length it falls out, that they depart from their
parents, to keep house by themselves. And this plainly appeared in Lea and
Rachell being sisters, Genesis 26.
and the wives of Jacob. For Jacob grieved at the wrong offered him by their
father Laban, boldly made his moan to them.

Whereupon they also complaining of their father, agreed with Jacob, and
consented together, to leave their father, and to follow their husband Jacob.
Herein likewise consists an other duty of the husband to the wife, and of
the wife to the husband: namely, that they show no greater secrecy or
communication, of their household affairs to their parents, then mutually each
to other: and this rule is especially to be put in practice, when there grows
any discontent between themselves. For if the husband shall complain to his
parents of his wife: or the wife of her husband, such dealing might breed a
most dangerous jealousy, and consequently perhaps irreconciliable dissension
and strife. But if it should grow to any complaint, it were requisite, so
discreetly to prosecute the matter, as that the wife should come to her
husbands parents, and the husband to the wifes parents. So should all cause of
jealousy cease, and the complaint procure most assured remedy.

This love and agreement in marriage produces yet another duty, common both
to the husband and the wife. And that is, that they never seek, neither once
think of divorce. And to that end, let them remember what is written: Mat.
19.6.
That which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Likewise, that
nothing but Adultery, may separate those that are united by marriage.

All other agreements and contracts, made by mutual consent, may be broken and
dissolved, by the like consent of both parties: but in the contract of
marriage, Almighty God comes in as a witness: yea, he receives the promise
of both parties, as joining them in that estate.

And this does Solomon note, Pro. 2.17.
where he obiecteth to the Harlot, that she has forgotten the covenant or
alliance of her God. But Malachie speaks more plainly, and gives a reason,
why God punished such husbands, as leaving their lawful wives, took others:
Mala. 2.14.
Because (says he) the Lord has been witness between thee and the wife of
thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed, yet is she thy companion, and
the wife of thy covenant. The promise therefore to God cannot be broken, but
only by his authority.

In the days of Moses, husbands were easily and soon entreated, to forsake
their wives, by giving them a Bill of divorce: yet so far was this course from
being lawful, that contrariwise; Mat. 19.8.
Jesus Christ says: that it was tolerated only in respect of the hardness of
husbands hearts, who otherwise would have vexed their wives, and entreated them
cruelly.

And this libell containing the cause of divorce, and putting away of the
woman, did justify her, and condemn the man. For seeing it was never given in
case of adultery, Leuit. 20.10. John 8.5.
(which was punished with death) all other causes alleged in the libell,
tended to justify the woman: and declare, that she was wrongfully divorced,
and so condemned the husband, as one that contraried the first institution of
Marriage: whereto, Jesus Christ condemning this corruption; does return them,
saying: It was not so from the beginning: and therefore whosoever shall put
away his wife, Mat. 19.8.
except it be for whoredom, and marries another, commits adultery: and
whosoever marries her, which is divorced, does commit adultery with her. So
straight is the bond of marriage.

Hereof it follows, that notwithstanding, whatsoever difficulties that may
arise between the husband and the wife* whether it be long, tedious, and
incurable sickness of either party: whether natural and contrary humors,
that breed debate, wrangling, or strife, about household affairs: whether it
be any vice, as the husband to be a drunkard, or the wife a slothful, idle,
or unthrifty huswife: whether either party forsake the truth, and profession
of religion, do fall to idolatry or heresy. Yet still the bond of marriage
remains steadfast; and not to be dissolved. Neither may they be separated,
even by their own mutual consent. For as the holy Ghost has pronounced: Mat.
19.6.
That which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. And therefore S.
Paul says: 1. Cor. 7.12.
If any brother has a wife, that believes not, if she be content to dwell
with him, let him not forsake here and the woman, which has a husband that
believes not, if he can be content to dwell with her, let her not forsake him.
Also because some did suppose, that the unbelief, in any of the parties, might
breed some pollution or disquiet in marriage: he answers no: his reason is:
For the unbelieving husband, is sanctified by his believing wife: and the
unbelieving wife, by her believing husband. And this he proves, by affirming,
that the children issuing of such a marriage, be holy: that is to say,
partakers of the covenant of God, and consequently accepted into the fellowship
of the Church. Only he adds this exception: Jf the unbelieving man depart
and forsake the believing wife, she is not subject to follow him. And yet must
this be understood, where such departure arises, either upon hatred, that he
bears to the true religion that his wife professes, or upon a desire to use
his polluted and false religion. For herein cannot his wife follow him, without
danger of defil^ (...) ^riuing of her self of the profession of the (...)
^ogither with the food of her soul.

Li^^^^se, where Saint Paul speaking of the husb^^d and wife, 1. Cor. 7.11.
both believers, says: If the woman depart from her husband, let her remain
unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. He therein means not, that it
shall be lawful for the woman, because she cannot bear the troublesome
nature of her husband, or to avoid strife and debate, to depart and live as a
widdowe: but only he shows, that when the husband upon such like occasion,
shall put away, or cast off his wife, yet is not she at her liberty to marry
another: but must remain unmarried, and labor to be reconciled. And therefore
are those women, which upon the hard dealing, or troublesome dispositions of
their husbands, do forsake them, greatly to be reproved, as thereby giving
occasion of great mischief and trouble: as also are those husbands, who upon
like occasion, do forsake their wives. For seeing nothing may make divorce,
but Adultery, every purpose and determination, to part upon any other occasion
or reason, is restrained by Gods ordinance, and the law of marriage. And for as
much, as it is not lawful for us to continue in such separation, the whole
course of our lives: neither is it lawful so to abide at all, either so much
as to enter thereinto.

If therefore upon such occasion, the husband forsake his wife, or the wife her
husband, rather then to continue the mischief begun, let them return
together again; and think, that the shortest follies do least hurt.





Let them labor, each to bear with other, that they may live in peace, and
continually pray to GOD, to give them grace so to do.

Let them remember, that the devil transformeth himself into an Angel of
light, when by propounding a duty to live in quiet, and consequently a mean
to pray unto God, for the compassing thereof, he induces them to gainsay
Gods prohibition, and also to separate that, which God has joined together.
For as the conjunction comes of God, so the separation and divorce proceeds
from the devil.

If they reply, that by living asunder; so that they marry not again, they
break not the bond of marriage: let them remember, that marriage being
ordained for a remedy against fornication, for the generation ad bringing up
of children, and also for a help each to other, in mutual society, and
inseparable conversation of life: yet does there appear no token or effect of
marriage, in those that live asunder, albeit they marry not again. So that
the benefit of marriage, consists not only in the procreation of children,
but also in the natural society of the two diverse sexes. Otherwise it could
not be said, that there were any marriage between two old folks.

This union of marriage, yet teaches us another duty, common both to the man
and to the wife. Which is, that their goods be common between them. That a
common wealth may in some sort be said to be happy, where they have no use
of these words: Mine, and thine. But in marriage especially, they ought not to
be heard. If the wife have brought most goods in marriage the marriage once
consummate and made, her part is gone, and they are gone, and they are made
common: as also are the debts, whether hers, or her husbands. And therefore can
neither of them say: This is mine, but this is ours. When a woman has brought
great goods, yet may she not say: I will do with mine own what I list: for
she her self, is not her own, but her husbands.

The husband, as the head and chief guide of the family, must have the
custody and chief government of the goods in the house: yet may he discharge
himself of the whole, or of part, as himself shall think meet and
convenient: yet let him remember, that he entreat her not as a servant, by
giving her money, as it were in mistrust, or with condition to return him a
particular account. For the husbands mistrust, does many times provoke the
woman: and the wives vain expense, breeds mistrust in the husband: but the
faithful and discreet employment, and good usage of the wife, and her husbands
confidence in her, will procure, that as the goods be common to both, so each
alike shall undertake the custody and employment of the same.

Hereunto, for a conclusion of this point, we will yet add two duties, common
both to the husband and the wife. The first, that they daily pray to God to
give them grace, to live together in peace and love, and that each may be a
help to others salvation. Let all such as desire to enjoy such a felicity,
understand, that they must daily pray to God for the obtaining thereof. And let
those that live in strife and debate, examine themselves, whether they have no
cause to impute their miserable estate, to their neglect of this duty. The
second, consists in the practice of the same: which Saint Paul teaches,
saying: Let those that be married, 1. Cor. 7.29.
be as if they were not married. But how? By so enjoying the commodity, and
contentation of marriage, that the benefit of their conjunction, breed no
divorce between God and them: likewise, that thereby they be not hindered, or
made slack in any duty toward God and their neighbors: as also that no
affliction depending or proceeding of marriage, withdraw them, or force them to
resolve of any thing contrary to the union of marriage, and their christian
profession, that they be the children of God.

The particular duties of the husband toward the wife, are: first to protect
her, to have regard and care over her, etc. Ruth 3.9. Secondly, that he
unfeignedly love her, out of which fountain, springs this duty, that he
must bear with her infirmities, and not by and by, to enter into bitterness
and wrath: Colos. 1. Pet. 3.7.
3.16. To the same end S. Peter exhorting husbands to behave themselves
discreetly, and with knowledge and wisdom toward their wives, her requires
of them 2 things: First, that they never say nor do any thing, that may justly
offend their wives: as some there be, who being prodigal, great spenders, or
idle and slack in their business, do cause their wives and children to
languish in poverty.

Others, who haunting Tauernes, Alehouses, and Gaming, do consume and waste
that, which should maintain their family.

Others, who coming home drunk, do beat and vex their wives, and as it
were, drive them into despair: Others, who by vile and bitter speeches, by
threatenings, and other unchristian actions, unworthy a husband, do provoke
their wives, and so stir up such strife and debate, as do convert the comfort
of marriage into an hell.

Seeing therefore, that the husband is head, he ought in such wisdom, reason,
and discretion to bear himself, that he give his wife no just occasion of
offense or provocation: yea, he must remember, that if the head be drunk, the
whole body is in danger of weak government, even of lying in the mire.

Secondly, that albeit the wife should minister just cause of grief and
displeasure, yet that the husband should not thereof take occasion against his
wifes infirmities, or enter into bitterness, tauntes, or disquietnesse: but
discreetly, and patiently bear with her, that so they might quietly and
lovingly live together.

The hurt or weakness of any one member of the body, provoke not the head
to wrath or bitterness: but rather to compassion, and an inclination to help
it. And indeed, whereas God having created woman the weaker vessel, as Saint
Peter notes, did so join her to man, it was not to the end, that he striving
with so frail a vessel, should bruise and break it: but that by gentle and
discreet entreating, he should quietly enjoy the help, that God has given him.

Let him therefore, after the counsel of Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 3.7. Gen 3.18.
so respect her, as one, who albeit she be weak, is nevertheless a profitable
vessel for him. Moreover, let him love and honor her as one, whom
notwithstanding the frailty of her sex, God has so honored, and Jesus
Christ so loved, that being together with man, redeemed with his blood, she is
together with her husband, coheite of life everlasting.

A crystal Glass, is a precious and profitable vessel, yet brittle: so is
the married woman. For albeit she be brittle, yet is she profitable to her
husband, and precious in the sight of God, as a child of God, and member of
Christ. As therefore a man does more carefully take heed of breaking such a
glass, then some earthen or tin vessel, the one being more base, and the
other more strong: so likewise should the husband have such regard of the
frailetie of his wife, that he may bear with her, and entreat her with
gentleness and discretion: that he may use her, as a precious and profitable
vessel, to his comfort and joy. And in as much, as prayer is an excellent
service, that God requires of us, and the ready means to purchase his
blessings, let the husband discreetly bear with his wife, least otherwise
through their strife and contention, their prayers (as S. Peter says) might be
let and interrupted. 1. Pet. 3.7.

Yet must we not say, but the husband, both may, and ought to tell his wife of
her infirmimities, that she may amend. But here we are to enter into
consideration of sundry points. First he is especially to reprove her
offenses against God: As when Rachell said unto Jacob: Genesis 30.1.
Give me children or else I die. He reproved her of importunity, saying: Am I
in Gods stead, who has withholden from thee, the fruit of thy womb? Also
when Jobs wife said to her husband: Do thou abide in thy integrity? Job.
2.9.
Curse God and die. He wisely reproved such a wicked speech saying: Thou
speak as an unwise woman. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God,
and not receive evil? Secondly, that it be with gentleness and testimony of
good will: as Helcana dealt with his wife Hanna, 1, Sam. 1.
when she mourned because she had no children. And indeed it is meet, that the
husband should reprove his wife lovingly, rather by persuasion, then by force.
For as in a great stormy wind, a man lappeth his cloak about him, and
holds it fast for fear of loosing, but when the wind is down, and the
weather calm, he lets it hang easily: so, when husbands will (as it were)
perforce, wrest away their wives infirmities, many of them will obstinatly
resist, yet contrariwise, by sweet words, and loving exhortations, they might
be won, voluntarily to forsake them.

Thirdly, the husband must seek diligently to remove the occasion and stone,
whereat his wife stumbleth, and takes occasion of grief. So when Sarah was
moved against Abraham, Genesis 16.
because of Agar, and objected unto him, albeit wrongfully, that he was the
cause, that she contemned her: bearing with his wife, he removed the cause of
the contention, in suffering her to turn Agar out of doors.

He must also take heed, that he himself be not tainted with the same vice,
which he reproves in his wife, least she stop his mouth, with the reproach
of the same fault: but rather by giving her example by the contrary virtue: let
her be induced and led to follow him. In reproving the wife, the husband must
always use such discretion, that she be not brought into contempt: and
therefore it should never be done in the presence of more then themselves. For
as it is mere folly for a husband to praise and commend his wife in company:
so is it as dangerous, to check and reprove her before witness. For indeed
thereof it comes, that women, not being able to bear that disgrace, will
reply, and so provoke strife, and dissension in open presence, which will
redound to great reproach and offense. And therefore, as the husband must not
flatter his wife, so he must not reprove her before strangers.

A wise husband, and one that seeks to live in quiet with his wife, must
observe these three rules. Often to admonish: Seldom to reprove: And never to
smite her.

Let the husband also remember, that the infirmities of his wife, must be
either taken away or borne withal. So that he, that can take them quite away,
makes his wife far more commodious and fit for his purpose: and he that can
bear with them, makes himself better, and more virtuous.

The husband is also to understand, that as God created the woman, not of the
head, and so equal in authority with her husband: so also he created her not
of Adams foot, that she should be trodden down and despised, but he took
her out of the rib, that she might walk jointly with him, under the conduct
and government of her head.

And in that respect, the husband is not to command his wife, in manner, as
the Master his servant, but as the soul does the body, as being conjoined in
like affection and good will. For as the soul in governing the body, tends
to the benefit and commodity of the same: so ought the dominion and
commandment of the husband over his wife, to tend to rejoice and content her.

To conclude: As God has testified his singular goodness unto man, in
creating him an helper to assist him: so let him consider, in how many sorts
she is to him a helper, to pass over this life in blessedness. And let this
daily seeking of such a benefit received at the hands of God, induce and
stir him up to render thanks, and to dispose himself to use it well, to his
own comfort and salvation: and not to abuse it, to the destruction both of
himself and his wife. But if he chances (as many do) upon troubles, and
afflictions in marriage, let him remember, that the same do proceed, not
properly from marriage, but from the corruptions of the parties married: and
for his part, let him study to amend his infirmities and faults, by
amendment of life: and withal, pray to God to grant the like grace unto his
wife, to the end, that the more they recover the Image of God, the more
feeling they may have of the felicity of Marriage: which Adam and Eve had
enjoyed, had they continued, as they were created, in the Image of God. And the
particular duties of the wife to the husband, are principally these: first,
that she be a helper unto him, etc. Secondly, that she be obedient unto him,
etc. These four special duties are partly touched before, and partly
afterward.

As love matrimonial is greatly allowed of God, and much commended of all good
men, as an ordinate, holy, and godly love: so contrariwise, hatred,
dissentio^, strife, debate, unquietness and frowardnes in marriage, highly
displeases God, and much grieueth al good and godly men. And therefore the
devil, the enemy of all unity, concord and agreement, labors by all
means he can, (especially at the first coming of the married folks to dwell
together) to sow dissension, discord, and to cause them not to agree, but to
dislike one of the other; against whom they must diligently watch, by fervent
and earnest prayer to God, that the devil prevail not against them, by such
too early disagreement. For as two boords at the first, if they be not well
coupled and joined together, they never are fastened right afterward: but if the
first coupling and joining together be good, then can there afterward no
violence drive the boords asunder: yea, the whole board does sooner break,
then the glewing of them together: even so the husband and wife must be very
careful and diligent, that their first cohabitation and dwelling together, The
best policy in marriage, is to begin well.
belouing, delectable, and friendly; and not separated through any spightfull
contention or discord: so shall the whole estate of their marriage be more
comfortable, and prosper the better as long as they shall live. And though there
happen to arise any spark of discord betwixt them, yet let them beware, that
at the least there be not too much displeasure, disdain, and inconvenience
kindled thereby. For if at their first dwelling together, there shall fall out
such untowardness, and uncomely discord, then will it now and then be
breaking out: even as it fares with great wounds, and broken legs or arms,
which seldom are so thoroughly healed, but sometimes they have pain at the
change of the weather. So likewise, if married folks behave themselves thus
untowardly and vnhonestlie the one toward the other at the first, and if iars
and discord be once begun between them, the old canker of hatred will breed
again, though it be scaled afterward. Let the one therefore learn betime to
be acquainted with the nature and conditions of the other, and to apply
themselves according to the same, in as much as they must needs dwell
together, one to enjoy another, and the one to live and dye with the other, and
so steadfastly and unfeignedly to love one the other, that neither of them have
any thing so dear, which they cannot be content to give and bestow one upon
the other: yea, even their own life, if need require. And therefore husbands
and wives must even at the beginning of their marriage give their diligence,
that all injuries and offenses may be avoided: for tender and soft love is
soon dissolved and broken. So that this new love and conjunction of the mind,
must be nourished with benign, sweet, and gentle conversation, until it be so
increased and fastened, that no great storm be able to dissolve or break it.
And all suspicion must be at all times, but specially at the beginning of
matrimony, eschued and shunned, least they should first begin to hate, or ever
they begin to love: yea, and they must beware they do not feign any suspicion,
nor conceive it of any light occasions and conjectures: for unto such they in
no wise must give ear, although there were some show and great appearance of
likelihood. And this will be a good means to effect and work this: namely,
if they accustom themselves to speak kindly, lovingly, and cheerfullie one to
the other. For as the ancient Counselors of king Solomon gave wise advise and
counsel unto Rehoboam king of Israel, 1. King. 12.7, 8. etc.
to the end that he might win the love and good liking of the people: Speak
kindly unto them (said they) and they will serve thee for ever after: which
counsel not being followed, great inconvenience and mischief after befell
unto him, etc. Even so likewise, if the husband be desirous to procure the
love of his wife, and to win her to God: or if the wife be desirous, and
would also procure the love of her husband, and win him to God; then they must
draw on one another with sweet and gentle words of love, speaking kindly one to
another: Judge. 19.3. Prou. 15.1.
because gentle words do pacify anger, as water quenches fire. But if they
shall use taunts, or words of reproach and despite one against another, Gal.
5.9.
much hurt then may ensue thereof: for a little leaven sowreth the whole lump.
And therefore let them use to give one to the other their dutiful names and
titles, and to eschew and shun the contrary. For example, like as the
spightfull Jews, which hated the Lord Jesus, would not vouchsafe to give him
his name, when they talked of him, or with him, but to show their utter dislike
of him they used to say: John. 7.11.15.35.
Is this he? or, art thou he that wilt do such a thing? Js not this he? etc.
Again, Whither will he go that we shall not find him? They would not say, Is
not this Jesus Christ? or the Son of God? This is a most despightfull kind
of speaking, and does bewray abundance of malice that was hidden in their
hearts: even so it sometimes falls out betwixt the husband and the wife,
betwixt the father and the son, betwixt the master and the servant, etc. that
they could speak dutifully one to an other: but contempt and disdain, anger
and malice, will not suffer the one to afford unto the other their due names
and titles, least they should be put in mind of those duties, which these
names require: whereout Satan sucketh no small advantage: whereas many times
the very name of husband, or wife, father or son, master or servant, etc.
does greatly help to persuade the mind, and to win the affection: yea, the
very mentioning of these names do oftentimes leave a print of duty behind in
the conscience.

Husbands must not forget this point, namely, that it is not sufficient for
them to declare, and outwardly make a show of a good life, in words and
precepts only, but also in life and deed: so that two things are very
necessary for him to rule withal: to wit, wisdom, and example, and that he
himself fulfill the thing that he commands to be done. The life and outward
conversation of a man, whether it be good or evil, does not only persuade,
but also constrain and enforce. We do see how mighty and auailable this or
the like exhortation of a Captain is in the time of war and battle: Oh my
soldiers, do that ye shall see me do: the which contempt of death in the
Captain, does so creep through the whole host, that there is not one, be he
never so feeble and weak hearted, that does esteem his life, for the which
he perceives that his Captain cares so little for. Thus did Christ with his
Apostles and Martyrs, draw the world unto the Christian faith: Leuit. 11.44.
and 19.2. and 20.7. and 21.8. John 13.15. Phil. 3.17. 1. Tim. 1.16. 2 Thessalonians.
3.9. For as they lived, so they spoke, and as they spoke, so they lived.
Therefore if the husband would have his wife to be temperate, quiet, chaste,
painful in her calling, religious, etc. then he must be careful that he be not
distempered, unquiet, no whoremonger, not careless in his calling, nor
irreligious etc. So that if he command any thing to be done, he must first
look that he deny not to do the same himself, and so shall his wife and
family obey the same, and to be the more readier and willinger to do it,
being both honest and lawful to be done.

The very name of a wife, is like the Angel which stayed Abraham's hand, Genes.
22.11.
when the stroke was coming. If David because he could not express the
commodity and comfort of unity, and brotherly love, was feign to say: Oh how
good and joyful a thing it is, Psalm. 133.1.
for brethren to dwell together in unity? Then let husbands weigh and
consider, how harsh and bitter a thing it is for them and their wives to dwell
together in enmity and strife. For the first year after marriage, Deuteronomy. 24.5.
God would not have the husband go to war with his enemies, to the end that
he and his wife might learn to know one another conditions and qualities, and
so afterward live in godly peace, and not to war one with another, and
therefore God gave and appointed, that the new married husband that year is to
stay at home and settle his love, that he might not war and jar after: for
the God of peace dwells not in the house of war. As a kingdom cannot
stand, if it be divided: Matthew. 12.25.
so a house cannot stand, if it be divided: for strife is like fire, which
leaves nothing but dust, smoke and ashes behind it. We read in the Scriptures
of masters that struck their servants, but never of any that struck his wife,
but rebuked her. Genes. 19.33.
Lot was drunk when he lay with his daughters in stead of a wife: and so is he
which strikes his wife in stead of his servants. The law shows how a bondsman
should be corrected: but the wife is like a judge, which is joined in
commission with her husband to correct other. Will thou strike one in his own
house? no more should thou strike thy wife in her house. She is come to thee
as to a Sanctuary, to defend her from hurt: and can thou hurt thy self?
Therefore Abraham said to Lot, Genes. 13.8.
Are we not brethren? that is, may brethren jar? but they may say, are we
not one? can one chide with another? can one fight with another? He is a bad
Oste that welcomes his guest with stripes. Does a King trample on his Crown?
Solomon calls the wife, Prou. 12.4.
The crown of her husbands therefore he which wounds her, wounds his own
honor. She is a free Citizen in thine house, and has taken the peace of thee
the first day of her marriage, Genes. 2.23. Ephesians. 5.19.
to hold thy hands till she release thee again. Adam says of his spouse,
This is flesh of my flesh: But no man (says Paul) ever hated his own flesh.
So then, if a man ask whether he may strike his wife? God says nay: thou
may not hate thy wife: for no man hates his own flesh: showing, that he
should not come near blows, but think his wrath too much.

Some husbands are wont to say, that they will rule their wives, whatsoever
they be, or howsoever they came by them, and that it is in the hand and power
of the husband, what, and of what qualities and conditions she shall be. True
it is, that a great part of this does rest and lie in the husband, so that he
understand as he ought to do, that marriage is the supreme and most excellent
part of all amity and friendship: and that it far differs from tyranny,
the which does compel men to obey. Truly it may force the body, but not the
will, in the which all love and amity does consist and stand: the which if it
be drawn and forced, does resist, and bow like a palm tree to the contrary
part. And the husband may assure himself that there cannot be any quiet
marriage or unity, where he and his wife does not agree in will and mind: the
which two, are the beginning and seat of al amity and friendship. And such
husbands as do brag, and think themselves able to rule, and overrule their
wives: by that time they have proceeded and gone a little further, they shall
well feel and perceive themselves to be beguiled, and find that thing to be
most hard and intricate, the which to be done, they esteemed most light and
easy.

Some husbands there be, that through evil and rough handling, and in
threatening of their wives, have and use them not as wives, but as their
servants. And yet surely they are but very fools, that judge and think
matrimony to be a dominion. For such as would be feared, do afterward
pitiouslie lament and complain, that they can find no love in their wives,
whose love and amity, through their own cruelty and hard dealing, they have
turned into hatred. And whereas at the beginning, they glorying and cracking
thus cruelly to be their wives masters, they have now purchased unto
themselves a most miserable and lamentable life in time to come: seeing now
that all love and pleasure is cast aside, and compassed with fear and
suspicion, hatred and sorrow. Surely, if a husband (as nature, reason, and the
holy Scripture do witness) be the head over his wife, and God their father:
there ought to be between them such society and fellowship: yea, and greater
then is between the father and his son, and not such as is between the
master and the servant. And amongst many reasons that may be used to persuade
the husband and wife to live together lovingly, quietly, and christianly, this
is not the least: namely, that for as much as neither of them is certain how
long they shall live together, and then the party that ouerliueth purposing to
marry again, and having been churlish, froward, etc. with his former wife: or
she with her first husband, which their so hard dealing one with the other
before being known, will (no doubt) be an occasion that they shall not speed
and match so well, as otherwise they might, if they had behaved themselves
peaceably, and dutifully in their first marriage.

What the duty of a wife is toward her husband.
THis duty is comprehended in these three points. First, that she reverence
her husband. Secondly, that she submit her self, and be obedient unto him.
And lastly, that she do not wear gorgeous apparel, beyond her degree and
place, but her attire must be comely and sober, according to her calling. The
first point is proved by the Apostles Peter and Paul: 1. Pet. 3.1. Ephesians.
5.22. Col. 3.18. 1. Cor. 7.3.
whereby they set forth the wives duties to their husbands commanding them to
be obedient unto them, although they be profane and irreligious, and that
they ought to do so much the more, that by their honest life and conversation,
they might win them to the obedience of the Lord.

Now for so much as the Apostle would have Christian wives, that are matched
with ungodly husbands, and such as are not yet good Christians, to reverence
and obey them: much more they should show themselves thankful to God, and
willingly and dutifully perform this obedience and subjection, when they are
coupled in marriage with godly, wise, discreet, learned, gentle, loving,
quiet, patient, honest, and thriftie husbands. Wives must be serviceable and
obedient unto their husbands, and stand in a reverend awe of them. Ephesians 5.33.
And therefore they ought evermore to reverence them, and to endeavor with true
obedience and love to serve them, to be loath in any wise to offend them: yea,
rather to be careful and diligent to please them, that their soul may bless
them. And if at any time it shall happen, that the wife shall anger or
displease her husband, by doing or speaking any thing that shall grieve him,
she ought never to rest until she has pacified him, and gotten his favor
again. And if he shall chance to blame her without a cause, and for that which
she could not help or remedy (which thing sometimes happens even of the
best men) yet she must bear it patiently, and give him no uncomely or unkind
words for it: but evermore look upon him with a loving and cheerful
countenance, and so rather let her take the fault upon her, Cheerful in
countenance.
then seem to be displeased. Let her be always merry and cheerful in his
company, but yet not with too much lightness. She must beware in any wise of
swelling, powting, lowering, or frowning: for that is a token of a cruel, and
unloving heart, except it be in respect of sin, or in time of sickness. She
may not be sorrowful for any adversity that God sends: but always to be
careful that nothing be spilt, or go to waste, through her negligence. In any
wise, Genes. 27.9.
see that she be quick and cleanly about her husbands meat and drink, and
to prepare him the same according to his diet in due season. Let her show her
self in word and deed, wise, humble, courteous, gentle, and loving toward
her husband, and also toward such as he does love; and then shall she lead a
blessed life. Let her show her self, not only to love no man so well as her
husband; but also to love none other at all, but him, unless it be for her
husbands sake. Genes. 2.23, 24 Matthew. 19.5. 1. Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 5.31.
Wherefore let the wife remember, that (as the Scripture reports) she is one
body with her husband; so that she ought to love him none otherwise then her
self: How the Wife ought to behave her self unto her Husband.
for this is the greatest virtue of a married woman, this is the thing that
wedlock signifies and commands, that the wife should reckon, to have her
husband for both father, mother, brother, and sister: like as Adam was unto
Eve: and as the most noble and chaste woman Andromache said her husband Hector
was unto her: Thou art unto me both father and mother,
Mine own dear husband, and well beloved brother.


And if it be true that men do say, that friendship makes one heart of two:
much more truly and effectually ought wedlock to do the same, which far
passes al manner both friendship and kindred. Therefore it is not said, that
marriage does make one man, or one mind, or one body of two, but clearly one
person: wherefore matrimony requires a greater duty of the husband toward
his wife, and the wife toward her husband, then otherwise they are bound to
show to their parents. The Apostle bids, Romans 12.15.
to rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. With whom
should the wife rejoice, rather then with her loving husband? Or with whom
should she weep and mourn, rather then with her own flesh? I will not leave
thee, 2. King. 21.5.
says Elisha to Eliah: so she should say, Gal. 6.2.
I will never leave him till death. Bear one another burden) says Paul.)
Who shall bear one another burden, if the wife do not bear the husbands
burden? Wicked Iezabel comforted her husband in his sickness: 1. King. 21.5.
1. King. 14.4. Genes. 12.1.
and Ieroboams wife sought for his health, though she was as bad as he. God did
not bid Sarah leave her father and country, as he did bid her husband, yet
because he bad Abraham leave his, she left hers too: showing that she was
content not only to be his play-fellow, Genes. 2.18.
but his yoke fellow too. Beside a yoke fellow, she is called a Helper, to
help him in his labors, to help him in his troubles, to help him in his
sickness, like a woman physician, sometime with her strength, and sometime
with her counsel: 1. Cor. 1.27.
for sometime as God confounds the wise by the foolish, and the strong by the
weak; so he teaches the wise by the foolish, and helps the strong by the
weak. Therefore Peter says, 1. Pet. 3.1.
Husbands are won by the conversation of their wives. As if he should say,
sometime the weaker vessel is the stronger vessel: and Abraham may take
counsel of Sarah, as Naaman was advised by his servant. The Shunamits counsel
made her husband receive a Prophet into his house: 2. King. 5.3. and 4.9. Hest.
7.3.
and Hesters counsel made her husband spare the Church of the Jews: so some
have been better help to their husbands, then their husbands have bin to them:
Deuteronomy. 32.21. Romans 10.19.
for it pleases God to provoke the wise with the foolish, as he did the Jews
with the Gentiles. Beside a helper, Prou. 5.18, 19. 1. Sam. 16.23.
she is called a Comforter too: and therefore the man is bid to rejoice in his
wife: which is as much to say, that wives must be the rejoicing of their
husbands, even like David's harp to comfort Saul: A good wife therefore is
known, when her words and deeds and countenance are such as her husband
loves She must not examine whether he be wise, or simple, but that she is his
wife, and therefore they that are bound must obey: as Abigail loved her
husband, 1. Sam. 52.3.
though he were a fool, churlish, and evil conditioned: for ye wife is as
much despised for taking rule over her husband, as he for yielding it unto her.
Therefore one says, that a mankind woman is a mo^ster: that is, half a woman,
and half a man. It beseems not the mistress to be a master, no more then it
becomes the master to be mistress: but both must sail with their own
wind, and both keep their standing.

Lastly, we call the wife Huswife, that is, Genes. 38.14. Genes. 34.1. Why
wives are called huswiues. Titus 2.5.
house-wife, not a street-wife, one that gaddeth up and down, like Thamer: nor
a field-wife, like Dinah, but a house-wife: to show that a good wife keeps her
house: and therefore Paul bids Titus to exhort women that they be chaste
and keeping at home: presently after chaste, he says keeping at home: as though
home were chastities keeper. And therefore Solomon depainting, Prou. 7.12.
and describing the qualities of a whore, sets her at the door, now sitting
upon her stall, now walking in the streets, now looking out of the window: 2.
King. 9.30.
like cursed Iezabel, as if she held forth the glass of temptation, for
vanity to gaze upon. But chastity cares to please but one, and therefore she
keeps her closet, as if she were still at prayer.

Genes. 18.9.
The Angel asked Abraham; Where is thy wife? Abraham answered: She is in the
tent. The Angel knew where she was: but he asked, that he might see how women
in old time did keep their tents and houses. 2. King. 4.22.
It is recorded of the Shunamite, that she did ask her husband leave to go
unto the Prophet, though she went to a Prophet, and went of a good errand, and
for his cause as much as her own: yet she thought it not meet to go far
abroad without her husbands leave.

The second point is, that wives submit themselves, Ephesians. 5.22, 23 1. Cor. 11
3. and 14.34.
and be obedient unto their own husbands, as to the Lord, because the husband
is by Gods ordinance, the wives head: that is, her defender, teacher, and
comforter: and therefore she owes her subjection to her husband, like as the
Church does to Christ; and because the example of Sarah, the mother of the
faithful, which obeyed Abraham and called him Lord, Genes. 18.12. 1. Pet. 3.6.
moves them thereunto. This point is partly handled before in the first point,
as in the duty of the husband to the wife.

As the Church should depend upon the wisdom, discretion and will of Christ,
Ephesians. 5.24.
and not follow what it self lists: so must the wife also submit and apply
her self to the discretion and will of her husband: even as the government and
conduct of every thing rests in the head, not in the body. Moses writes,
Genes. 3.1.
that the Serpent was wise above all beasts of the field: and that he did
declare in assaulting the woman, that when he had seduced her, she might also
seduce and deceive her husband. 1. Tim. 2.14.
Saint Paul noting this, among other the causes of the woman's subjection, does
sufficiently show, that for the avoiding of the like inconveniences, it is Gods
will that she should be subject to her husband, so that she shall have no
other discretion or will, but what may depend upon her head. As also the same
Moses says: Genes. 3.16.
Thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee. This
dominion over the wives will does manifestly appear in this, that God in old
time ordained, Numb. 30.7.
that if the woman had vowed any thing unto God, it should notwithstanding rest
in her husband to disauow it. So much is the wives will subject to her husband:
yet it is not meant, that the wife should not employ her knowledge and
discretion which God has given her, in the help, and for the good of her
husband. But always it must be with condition to submit her self unto him,
acknowledging him to be her head, that finally they may so agree in one, as
the conjunction of marriage does require. Yet as when in a Lute, or other
musical instrument, two strings concurring in one tune, the sound
nevertheless is imputed to the strongest and highest: so in a well ordered
household, there must be a communication, and consent of counsel and will
between the husband and the wife: yet such, as the counsel and commandment
may rest in the husband. True it is, that some women are wiser and more
discreet then their husbands: as Abigail the wife of Naball, Prou. 16.1. and
18.22. and 19.14. and 31. all.
and others. Whereupon Solomon says: A wise woman builds up the house: and
blessed is the man that has a discreet wife. Yet still a great part of the
discretion of such women, shall rest in acknowledging their husbands to be
their heads, and so using the graces that they have received of the Lord, that
their husbands may be honored, not contemned, neither of them nor of others:
which falls out contrary, when the wife will seem wiser then her husband.
So that this modesty and government ought to be in a wife: namely, that she
should not speak but to her husband, or by her husband. And as the voice of
him that sounds a trumpet, is not so loud, as the sound that it yields: so
is the wisdom and word of a woman, of greater virtue and efficacy, when all
that she knows, and can do, is as if it were said and done by her husband.
The obedience that the wife owes to her husband, depends upon this
subjection of her will and wisdom unto him. As 1. Pet. 3.6. Ephesians. 5.33.
Ester 1.1, 2. etc. 12. So that women may not provoke their husbands by
disobedience, in matters that may be performed without offense to God: neither
to presume over him, either in kindred or wealth, or obstinately to refuse in a
matter that may trouble household peace and quiet. For disobedience begets
contempt of the husband, and contempt wrath, and is many times the cause of
troubles between the man and the wife. If the obedience imports any
difficulty, she may for her excuse gently propound the same: yet upon
condition to obey, in case the husband should persist in his intent, so long as
the discommoditie imports no wickedness. For it is better to continue peace
by obedience, then to break it by resistance. And indeed it is natural in
the members, to obey the conduct and government of the head. Yet must not this
obedience so far extend, as that the husband should command any thing contrary
to her honor, credit and salvation, but as it is comely in the Lord: Col.
3.18. Ephesians. 5.22. Therefore, as it were a monstrous matter, and the means to
overthrow the person, that the body should, in refusing all subjection and
obedience to the head, take upon it to guide it self, and to command the
head: so were it for the wife to rebel against the husband. Let her then
beware of disordering and perverting the course, which God in his wisdom has
established: and with all let her understand, that going about it, she rises
not so much against her husband, as against GOD: and that it is her good, and
honor, to obey God in her subjection and obedience to her husband. If in the
practice of this duty, she find any difficulty or trouble, through the
inconsiderate course of her husband, or otherwise; let her remember, that the
same proceeds not of the order established by the Lord, but through some sin
afterward crept in, which has mixed gall among the honey of the subjection and
obedience, that the woman should have enjoyed in that estate, wherein together
with Adam, she was created after the image of God. And so let her humble her
self in the sight of God, and be well assured that her subjection and
obedience is acceptable unto him. Likewise, that the more that the image of God
is restored in her, and her husband, through the regeneration of the holy
Ghost, the less difficulty shall she find in that subjection and obedience:
as many in their marriage have in deed tried, to their great contentment and
consolation.

Further, there is a certain discretion and desire required of women to please
the nature, inclinations and manners of their husbands, so long as the same
imports no wickedness. For as the looking-glass, howsoever fair and
beautifully adorned, is nothing worth, if it show that countenance sad, which
is pleasant: or the same pleasant, that is sad: so the woman deserves no
commendation, that (as it were) contrarying her husband, when he is merry,
shows her self sad; or in his sadness utters her mirth: for as men should
obey the laws of their cities, so women the manners of their husbands. To some
women, a beck of her husband is sufficient to declare that there is somewhat
amiss that displeases him, and specially if she bear her husband any
reverence. For an honest matron has no need of any greater staff, but of one
word, or one sour countenance. Moreover, a modest and chaste woman that loves
her husband, must also love her house, as remembering, that the husband that
loves his wife, cannot so well like of the sight of any tapestrie, as to see
his wife in his house. For the woman that gaddeth from house to house to prate,
confounds her self, her husband, and family: Titus 2.5. But there are four
reasons why the woman is to go abroad. First, to come to holy meetings,
according to the duty of godliness. The second, to visit such as stand in
need, as the duty of love and charity do require. The third, for employment
and provision in household affairs committed to her charge. And lastly, with
her husband when he shall require her. The wife must keep a good tongue.
Genesis 20.1. etc. The evil and unquiet life that some women have, and pass
with their husbands, is not so much for that they commit with, and in their
persons, as it is for that they speak with their tongues. When the wife does
hold her peace, she keeps the peace. The cause of domestical combats.
If the wife would keep silence when her husband begins to chide, he should
not have so unquiet dinners, neither she the worse supper: which surely is not
so: for at the same time that the husband begins to utter his grief, the
wife then begins to scold and chafe; whereof does follow, that now and then
most unnaturally they come to handy gripes, more beastlike the^ christianlike:
which their so doing is both a great shame, Silence becomes a woman.
and a foul discredit to them both. The best means therefore that a wife can
use to obtain, and maintain the love and good liking of her husband, is to
be silent, obedient, peaceable, patient, studious to appease his choler, if he
be angry, painful and diligent in looking to her business, Lack of
knowledge of Gods word, is the principal cause why wives do not their duty
to their husbands.
to be solitary and honest. The chief and special cause why most women do
fail in not performing this duty to their husbands, is, because they be
ignorant of the word of God, which teaches the same and all other duties: and
therefore their souls and consciences not being brought into subjection to God
and his word, they can never until then, yield and perform true subjection
and obedience to their husbands, and behave themselves so every way, as
christian wives are in duty bound to do. But if wives be not so dutitiful,
serviceable, and subject to their husbands, as in conscience they ought; the
only cause thereof, for the most part, is through the want and neglect of the
wise, discreet, and good government that should be in the husbands: besides the
want of good example that they should give unto their wives both in word and
deed. One heart and one will.
For as the common saying is: Such a husband, such a wife: a good Jack makes
a good Gill. For so much as marriage makes of two persons one, How the love,
faithfulness, and duty of married folks may be kept and increased.
therefore the love of the husband and wife may the better be kept and
increased, and so continued, if they remember the duties last spoken of, as
also not forget these three points following.

1. They must be of one heart, will and mind, and neither to vpbraide, or cast
the other in the teeth with their wants and imperfections any ways, or to
pride themselves in their gifts: but rather the one to endeavor to supply the
others wants, that so they both helping and doing their best together, may be
one perfect body.

2. It does greatly increase love, when the one faithfully serves the other,
when in things concerning marriage the one hides no secrets nor priuities from
the other, and the one does not utter or publish the frailties or infirmities
of the other: and when of all that ever they obtain or get, they have but one
common purse together, the one locking up nothing from the other: and also when
the one is faithful to the other, in eating, drinking, and so in all their
necessities and affairs. Likewise, when the one harkneth to the other, and
when the one thinks not scorn of the other, and when in matters concerning
the government of the house, the one will be counseled and advised by the
other: and always the one to be loving, kind, courteous, plain, and gentle in
words, manners and deeds.

3. Let the one learn ever to be obsequious, diligent, and serviceable to the
other in all other things. And this will the sooner come to pass, if the one
observe and mark what thing the other can away withal, or cannot away
withal: and what pleases or displeases them. And so from thence-forth to do
the one, and to leave the other undone. They must secretly keep no evil will
in their minds, but tell their grief.
And if one of them be angry and offended with the other, then let the party
grieved, open and make known to the other their grief in due time, and with
discretion: for the longer a displeasure or evil will rages in secret, the
worse will be the discord. And this must be observed, that it be done in a
fit and convenient time: because there is some season, in the which if griefs
were showed, it should make greater debate. As if the wife should go about to
tell or admonish her husband when he is out of patience, or moved with anger,
it should then be no fit time to talk with him. 1. Sam. 25.36, 37.
Therefore Abigail perceiving Naball her husband to be drunk, would not
speak to him until the morning. Both the husband and wife must remember, that
the one be not so offended and displeased with the manners of the other, 1. Cor.
7.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Matthew. 19.6. Matthew. 19.9. and 5.33. Luke. 16.18.
that they should thereupon forsake the company one of the other: for that
were like to one that being stung with the Bees, would therefore forsake the
honey. And therefore no man may put away his wife for any cause, except for
whoredom, which must be duly proved before a lawful Judge. But all godly and
faithful married folks are to commend their state and marriage to God, by
humble and fervent prayer, that he for his beloved sons sake, would so bless
them and their marriage, that they may so christianly and dutifully agree
between themselves, that they may have no cause of any separation or
diuorcement. For like as all manner of medicines (and specially as they that
go nighest death, as to cut off whole members, etc.) are very loathsome and
terrible: even so is diuorcement indeed a medicine, but a perilous and terrible
medicine. Therefore every good Christian husband and wife, ought with all care
and heedfulnesse, so to live in marriage, that they have no need of such
medicine. As the holy Scripture makes mention of many wives and women that
were wicked and ungodly, as partly may be seen by these quotations, 1. King.
11.1, 2. Prou. 21.9.22.14. and 25.24. and 27.15. Eccles. 7.28.30: So
contrariwise, the same sacred Scripture also commends unto us many women that
have been devout, religious and virtuous: as partly is manifest by that which
has already been said: and also by these places of Scripture, Ruth. 3.11. 1.
Sam. 25.3. Pro. 14.1. and 31.10. Matt. 28.1.8.9.10. Luke 8.2.3. and 23.55.56.
and 14.1. Act. 16.14.15. and 1.14. and 17.4. and 9.36.39. 2. Ioh. 1. 2. Tim.
1.5. And whosoever shall observe it in the reading of the word of God, shall
find that it speaks of the praise of as many, and more good women, as men:
yea, and we are persuaded that if at this day a due survey should be taken of
all men and women throughout her Majesty's dominions, that there would be
found in number more women that are faithful, religious and virtuous, then men.

The wife ought to obey her husband in all things, that be honest and agreeable
to Gods word.
Now, if a wife be desirous to know how far she is bound to obey her husband,
the Apostle resolves this doubt, where he says, Ephesians. 5.22. saying, Wives,
submit your selves unto your husbands, as to the Lord. As if he had said:
Wives cannot be disobedient to their husbands, but they must resist God also,
who is the author of this subjection, and that she must regard her husbands
will, as the Lords will: but yet withal, as the Lord commands one that which
is good and right: so she should obey her husband in good and right, or else she
does not obey him as the Lord, but as the tempter. The first subjection of the
woman began at sin: for when God cursed her for seducing her husband, when
the Serpent had deceived her, he said: He shall have authority over thee.
Genes. 3.16.
And therefore as the man named all other creatures, in sign that they should
be subject to him, as a servant which comes when his master calls him by
his name: so he did name the woman also, Hest. 1.20.22. Numb. 30.7, 8, 9. 1.
Pet. 3.6. Judge. 19.26.
in token that she should be subject to him likewise. And therefore Assuerus
made a law, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and not the
woman. Because she sinned first, therefore she is humbled most: and ever since,
the daughters of Sarah are bound to call their husbands Lord, as Sarah called
her husband: that is, to take them for heads and governors.

Amongst the particular duties that a Christian wife ought to perform in her
family, It is a special duty of a mother, to give her children suck her
self.
this is one: namely, that it belongs to her to nurse her own children,
which to omit, and to put them forth to nursing, is both against the law of
nature, and also against the will of God: besides, it is hurtful both for the
childs body, and also for his wit: and lastly, it is hurtful to the mother
her self, and it is an occasion that she falls into much sickness thereby.

1. First, Nature gives milk to the woman for none other end, but that she
should bestow it upon her child. We see by experience, that every beast, and
every foul, is nourished and bred of the same that did bear it: only some
women love to be mothers, but not nurses. And as every tree does cherish and
nourish that which it brings forth: even so also it becomes natural mothers
to nourish their children with their own milk. 1. Tim. 5.10.


2. Secondly, the example of the Scriptures are many that prove this. As Sarah,
who nursed Isaac, Genes. 22.7.
though she were a Princess, and therefore able enough to have had others to
have taken yt pains: as also having bin a beautiful woman, even in old age
being of great years, yet she her self nurseth and gives suck to her son.
1. Sam. 1.23.
Also Anna, whom the holy Ghost has lest it recorded, as a commendation unto
her, for that she nursed her own son Samuel. So when God chose a nurse for
Moses, he led the Hand-maide of Pharaohs daughter to his mother; Exodus 2.8.
Judge. 13.24. Cant. 8.1. Psalm. 22.9. Matthew. 2.14. Luke. 2.7.12.
as though God would have none to nurse him but his mother. Likewise, after
when the Son of God was borne, his father thought none fit to be his nurse,
but the virgin his mother. It is a commendation of a good woman, and set down
in the first place, 1. Tim. 5.10.
as a principal good work in a widow that is well reported of, if she have
nursed her children. And therefore such as refuse thus to do, may well and
fitly be called nice and unnatural mothers: yea, in so doing they make
themselves but halfe-mothers, and so break the holy bond of nature, in locking
up her breast from her child, and delivering it forth like the Cuckoo, to be
hatched in the Sparrowes nest.

3. Again, the childrens bodies be commonly so affected, as the milk is which
they receive. Now, if the Nurse be of an evil complexion, and as she is
affected in her body, or in her mind, or have some hidden disease, the child
sucking of her breast, must needs take part with her. And if that be true
which the learned do say, that the temperature of the mind follows the
constitution of the body, needs must it be, that if the nurse be of a naughty
nature, the child must take thereafter. Yet if it be that the nurse be of a
good complexion, of an honest behavior: (whereas contrariwise, Maidens that
have made a escape, are commonly called to be Nurses) yet can it not be, but
that the mothers milk should be much more natural for the child, then the
milk of a stranger. As by experience, let a man be long accustomed to one
kind of drink, if the same man change his air, and his drink, he is like
to mislike it. As the eggs of a Hen are altered under a Hawke:
nevertheless, such women, as be oppressed with infirmities, diseases, want of
milk, or other just and lawful causes, are to be dispensed withal, but,
whose breasts have this perpetual drought? Forsooth, it is like the gowte, no
beggars may have it, but Citizens or Gentlewomen. In the 9. of Hosea, verse 14.
dry breasts are named for a curse. What a lamentable hap have Gentlewomen, to
light upon this curse, more then other? sure, if their breasts be dry, (as
they say) they should fast and pray together, that this curse might be removed
from them.

4. And lastly, that it is hurtful to the mothers themselves, both Physicians
can tell, and some women full often have felt, how they have been troubled with
sore breasts, besides other diseases, that happen to them, through plenty of
milk.

The wife is further to remember, that God has given her two breasts, not that
she should employ and use them for a show, or of ostentation, but in the
service of God, and to be a help to her husband, in suckling the child common
to them both. Experience teaches, that God co^uerteth her blood into the
milk, wherewith the child is nursed in the mothers womb. He brings it into
the breasts, furnished with nipples, convenient to minister the warm milk
unto the child, whom he indueth with industry, to draw out the milk for his
own sustenance. The woman therefore, that can suckle her child, and does it
not, but refuses this office and duty of a mother, declares her self to be
very unthankful to God, and (as it were) forsakes and contemns the fruit
of her womb. And therefore the bruit beasts lying upon the ground, and
granting not one nipple or two, but six or seven to their young ones, shall
rise in judgment against these dainty halfe-mothers, who for fear of
wrinckling of their faces, or to avoid some small labor, do refuse this so
necessary a duty of a mother due to her children. The properties due to a
married wife, are, that she have gravity when she walks abroad: wisdom,
to govern her house: patience, to suffer her husband: love, to breed and bring
up her children: courteous toward her neighbors: diligence, to lay up, and to
save such goods as are within her charge: a friend of honest company, and a
greater enemy of wanton and light toys. 1. So then, the principal duty of
the wife, is, first to be subject to her husband, Ephesians. 5.22. Col. 3.18. 1.
Pet. 3.1. 2. To be chaste and shamefast, modest and silent, godly and discreet.
3. To keep herself at home, for the good government of her family, and not
to stray abroad without just cause.

Srepfathers and Stepmothers their duties.
Here it is not to be pretermitted, but that we must say somewhat touching men
and women that be twice married, and so become Step-fathers, The Husband and
Wife, must so praise his first Wife, and she her first Husband, so as it be not
done to the offense or reproach of either to the other. Jealousy, which is the
suspecting of adultrie in the married parties, ought wisely and carefully to
be suppressed on both parties, without apparent matter.
and Step-mothers. Such husbands and wives as marry again, after the death of
their first wives, or first husbands, are carefully to remember that they do
not displease their wives, or their husbands, which they now have, by overmuch
rehearsing of their first wife, or first husband. For the course and condition
of the world is such, that husbands and wives do account and recover things
past, better then things that be present. And the reason is, because no
commodity or felicity is so great, but it has some grief and displeasure,
and also some bitterness mingled with it: which so long as it is present
grieueth us sore, but when it is one gone, it leaves no great feeling of it
self behind it: and for that cause we seem to be less troubled with
sorrows and discommodities past, then with those that are present. Also age
steals and comes on apace, which causes both men and women to be the less
able to sustain and endure troubles and griefs now, then before. Therefore
such men and women as be twice married, and be wise and religious, ought not
to esteem their wife, or husband which is dead, better then her or him which
they enjoy now alive: remembering the common proverb, That we must live by the
quick, and not by the dead: and that we must make much of that we now have.
The very name of Stepfather and Stepmother, teaches them their duty.
Let the name of Step-father and Stepmother, admonish and put them in mind of
their duty toward the children of the one and the others for Step-father and
Stepmother, does signify a sted-father and a sted-mother: that is, one
father, or one mother dies, and another succeeds and comes in their stead
and room. Therefore to the end that both their loves may be settled toward the
children of the one and the other, they must remember that they are
stead-father and stead-mother: that is, in stead of their own father and
mother: and therefore they ought to love them, to tender them, and to cherish
them, as their own father or mother did. They must not look upon them like
Rehoboam, who told his people, 1. King. 12.13. to 21.
that he would be worse unto them then his predecessor: for then the children
will dislike of you, and turn from you, as his subjects did from him: but ye
must come to the^, as David came to the people after Saul's death, who said: 2.
Sam. 2.7.
Though your master Saul be dead, yet I will reign over you: so ye must say
to them, though your father be dead, or though your mother be dead, yet I will
be a father, or I will be a mother unto you: so the children will love you, as
much as their dead father, or dead mother did. For that man and that woman that
are led with discretion, reason, and consideration, will reckon himself and
his wife all one: and likewise, she will account herself and her husband as
one. And therefore they ought to account both the children of the one, and of
the other, as common to them both: for if friendship make all things common
among friends, insomuch, that many have loved and favored their friends
children, as their own; how much more effectually and perfectly ought marriage
to cause the same, which is the highest degree, not only of friendships, but
also of al blood and kindred. But Step-mothers do more often offend, and fail
in this duty, then men, by reason that their affections be stronger then
men's, and many times over rule them: and therefore they are earnestly to be
admonished and warned, that they show themselves to those motherles children,
no step-mothers friendship, but a right motherly kindness. Let the stepmother
advisedly consider, that God has ordained and appointed her (in stead of their
own mother) to be to them a right true mother, and not only to regard them
as children, but as orphane children, and requires her to love them, and to do
them good, as to her own. What a grief would it be to her heart, if she should
know now that her own children whom she has borne in her own body, should
(after her death) have a stepmother that would be rigorous, churlish, and
unkind unto them? doubtless those childrens mother, that dead is, had upon her
deathbed no less care for her children. Let her therefore always have in
mind this saying of our Savior Christ: As you measure unto other, Matthew. 7.2.
so it shall be measured to you again: That is, as the stepmother does
entreat the children of her predecessor, so another wife may come after her,
and entreat her children: for he that took away the first mother, and sent
her, can take away the second mother, and send a third, which will not be like
a stead-mother to hers, unless she be like a stead-mother to these. Verily, a
good woman will be unto her husbands children, that which she may hear them
call her so often: that is, Mother. For what christian woman is so far from
all humanity and natural affection, that will not be moved and mittigated
with this word Mother, of whom soever it be spoken? And chiefly of children
which cannot flatter, but speak even so from their heart, like as they would
to their own mother, of whom they were borne. How sweet is the name of
friendship? how many injuries, hatreds and displeasures does it hide and put
away? Then how much more effectual ought the sweet name of mother to be, which
is full of incredible love? Therefore every religious and loving wife will be
mollified and moved in her heart and mind, when she shall hear her self
named mother, by any of her husbands children. Otherwise, she shall show her
self to be more unnatural and unkind, then the wild savage beast: for there
is no beast so outrageous and cruel but if any other young beast of her own
kind fawn upon her, she will by and by show kindness and mildnes unto it. And
shall not her husbands children make her kind and loving unto them, when they
call and speak unto her, by the loving and sweet name of mother?

As wives ought to go comely, cleanly, and handsomely in their apparel, so
they must in any wise beware of pride, riot, or excess therein.
3. The third and last point that appertains to the duty of wives, is, that
they do not wear gorgeous and sumptuous apparel, or broidered hair trimmed
with gold: but that after the example of holy women which trusted in God,
they be sober in outward apparel, and ought to be garnished and decked
inwardly with virtues of their minds: as with gentleness, meeknes, quietness, and
chastity, which indeed are most precious things in the sight of God. This
point is so plainly spoken of by the Apostle to Timothy, chap. 2. verse 9.10.
in which place he so flatly condemns, both the excess and pride of apparel,
as also the pomp, curiosity and wantonness which women use in trimming their
heads, by plating, crisping, broyding, curling, and curiously laying out, yt no
man can say more against it, in so few words, as he has spoken to ye utter
dislike thereof. For if a man should occupy himself, and give liberty to his
pen to write of the horrible abuse and excessive pride, Pride is hateful
before God and man. Be not therefore proud, for thou art but d^ff and ashes.
that many women commit in this behalf, he should rather want time to write,
then matter to speak. Therefore such women as will not reform themselves
herein, we leave them to the Lord, who (no doubt) will in his appointed time,
not only severely punish the^, but also their husbands, for suffering this
great wickedness and dissoluteness in their wives: as he did the Jews for
the same sin, as plainly may be seen in Esaias 3.16. etc. For so it falls
out, according to the common proverb, Prou. 16.18.
That pride goes before, and shame and destruction comes after. And on the
contrary part, we hope that such women as be true professors of Christ and his
religion, will both attire and dress their heads so decently, and also content
themselves with such comely apparel, as best beseems their calling and
degree; so as by their good example, Titus 2.3.
they may draw on other women to reform themselves in this behalf: and so
rather to come short of that, which their ability and place would serve to
maintain, then any ways to exceed herein, to the slander of their
profession. Temperance in apparel.
And let them not so much regard what thing they would feign have, but rather
what they cannot well be without: so that whatsoever they have no need of, is
too dear of a farthing.

The duty of Parents toward their children.
This duty contains four points, namely, in teaching or instructing them
in religion, in manners good example of life, and skill of an occupation.
THis duty consists upon four points. First, that fathers and mothers do
instruct and bring up their children even from the cradle, in the fear and
nurture of the Lord.

Secondly, that they bring them up in shamefastness, hatred of vice, and love
of all virtue.

Thirdly, that they be unto their children, examples of all godliness, and
vertuousnes.

Fourthly, that they keep them from idleness, the mother of all mischiefs, and
bring them up either in learning, or in some good Art, or Occupation, whereby
they may get their living with honesty and truth, when they shall come to age
and years of discretion.

The first point
1. Touching the first point, Parents are to be admonished, that they bear in
mind, that the cause why the Lord has blessed them with children, is: first,
that they should be careful to see that their children be so virtuously
brought up, that they may become citizens of the church of God: so that
whenever they themselves shall dye in the Lord, they may leave their children
true worshippers of God in their place: but alas, there be few that have any
great care of this duty.

It is to be remembered, The children of Christians ought not to be called by
any popish name. Dan. 1.7.
that it is the fathers duty, with all convenient speed to present the child
to baptism, and there to give the name unto his child: as may appear by the
example of Jacob and Zacharias, Genes. 35.18. and 4.25.26. Luke 1.63. Genes.
16.15. and 21.3. And it is a thing worthy to be wished, that all parents,
when, and at such time as God blesses them, having any children borne, that
then they would give them such names, as are named and commended unto us in the
holy Scriptures, to the end that when they come to years of discretion, they
by hearing those names, may be excited and moved to follow the virtuous life
and christian conversation of those men and women, whose names they bear,
which the holy Ghost has commended them for: and contrariwise to eschew and
avoid those faults and vices, which are discommended in them. We are neither
better nor worse in respect of our names. Joshua 10.3. The name profits none
in whom virtue is not commended.
And yet we have to remember, that as those children which are named and
called by, and after any of the names of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, or by
the name of any other Saint, man or woman, are not any thing the better,
because they have such godly and christian names, unless that they do imitate
and follow them in faith, virtue, and godly behavior: so on the other side,
they that be not called by such christian names, as are mentioned in the
sacred Scripture, are not in respect of their names any thing the worse, having
an assured faith in the merits of Christ his death passion and bloudshedding,
and leading their lives agreeable to the same. For as neither the yearly
revenues, nor the glorious titles and names of ancestors, and to descend of
noble parentage, makes me^ noble and renowned in deed, unless they themselves
be godly, honest, and wise: so neither the godly names, no nor yet the faith
and virtue of the fathers, avails the wicked and ungodly children any thing
at all, unless they repent and become faithful, and godly, as they were. Let
us here consider, that so often as in the race of our life we do hear or do
speak of our name, it does put us in remembrance: first, of Gods mercy showed
unto us in our baptism: secondly, of our promise to God again. And as in
times amongst our ancestors, Luke 1.59. and 2.21* Proper names are also given
unto us, for this use and end, that is, to distinguish betwixt man and man.
Infants had their names given them when they were circumcised, as appears in
Luke no doubt to this end that the circumcised should be admonished by the
calling by their names, at what time and place they had their names given the^,
and should think that they are written in the number of the children of God,
and joined in league with him, and made partakers of the covenant: so likewise
after the same manner, must we that have had our names given us in baptism,
remember and bear in mind, that we are by grace adopted to be the sons of God,
and received into his favor, and therefore that we are Gods own, and as it were
his goods and riches, as who bear his name as proper unto him.

2. Secondly, they must assure themselves, that all their labor is lost which
they bestow upon their children, unless they bring them up in the fear of
God, and oftentimes call upon Gods help by earnest prayer, that he in mercy
would vouchsafe to preserve them from the manifold snares, subtilties, and
temptations of Satan, which their tender age is subject unto. We may hear
many parents complain of the disobedience of their children: but they do not
mark and consider that they are justly punished by God, for that they think
by their own industry and wit, to make them good and virtuous, without Gods
blessing, which they seldom or never call for in good earnest.

3. Thirdly, let them consider how noble a thing a child is, whom God himself
has shaped and formed in his mothers womb, nourished, brought forth into the
light, and endued with body and soul, to the end he should (as it were in a
table) represent God his first pattern. Instructing, correcting, and praying,
make good children, and happy Parents.


4. Fourthly, let them know that these things are to be dealt withal in order.
Unto the body, nourishment, bringing up, apparel, and sometime correction,
that they may keep their children in awe. 1. King. 2.2, 3. Genes. 34.30. John
1.5.
Unto the soul they owe catechizing, instruction and doctrine: and that of two
sorts, namely, of godliness, and of civility. By the one, they shall keep a
good conscience before God. By the other, they shall obtain a good report
among men. For these are the two principal points which parents ought to be
most careful to plant in this life in their children: both which the Apostle
comprehends in one verse, where he says, Ephesians. 6.1. Ye, fathers provoke not
your children to wrath, but bring them up in instruction, and information of
the Lord. And therefore all parents are diligently to instruct and teach their
children the first principles of Christ his religion, so soon as by age they
are able to perceive and understand the same, that they may (as it were) suck
in godliness together with their mothers milk, and straight ways after their
cradle, may be nourished with the tender food of virtue toward that blessed
life. To have godly children (no doubt) is the greatest treasure that may be.
For in the children do the parents live (in a manner) even after death. And if
they be well instructed, catechized, and virtuously brought up, God is honored
by them, the common wealth is advanced: yea, their parents, and all other fare
the better for them. They are their parents comfort, next unto God, their joy,
staff, and upholding of their age: and therefore parents ought to begin
betimes to plant virtue in their childrens breasts: for late sowing brings a
late or never an apt Harvest. Young branches will bow as a man will have them,
but old trees will sooner break then bow. And therefore as arrows are an
excellent weapon of defense, to a strong and a mighty man that can shoot them
with courage: even so children godly brought up, are a special protection and
defense to their parents. And as the strong man's quiver, the better it is
furnished with chosen shafts, the better defense he has: so likewise the more
godly children that parents have, the greater is their joy and happiness. Yea
and further, as arrows are at the commandment of the owner to be used: even
so children well taught, are at the commandment of godly parents.

5. Lastly, let parents remember how many sins they commit and heap one upon
another, which do not their duty in bringing up their children, as they ought
to do. First, they transgress the law of nature, which tells all men, that
their duty is to bring up their children godlily and honestly. Secondly, Deuteronomy.
6.7, 8. and 4.9. and 11.19. Psalm. 71.5, 6, 7, 8. Iosu. 4.6.
they sin against God: for they despise the commandment and authority of
God: for he commands, that children should be brought up religiously and
honestly: but he is a despiser of God that refuses to do as he is
commanded. Thirdly, he offends against his own credit and estimation. Exodus
12.26.27. Luke 11 12.
For Gods will is, that parents should (after a sort) be in his stead, so far
forth as pertains to outward discipline. But such make small account of this
dignity, who neglect their duty in this behalf. Parents are further to
understand, that it is their duty to have diligent care to see their children
taught to pray to God, and to rehearse the Apostles Creed, and the ten
commandments. For as by this exercise their hearts and minds shall the rather
be inclined to godliness and reverence toward God; so as they increase in
age, they shall every day better then other comprehend that which they learn,
to their own comfort, and instruction to salvation. Also, as the tongue is
called the glory of man, because that besides al other reasons, by his speech
he is discerned from the brute beasts: so it is meet, that so soon as the
child can begin to speak, his tongue should be employed to glorify God, by
calling upon him, and by learning some short Catechism, containing the
principles and grounds of Christian religion: as also in repeating the will of
God in such sort, as he will that we should serve and honor him.

If parents do note or perceive any vice in their little ones, as swearing,
lying, choler, envy filching, covetousness, contempt of parents, readiness
to strife, and other like corruptions: it is their duty, diligently and in time
to reprove and correct the^: as men use to pluck up weeds while they be yet
young, least growing up among the good seeds, they should hinder their growth,
and choke them up. By experience we can see, that mothers in swaddling their
little ones, do lay their limbs right, each in his place: likewise, if a
child be given to be left handed, they chide him: yea, sometimes they bind
it up, or otherwise restrain the use of it, that he may be accustomed to use
his right hand. Also, if the child have some string under his tongue, they cut
it, least it should hinder his speech: much more then ought they to beware,
that through their negligence the vices of the souls do not increase: for it
is the duty of parents, even in the infancy, to begin to shape and frame the
soul unto virtue.

It is also the duty of parents to provide that their children may learn, at
the least to write and read: for it may be unto them a great help in the
course of this life, and a treasure of much greater account then money. And
therefore the negligence of many is sharply to be reproved. Besides that, the
performance of the duties herein, does greatly bind their children unto them.
Nevertheless, the principal end thereof should not have respect to such
commodity, as the children may reap thereby toward the use of this present
life: but rather that they may read the word of God to their comfort and
instruction to salvation. As also it were their parts to use them daily to
read some chapters of the holy Scriptures, thereby to incline and win their
affections to the word of God, to inure and acquaint them in the phrase of the
holy Ghost, by little and little to learn the heavenly doctrine, to note the
examples of Gods vengeance powered upon the wicked and disobedient: and of his
blessings unto those that walk in his fear. Therefore if parents do look that
their children should obey them, then let them join and accustom them to Gods
word, which will redownd much to their parents profit. If they cause their
children to hear and read the holy Scriptures, therein they may learn,
Honor thy father and thy mother: But if parents do otherwise, then they
train them up in the scriptures of devils, whereout their children will learn
most wicked things: but it is not so when they are instructed in the holy
Scriptures. Parents therefore are diligently to apply themselves to this which
God commands, and so often and earnestly commends unto them: namely, to
instruct their children in the knowledge and fear of GOD, and in the faith of
Jesus Christ: Deuteronomy. 6.6.7. and 32.46. Ephesians. 6.4. So also to teach them those
things which they are to use in their age. It is then great folly to linger
children in the learning of vain, trifling, and unprofitable things, which as
they grow in years, they will contemn and forget. Parents can be careful
enough to bring up their children in some course, trade, or other estate,
wherein to get their livings when they come to be men: and verily such fathers
as do neglect that, are unworthy to have children. But as the soul is more
precious then the body; so is it the duty of parents, in youth to train up
their children in the practice of those things, wherewith in age, even in this
life, they may glorify God, and be heirs of the Lord. If parents want
knowledge, or be unwilling to take leisure to teach them; yet let them do as
much for their childrens souls, and the life to come, as for their bodies, and
this present life. Parents that either cannot write and read, or will not, or
have not time to teach their children, will yet send the^ to school: and such
as would have them learn some Art or Occupation, or traffic, if themselves
profess not the same, wherein they like to employ their children, they will
yet put them to dwell with those that do profess the same, to the end they
may learn. How therefore can parents excuse themselves, when their children
remain untaught in those things that concern the glory of GOD, and life
everlasting? But howsoever it be, if they be neither able of themselves, nor
do provide to have the^ taught by others, they shall be inexcusable in the
sight of God: and the ignorance of the children, ingendring contempt of God,
love of the world, and neglect of heavenly felicity, will cry out for
everlasting vengeance against their parents: so that if they account not their
children as beasts without soul, or if they love them with the due love
belonging to parents let them declare their love especially to the soul: the
christian instruction whereof surmounteth all worldly treasure.

Some say, it would be a great comfort for them in heaven to know their near
kindred, and consequently their children: and this comes of natural
affection. But might it not be a greater discomfort for them, even in their
life time to see them go to hell for want of instruction? Some charge their
children to be dull witted, and hard to be bowed, or brought to any goodness
or virtue. Albeit natural inclination be a great help or profiting, yet
exercise and custom to do well, is a mighty means to bend and shape them
that way: yea, even such that by experience we find this old proverb true:
Use over comes nature. As the wheele-wright does by strength bow his timber,
and letting it lie long in that bent, it abides crooked. Barren ground well
tilled, soyled and sown with good feed, grows fruitful, and yields good
increase. Iron wears with handling: The water by continual dropping wears
the stone: Wild beasts may be tamed: and wild colts by custom be brought to
the saddle, and are content to be led by the bridle even so the dullest
capacities may by instruction and custom be fashioned to virtue. As
contrariwise, the wit most inclined by nature to virtue, may by bad instruction
and the conversation of the wicked, be perverted and grow vicious.

Parents therefore are herein to respect two points: first, to begin to frame
and bend their children in their tender youth to virtue, remembering, that a
seal enters deepest into softest wax. They must be careful, that they do
not speak or tell any foolish tales, bawdie rimes, or ungodly speeches before
their children: least they infect their tender wits with folly and
astonishment. Experience shows, that children will sooner learn any language
by conversation, then elder folks. Also, that the younger the twig is, the
sooner it is bent or made straight. Secondly, it is the parents duty, to
restrain their children from haunting and conuersing, with such as be vicious,
perverse, and wicked. And undoubtedly we see, that they do soon learn
villainous and unseemly speeches, and malicious lewd actions, with their
corruptions, and as the old proverb says: Halting with the lame, they shall
learn to halt. A child that naturally speaks well, by conuersing with such as
corrupt their speech, shall degenerate and speak as badly. Tie a young twig
that is crooked, with a straight one, that is stronger then it, and in growing
it will become straight, and so continue when it is undone. And contrariwise, a
straight one tied to that which is crooked, and stronger then it self, will
grow and continue crooked.

Moreover, parents when they mean to put forth their children to any trade or
occupation, either to learning, they then ought carefully to see and enquire,
whether such as they think to place them withal, be r^ligious and virtuous,
and endued with the fear of God.

Many men in the admittance of a servant, the fear of some temporal, or
carnal inconvenience, causes them to enquire of his, or her truth, honesty,
or other qualities. Therefore, if parents shall commit their child to the
ordering and instruction of a master, before they make inquiry of his honesty
and christian conversation, they plainly show, that they have less care of
the corrupting or infecting of their child with vice, then of some small
inconvenience that might happen by an dishonest, and unthrifty servant. When
they buy an earthen pot, they sound upon it, to see whether it be broken, least
they should be deceived in a small piece of money: yet do they not sound,
whether the master, to whom they commit their child, be vicious, or virtuous:
albeit by putting and placing him with one that is vicious and irreligious,
they put him in danger of loss, both of body and soul.

Some do respect their friendship with some masters, rather then their virtue,
and so do commit to the^ their children, least they should be angry for
putting them to another.

These men do resemble and be like him, who being dangerously sick, uses
the advice of an ignorant Physician: that is, his kinsman or familiar friend,
for fear he should take offense, if he should call another, albeit without
comparison, more learned and skillful.

If thou should have any weighty matter in law, would thou rather commit
thy cause to an ignorant and negligent attorney, because he is thy friend, then
to him that were both diligent and learned? Making a Voyage through some
dangerous Sea, would thou in a tempest, commit thy Ship to a young Pilot,
unskillful, or drunk, because he is thy Friend? What a fool art thou, that
wilt not take the like care of the profit, honor, safety, and salvation of
thy child?

Others commit their children, either to him, that is best cheap, or by whom
they may grow into greatest advancement in the world, but never respect the
hazard of their child, so they may either spare, or get worldly goods.

Let them also be careful to restrain their children from vice, and to inure
and accustom them to virtue. As indeed the fathers that instruct, or cause
their children to be instructed, do far excel such, as only do beget
them: for of these they receive life only: of the other good and virtuous
life. Yet parents ought not so much to rely and rest upon the diligence of
their childrens masters, as never to care to understand, how they profit and
go forward in learning and virtue: for the regard of such diligence, would
make the masters more carefully to discharge their duties. And thereof came the
Proverb: The masters eye fatteth the horse: and this, The masters eye is the
fruitfulness of the garden.

Upon these sins ensue many punishments, both ghostly and bodily, as well in
the parents, as in the children: yea, and in all the posterity.

The holy Scripture gives great commendarion to sundry men and women, for
their godly education, and virtuous bringing up of their children: as to
Abraham, for he commanded his sons and his household, to keep the way of the
Lord. So David counseled his son Solomon to serve God, Genesis 18.19. 1. Chro.
28.9. Act. 10.2. 2. Tim. 1 5. Parents must perform their duty to their
children moderately with great gravity and authority. Genesis 22.7.8. Pro. 4.3.4,
5, 6 Pro. 3.1.2. etc. That is thought to be well done, which is done by
example. 2. Sam. 13.28.29. Ezech. 16.44. Esaias. 24.2. Fruits are wont to take
their shape and nature of the tree.
with a perfect heart, and a willing mind. It is said also of Cornelius, that
he feared God, and all his household. Likewise of Eunica the mother of
Timothy, that she nourished up her son in the words of faith, and good
doctrine. For where a virtuous and godly childhood goes before, there a godly
and virtuous age follows after. Contrariwise, when the parents are not
careful to teach their children to know God, and to know themselves: when they
do not breed them up in virtue, nor reprove them when they do amiss, they
then become corrupt in their understanding, and abominable in their doings:
ignorant, and void of all knowledge and grace, and of reverence or feeling of
nature.

If Parents be desirous to have their children virtuous, and honest indeed (as
in conscience they ought) then they must be diligent and careful to practice
godliness and honesty themselves. For we see by experience, according to the
common Proverb. As the old cock croweth, the young learneth: such a father,
such a son: and such a mother, such a daughter. For like as when the head is
well and sound, and also the stomach pure from hurtful humors, the body is
commonly well affected: even so, where the head or chief of any family or
household, is religious and sound in the faith, and fears God, it commonly
goes well with all the household.

What shall it avail, for parents to teach their children honesty and
modesty, when they themselves in their works and behavior, do inuit them to
wantonness, and lewdness? Verbal instruction, without example of good deeds,
is a dead doctrine: and contrariwise, good examples are the life of
instruction, to make it profitable and effectual. If the example of parents be
contrary to their instructions: If (we say) they teach their children
sobriety, modesty, and chastity, and yet themselves will follow
drunkenness, foul and lascivious speeches, gestures, and actions: it is as if
with their tongues they should say: be virtuous, and by the hands lead them
with them to all vice and corruption. So that wicked parents are wicked
counselors to their children. If we would take him to be a Monster in nature,
and unworthy to live in a Commonwealth, that should counsel his child to
drunkenness and fornication: what shall we think of those, who committing
such iniquity, do by their example much more mightily put forward their
children to such abomination, then by word they are able? What account can
those parents give unto GOD, who by their evil example, have drawn into Hell
their children, whom he delivered to their charge to be guided into heaven?
Albeit such parents pity not themselves, yet at last let them take pity of
their children, and not carry them with them into everlasting destruction.
Such parents then deserve grievously to be reproved, as shall use any lewd
speeches, or shameless behavior in brief, any worldly or carnal actions, in
the presence of their children, to whom their example may be as a dispensation,
to give themselves to the like. As also, how can they forbid that in their
children, which they themselves do commit? How can they correct them for the
faults, which they themselves use? Albeit children, in respect and reverence to
their parents, dare not reply and say, that themselves do these things, for
the which they reprove them: yet will the neighbors or others, object it to
their shame. Besides, their authority shall be so much the less, in that they
declare in their works and actions, that they allow that which they forbid in
words. If parents therefore desire that their instruction may be effectual,
and yield fruit, let them declare the same in holy life and virtuous
conversation: let them so order and govern themselves, that their children
seeing the same, as it were in a glass, may be restrained from dishonest
speech and wicked deeds.

Let them do as guides, that show the right way over foordes and rivers, by
going before those whom they lead: that their children following the steps and
examples of their parents, may conform themselves to their virtues, and so
with them, and by them, be led to salvation, and life everlasting.

For this cause Moses gave commandment unto the Jews, Deuteronomy. 6.5.6.7. and
31.13.
yt the law might be kept in their families, that they might prosper in all that
they went about. 2. Sam. 6.11.
When Obed-edom had received the Ark of God into his house, which signified
true religion, 1. King. 17.10. etc. 2. King. 4.1. etc
the Lord blessed him and all his household. When the widow of Zarepthah in
the days of Eliah, and the other widow of Israel, in the days of Elisha, had
received the Prophets of God into their houses: how mightily and mercifully the
Lord provided for them, who is ignorant? When our Savior Christ had restored
the Rulers son to his health, the Ruler believed and all his family. John
4.53. Luke 19.9.
After Zacheus had received Christ into his house, and was converted: salvation
came to the same household. Act. 10.44.
To be short, when Cornelius the Centurion embraced the Gospel, his family
also believed and were baptized, and the holy Ghost fell upon them all, which
heard the preaching. And how well that house was ordered, 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15.
where Timothy was brought up, his knowledge in the Scriptures from a child
can witness.

And this is also a point worthy to be remembered, that whereas the Lord by his
Prophet Ezechiel, Eze. 10.20.21.
calls the children of the Israelites, which they had begotten, His children,
because they were partakers of the promises, and signed with the seal of his
covenant. And the Prophet calls them, Psalm. 127.3.
The inheritance of the Lord.

Such parents therefore, as be Christians, must know, that their children are
also the children of God, and partakers of those blessings that are promised to
them in Christ Jesus their Savior: and therefore that they shall do great
injury to God himself, whose children they are, if they shall not see them
carefully brought up in his fear.

And much more, if they, as before time, See more of this point in the Treatise
of the use and necessity of catechizing.
many have done, bequeath them, and in a manner consecrate and sacrifice them to
the service of men, by thrusting the^ into Abbeyes, Munckeries, Frieries,
Nunneries, and Seminaries, there to be brought up, and remain in perpetual
bondage of ignorance and error, in superstition and idolatry.

The second point is, The second point.
that fathers and mothers, do nourish and train up their children in
shamefastness, hatred of vice, and love of all virtue.

They be charged by the fifth commandment, to feed, to nourish, Esaias. 28.10.
Deuteronomy. 6.20. Exodus 12 26. and 13.14. The proper duty of good parents to their
children is to nourish them soberly, to keep them under obedience, and to
teach them good manners
and to bring up their children, to teach them the principles and seeds of
christian religion: to see they learn the Catechism, to teach them to praise
God before and after meals, as also to teach them by little and little, and by
often repetitions, to understand wherefore the Sacraments were instituted: to
teach them manners, how to behave themselves decently in their going, in their
speaking, and gesture of their bodies: how to order them selves reverently in
the Church: how abroad in all places, and toward all men, in all honest
companies: and so to begin some conscience in them. For it were better for
children to be unborn, then untaught.

Now contrary to this, is, when parents suffer their children to have their
will from the beginning: when they discourage and daunt them by severity, and
by being too hasty with them: when they let the common ignorance of the word
to be rooted in them, and have no care to frame them to learn truth and
godliness, and so to prepare them to be apt to receive profit from the public
Ministry.

Pro. 23.13. and 19.18. and 29.15.17. and 22.6.15. and 13.24.
It is therefore meet that all fathers and mothers, if they will have joy of
their children, that then they correct them when they do amiss, and keep
them in shamefastness, hatred of vice, and love of all virtue, according as
the holy Ghost counsels by the mouth of the wise man in sundry places.

For as the common Proverb is: Byrch breaks no bones: neither moderate
correction brings danger of death: but oftentimes it bridleth and keeps
back the child, that otherwise would run headlong into hell, and so is a
mean to save his soul.

For the fountain of all virtue, and chief of all man's felicity, is good
instruction, and right bringing up. And contrariwise, children evil brought
up, bring shame and great heart break to their parents. As old Elie was
corrected himself, for not correcting his sons, 1. Sam. 2.12. and 3,
12.13.14. and 4.11. 1. King. 1.5.6. 2. King. 2.23.24.
which is a notable example, necessary for all parents to imprint in their
hearts, that they may see their children well taught and corrected, least they
procure the wrath of God to fall upon them, as did upon this Elie, who honored
his children above the Lord, and therefore the Lord cut him and them off. For
the comfort he had of his sons, was this, the Arc (the witness of the
Lords presence) was lost: thirty thousand of the people slain, his two sons
Hophni and Phinehas killed: who when news thereof came to him, for sorrow fell
backward, and brake his neck: upon this his daughter in law, fell in travel,
and in travel died: the remnant of his house was glad to crave and beg for a
small piece of silver, and a morsel of bread.

Also the two and forty children, 2. King. 2.23.24.
that mocked Elisha the Lords Prophet, saying: Come up thou bald head, were
rent in pieces with Bears. Thus we see that children untaught, and vnchastised,
bring shame and confusion to their parents.

Let them therefore always remember this, How children should be brought up.
that they provide and bestow diligent labor, that their children be forthwith
instructed in virtue and godliness, Hold thy children in awe, and they shall
have thee in reverence.
whilst their wits are yet void from cares and vices: and whilst their age is
tender and tractable, and their minds flexible, and ready to every thing, who
then will keep fast good lessons and virtuous precepts, if they be taught
them. For this is certain, that we remember nothing so well when we be old,
as those things we learn in young years.

It shall be convenient and profitable therefore to handle the wax straightway
while it is moist: to season those earthen vessels with very good liquor whilst
they are new: to dye and litte the wool while it is fair and white, and not
defiled with any spots. The Emmets, or Pismires are not taught to gather into
their holes or hillockes, Pro. 30.25. and 6.6.7, 8.
in summer, whereby they should live in winter. Bees learn not to make their
cells, to gather juice, and to make honey: but all these things be done by
instruction of nature. So every living thing, the less meet it is to
learning, so much the more it has of native prudence. But man neither can
eat, nor go, nor speak, except he be taught. Then if fertile fields, for
want of tillage wax barren: if trees being neglected, either bring forth no
fruit, or else the same unsavory, without diligence or grafting and pruning:
if dogs be unmeet to hunt, the horse and oxen unapt to the plough, except man's
diligence be put thereto: how wild then and unprofitable creatures would
children become, except diligently and in due time they should be fashioned by
good bringing up? What a shame is this for any man to take great care to have
his dog well taught, his horse well broken, his land well husbanded, his house
goodly trimmed, and richly furnished: and yet to have his child shamely rude
in manners, and altogether void of al garnishing and instruction of virtue and
godliness? What a great folly and madness is this, for a father to take
great care and thought how to get money and possessions, and to have no regard
of his child for whom the same is gotten? Which is no less shame to hear,
then if a man taking thought for the shoe, would set naught by the foot: or
with great care and study would provide, that there should be no fault in the
childs garment, not regarding the health of his body. This is (as the common
saying is) To be pennywise, and pound-foolish: to save a stick, and burn a
house: to save a joint, and lose the body. But oh vain man, have thou more
care and desire to leave thy son a fair building, and full of lands, then
for to instruct him in the way of godliness, and so leave him a virtuous
conscience? Have thou rather a desire to hoord up treasure for him, Mat. 6.19.
with rust and moth to be consumed, then for to teach him the knowledge of God,
which will not canker, but last for aye? Most parents (a pitiful thing to
remember) be loving to the bodies of their children, but their souls they care
not for: they desire their welfare in this world, but they pass not what they
shall suffer in the world to come. Yea, fathers provide lands, rents, revenues,
great annuities, fees and offices, for their children here: but alas, few
provide or be careful to have them brought up in virtue, and the fear of
God. For the loss of their lives and bodies, they will sore bewail and much
lament: but the health and salvation of their souls, they make no reckning of:
if they see them poor and sick, they sorrow and sigh: but though they see
them sin, and greatly displease God, they are nothing grieved. It behooves,
that parents do carefully observe, unto what vices their children are most
inclined, and s^ by good means to admonish and draw them from the same. As
parents be careful to provide temporal things for their childrens bodies,
which are transitory: so much more careful ought they to provide spiritual
things for their souls. And as they be diligent to keep the bodies of their
children from fire and water, when they be young: so much more they ought to
take care, that their souls be not poisoned with vices, and false and
erroneous doctrine, when they come to years of discretion: and this is the
most acceptablest service that they can do to God. Psalm. 132.1. Mat. 12.33.
Children are called the fruit of their parents. Therefore, as a good tree is
known by bringing forth good fruit: so parents should show their goodness in
the good education of their children, which are their fruit. For like as
fruitful fields for lack of tillage, wax barre^: or as trees, being
neglected, either bring forth no fruit, or else the same unsavory, without the
diligence of grafting and pruning: or as dogs be unmeet to hunt: the horse and
oxen unapt to the plough, except man's diligence be put thereto: even so, how
savage and unfruitful creatures would children become, except diligently, and
in due time, they should be fashioned, by good and virtuous bringing up.

To teach a child in the trade of his way, as Solomon commands, Pro. 22.6.
which is, not only to instruct him unto godliness, but also unto all other
humane duties: then in any other ground, because it likes his own soil best:
so children will sooner take instruction and good nourture from their parents,
whom they best like, and from whom they had their first being, then from any
other: and therefore you parents are in fault, if your children be not well
taught. For whatsoever good comes from the parent to the child, is natural
and kindly, no otherwise then the warm milk from the mothers dugge: you shall
sooner be heard of your children, then either the sage counsel of the ancient,
or the forcible and moving speech of the learned. Lastly, the rule of justice
does require, that even as the first parent Adam, Genesis 5.3.
and so all other after him, have been a mean of falling to al their
posterity, in the begetting of children in their own image, which according
to the law of creation, should have been borne Gods Image: so now in lieu of
this, al parents should lend their hands to lift them up again, and never
cease, until they see in some measure, the beauty of the first Image, and the
virtue of the second Adam. This is confirmed by many testimonies of Scripture,
as amongst other, these do prove. Deuteronomy. 4.9. and 11.18.19. Ephesians. 6.4. Psalm.
78.5. And because this duty of parents, is many times committed to
Schoolemasters, to Masters of Families, to Dames, to Patrones, and Guardians,
and such like: they must therefore understand, whosoever they be, that they are
bound by the voice of the almighty, to perform and to do the duty of
parents, to all such as are committed to their charge, as if they were their
own children.

Now, the vices which some parents commit, in not performing these duties
before and after named, and ought of them to be eschued, are these.

1. First, the ignorance of the parents: as if they be so rude, that they be
not able to teach their children, then they greatly offend God in the breach of
this so necessary a duty: and therefore they must endeavor to get so much
nourture and knowledge, as that they may be able to instruct others under them.

2. The second vice is, the profaneness of many parents, who, so they may
provide liuelihood and necessaries for their children, they care for no more.

3. The third vice is committed, of such poor parents, which make no great
choice with what Masters and Dames they place their children, so they may have
meat and drink enough, and wages thereto competent, and are neither
back-beaten, nor belly beaten, as they say. Alas, such poor children, while
they serve for their bellies, they may loose their souls, because they want
godly masters and dames, to give them wholesome instruction, to hold them in
by good example, and to govern them continually in the fear of the Lord.
Wherefore here let all Parents learn, that it is their duty to make choice of
such masters and dames for their children, as are godly and religious, wise
hearted, such as are both able and well disposed, to train up youth in all
good nourture, and Gods service: and not only this (for the greatest care of
all lies upon the parents) but also they must so often, as conveniently they
may, repair unto them, and see how they profit, and hold them up by their
good counsel, and be careful to entreat those which have the government of
them, to be good unto them, in this chief point above the rest. For (as
Solomon says:) Life and death is in the power of the tongue: Pro. 18.21.
so we may well say, life and death is in the education of our children. If
they be well brought up, it shall be life unto them: but if it be otherwise,
they are trained up to everlasting death.

4. The fourth vice is, the fault of many masters and dames, who make no
further reckening of their servants, then they do of their brute beasts* For so
long as their work and business be well done by them, they care for no more,
and they will teach them no further, then may serve for their own turn and
benefit: that is, to be a profitable servant unto them. Such masters make
their servants drudges to the world and the devil: and the life of such youth,
dies while it shoots up. All these sin and trespass against the will and
word of God, because they are contrary to good nourture and godly instruction.
Parents must be very careful, that their children may learn some occupation,
or profession of life: and this is either mechanical, which we call
handicraft: or liberal, which is the learning of schools: and the end of this
is, either to get their living honestly, and in Gods ordinance, or else if they
want no maintenance, to apply their profession and trade to the benefit of the
Commonwealth. No child of what birth and stock so ever he be, ought to want
this instruction and bringing up. If thou say, my child has no need of any
trade: yet the Common wealth and Gods Church have need of him, for no man is
borne for himself, but his friends will require one part, his kindred
another, and his country the third. And if handicrafts like thee not, thou
have the liberal Sciences, of which no man ever was yet ashamed, but many have
made them their crown of glory. Saul was anointed King, while he was seeking
his fathers Asses: 1. Sam. 9.2. etc. and 16.11. Psalm. 78.70.71. 1 King. 19.19.
Amos. 1.1.2.
and David was taken from the sheepefolde, to feed with his wisdom, and
govern with his prudence that honorable people of the children of Israel.
And again, we read that those two famous Prophets, Elisha and Amos, the one
was called from the plough, and the other from keeping of beasts: which
examples do plainly teach us, that the great and reverent God despises no
honest trade of life, be it never so mean, but crowns it with his blessing,
to draw all good minds to his holy ordinance. But now a days, such is the
pride of our hearts (a thing to be lamented through all our land) that many
gentlemen's children may not be brought up in any trade. Oh it is too base and
beggarly for them: they must live of their lands, they must maintain their
gentry: a small learning will serve their turn: but in the mean while, this
ordinance of God is neglected, what misery from hence ensues? Who are the
wasters of patrimonies? Who are the robbers and rouers in the Common wealth?
Who are the deflowrers of maidens? Who are the defilers of matrones? Who are
the corrupters of youth? and to speak in one word, who are the seedes-men of
al mischief in our country, but these children of gentlemen, who have not
been taught and trained up in learning, or some occupation, while they were
young? For even as a weed, if it grow in a rank soil, will wax out of
measure noisome: so these children coming of honorable and worshipful parents,
brought up, in ease, and pampered with the delights of gentry, they wax
immeasurably vicious, and who may keep them under? neither laws, nor
Magistrates, nor any other good mean.

First, Good manners in speech
Parents must teach their children to use fair speech, not only toward
themselves, but also toward others, and to call their betters by a reverent
and an honorable name: 1. Sam. 25.24. Mar. 10.17. Pro. 16.24.

Secondly, to speak modestly and humbly of themselves, and this point of good
manners, they may learn of that wise matrone Abigail, in 1. Sam. 25.41. where
we read, that when she was sent for of David, to be his wife, she first
bowed her self to the servants, and then made this lowly answer to him that
brought the message: Behold, let thine Handmaide be servant to wash the feet
of the servants of my Lord.

Thirdly, to admonish them, lovingly to salute their friends and acquaintance,
and generally all others, whom they take to be christians and brethren: which
consists in praying well to others, wishing health and prosperity unto them:
Luke. 1.28, 40. 1. King. 1.27.

Fourthly, to put the^ in mind, to acknowledge a benefit, where they have
received it, with giving of thanks: Eccles. 29.16. Genes. 30.37.

Fifthly, to teach them to confess an offense where it is committed, with
humble craving of pardon. An example hereof, they may have in that virtuous and
fair spoken matrone Abigail, as they may read in 1. Sam. 25.23. etc. Oh that
men and children saw what great dangers they draw upon them by the neglect
of this duty, and might prevent it: and also what gracious blessings they
might procure both to themselves and others, by means of it, as this virtuous
Abigail kept David from shedding innocent blood: saved her own life, with the
lives of her family, and in the end was received to be a Princes wife, for the
wise carriage of her self in this matter.

Again, Parents must teach their children good manners, and civil behavior,
to rise up to their betters, to uncover the head? to make obeisance, to be
courteous toward their equals, to be gentle and lowly to their inferiors,
and loving and kind to all: this is no less needful for youth, then their
meat and their drink.

Also to admonish them, to give their elders and betters leave to speak before
them: Job. 32.4.5. That they keep silence while their betters are in place,
until they be spoken unto: and then they must make answer in few words,
without unnecessary circumstances, and directly unto the matter. And they may
not be loud, babbling, or hot in speech, but cold and mild: Pro. 17.27.
Warn them, that they do not interrupt or trouble others while they are in
speaking Pro. 29.20. Wherefore, if children will keep the bounds of good manners,
they must not be streporous or troublesome in talk, but they must observe and
take their due time and course, and if there be any thing spoken, unto which
they would willingly make answer, they must either courteously crave leave of
him that speaks, or else they must carry it in remembrance, until their
turn comes to speak, which is the better of the twain. And further, they
must give an intercourse of speech unto others: and so suffer others to speak
by them: for there is a time to keep silence, and so to hear others speaking,
for he that will have all the talk, passes the bounds of good manners.

Moreover, Good manners in gesture
Parents ought to teach their children, how to frame their gesture to a
reverent and dutiful behavior toward others, which consists in these
points.

1. The first is to meet those that are coming toward them. And of this they
have an example in holy Abraham, Genes. 18.2. where it is said: And he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men stood by him, and when he saw
them, he ran to meet them from the tent door. Again, another example they
may have in King Solomon, sitting upon his regal throne: 1 King. 2.19.
Bathsheba therefore went to King Solomon, to speak unto him for Adoniiah, and
the King rose, to meet her.

2. The second is, to rise up to elders and betters, when they pass by them.
And this is taught Leuit. 19.23. Thou shall rise up before the hoare head, and
honor the person of the old man, and dread thy God, I am the Lord. But here
we must warn you of a great abuse, which for the most part is committed in
all Churches, and which tends to the high dishonor of God: which is this,
that neither you your selves, neither your children, nor servants, do know the
time of your duties: but you will then rise up to men, when both you and they
should kneel down to God: as if one that is more honorable among you, shall
come into the church, while you are upon your knees in prayer unto God,
presently you start up, and leave God to reverence men. Is this religion? is
this devotion becoming Gods house? is not this all one, as if a man should
say, stay GOD, here comes in my father, my master, my worshipful neighbor,
and my good friend, to whom I am much beholden, I must do my duty unto him, I
must rise up till he be past, and then I will come to thee again? What is
this but to prefer men before God? this doing plainly shows, that such are
lovers of men, more then God: and that such as take this duty and reverence
upon them, are robbers of Gods honor, and they shall answer him for it. Is
there no time to show our duty toward men, but even then, when we are about
Gods service? Why, know thou, when man stands before God, how honorable so
ever he be, he is but dung and filth, and not to be regarded: and let
Parents learn this wisdom, that while they are taught their duties toward
men, it is not to rob God of his worship: but there is an appointed time to
every duty and purpose: as Ecclesiastes in his third chapter well admonishes:
Eccles. 3.1.
To all things there is an appointed time, and a time to every purpose under
the heaven. It is recorded of Levy, to his eternal praise: Deuteronomy. 33.9 that in
Gods cause he said of his father and mother: I see him not, neither kn^w he his
brethren, nor his own children: even so beloved, our eyes and our minds, and
devotions, should be so fixed and intent upon God, when we are in his service,
that we should not see or regard any man in that while. And again, we read
in the second chapter of the Gospel after S. John, of our Savior himself,
who though he was the most dutiful child that ever was borne of woman, yet
when he was about his fathers business, he says unto his mother: Woman,
Ioh. 2.4.
what have I to do with thee? which examples will teach us, that when we are a
bout Gods service, all other duties must sleep and be laid apart.

3. The third duty of good manners, to be observed in their gesture, is to
stand while their betters are sitting in place: example of this we have in
holy Abraham, of his entertaining of the two strangers, as it is written Genesis
18.8. And he took butter and milk, and the calfe which he had prepared, and
set before them, and stood by himself under the tree, and they did eat. Well
may Abraham be called the father of the faithful, for giving his children so
good example.

4. Their fourth duty is to bend the knee, in token of humility and
subjection: example of this Mar. 10.17. 1, King. 2.19.

4. The first thing is, that they give the chief place to their betters, and
to offer the same to others in courtesy. 1. King. 2.11. Luke. 14.8.9.10. Pro.
1^.33. and 16.18.

6. Their last duty, is, to uncover their head. And though we find no
example for this in holy scripture, as being not used in those former times:
yet seeing the thing is civil and comely, and one of the special courtesies of
our days, we will confirm it also with the authority of Gods word: Phil.
4.8. Whatsoever things are honest whatsoever things are of good report, those
things do. And again, 1 Cor. 14, 40. Let all things be done decently, and
according to order. But this kind of civility is both decent and according to
order, as also honest and of good report: and therefore warranted and commended
by Gods word, and so worthy to be followed. Therefore if our children be not
thus trained up in nurture, while they be young, when they be old, they shall
be found so headstrong, that they will not be governed, but this consequent
must needs follow, that all order shall be taken away, and then confusion
must needs ensue. For if nourture be neglected, then our elders and governors
shall not be reverenced: if they be not reverenced, they will not be regarded:
if they be not regarded, they will not be obeyed: and if they be not obeyed,
then steps in rebellion, and every one will do what he lists.

These vices and great abuses, are to be reformed, and with speed amended,
not only of many parents and masters themselves, but also that they labor
with all diligence, that they may be redressed and amended in their children
and servants: first, the gross ignorance in the grounds of christian religion,
which yet remains in any Parents, Masters, and their families, who give
themselves to sleep in the church, to talk one with another, to turn over
their books there, and using of their own private devotions or prayers, in
the time of public preaching and prayer, all which no doubt are grievous
sins and transgressions: and besides many absent themselves from holy
exercises, and specially upon the Lords day, then lying in their beds,
haunting of Alehouses and tauernes, riding and going abroad about their
worldly affairs, for pleasure and profit, being also weary whilst they be
present at prayers and preaching, seldom do they prevent or come before
prayers, nay many come in the midst thereof, to the great disturbance of the
same, and others that are there: and some again before the sermons are ended:
other some after the prayers made, and before the singing of the Psalms, and
the usual blessing to be pronounced, depart thence, whereof they as well as
those that tarry, should be partakers, posting also out of the church, as it
were from a play, or may game, as though they supposed, that no more reverence
should be showed there, then in other places or that some part of divine
service belonged unto them, and not unto other some whereas in very truth,
every one ought to be alike partakers of the whole. And how should we look
for any goodness from God, where this, that is the seed of all sin, and the
nurse of al abominations reigns and swaieth so much?

Let such as are fathers and mothers, and have children, know in what sort they
must be careful for them. Their children are a good blessings of God, they be
members of the body of Christ, Math. 16.14.
and the sons of God. The kingdom of heaven belongs to the^. God has
appointed his Angels to guide and lead them, and to shield them from evil:
and their Angels be in the presence of God, and do behold the face of their
father which is in heaven. They be fresh plants of the church. Who knows what
necessary instruments they may be in the house of God? It is not enough to feed
them, to cloth them, and to nourish their bodies with necessary sustenance.
For the heathen do this, which know not God: and the savage and brute beasts,
and the birds, which have no understanding: they breed up their young ones, and
are tender and painful to provide for the^. The Ass though she be dull, the
Bear and Lion, though they be wild and cruel, yet seek they far and near,
to get wherewith to help their young. Therefore, if there be any, or can be
any, which does forsake and leave his own, he is more beastly then the foolish
Ass, and more unnatural, then most cruel Bears and Lions, and Tigers.

But in this behalf, men are for the most part ouer-carefull. For this cause
many build their houses with blood, and seek possessions by iniquity: they
join house to house, and field to field, and will dwell alone upon the earth:
Esaias. 5.8.
they oppress the poor and needy, and do wrong to the Widow and the
fatherless: they make money their God, and spoil one another: and all to
provide for the children. This is the cover and cloak for all their
mischiefs, they may not leave their children unprovided for. Unhappy are such
fathers, which in this sort care for their children, Esaias. 33.1.
by the ruin and spoil of the needy and innocent, and so break the
commandment of God: because their portion shall be with the wicked, in the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And unhappy are their children,
because they are partakers of their Fathers wickedness, and therefore shall
also be partakers of punishment with them. Psalm. 37.35.36.
The Prophet David says: I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading
himself like a green Baytree: Yet he passed away, and lo, he was gone, and
I sought him, but he could not be found. His root was deep, his stock
strong, his branches broad, he spread over and shadowed the whole country:
yet he passed away. He departed, his sons died, his house soon decayed, and
his name was in little time quite forgotten.

Oh, how much better then is it, to furnish the minds of your children, and to
instruct them in godliness, to teach them to know God, to lead their life
virtuously, and to rebuke them, and chastise them for ill doing.

Psalm. 111.10. Pro. 9.10.
The beginning of wisdom, is the fear of God. Let them then learn, what that
good and acceptable will of God is. Show them the way in which they should
walk, that they go neither to the right hand, Psalm. 19.7.8.6. and.119.6.105.
nor to the left. The word of God is pure, and gives understanding to the
simple: it is a light to their footesteps: it teaches those that are young to
amend their ways. For children by nature are darkness, and cannot see except
they be lightened with Gods word. And therefore Solomon says: Pro. 22.6.
Catechize a child in his youth, and he will remember it when he is old.
This is the right blessing, which fathers and mothers give to their children,
when they cause God to bless them too.

When Christ came into Jerusalem the young children received him. Math. 21.15.16.
They cried Osanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord. Christ gives witness of them: By the mouth of babes and
sucklings, Psalm. 82.
have thou set forth thy praise. The words of the little and simple children,
were able to confound the wisdom of the Pharisees. Thus were they taught from
their cradle, so careful were their godly parents for them.

Contrariwise, they cannot have any wisdom, that despise the law of the
Lord. They become blind and wicked, and abominable in all their ways. They
have no sense nor feeling of the will of God. They cannot know light from
darkness, nor God from Belial. 2. King. 23. 2. Sam. 15.1. etc.
Such were the children that derided Elisha, as also Absolon, whose heart
Satan had so possessed with the spirit of pride and ambition, that he went
about to depose his father from his kingdom. 1. King. 1.5.
So also his brother Adoniiah usurped the kingdom of his father David.

Another care, which a father ought to have of his children, is tt train them
up in study and virtue, and of a godly life. Math. 5.8.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. They which keep not
this way, are the children of wrath. Herein stands the whole profession of a
christian life. For God has not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness.
1, These. 4.7.
This is the will of God, and this is our promise made unto him, that we serve
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, Luke 1.74.75.
that we increase in virtue, and grow from grace to grace.

A wise and loving father, which sends his son to a dangerous journey,
either by sea or land: first instructs him with advise, and tells him in
what sort he shall avoid periles. Take heed (says he) yt way is dangerous,
which thou must pass. The sea is terrible, the waves rise up as high as
heaven, and by and by, thou shall see a pit as low as hell. The sands may
swallow thee, ye rocks may destroy thee. Thou shall pass by huge mountains,
and through a wilderness, where thieves will assault thee. Thy heart will quake.
Thou shall cry for succor, and find no man to help thee. In these and these
places, has many a good man's child bee^ cast away. Oh take heed (my son)
thou art the staff, and the comfort of mine age. If ought come to thee
otherwise then well, I shall come end my days in sorrow.

If a father be thus careful that this child should escape worldly dangers:
he must be careful of spiritual dangers, in which whosoever is lost, is
lost for ever. Therefore, thus, or to this effect, will he say to him: Oh my
son understand what God has done for thy sake. Take heed to thy self. 1
Pet. 5.8. Iam. 4.7. Pro. 18.10. Psalm. ^0.15.
The world is all over strawde with snares. The devil raungeth and seeks
whom he may devour. Give no ground to him: but resist him, and he will fly
from thee. Be strong in faith. The name of the Lord is a strong tower of
defense. Call upon him in the day of thy trouble, and he will deliver thee. He
will give thee of his spirit. Take heed my son, and be not deceived: let no
wilfulness cast thee away. If sinners entice thee, be not a companion of them
in wickedness. Pro. 1.10.11. Romans 12.2. 1. Ioh. 2.15.
Fashion not thy self to the likeness of this world: for the world passes
away, and the lust thereof. He that loves this world, the love of God is not
in him. Be not like unto them that perish. Psalm. 51.5. Ephe. 2.3. Col. 1.12,
13.
Thou wast conceived and borne in sin. Thou art by nature the child of wrath:
but God made thee meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in
light, and has delivered thee from the power of darkness: and has translated
thee into the kingdom of his dear son. 2. Cor. ^.1. Romans 13.12.
Receive not this grace in vain: but cast away the works of darkness, and put
on the armor of light. Be renewed in thy heart, and in thy spirit, that it may
appear I have bin careful for thee. Thus a careful father seeks to train
up his son, and to nurture him.

Now there be some necessary means and helps, whereby godly parents may the
more effectually and virtuously bring up their children according to the
directions before spoken of, as these.

First, not to suffer their children and youth to have their own will. For
Solomon says, Prou. 11.20. They that are of a froward heart, are abomination
unto the Lord. And again, in the 29. chapter, verse. 15. A child set at
liberty, makes his mother ashamed. But what will some be ready to answer in
this case? Oh he may be broken of that time enough afterward. But what says
the Wiseman, Eccles. 25.27. Give no passage to the waters, no not a little. The
heart of a child is as the violent waters. And as those which have experience
in keeping and repairing the sea banks, can easily tell us, that if the raging
waves should be suffered to break over but one tide, they should hardly in many
days recover it again: so if thou suffer thy childs affections to have
the full swinge and course, yea but a small season, thou shall hardly or never
again win this breach.

2. The second means is, moderation in diet, not to pamper children with too
much meat, or that which is delicate; but to give the^ that which is wholesome
and sufficient, and no more. For excess breeds diseases, both in body and
mind, makes them gluttons and drunkards, consumers of patrimony, and this
vice draws a thousand more with it: and even as the fattest soil brings
forth the rankest weeds; so pampered children brought up without due
government and discipline, thrust forth the greatest and most ouergrowne vices.

3. The third help is, not to clothe them with costly apparel, or to attire
them with new fashions. For this again is contray to the nature of pains and
labor, and stirs up pride. For even as the soft flax soon catches hold
on the fire: so youthful nature will soon be inflamed with this vice, as
lamentable experience too much teaches at this day. For from whence comes
this disguised and monstrous apparel, but from wanton and dissolute education
of youth? This is the special sin of England, and if any thing be the
overthrow of it (which God for his mercy turn away) it will be this: the land
is too heavy of this sin. For the pride of al nations, and the follies of al
countries are upon us, how should we long bear them? How art thou fallen from
heaven, Esa. 14.12. Zeph. 1.8.
o Lucifer, son of the morning? And it shall be in the day of the Lords
sacrifice, that J will visit the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such
as are clothed with strange apparel.

4. The fourth help is reprehension, or chiding. And this is taught, Prou.
29.15. The rod and correction give wisdom. Where by the rod, is understood
chastisement; and by corrections is understood, chiding or reprehension. The
want of this help was the utter spoil and undoing of Adonijah, as may be
seen 1. King. 1. and 2. chapters. And here we cannot but justly find fault
with most parents, who though they be somewhat careful for their children
while they be tender: yet when they be come to some years of discretion, as to
fifteen or sixteen, (which time is most fit for reprehension) because then by all reason it should soonest enter, and which time again is most dangerous,
because then our affections are most strong in us: oh then they be grown to
men's and women's estate, they may not be reprehended, they may not be disgraced.
But know thou, oh wise parent, that so long as thou have a child, so long thou
art a parent: and so long as thou art a father, so long thou must carry a
fatherly authority and power over him.

5. The fifth help is chastisement, and it may well be called a help, because
where reprehension will not serve, that must help: and this must be used in
order and method, as the skillful Physician will not give his strong and bitter
pill before his preparatiue, least the working of it should be hindered by the
stubborn and indurate obstructions: so the wise parent in curing his sons
vices, must not strike before he has reprehended or preadmonished: least
either he be too much cast down and discouraged, or wax obstinate. This
kind of physic, as it is more strong then the former, so it has a more
forcible and excellent working. For great is the godliness in that severity,
by which the power of sinning is taken away. And again, Solomon in the 22. of
the Proverbs, verse. 15. says more worthily: Foolishnes is bound in the heart of
a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it away. And again in the 13.
chapter, verse. 24. He which spares the rod, hates his son: that is, he is
an enemy unto him. Wherefore know thou this, O thou father, that when thou
see thy son dangerously sick with the disease of sin, and do not use
this help and remedy, which God in his holy word has prescribed unto thee,
thou art accessarie to thy childs death, as an enemy, and his blood shall be
required at thy hands: because that where thou might have saved him, thou
have wilfully cast him away. For Gods love (good parents) look to your
children. Oh that parents had less natural affection, or more wisdom: for
every parent is blind in his own children. Oh, is it not a pitiful thing,
that parents should themselves make graves for their own children, and bury
them quick without all compassion, and think they do well in it? And is it
not a folly above al follies, that while the parent lays his hand upon his
child's mouth, to keep away the cold wind, he presses it down so hard, that
he strangleth him therewith? Thus many a father and mother in the world, have
killed their dear ones, by their inordinate love and cockering of them, and
thus many poor infants must still be murdered, because parents will not be
warned. Parents are bound by the law of nature to love their children: for what
a cruelty were it, not to love them that they have gotten and borne. But yet
wisdom requires that they somewhat dissemble and hide their love (especially
to those children that be of some reasonable discretion) least they should
take boldness thereupon to do what they list. Genes. 6.5. and 8.21. Matthew.
15.19.
For if we well consider of man's nature, that it is evil even from his birth,
we shall then find the young child which lies in the cradle, to be both
wayward and full of affections, which though his body be but small, yet he
has a great heart, and is altogether inclined to evil: and the more he
waxes in reason by years, the more he grows proud, froward, wilful,
unruly, and disobedient. If this sparkle be suffered to increase, it will rage
over, and burn down the whole house. For we are changed and become good, not
by birth, but by education. For like as planting and carfulness has great
power in all growing things; even so has Education greater virtue and
strength: yea, and better fruit in the diligent bringing up of children.
Therefore parents must be wary and circumspect, that they never smile or
laugh at any words or deeds of their children, done lewdly, unhonestly,
naughtily, wantonly, or shamefully, nor to kiss or commend them for so doing.
For children will commonly accustom themselves unto such things, as they shall
see and perceive to be pleasing, and delightful to their father and mother.
Therefore they must correct, and sharply reprove their children, for saying or
doing ill* and make it known unto them, that they be neither well pleased, nor
contented with their so doing, but that it greatly disliketh them. And again,
on the other side, let them kiss and make much of them, whenever they shall
see or hear them do any thing that is a sign of goodness.

But such is the fond and too much cockering affection of some parents toward
their children, that there is more need in these days, to teach and admonish
them not to love them too much, then to persuade them to love them. For David's
darling, was David's traitor. 2. Sam. 15. all, and 18.33.
And this is the manner of God and his just judgment, that when any father or
mother begins (as it were) to set their child, or any thing else, in the room
of God, and so love the same above him which gave it, either to take away the
child, or the thing, or else to take away the parents, before they provoke him
too much. For as the Ape does with too much embracings, well near kill her
young whelps: so likewise, some indiscreet parents, through immoderate love
and overmuch pampering and cherishing, do utterly spoil and mar their
children. Therefore, if parents would have their children live, they must take
heed that they love them not too much: for the giver is displeased when the
gift is more esteemed then he.

Ill bringing up, is a cause of marring many which are of a good towardness
and wit.
We may see by experience, how that many children of good wit and towardness,
are marred and spoiled for want of good education, and so get those vices from
their tender years, which all their life after do for the most part
accompany them. For when parents do either too much cocker their children, or
by their lewd example allure them to naughtiness, or neglect due instruction:
what other thing (I pray you) can come to pass, then which we see in trees,
which from the beginning being neglected, become crooked and unfruitful.
Contrariwise, they that are pruned, erected, ordered and watered with the hand
and cunning of the Husbandman, are made straight, fertile, and fruitful. So
that the manner of life, education and custom, are of great importance to move
to virtue. What a great folly is it in parents, to toil themselves and be
occupied in getting riches, and to be nothing careful for their children, for
whose sake riches are gotten? Assuredly there can none more precious and better
heritage be left unto children, then if they be well and virtuously brought
up from their tender age, and be rightly instructed unto virtue from their
infancy. This patrimony remains with them continually, nothing at all
subject to the storms and troubles of fortune. But we see two special
causes, Two things which much hinder good education.
why some parents do more negligently provide that their children be
instructed: to wit, too much cockering and niggardship.

In cockering, mothers do more often offend, and especially those which have
but few children. These do like as if some Husband man should refuse to till
his field because he has but one only. Who could suffer this man's folly and
perverseness of judgment? Is it not much more to be tilled, because it is
only one? Yes verily, that so the profit and increase of one, may recompense
the want of many: even so, after the same sort we judge it to be the duty of
mothers, so much more diligently to bring up their children, by how much they
are fewer. But we see what does let mothers, The fewer the children, the more
diligently to be cared for, that they bewel brought up.
that they love their children more dearly, then that they can suffer them to
be an hour out of their sight: but this is cruel love so to love their
children, that they should be as it were given over of their mothers unto all
naughtiness, of which perverse and cruel love, not a few shall suffer the
just punishment, which with great grief of mind, and with tears shall be
compelled to see the unbridled wantonness and ungraciousness of their
children, unto which they do now all too late, go about to provide a remedy.

The second cause, which hinders good education.
On the other side, niggardship is oftentimes greater, then that parents will
bestow the cost. Whatsoever is spent upon horse-keepers, or horse-breakers,
fools, minstrels, dogs, hawks, etc. that some think well bestowed: but if
they see any thing to be spent about instructing their children, they think
all that ill bestowed, and are much more careful that an horse be well framed
to vauting and leaping, then that their child be well instructed to virtue.
This inconvenience comes to the minds of children, if they be not well
brought up, that they become servile, and open to all sin and naughtines. For
if a man leave his field untilled, he shall find it to have brought forth
fearne and thistles, and such unprofitable weeds: after the same sort, if he
shall leave the wits of his children unlooked unto, and unexercised, he
shall be sure to reap most abundant fruit of wantonness and ungraciousness.

The holy Ghost speaking in the Scriptures of foolish sons; as that he that
begets such a one, gets himself sorrow, and that the father of a fool
has no joy: Prou. 17.21. means it not so much of natural fools or idiots,
and such as are destitute of common reason, although it is true, that is a
lamentable judgment of God, and a heaviness to the parents of such a child:
as of wicked children, such as either are ignorant in the word, or not knowing
how to order one right step to the kingdom of God: or else having some
knowledge, abuse it to maintain their carnal lusts and appetite. For this
cause, as it would griue parents to have natural fools to their children, or
such as either in some imperfection of nature are dismembered, or deformed, and
misfigured in the parts of their body: so much more should it grieve them to
have such children, as either for want of knowledge and heavenly wisdom,
cannot walk in the fear of God; or abusing the knowledge given them,
prostitute and give themselves to all sin and wickedness: it is marvelous
how greatly parents can bewail the want of one natural gift proceeding of
some imperfection, and how easily they can pass over without any grief, the
want of all spiritual graces, springing from corrupt education.

In like manner is it strange, that men can take the matter so heavily, when
their children break into such offenses, as either have open shame, or civil
punishment following them: and yet can make no bones, but pass over such sins
as are against the majesty of God, accompanied with everlasting confusion, and
unspeakable torments? Wherein what does the most part of men bewray, but their
great hypocrisy, in that neither their joy, nor their grief is found to their
children, and that they love themselves more in their children, then either
their salvation, or the glory of God: the tender love and care whereof (no
doubt) did increase the sorrow of David, for the death of his son Absolon, 2.
Sam. 18.33.
who was not so much grieved for the loss of a son, as for that untimely end
of his son, to whom the time of repentance for his salvation, and the glory of
God, was denied: which happily, if he had lived, his father David might have
rejoiced in. Let parents therefore learn to correct their affections to their
children, and be grieved for their ignorance, impiety, and sins, whereof
either their carnal copulation, the not lamenting of their natural
corruption, the want of prayer and holy seed, or profane education, armed
with the wrath of God, may be a most just occasion. Can parents hope for a
holy posterity? or do they marvel if the Lord cross them in the children
of their bodies, when they make as bold and brutish an entrance into that
holy ordinance of the Lord, as is the meeting of the neighing horse with his
mare: when being joined in that honorable estate of matrimony, either as
mere natural men, without all knowledge of God, they beget their children: or
as too carnal men without the fear and reverence of the Lord, neither
bewayling their corruptions which they received of their ancestrie, nor praying
against their infirmities, which may descend to their posterity, they abuse
the marriage bed.

Lastly, when having received the fruit of the womb, they have no care, by
good and virtuous bringing up, to offer it to the Lord, that their child by
carnal generation, may be the child of God by spiritual regeneration.
Surely no: and yet men looking up to God his providence and secret counsel,
without all bethinking themselves of their corrupt generation, from which their
children are descended, without all looking back into their wicked and
godless bringing of them up, will fret against their sins, fume against
their children: yea, often they will correct them, and that to serve their own
corruptions, not so much grieved for that they have sinned against God, as that
they have offended them. Christians therefore must know, that when men and women
raging with boiling lust, meet together as brute beasts, having no other
respect, then to satisfy their own carnal concupiscence, when they make no
conscience to sanctify the marriage bed with prayer, when they have no care
to increase the Church of Christ, and the number of the elect, it is the just
judgment of God to send them either monsters, or natural fools, or else such
as having good gifts of the mind, and well proportioned bodies, are most
wicked, graceless, and profane persons.

Again on the contrary, we shall find in the word of God, that noble and
notable men commended unto us, for rare examples of virtue and godliness, were
children asked and obtained of God by prayer. Gene. 4.2.25.
Our first parents Adam and Eve, being humbled after the birth of their wicked
son Caine, obtained a righteous Abel: of whom, when by his bloody brother
they were bereft, they received that holy man Seth. Abraham begetting in the
flesh, had a cursed son Ismael, but waiting by faith for the accomplishment
of God his covenant, he obtained a blessed Isaac. Gene. 21, 2.
Jacob not content with one wife, according to the ordinance of God, was
punished in his children: yet afterward being humbled, he received faithful
Joseph. Gene. 30.24. 1. Sam. 29.
Elkana and Hannah, praying and being cast down, had a Samuel, that did
minister before the Lord. David and Bethsheba lamenting their sins, 2. Sam.
22.24.
obtained Solomon, a man of excellent wisdom. Zachary and Elizabeth fearing
the Lord, Luke 1.13.
received John the Baptist, a forerunner of Christ.

Look what sins parents have received naturally without God his great
blessing, without prayer and humbling of themselves, they shall convey them to
their posterity. And although the Lord grants sometimes civil gifts unto
the children of natural and carnal men: yet for the most part they receive
their natural sins. But if the children of God by regeneration, do see in
themselves, and lament their sins of generation, praying that their natural
corruptions may be prevented in their posterities; they shall see the great
mercies of God in some measure, freeing their children from the same.

Now when thou shall see such sins to be in thy children, enter into thine
own heart, examine thy self whether they are not come from thee: consider how
justly the hand of GOD may be upon thee: and when thou would be angry
against thy child, have an holy anger with thy self, and use this, and such
like meditation with thine own soul: Lord, shall I thus punish mine own
sin, and that in mine own child? shall I thus persecute the corruptions of
my ancestors? nay, I see (O Lord) and prove, that thou art displeased with me,
for the too carnal conception of my child: I lay then in some sin, I asked
it not of thee by prayer: be merciful unto me (O Lord) and in thy good time
show some pity upon my child.

Thus thinking thou go about to correct nature in thy child, which he could
not help, arming thy self with prayer, repenting with Jacob, thou shall be
so affected, as desirous to draw thy child out of sin, yet with the mildest
means and least rigor. And one thing is most wonderful; that some will teach
their children to speak corruptly, and do wickedly whilst they are young,
and yet beat them for it when they are old. Again, some will imbolden their
little ones to practice iniquity toward others, which when by the just
judgment of God, they afterward exercise toward the parents themselves, they
are corrected for it. And yet deal with these, and such like men, for the
evil education of their children, and they will answer: Do not we, as much
as is of us required? we send our children to the church to be instructed of
the Pastor: and to the school to be taught of the master: if they learn, it
will be the better for them: if not, they have the more to answer for: what can
we do more? But remember, O man: consider, O woman, whosoever thus speaks,
for that sins sake, and the want of prayer, there may be a plague upon the
Pastors pains, and a curse upon the teachers travel.

Children profit more by good example in one month, then by instruction in a
whole year.
If parents therefore would have their children blessed at the Church, and at
the school: let them beware they give their children no corrupt example at
home, by any carelessness, profaneness, or ungodliness; for when examples
are set before childrens eyes, they are easily led away to that which is evil:
otherwise, parents will do them more harm at home, then both Pastor and
schoolmaster can do good abroad: for ye corrupt example of the one, fights
with the good doctrine of the other: which is by so much the more dangerous,
because that corrupt walking is armed with nature, and therefore more forcibly
inclines the affections of children to that side. And further, experience
teaches us, that children like, or mislike more by countenance, gesture and
behavior, then by any rule, doctrine, or precept whatsoever.

Some there be, that will not have their children taught, until they be ten or
twelve years old, because (as they say) at that age they have but an apish
imitation.

To whom we answer, that although they cannot then deeply discern, nor
profoundly conceive things: yet how many things before these years, will they
both receive and remember? And we demand, if children be apish in imitating,
and following that, whilst they be young, which they will have the habit,
quality or property of, when they be old, may they not much better do
apishly good, whiles they are young, which they may carefully do, when they
are old? besides, let them go so untaught, and they will grow so headstrong,
that they will sooner be broken, then bended: and sure it is, that one stripe,
or two words, will do more good to a child in time, then a hundredth stripes
afterward. And here let parents be admonished of their indiscreet correction,
who do their children more harm, in showing a merry countenance, after their
discipline used, then they do good by their chastisement of them, whiles they
do correct them. Neither do we purpose to take away natural affections, and
a christian kind of compassion in all our censures: for it is our great
complaint of the brutish unmercifulness of many parents herein, but we would
wish Christians, to correct their indiscreet affections herein by heavenly
wisdom. Neither are we so stoicall, as to deny a more mild and affable kind
of speech, to be both lawfully and conveniently used to children, and yet we
wish it to be void of all unseemly lenity, and without all show of foolish,
vain and unnecessary behavior.

To be brief, how needful household government is toward children, may
appear by the slender thriuing, and small profiting either of religion or
virtue, either in the Church or Commonwealth. Speak men of discipline never
so much, complain they of the want of Church government never so loud, preach
they, teach they never so much abroad, unless they will begin discipline, in
reforming their houses, and give religion some room at home, they shall
travel much, and profit little. And surely, if men be careful to reform
themselves first, and then their families: if their charge be greater then
their circuits and provinces wherein the Lord has placed the^, it were the
best way to move the Lord to bestow reformation and discipline on his Church
among us: and of all means that now may be hoped for, this seems best: for
of particular persons, come families: of families, towns: of towns,
provinces: of provinces, Realms: so that conueying discipline thus from one to
another, in time, and that shortly, it would come into the Church. Well (we
say) let there be never so good laws in cities, never so pure orders in
churches, if there be no practice at home: if fathers of families use not
doctrine and discipline in their houses, and join their helping hands to
Magistrates and Ministers, they may indeed, but unjustly, as many have done,
complain that their children are corrupted abroad, when they were before, and
are still corrupted and spoiled at home. Alas, if parents, to whom the comfort
of their children well brought up, is a precious crown, will not inform, and
reform their children in the fear of God, how would hope sustain these men,
that others will perform this duty for the^, to who^ this charge does far less
appertain. Lastly, let parents remember, that therefore they have disordered
and disobedient children to themselves, because they have bin disobedient
children unto the Lord, and disordered to their parents, when they were young:
whereof because they have not repented, the Lord punishes their sins to
others, with the like sin to themselves. Will thou know, thou father, how
thou may have that blessing to be the blessed father of a blessed seed? Will thou thou know, thou mother, how to avoid that curse, to be the cursed mother
of a cursed seed? bring thy children within the compass of the covenant,
endeavor to make thy son, the son of God, and thy daughter by nature, the
daughter of God by grace: and remember how that God, which on his part
protested to father Abraham, Genesis 17.1.
that he was all sufficient, for the accomplishment of his promise, in giving
him a blessed seed: and requested also on father Abraham's part, that he should
walk before him, and be upright. Will thou then have the one part of this? of
the covenant that is, that God should bless thee in thy seed: then remember
also, that thou walk before the Lord, and be upright. Will thou have thy
children as the blessed seed of Abraham? teach them with Abraham the judgments
of the Lord: pray for them with Abraham, that they may live in the light of the
Lord: be ready to offer them with Abraham, that they may be an holy sacrifice
unto the Lord. It is thou (O man) (O woman) that may do thy child the
greatest good, and the greatest harm: if thou prayest for him, and repentest
for thy self, the Lord will bless thy care, the Pastors pains, and the
Teachers travel: but if thou despisest these duties, the Lord will deny thee
these blessings, and the curse of God will fall upon thy child, at home in thy
house, abroad in the Church, and in the school.

And seeing the Lord has promised that he will be thy God, and bless thy
seed, if thou be faithful, thou may both hope, that thou art of the
faithful, if thou have a blessed seed: and fear that thou have not as yet,
the blessing of the covenant, when thy seed is accursed.

Jacob wicked children, and David godly sons? and does not daily experience
teach us, that wicked men have godly children? Yes, third and fourth generation
going before. To the second (we say) that an evil father having a good child,
though the Lord show not mercy to that particular man therein, yet he may
remember his promise to some of the Forefathers, in the thousand generations
going before: and though that an evil man have no cursed child, yet the curse
may be accomplished in the third and fourth generations following.

Wherefore, not speaking of election, or reprobation, which we leave only to
the Lord, to make good or bad: we exhort parents to use the ordinary means to
bring up their children, so as they, either by some good tokens may see them
the children of God, and heirs of the covenant, or at least be comforted in
their own conscience: if their children for some cause unknown refuse it, in
that to the uttermost of their ability, they have used all good and godly
means to bring them up well, and offered them to God.

And if parents have cause to be grieved, when thus traveling in good
education, they cannot see good in their children, how much more cause of
grief may they have, when they have used and bestowed no labor at all, to
bring them up in the fear of the Lord? And yet many will be grieved for the
one, that will not for the other. Wherefore let us learn, if we wish to convey
God his blessings to our posterities, let us use the duties thereunto: let us,
(if we be loath to convey God his judgments to our children) carefully avoid
the means unto it: and surely, as it is a blessed thing in the hour of death,
with Simeon to depart in peace, Luke 2.29.
leaving our wives, children, and servants, members of Christ, spouses to
Christ, children to God, and servants to the Lord: so in death, no one thing
will be more grievous unto a man, then (the Lord having given him the charge
of so many souls to be furthered to salvation) that his own tormented
conscience shall press him: how, in as much as he could, he has helped the^
forward to their damnation: and so (which is more fearful) he shall have them
spewing and foming out on his face, continual curses in hell, accusing him for
ever to be a murderer of their souls, and a cut of their salvation.

The end of all this, briefly is thus much: that parents having fools,
children not walking either in knowledge, or in a good conscience, must make
some use of so just a cause of grief, examining themselves, and accusing their
own souls before the Lord, either for that their meeting was profane to so
holy an estate, or brutish, because they desired rather a seed like unto
themselves in flesh and blood, then such as might be like to Christ by grace,
and new birth, or that they begat their offspring as mere natural, or very
carnal men: or because they either profanely neglected all good education: or
monstrously misliked that in their young children, which they liked in
themselves, and punished in them their own corrupt precepts: or for that they
suffered their children injuriously to do evil to others, which they could not
suffer to do to themselves: or untaught them that at home, which was taught
abroad: or in that they do lie in some sin unrepented of: or else because
they never made conscience to bring their posterity within the covenant of
salvation, but still loved the flesh of their children, and not their souls.

Let all Parents remember, that they are bound by the Law of God and nature, as
concerning this bodily life, to make good and honest provision (according to
their degrees) for the relief and maintenance of their children and family.
And therefore such Fathers and mothers, as consume and waste away their money
and substance unthriftily, by dicing, carding, gaming, or by any other indirect
and unlawful means, whereby their children and family should be maintained,
do very unnaturally sin, and break Gods commandments.

The wise man shows parents, when is the best time to sow the seed of virtue
in their children, that it may bring forth the fruit of life, and make them
always ready to die: saying, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now (says he) thy Creator
in the days of thy youth. Youth must think on death betimes, to the end to
live well, and die well.
As if he should say: Be mindful, and think on God in thy youth, and do not
prolong or defer it until age, And so all their life shall run in a line, the
middle like the beginning, and the end like the middle: as the Sun sets
against the place where it rose.

One of the principallest duties that belong to parents toward their children,
is, that they be very wary and careful, Marriage with Papists, etc.
that their sons and daughters do not match in marriage, with such as are
ungodly, wicked, and void of true religion. Which if they do, they endanger
the faith of their children, and so commit a grievous sin.

For proof whereof, let us consider first what marriage is, and how nigh a
coniunctio^ the Lord has made it. He made the woman of the man's nature, flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones: Genesis 2.23.
so that we may not imagine, that in the outward and worser part, that that
God which required so near a coniuction, will suffer the mind and spirit of the
husband and wife, between faith and superstition to be rent asunder. Therefore
when God said: They shall be two in one flesh: Verse 24.
We may not think but that he spoke it of the whole and perfect creature made
of body and soul, that they should be of two one. Or that God did by so holy
a Law, set free the holiest part, requiring only such agreement in the flesh
and body, and leave the soul and spirit in dissension? For as God gave unto
both one name, as touching their earthly nature, signifying their unity, and
called the^ Adam: Genes. 5.2. So he gave unto them a likeness in name, as
they were joined in marriage, to signify their agreement in mind and spirit,
and called the one Man, and the other Woman: Genes. 2.22, 23. Yea, he gave unto
marriage this especial privilege. Genesis 2.24.
For this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall leave to
his wife, and they shall be one flesh: but it could never be, that any uniting
only of flesh and blood, should have found a dispensation from that Law, that
binds mind and conscience. Honor thy father and thy mother: Exodus 20.12.

The holy and faithful bond of marriage between man and wife, signifies unto
us, that most holy Conjunction of us and Christ with his Church: Ephesians. 5.25.
Seeing that this is a Conjunction both of body and soul, then such as are
christian parents, ought to be careful, that their children may rejoice in
it, How should that marriage speed well, when the bridegroom marries such one,
as to who^ he may not say, God speed, because she is none of Gods friends. 2
Job. 10. 1. Cor. 7.39. But how do they marry in the Lord, who do marry the
Lords enemies.
howsoever it likes other to marry their children, yet they ought to see that
their children do settle themselves, that they may knit their minds in
religion, where they make their bodies one, that so their marriage may be to
them, as a looking-glass to view and behold the love of Christ. Saint Paul
gives this general rule to all that will marry, that they marry in the
Lord. And to marry only in the Lord, is not to be led by flesh and blood,
with favor, credit, honor, friendship, riches, or beauty: but rather it is
to marry religiously in the fear of God, and in the fellowship of the Church
of Christ, where true christians live by one faith, profess one religion, and
serve one God. Now let us a little call to our remembrance, what fruit such
unequal marriages have brought forth from the beginning. The sons of God,
Genesis 6.2.11. As the Jews might not marry with the Chananites, so christians
may not marry with them, which are like Chananites. Genesis 24.3. and 28.1. Mal.
2.11. Ezra. 9.12.
saw the daughters of men, that they were fair, and they took them wives of
all that they liked. This aduenturous marriage in strange religion, did so
infect the world, that all flesh had corrupted his ways. For this cause God
gave this plain and express law unto the people of Israel, as touching all
the Inhabitants of the land of Canaan: Thou shall not give thy daughters unto
his sons: Deuteronomy. 72.3, 4. Exo. 34.16. Surely they will turn away thy heart:
1. Kin. 11.2. Ezra 9.1.2. etc. and 10.1.2. etc. read the places. We may not
here think, that this inhibitio^ serves now unto us, as touching Pagans,
Turks, or Infidels: but rather we must assure our selves in the truth, and
know that no people in the world are more within the compass of this law, the^
the papist, and superstitious idolater. The holy Ghost forbids us to keep
company with Idolaters, If adultery may separate marriage, shall not idolatry
hinder marriage, which is worse then it.
and such as are of a strange religion. And how can he then permit, that we
should marry with them? He commands straightly: that we should not draw in
one yoke with the unbelieving. 2. Cor. 6.14. which to do, is as unseemly, as
an ox and an ass to be yoked together to plough: Deuteronomy. 22.10. And how can we
possibly devise to violate and break this commandment more contumeliously,
then to yoke our selves in marriage with the unfaithful? We are charged: To
offer up our bodies, a linely, a holy, and a reasonable sacrifice unto God:
Romans 12.1. But if we shall give our bodies to Papists, we then shall make them
one flesh with the Papists, and then we may be sure, that no corrupt sacrifice
can be a sweet smelling sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Parents may not give
their daughters to a man unsanctified. Genesis 34.14.
Here godly parents ought then advisedly to consider, that the strengthening and
constant standing in religion of their children, is only of God, and from God,
and not of themselves, and therefore although they have brought up their
children religiously and virtuously, and think they are so well grounded and
settled therein, that they cannot be removed and drawn from their sound
profession: yet they must beware, that they do not tempt God, and venture
their children to walk in that way, which so many have fallen in. How can they
assure themselves? that their children shall abide constant, and stand upright,
if they shall consent, that they may couple themselves in Marriage with Papists.

Sampson was borne by Gods promise, consecrated to the Lord from the day of his
birth, to the day of his death, made Judge of Israel, a Deliverer of Gods
Church, and a Revenger of his enemies, very great and especial tokens of the
grace of God in him, that it should be continued: yet, when he would attempt to
marry one of a strange religion, he lost his honor, and became a laughing
stock unto the enemies of God. Judge. the fourteenth Chapter and first verse
etc. and 16.4.17.18. etc.

Solomon was a wise man, Miserable is that man, which is fettered with a woman,
that likes not his religion.
as ever was any before him or after him: God had endued him with heavenly
gifts, and had set him up, as a figure of his Son Christ: yet when he had
married with Pharaohs daughter, (a woman of another religion, and a stranger
from the Commonwealth of Israel) he then fell from worse to worse, till at the
last he became a miserable Idolater. 1. King. 11.4.

What was the cause that Ahab King of Israel, did worse then all the Kings
before him, He fears not sin, which does not shun occasions, and he is
worthy to be snared, which leads himself into temptation, and ^o makes a
trap for himself. Luke 11.4.
a man even sold to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: above all his
idolatries, and walking in the most wretched ways of Jeroboam: the Scripture
lays this to his charge, even as his greatest sin, that he took the
daughter of the King of the Sidonians to his wife: 1. King. 16.28, 29, 30, 31.
And least such parents as either have, or hereafter shall marry their children
to Papists, should think their case to be better then his, because though
they marry the^ to Papists, or to Atheists, yet they do not marry them to
any Pagans.

The wife must be meet, as God said, Genesis 2.18. But how is she meet* if the
husband be a Christian, and she a Papist?
Let them consider what the Scripture teaches them more: Iehoram king of Judah,
he married neither with any Sidonian, nor Egyptian, neither with Pagan nor
Infidel, but with one of his own people, and of the Tribe of Israel: yet
because she had corrupted her religion in her fathers house, the Scripture
shows this to be the cause of all Iehorams sin: He did evil in the sight of
the Lord, because the daughter of Ahab was his wife, 2. King. 8.18. Yea, the
Scripture makes this sin so great, that Iehosophat a good king, was yet
defiled with it, and it is reported as a great blemish of his virtuous doings,
that ever he suffered his son Jehoram so dangerously to marry. 2. Chro. 18.1.

When God would blame the Idolatry of his people of Israel, showing both how
greatly he did hate it, and what plagues he would bring upon them for it, he
revealed it unto his Prophet under this parable, bidding him take unto himself
a wife of fornications: that is, a wife full of spiritual whoredoms, such a
one as a Papist is, that in such a marriage (as in a glass) he might behold how
loathsome the peoples Idolatries were: Hose. 1.2. etc.

Parents have further to remember, that they have not this rule and authority
over their children, that they may choose whether they will let them marry or
no, or when they list, and whom they list; but fathers and mothers must
consider, that they have rule over their children under the Lord, so that the
Lord is above them: and therefore parents must deal with their children
according to the will and mind of God, which will of God is revealed unto us
out of his word.

Now God by his Apostle says: To avoid fornication, let every man have his
own wife, 1. Cor. 7.2.
and let every woman have her own husband. Whereby all parents may see, that God
commands them to permit and suffer every one to marry that is disposed to
marry.

Now, if they may not forbid any man or woman to marry, much less their own
children, whom if they suffer not to marry, not having the gift of
continency, then they break and resist Gods ordinance. For we read, that
when Isaac forbad his son Jacob to marry any of the daughters of Canaan,
Genesis 28.1.2.
he did not restrain him altogether from marriage, and therefore he directed
him, where, and with whom he should marry.

Likewise the parents of Sampson, Judge. 14.12.3.
when he asked a wife of them, did not simply forbid him to marry, but they
reproved him, for because he would marry an infidel, and a profane woman.
It is the parents duty to give their children that which may help them in
this life, to counsel or to provide them fit and religious marriages 2. Cor.
12.14. Genesis 24.2, 3, 4. Ruth. 3.1.
Therefore such parents as be godly, will have advised consideration and
regard of the infirmities of their children, and whether they can live
continent and chaste, or no: and if they shall make choice, and have a good
liking to such as be honest, religious and godly, (having craved their parents
consent) although they be not so rich and wealthy, as they would wish them to
match with: yet they ought not to hinder, restrain, and forbid their children
to marry, only for want of goods and substance.

Parents ought to be careful, that their childoe marry in such an age
wherein they should understand whom they choose, and very well perceive what
they take in hand, and that they do not seek to match them selves in marriage
above their degree. And it is very expedient, that parents admonish their
children, to make their choice according to their complexion and condition.

When parents do abuse their authority.
This is a most unnatural and cruel part, for parents to sell their children
for gain and lucre, and to marry them when they list, and to whom they list,
without the good liking of their children, Parents must not match their
children only for carnal respects.
and so bring them into bondage. And therefore if parents shall force and
compel their children to marry contrary to their mind and liking: then the
sorrowful children may not say, they have married them; but for ever they have
married and undone them. And therefore to the end, When parents do marry their
daughters to men of understanding, they shall perform a weighty work.
that marriages may be perpetual, loving, and delightful betwixt the parties:
there must and ought to be a knitting of hearts, before striking of hands. The
places of scripture, are many and diverse, by which may plainly appear, that
all godly and christian Parents, are charged by God himself, that they should
be careful in time, to make meet choice of husbands for their daughters, and
fit wives for their sons: amongst many, these quotations do sufficiently
prove. Deuteronomy. 7.3. Nehe. 13.23.24. Ier. 29.6.1. Cor. 7.36.37.38. Genesis 24.12.
etc. and 28 1.1. and 34.4. and 38.6.8. Iosu. 15.16, 17.2. Sam. 13.13. Judge.
14.1, etc. Let fathers and mothers therefore, on whom this charge by God his
commandment lies, to take wives for their sons, and to provide husbands
for their daughters, take diligent heed hereunto, that they abuse not this
their power and authority over their children, but as in other cases, they are
willed by the Apostle, Col. 3.21.
that they do^^ not in such sort toward them, that they hereby be dismayed
and discouraged; so especially in this matter of greatest moment and value, or
all other worldly things whatsoever: let them abstain from all rigor and
roughness, and beware that they turn not their fatherly jurisdiction and
government, into a tyrannical sowernesse and waywardness, letting their will
go for a law, and their pleasure for a reason. For the rule of Parents over
their children, ought to resemble the government of good Princes toward their
subjects: that is to say, it must be mild, gentle, and easy to be borne, for
as they, so likewise Parents, so far as concerns them, and lies in their
ability to perform, they must carry such an even and upright hand in their
government, that they may by love seek to win the hearts of those, over whom
they are set, to be firm and sure toward them, and not to keep them under a
servile o^ slavish awe and subjection by too much fear, but rather by a
childelike and reverent fear, which both the subjects owe unto their Princes,
and children unto their Parents, and which both the one and the other, easily
obtain at the hands of such as are under their government, by their equal,
upright, and moderate behavior toward them. Parents ought to deal sincerely
in the choice for their children.
It does therefore stand Parents greatly in hand, that in making choice for
their children, they be free from all sinister and corrupt affection, and that
for lucre and covetousness they seek not to thrust such matches upon their
children, as they cannot brook, nor like well of. Yea, and in this most grave
and weighty cause, it is a thing earnestly to be wished, In providing of
matches for their children, Parents ought to begin with prayer.
that all christian Parents would not take this matter and business lightly in
hand, as if it were but a toy, or a jest, but that they begin it with prayer,
that in the whole action, they may in such sort be directed, that they do
nothing against the word of God, or unbeseeming the same authority, the which
God himself in this cause has imposed or laid upon them. And thus doing, God
no doubt will ad a blessing unto their godly endeavor and holy care, and work
obedience in the hearts of their children, as he framed the heart of Isaac with
entire affection to embrace Rebeccah, whom his father Abraham had by his
steward provided for him: Genesis 22.7. etc.

The third point, that appertains to parents, The third point. Examples do
much more persuade then words, yet we must live by precepts, and not by
examples.
is to be themselves examples of al godliness and vertuousnesse to their
children. So that they must remember, that they themselves do not say, or do
anything, that is evil or offensive, in ye presence of their children. For it
is certain, that children follow and learn nothing so much, and so soon, as
that which they see their father and mother do, or say. For the virtue,
thriuing, and prosperity of children, are for ye most part wrought by the
fathers and mothers good example and instructions: and so contrariwise. For
that which is done by example, the inferiors will think they may lawfully do
the like. As good examples do edify and uphold: so ill examples do destroy
and confound. For humanity is taught by the law of Nature. If therefore
Parents by their example should teach the contrary, what do they else but
endeavor to transform me^ into beasts, beginning first to perform it in their
own children? They must be circumspect, that their children do not fight, and
injury one another: and if they swear, curse, lie, or speak any bawdie or
ribaldous words, or sing any filthy rymes, or unchristian songs, the^ to
reprove them sharply for it. And let Parents always labor, that their children
may rather fear them, for love and reverence, then for fear of punishment.
For children that obey their Parents for fear of correction, such commonly
fear them no longer, then the stripes endures. As the father begins, so it
is like the son will proceed.
Before all things, it is needful that Parents should show themselves unto
their children, as a manifest pattern or example, not only by not sinning and
offending God any ways: but also by living godly, and by doing all things
honestly, that so their children may look into their lives, and peruse
themselves as in a glass. And therefore, if Parents do give good examples,
Gal. 6.7.
they shall reap the fruit thereof, on the life, behavior, manners, and
prosperity of their children. For children love and delight to do, as their
Parents did before them.

All christian fathers ought to be very careful, in nourishing and maintaining
natural love and concord, amongst the children and family, and in no wise to
suffer any spark of hatred to enter into their hearts, Math. 18.7.
least it kindle a fire in their breast: much less ought they themselves to
cast in coals of discord among them, by unkind, or injurious examples of
dealing. For the state of a family, if it be in due order, is like to a frame
of joining work, or building, whereof, if some one piece be out of his place,
it tends to a disordering of all the rest: and one disorder following
another, all be comes out of joint, and falls unto confusion very
dispraisable. So that Parents therefore ought to be careful to maintain their
children in peace, concord and amity. For if discord and contention be
dangerous and pernicious among al men, how much rather between brethren and
sisters? Likewise, if it be hard quenching of stomach and debate, between
those that are not conjoined in kindred, it is far more difficult to reunite
brethren, because enmity among the^ is mighty and strong, like Iron bars
to keep them asunder. Neither is there any thing more slipperie or of greater
efficacy to subvert a family, then dissension among brethren. It is an old
saying: by concord small things do grow, but by discord great things come to
naught. Again, how dangerous it is for Parents to show more love and
affection to one child, the^ to another, except upon just and great cause,
the example of Jacobs children does testify. For what was the original of
their envy and cruelty executed against their brother Joseph, Genes. 37.3.
Moses there says, that Jacob loving Joseph better then his brethren, made him
a party colored coat, and thereof they took occasion to take him, and to
speak roughly unto him. Parents therefore to the end to prevent like
inconveniences, are to use equality among their children so near as may be,
whether in their ordinary usage, or in the division of their goods. For all
men naturally are inclined, but too much to the love of earthly goods: so the
unequal sharing and dividing of the same, does oftentimes breed great braules
and pernicious debate between brethren and sisters. Therefore all fathers and
mothers are with great diligence, to take heed what they say or do in their
houses and that they do not commit any lewd or wicked deed, whereby their
children may be moved to imitate and follow the same: neither that they utter
or speak any bawdy or ribaldous words, or use to swear, or lie, in their
presence: for evil speakings or communication (says the Apostle) corrupts
good manners. 1. Cor. 15.33.
Servants also are to be looked unto, and sharply rebuked, if they do commit
or show any lewd trick, or dishonest behavior in the presence of children
either in word, deed, or gesture. For justly be they called murderers, that
kill their children, being newborn, and kill but the body. How great
wickedness is it then to kill the minds of children, through evil examples?
Deserve not such servants severely to be punished by law, (think you) that
bewitch young children, or hurt their weak bodies with poisons? What then do
they deserve, which corrupt the chief parts of Infants, with most ungracious
venom: we mean, by filthy talk and lew^e conversation of life? yet it is a
lighter matter to kill the body, then the mind and soul.

Further, Parents ought to be circumspect and wary, that their children do
not haunt or use evil company, or use any dishonest pastime. For if it be so,
that a father will not suffer his child to come into a place where he may be
in danger to take hurt of his body, either by infection of the plague, or
otherwise: how much more is he bound to with hold and keep his child from
coming there, where he should hurt and poison his soul? The last point. Genesis
3.19 Ezech. 16.49. Pro. 12 11. and 18.9. 1. Tim. 5.13. 2. These. 3.10.11.
The fourth and last point is, that all Parents do with all care and
diligence, keep their children from lazy Idleness, a vice no doubt, out of
which do spring many inconveniences. And is condemned by the holy Ghost, in
many places of scripture: whereby God declares, that he created no man in
vain, or to no purpose, neither is there any man, unto who^ he has not
allotted, as it were, a certain standing and room, and a lawful calling to
walk in. Whereupon it follows, that the order which God has appointed, is
troubled by such as live idely: yea, Gods ordinance is broken, which is great
sin and wickedness. So then by the word of God, none ought to liue^idly, and
to neglect his charge and duty, but ought to give himself to some profitable
calling, to get his living by, and to do good to others. Although fathers
provide for their children great store of money, and huge heaps of treasure:
yet in three or four hours, al may be wasted and come to naught. For much
evil comes through idleness: It is an evil teacher, He that does nothing
is ill occupied, The mind of man is ever stirring and doing somewhat. If it be
not doing wll, it is doing ill. As water though it be never so clear and
fair, fresh and comfortable: yet if it stand still in a pit or hole, or be
kept long in a vessel whence it has no issue it will putrify and corrupt,
rotte and smell, and be unwholesome: even so it fares with children: yea, and
with all the sons of Adam, if they have nothing to do, no way to bestow their
wit, they will rotte, and prove unwholesome, and devise mischief all the
day long. Idleness brings much evil.
For as labor and exercise of body in one man, industry and diligence of mind
in an other man, are sure Fortes and strong Bulwarks of Countries: even so
idleness and negligence, are the cause of all evil, for an idle man's brain
becomes quickly the shop of the devil. And as in all things natural,
there is one thing or other, which is the spoil of it: as the canker to the
rose, the worm to the apple, and the caterpiller to the leaf: so the common
spoil to all youth, is the contrary to pains and labor, which is idleness.
Therefore is idleness worthily called the mother of all evils, and step-dame of
all virtues. The Prophet Ezechiel in his sixteenth chapter, verse forty nine,
teaches, that idleness was one of the principal sins of Sodom which
pulled down fire and brimstone from heaven upon their heads: this idleness is
the devils confederate, for even as the traitorous servant, while his master
is asleep, and all things at rest, sets open the door for the thief to
enter in upon him, and spoil him at his pleasure: even so idleness, while we
are not aware, lying soft upon the pillowes of security, opens the door
for the evil to enter into us with full swing, to the destruction both of body
and soul. S. Matthew says, chapter thirteen, twenty five verse, that while
men slept, the enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat: so the fittest
time that the devil can find to work upon us, is, when we aree idle, for
that is the sleep of the soul. In the 11. chapter, of the 2. Sam. we read,
that that while David tarried idely at home, in the beginning of the year,
when Kings used to go forth to battle, he was soon overtaken with those
two foul sins of adultery, and manslaughter. Oh that men saw, to how many
vices and evils they shut the door, when they cease to be idle, and give
themselves to honest labors, and a lawful calling. So long as Sampson (Judge.
19.) warred with the Philistines, he could never be taken or overcome, but
after that, he gave himself to idleness and pleasure: he not only committed
fornication with the strumpet Dalilah, hut also was taken of his enemies, and
had his eyes miserably put out. If those two which were such excellent me^,
endued of God with singular gifts, the one of prophecy, and the other of
strength, and such as no labor or trouble could ouerco^e, were notwithstanding
overthrown, and fallen into grievous sins, by yielding for a short time to
ease: then what crimes, what mischiefs and inconveniences, are not to be
feared of the^, who all their life long, give themselves to idleness and
loytering? But such has always been the perverse incredulity of men's hearts,
that they will not believe that other men have perished, until they themselves
perish also. If we be utterly void of understanding let us go to the brute
creatures, which want these helps of reason and government, that man has, and
learn of them: Go to the Pismire, o sluggard (says Solomon. Pro. 6.6.) behold
her ways, and be wise: for she having no guide, nor ruler, prepares her meat
in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest. What is it that fills
the prisons, and brings so many to the gallows, and causes so many Parents
to lament and bewail the untimely death of their children, but Idleness? When
the poor condemned wretches have received their judgment, and come to the
place of execution, and stand on the ladder, what counsel give they to young
men, and to children, but to beware of idleness? What is the cause of such,
and so many diseases in the body? Ask the Physicians, and they will tell you,
Idleness? Whereof rise rebellions in kingdoms against Princes? Whereof rise
mutinies, and mutterings in Cities against Magistrates? You can give no
greater cause thereof, then Idleness. Christ our redeemer says: Of every idle
word (that is vain and unprofitable trifles, Math. 12.36.
which the most part of people spend their lives in) that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. If we shall make an
account for idle words, what shall we do for idle hands, for idle feet, for
idle body, for idle soul? What account for all our idleness, especially for
wicked deeds, shall we make at the day of judgment? Seeing the^ that idleness
is so noisome and hurtful, let all christian parents therefore labor and
endeavor to avoid it, both in themselves, and in their children, as a plague or
contagious disease. Therefore it is most requisite and necessary, thar Parents
do bring up their children either in learning, to learn that science, which
they be most apt for. Objection.
or in some occupation and handicraft, whereby they may get their living
another day, and so live the better. But some unadvisedly, and foolishly do
reason, saying: What need is it for noble and rich men's children to have
learning? they shall have enough? We answer, Pro. 3.13.24.15.
For learning, knowledge, and understanding, is profitable both for rich and
poor. So that (as the Grecians say:) He that is ignorant and unlearned, sees
nothing, although he have eyes. The life of such a one is as a tree without
fruit, a day without Sun, a night without moon and stars, a house without
a man, and a head without a body. It is found by experience, which the best
schoolemaister, that unto what occupation or science soever any young man shall
be put to, the more skill and knowledge he has in the liberal sciences, so
much the more sooner shall he learn his occupation, and the more ready, and
handsomer shall he^ be about the same. And besides this, he that has
learning, although it be but small, shall much better understand the
Preachers, and take more profit by hearing of them, to his great and endless
comfort, then he that has no learning. Experience also teaches us this, that
goods, riches, beauty, glory, and health, be unstable, and fade, perish,
pass, away, come and go: but learning and virtue never stagger, always be
constant. Therefore of all the charges that Parents be about their children,
that money is best bestowed, that is laid out upon learning: especially when
they are taught to know God aright, and how he will be served.

It is a lamentable thing, to consider how careless some Parents are of their
children, when they put them to the school, in that they make no small account
and reckoning to what schoolemaister they put their children to learn, so they
may have the^ taught for little or no cost, though their children profit little
or nothing in learning, so that oftentimes they not only bestow their money
in vain, but also they suffer their children to loose their time, which is a
thing so precious, as it cannot be redeemed with any money: and so to let them
spend two or three years in learning of that, which they might by the
diligence and orderly teaching of a skilful schoolemaister, learn in less
then half this time, if there be any aptness and towardness in their
children. Therefore let parents remember, that as the goodness of the ground is
not much profitable for corn, unless there be a meet husbandman, to till and
sow the same: so likewise it is not enough to find good towardness in your
children, unless you provide a meet and fit Schoolmaster to further the
same. And as Noblemen, and Gentlemen, are desirous to have a good and skillful
hors-keeper, that can keep their horses well and they spare not to give
stipends to such: even so much more ought christian Parents be desirous, to
have and maintain a good schoolmaster, that might bring up their children in
virtue, wisdom, and good learning. And like as, if their horse be not well
broken, or have any evil quality, they will be careful to see it remedied, and
yt he may be made tractable and gentle: so likewise godly parents, ought to be
much more careful, not only yt their children may by instruction be brought to
some good order, but also to look yt there be no fault in the teacher, to whom
they commit the care, to bring them up in learning and good manners.

Why some men bring not up their children to any good perfection in learning.
But alas, and with grief be it spoken, many men now a days, albeit they
perceive their children to be forward and apt unto letters, and capable to
receive good learning, having wealth and riches enough to maintain them
thereat, yet will they not suffer them to continue thereat, until they come to
any good perfection: some because they themselves do not like of our state and
religion: other some, because they see little preferment, and no worldly
advantage to follow learning, but great trouble and affliction: all which men
in this doing, declare themselves to be irreligious, ungodly, and destroyers
both of themselves, their children, and of all Commonwealthes and
Congregations. For what public Wealth, Town, City, or Parish, can be well
governed, without the Prince, Magistrate, and Preacher, be learned both in
human, and divine laws? In times past, when ignorance and superstition was
accounted good devotion, at which time men saw so many spiritual promotions (as
they then called them) unto rich Bishoppricks, Abbeyes, Priories, Deaneries,
benefices, etc. then they would let for no cost to have their children learned
in some sort to the end they might get them to be Priests, and so to say
Mass, and the rest of that Idolatrous service, that so they might live in ease
aed idleness. But now they see how painful and perilous a charge it is to
preach, and rightly to divide Gods word, and to deliver the same freely, and
faithfully, and also how unthankful an office and calling it is, to govern
well a Congregation: that they had rather their children should be bound
prentices to some trade, or else to follow any other profession, then that they
should study divinity.

When children were nothing apt to good learning, and when there was no good
learning to be had, no nor good teachers, yet then, well was he that might set
his child to school. But now when youth was never so apt to good learning, as
it is at this day: and learning and al good means never so plenteously
flourishing, being restored and reduced into such a facility, and a compendious
clear briefnesse: yea, never so good, learned, and skillful School masters:
never so plenty of so good and plain books printed: never so good cheap:
the holy Ghost mercifully offering his gifts, as it were into the mouths of
all men, and yet alas, but few there be, that will open their mouths to receive
them: their eyes to see so clear light: nor yet their ears to hear, so pure,
manifest and wholesome, and heavenly doctrine, even the word of God, the means
of their salvation. It is therefore to be feared, that for this our great
unthankfulness: these so manifold heavenly blessings shall be taken from us,
and given to some other nation, that will both be more thankful for them, and
also show forth better fruits of christianity, then we hitherto have done. Oh
therefore, that parents would advisedly consider, that for want of this
christian duty of the good education of their children, is the only cause of
great mischief and much misery, both upon children and themselves: yea in
truth, it is from hence, that so much sorrow, grief, and shame, befalls many
times upon fathers and mothers. And how comes this to pass, that the Parents
own dung, is cast in their faces by their own children, in mocking and
despising of them? and whence arise all these inconveniences before named,
together with all these grievous plagues and judgments of God upon their
children, to the consuming of their eyes, but from this their own negligence,
in bringing up their children? for it is even just with God, that seeing they
have offended him in the greatest blessings, they should be plagued with the
fame thing wherein they offended, with his greatest judgments. O you
unnatural parents! the rich man in hell shall rise up against you, Luke. 16.27.
in the day of judgment, and condemn you: for he being in hell, had a care of
his fathers house, that they might be forewarned: and therefore desired
Abraham, to send Lazarus to his brethren, to testify unto them, that they came
not into that place of torment: but you will not admonish your children, you
will not teach them Moses and the Prophets: and you will not show them the
danger of Gods heavy displeasure, hanging over their heads and therefore your
own children shall be one of the furies in hell, to torment you. The Lord open
your eyes, Pro. 22.6.
to foresee and she these fearful judgments. But if you will bring them up
well and virtuously, they shall be the better for it, all their lives after:
nay, the world to come shall reap this benefit: for such children as you now
bring up, such parents shall they be after you when you are gone: and look what
parents you leave behind you, the like children again shall they rear up.
Wherefore, O you parents, you are either the making, or the marring of the
world: for if your children learn no good erudition at your hands, how should
they be good fathers after you? and how should they leave that to their
posterity, by the right of inheritance, which they never received from their
ancestors? To conclude this point (we say) once again: Oh ye parents endeavor
to go forward in this virtuous education of your children, and then God (no
doubt) shall, nor will hide no necessary secret or instruction from you,
neither will he withhold any good blessing from your posterity: so shall ye
be fathers of the faithful as Abraham was, if you will have the same care, and
practice the same diligence for your children and family, that he did Genesis
18.17.18. and 12.2.3.

Disheriting of the eldest son, is a thing very unlawful. 2. Chro. 21.3. 1.
King. 21.3. Le^it. 25.23. Number. 27.3. etc
Parents also have to remember, that they shall commit an act very unnatural,
injurious, and ungodly if they should undeservedly disinherit their eldest
son. For as nature in all her works* for the most part, seems to make some
one thing to be chief before all the rest, whereby the same is and the rather
continues: so reason in the order of a family, which is an imitation of a
state civil, or body politic, persuades of experience and necessity, that
there be one before the rest as chief. Whereby may be conserved, that beauty
of unity, and harmony of concord, which the Almighty in his creation so
wonderfully and diversely teaches, and our Savior himself, so carefully and
especially commended to his Church. And thereof seems to come that
pre-eminence or more special regard, Exodus 13.1, 2. and 34.19, 20. Leuit.
27.26. Number. 3.13. and 18.16.
which the law of God in the old Testament appointed to his people the
Israelites, to be observed toward the first begotten son, and likewise
somewhat concerning other dumb creatures, which first were brought forth into
the world. By the ancient law of the Jews, the eldest had double so much as
the others of the fathers goods, and alone to the eldest pertained the blessing
of the father, wherewith should seem always the heritage to go and succeed:
as is manifest by the will of God, in Deuter. 31.15, 16, 17. If a man have two
wives, one loved, and another hated, and they have borne him children, both the
loved, and also the hated: if the first borne be the son of the hated, then
when the time comes, that he appoints his sons to be heirs of that
which he has, he may not make the son of the beloved first borne, before
the son of the hated, which is the first borne: but he shall acknowledge the
son of the hated, which is the first borne, and give him double portion of
all that he has: for he is the first of his strength, and to him belongs
the right of the first borne. The Patriarchs, and others the servants of God,
although by divine revelation and other notice of the will of God, they were
certified that they might marry many or sundry wives at one time, yet did
they exclude from their heritage and prerogative of the blessing, all the
children of those secondarie and after marriages. This appears in Genesis 21.10.
The son of the bond woman shall not be heir with my son Isaac: yet was
he the eldest, but was not the son of the first marriage. Also an heir, is
the work and institution of nature, and heritage is due to the son by nature,
therefore it is so due that he must needs have it: seeing those things which
come by nature, or be natural, are not mutable or to be changed. Moreover this
name Heir, which in manner with all Nations is the eldest, he is the successor
of the law National, besides the laws natural and divine. And that father,
who makes another heir then is by these authorities appointed, cannot but
express himself a rebel, in disobeying and contemning so great laws and
authorities, beginning a new law of his own head contrary thereunto. Then what
is more unjust, then to do contrary to all laws, and therewith to disobey the
will of God, to pervert the due order of descent, preferring the second marriage
before the first, the younger before the elder, the late offpring before the
first begotten, so much tendered and respected? Now as the greatest injury a
father can do to his son, is to disherit him: so is it the most reproachful
blot or damage, to suffer the infamy and discredit of disherison. For if the
eldest son be worthy to be disherited in his fathers house, he may be
thought not worthy to draw breath out of it: for that he ought to be
convinced faulty in those crimes and heinous offenses, which be either
repugnant to the duty of a child, or not meet for the profession of a
Christian: namely, if he strike or offer violence to his father: Deuteronomy. 21.18.
etc.
if he oppresses him with some great wrong: if he seek his death or
destruction, by poisoning, or otherwise: if he lie with his fathers wife: Genesis
35.22. and 49.^.4. 1. Chro. 5.1.
if he will not suffer his father to make his will: if he be not of the true and
Catholic faith, but is convinced to be an heretic, whereby his life and
heritage is in hazard. Or if he refuse to succor and deliver his father out of
prison, by his suertiship: or if he follow the trade and company of such
persons, as in the law be counted infamous, vile and most dishonest: as
Iuglers. Sorcerers, Coniurers, Thieves, and Pirates. Or if he be an idiot, a mad
man a natural, or lunatike person. Or if the father offering him a meet
marriage, under 25. years, he refuses it, and delights to live continually in
whoredom, and filthy order of life: these and such like, be ye causes that the
civil or Ecclesiastical laws do assign.

The duty of Children toward their parents.
THis duty of children, as it may be gathered out of the holy Scriptures,
consists in five points.

1. First, that they Ephesians. 6.1, 2, 3. Col. 3.20. Pro. 8. and 4.1. and 23.22.
obey their parents, and do serve them, and also do Leuit. 10.3. N^m. 12.14.
fear, love honor, and reverence them, not only in word and deed* but in
their hearts and minds also.

2. Secondly, that they follow their good precepts and examples of life.

3. Thirdly, that they patiently take Pro. 15.5.32.
correction at their hands.

4. Fourthly, that they make continual and hearty prayers to God for them.

1. Tim. 5.4. Matthew. 15.4, 5, 6. Genes. 47.12.
5. And lastly, that they do relieve, maintain and nourish their parents, in
case they shall fall into poverty or decay.

The sum and effect of all which, is as follows.

Fathers and Mothers are to their children in Gods stead. Exodus 20.12. Deuteronomy.
5.13. By honor, is meantal kind of duty, which children owe to their Parents.
As the Lord our God has made and created children through their parents: so
has he cast and made them subject under the power and authority of their
parents, to obey and serve them in his stead, saying: Honor thy father and
mother: which honor consists not in bowing the knee, or putting off the cap,
or giving to their parents the upper hand only: but that they must love them
with all their hearts, fear and dread them, and that they cheerfully do
their commandments, will and pleasure, and that they seek their worship,
credit profit and preferment in all things lawful, and if need require, that
they should give their lives for them: remembering that they are their parents
goods and possessions, and they owe to them even their own selves, and all that
they are able to do, yea, and more then they are able.

By this word Honor, is also signified the love, reverence, duty, obedience,
subjection, entertainment, and necessary assistance that children owe to their
parents. As concerning the love, the summarie of the second Table, comprehended
in these words: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, does manifestly
confirm it. Matthew. 22.39.
For who can be a nearer neighbor for the children to love, then their parents?

Besides that, they are not to be loved only as neighbors proceeding of Adam
and Eve, but also as fathers and mothers. And therefore what ingratitude is it,
not to love those of who^, next after God, they have their life and being,
together with many great and continual benefits toward them? Also the love
that parents do bear to their children, besides so many their labors,
sorrows, troubles, and vexations, should bind them reciprocally to love them.
The Sun shining a while upon the cold stones does so hear the^, they they
yield some warmth: so albeit that children be as hard and cold as stones, yet
the experience, and the daily feeling of the love of their parents toward
them, ought mightily to inflame their hearts to love them again. Take away the
beam from the Sun, and it will not shine; the springs from the river, and it
will dry up; the bough from the tree, and it will wither; the member from the
body, and it will rot. And so take from children their duty to their parents,
and they are no longer children, but brethren and companions with those unto
whom Jesus Christ said: Ye are the children of the devil. Ioh. 8.44.

This band of the love of children toward their parents, should take such
place, not only toward such parents as are loving and gentle, but also (as
Saint Peter says of the duties of servants to their masters) even toward such
as be rigorous. For if we ought to love all the children of Adam, even those
whom we know not, or our enemies and persecutors: how much rather our parents,
albeit they should entreat us roughly and with rigor, either in word or deed?
and verily the principal cause still abides: namely, that they be our father
and mother. This ought children well to note, to the end that patiently bearing
their reprehensions, reproves, and in general, whatsoever their troublesome
and sharp affections, they may still continue and declare their childlike
affection and love. And to that purpose children must remember the labor,
grief, anguish, weeping, sorrow, and other troublesome cares, that their
parents do abide and endure for them.

This love must be accompanied with reverence and respect: and to say the
truth, Matthew. 23.9.
albeit the name of father belongs properly unto God, as Jesus Christ says:
You have but one father, even him that is in heaven. Yet does he so impart it
to those that have begotten us, that they being called fathers, do bear the
title and image of God. And this is it that binds children to respect and
honor them, and to testify the same by their outward reverence. Of this
reverence we have a notable example in Solomon: he understanding that his
mother Berthsheba was coming to speak with him, 1. King. 2.19.
arose from his seat, came to meet her, bowed before her, and set her upon
his right hand. Neither could his greatness, neither his royal estate
privilege him from this respect and honor due to his mother. But when the
son does execute his magistracy, or public office, he is greater then his
father, and must bear himself as a Magistrate, not as a son: but when he
is out of place, or execution of office, he must (how highly soever he be
advanced) have a respect, and yield reverence to his parents. But many times it
falls out otherwise: for many children when they come to honor, or wealth,
do despise their parents, if they be of meaner calling then themselves, that
hardly they will acknowledge, or call them father, as if they were ashamed of
the^. So that that man puts off the affection of a child to his father, who
by the eminency of an office over him, quenches the name of a son. But
Solomon forgot not himself in this kind of duty, for he did not only bow
before his mother, as is aforesaid, but also called her mother: saying, 1.
King. 2.10.
Mother, ask, and J will not deny thee. And this do we the rather note also
upon another consideration, namely, that his example condemns the custom of
these days, wherein this name of father and mother is accounted so base and
contemptible, that the children of kings, princes, yea even of mean gentlemen,
speaking to their parents, must not say, father, mother: but Sir, my Lord, my
Lady, Madam, etc.

But the due honor to parents that we here speak of, implies not only this
outward reverence, but also that we should so esteem of them, as that neither
our selves should despise them, neither should we suffer others to have them
in contempt. And this are we to understand in the saying of Jesus Christ: John
8.49.
I honor my father, but you dishonor me. He there defends the honor of his
father, against the false opinions and slanders of the Jews. But some there
are so unnatural and perverse, that forgetting all due reverence and respect
to their parents, they will not only despise them in their own hearts, and
suffer others to speak hardly of the^: but also will themselves so far
exceed, as even to lay them open to the scorn of others.

Ham the son of Noah, seeing his father lie uncovered, Genesis 9.22.
called his brethren to show them his father^ shame. But so odious was this
impiety in the sight of God, that Noah by the conduct and direction of the
holy Ghost, cursed both him and all his posterity. And therefore we well and
truly may say, that those children, who in stead of defending the honor of
their parents, do lay them open to shame and reproof, and come of the cursed
seed of Ham.

This duty of honoring parents, The honor due to parents.
is performed and paid, when they do worshipfully and reverently esteem of
them, as to think that ^hey are given to them of God, Childrens duty is from
their beginning to their ending, to be subject, obedient and helpful to their
Parents.
to the end that they should reverence, love, and always have a care of them,
if for nothing else, yet for the Lord sake, who is, and does think himself
despised, so long as children contemn their parents, and either think or
little regard them. So then children honor their parents when with their help
and counsel, they aid them in their old age, and vnweildie crookedness,
when they ease and help them in the time of their need, Matthew. 15.4, 5, 6,
or succor them otherwise in any case else, and do wholly bestow themselves,
and all that they have, Exodus 21.15.17 Leuit. 20.9. Pro. 20.20. and 30.17.
Deuteronomy. 27.16.
to do them good withal: yea, they ought not to give them a rough or stubborn
answer, or once so much as to mumble or mutter an answer against their
parents, neither to smite or curse, or speak evil of their father and mother:
unless they will procure the vengeance of God to light upon them for the same.

What children do to their parents, they do to God, so that they may not
purloyne or diminish any of their substance. Pro. 28.24.
Children have always to remember, that whatsoever they do to their fathers
and mothers (be it good or evil) they do it to God: when they please them,
they please God: and when they disobey them, they disobey God: when their
parents are justly angry with them, God is angry with them: neither can it
be, that they may come to have the favor of God again: (no although all the
Saints in heaven should entreat for them) until they have submitted themselves
to their father and mother.

If children and servants would always keep in mind this saying; so to do
and behave themselves to their parents, Matthew. 7.12.
masters, and dames, as they would have their children and servants to do, and
behave themselves to them, when God shall vouchsafe to make them parents,
masters, or dames; then no doubt they would obey and reverence their parents,
masters, and dames, more dutifully and faithfully then now they do. Matthew.
7.2. Luke. 6.3.8.
For let them assure themselves, that such measure as they now meat to their
parents, masters, and dames, such will be measured to them again, by their
children and servants.

Also children must be careful to follow the good examples of their fathers
and mothers, and to suffer themselves to be governed by them, and to be
mindful to bestow all pain and diligence to discharge their duty toward
them: and herewithall they must know, that they are not at their own liberty
to do as they list, so long as they have a father and mother to rule them: and
not to fall out among themselves, Psalm. 133.1.
but mutually to love and help one another.

And yet children have always to remember, that they may not in any case obey
their parents, when they shall command them to do or say any thing that is
contrary to the word of God. And yet they are to be thought well of: For
example, Jonathan, who with others, obeyed not his father Saul's commandment,
1. Sam. 20.28. etc. and 22.17. Dan. 3.18. Acts 4.19.
who charged him to persecute David: and therefore he is worthily commended in
the holy Scriptures. For the duties of the first table, are always to be
preferred before the duties of the second table. This subjection therefore that
children owe unto their fathers, ought in very deed to be unto them as a
ladder, or staier, Matthew. 23.9.
to lead them to the reverence and obedience of God, who is our chief father.

As children receive of their parents three things: to wit, life, maintenance,
and instruction: so for these three they owe other three, namely, for life,
they owe love: for maintenance, they owe obedience: for instruction, they owe
reverence. For their life, they must fervently love their parents: for their
maintenance, they must dutifully obey their parents, as masters: and for their
instruction, they must cheerfully reverence their parents as their Tutors.

And further, children must remember, that the Lord has given to them their
parents, to take of them their beginning of life, and that they might nourish
and bring them up: and of rude, and almost brutish things, they might make them
able to help and live of themselves: yea, and such mothers as are godly and
virtuous, do suffer and endure more pain and grief in the bearing, bringing
up, and nourishing of their children, then the fathers do. So that greater are
the pleasures and good turns, that christian parents do for their children,
greater is the cost and labor that they bestow on them, and greater is the
care, grief, and trouble, which they take for them, then any man, how learned
so ever he be, is able to express. And therefore if there were no other
reasons or causes to move children greatly to love, to esteem well, to obey,
to be kind, faithful, and dutiful, and to reverence their parents, and that
with such a reverence as comes from the heart: yet these were sufficient.

Maids and young women are to be put in mind, and always to remember, that
the best portion, the greatest inheritance, and the most precious jewel that
they can bring them on their marriage day, is Shamefastness: the want whereof
is most hurtful in all women. And therefore they must carefully shun and
avoid all idle and wanton talk, nice looks, dalliance, and light
countenance, when they walk abroad, or be in company. A man needs many
things: as wisdom, eloquence, knowledge of things, remembrance, skill in some
trade, or craft to live by, justice, courage, and other things and qualities
more, which were too long to rehearse: and though some of these be lacking, yet
he is not to be disliked, so that he have many of them. But in a maid, no man
will look for eloquence, great wit, ordering of the Commonwealth, prudence,
etc. Finally, no man will look for any other thing of a woman, When a woman
loses her honesty, then has she lost her chief treasure.
but her Honesty: the which only if it be lacking, she is like a man that
wants all that he should have. For in a maid, the honesty and chastity is
in stead of all. She verily may truly be said to be an evil keeper, that
cannot keep one thing well committed to her keeping, and put in trust to her,
with much commendation of words: and especially which no man will take from her
against her will, nor touch it except she be willing her self. The which thing
only, if a woman remember, it will cause her to take great heed unto, and to
be a more wary and careful keeper of her honesty, which alone being lost,
though all other things be never so well and safe, yet they perish together
therewith because she that has once lost her Honesty, should think there is
nothing lost. Take from a maid or woman her beauty, take from her, kindred,
riches, comeliness, eloquence, sharpness of wit, cunning in her craft: give
her Chastity, and you have given her all things. And on the other side, give
her all these things, and call her whore or naughty pack: with that one
word you have taken all from her, and left her bare and foul. How precious a
jewel Chastity is, may easily be gathered from the example of Dinah the
daugther of Leah, Genesis 34.1.2.
which she bare unto Jacob, who when he heard that she was ravished and
defiled by Sechem, the son of Hamos the Hiuite, Lord of that Country, his
mind was grievously wounded with this great shame and reproath. Children may
not marry without the consent and agreement of their Parents: so that an
unlawful promise made by the child, may lawfully be broken.


Children may not forget this duty, who having received their being from their
parents, and being brought up by them, with great pains and much cost, they
should not therefore so much as give any liking, much less speech of marrige,
without the consent of parents, or of those which are set over them by their
parents: the duty of thankfulness requiring it at their hands, and not only
in regard of thankfulness, is this duty to be performed to their parents,
but even in regard of their own inabilitie, as being not experienced in such
things, and their wits being not so ripe as their parents, they wanting
wisdom and discretion to behave themselves as they ought. For some children
know not what are meet and convenient for them, nor whether they be of meet age
and condition to marry. Which inabilitie being in the sons, is much more in
the daughters, as being the weaker by nature, and more unable to provide for
themselves, and therefore it is necessary, that they should not marry without
the consent and direction of their parents, but to be at their bestowing: for,
to do otherwise is a sin, even that nature it self abhors: and all sound
Writers, old and new, do utterly disallow. It is a sweet wedding, when the
father and the mother bring a blessing to the feast: and a heavy union, which
is cursed the first day that it is knit.
And for so much as marriage being the means, the which God himself has
ordained, and sanctified for the propagation and increase of mankind, that
being taken in hand in his fear, a godly seed being multiplied and grown up
here on earth, the same may be blessed to the constitution and making of a
Church, the which may serve him in holiness and righteousness: when the same is
taken in hand, with the breach of his commandment, so far off is it, that any
blessing is to be hoped for, that contrariwise, his hot indignation, wrath and
heavy curse hangs over that house and family, where the parties, which are
the principal pillars and vpholders of the same, are linked and tied together
in such a band of wedlock, whose links and inclosings, are not fastened and
coupled together with the necessary and lawful assent and liking of the
parents, whose authority and consent; ought to bear the chiefest sway, and
strike likewise the greatest stroke, in this most holy and heavenly action. And
likewise as marriage, that is begun and enterprised in the fear of God,
according to his word, there God is well pleased, there the parties so matched,
live together in a joyful agreement, and linking the one to the other: there
God is honored, and served in sincerity and truth: there the children, when
God gives them, with the rest of the family, are instructed and brought up in
knowledge of religion, and grounds of faith: so on the other side, the regard
of that which God especially commands, being shut out of our marriages, there
must needs ensue his dislike, and displeasure: there is jar and discord:
there Gods honor is neglected: there household discipline and christian
instruction of such as belong unto our charge, goes utterly to wrack, and is
nothing at all regarded. And no marvel: for, if where God blesses, all things
go well, and do prosper: then consequently, where he curses, there nothing
thriueth, has good success, or goes happily forward. It may appear by
sundry examples, both before the Law was given, and after, that this is a duty
required of children toward their parents: namely, to have their consent in
contracting of marriage. As these places do plainly show: 1. Sam. 18.17.
Genesis 21.21. and 24.3. etc. and 21.1.2. and 29.19. and 34.4. Deuteronomy. 7.3.4. Judge.
14.1. etc. 1. Cor. 7.36.38. Whereby is manifestly proved, that first it is
against the law of nature. Secondly, for that the parents have authority over
their children, Exodus 21.2. Leuit. 25.39. Deuteronomy. 15.12.
more then they have over their servants. Thirdly, because children are their
fathers goods and riches, and therefore they must not bestow themselves in
marriage, but must be bestowed of their parents. Fourthly, for that parents
have authority over the vows of their children, Numb. 30.4. 5, 6. Fifthly, if
a man's daughter be enticed; Contracts void, without the consent of parents.
yet her father may refuse, being not available, or of any force, without his
consent. Exodus 22.16.17. Besides all this, what cleerer proof can we have,
then the fifth commandment, in the which children are commanded to honor their
fathers and mothers, with a blessing promised to those which perform the same:
whereby we gather by the nature of contraries, that there is a curse also
belonging to all those children, that shall dishonor them. And in that God
wills that the parents by their children should be honored, he means, that
they should in all humility and modesty reverence them, with all dutiful
submission be obedient unto them, and with all willingness, show themselves
thankful for their creation, education, sustentation, and all other benefits,
that under God they have received from them, being ready by all means they
possibly may, to imitate and express toward the^ the nature of the Storke,
whose property (as they write of them) is to provide meat and feed their dams,
when through age they grow so old, that they are not able for to help
themselves: that is to say, they must to their very utmost seek to make them
recompense and requital, of some part of those vnrequitable pains, the which
their loving parents have taken with them, and make some amends for the
vncounteruailable kindness that they have showed toward them. But where they
bestow themselves in marriage, without the consent of their parents, there they
do fault, and make a breach of duty, in all these three respects: that is to
say, they neither reverence, obey, nor show themselves thankful unto them. For
reverence consists in this, that children carry toward their parents, a
certain honest, and modest shamefastnes, joined with a bashful awefulnes and
standing in fear of them, the which works in them, a conceiving of such an
opinion and estimation of them, as that they have an especial respect and
regard of them, in doing or not doing of things, neither of a care to please
them, or of a fear to offend them. Obedience herein shows forth it self, in
that willingly without murmuring or grudging, they be willing to be ordered,
directed, guided and ruled, by their parents, being ready to do all lawful
things, the which they command them, and to refrain from all those things,
the which they shall forbid them. Thankfulness, besides that there are many
other branches, is always mindful of benefits received, and therefore carries
continually a vigilant and watchful eye toward the party by whom it has bin
pleasured, that no discourtesie in any case be offered, or any occasion
ministered, whereby he may conceive unkindness. And by this familiar description
of these three heads, whereof stands chiefly, the honor due unto parents: we
may clearly see, that those children which in wedding tarry not for the
consent of their fathers and mothers, do neither stand in any awful fear of
them, as also whom they would be loath to offend or displease, nor yet give over
themselves in all things to be governed and advised by them, or have any
regard, that they be not causers to make their friends or parents conceive
hardly and unkindly of them, when as it is more then manifest, that in matters
concerning their duty toward their parents, no grief cutteth nearer unto the
heart, then this, when their children entangle themselves contrary to their
mind and liking. And therefore such children, as match in this sort, as it were
in spite of the teeth of their fathers and mothers, are neither reverent,
obedient, nor thankful unto them, and so consequently, they do not honor
them, whereby they incur and run into the curse of God, the which must
without true and unfeigned repentance, pull down upon the heads of themselves
and their families, the fearful plagues of God his heavy and hot indignation
against them, to their utter subversion, decay and ruin. Let all dutiful and
good natured children, therefore in the reverence and fear of God, consider,
what honor, and obedience they do owe unto their parents, and what power and
authority he has in his word sanctified unto them, over their children in
the Lord: in regard hereof, let them yield unto them this duty, that their
fathers having provided for them, Children mariageable, are to pray unto God to
direct their parents in a godly choice, to incline their minds to accept of the
same.
such as are not of a wicked life, nor deformed, or evil favored, nor of a
contrary religion, they willingly submit themselves unto their choice, which if
for the present, or upon the sudden, they cannot yield unto, let them by
earnest calling upon the name of God, not only desire him to direct their
parents in a godly and fit choice, but also to subdue in the^ this corrupt
affection, and to frame their wills to be pliable unto their fathers in such
lawful cases. As the Lord our God in his justice, does justly punish
disobedient children: as may appear by the example of Ham, Genesis 9.22.
the younger son of Noah, who derided his father, and was justly punished for
it. 2. Sam. 15.1. etc. and 18.9.
Likewise Absolon, who used wicked practices, to get the kingdom from David
his father, but he for this his rebellion and disobedience, came to a most
miserable end: yea, and he has in his law, set down a most severe and sharp
punishment against disobedient children: where he says: If any man have a
son, Deuteronomy. 21.18.19.20.21.
that is stubborn and disobedient, which will not hearke^ unto the voice of his
father and the voice of his mother, and they have chastened him, and he would
not obey them, then shall his father and his mother take him, and bring him out
unto the Elders of his city, and unto the gate of the place where he dwells,
and shall say unto the Elders of his city: This our son is stubborn and
disobedient, and he will not obey our admonition: he is a riot our and a
drunkard: Then all the men of his City shall stone him with stones unto death
so thou shall take away evil from among you, that all Israel may hear it, and
fear. For eue^ as a long and a prosperous life, is promised unto obedient
children: so on the other side, Exodus 20.12. Ephesians. 6.2.
al disobedient, unthankful, and obstinate children, are assured of the
punishment of infamy, joined with diverse and great calamities and torments. 1.
Sa^. 2.22. 1. Kin 1.25. etc. Deu. 21.18. etc. Pro. 20.20. and. 30.17. Deuteronomy.
28.15. etc. Leuit. 26.14. etc.
And although yt the temporal officers, be negligent in punishing such
disobedience: yet shall they not escape unpunished. For the vengeance of God
shall accompany the^, until they be utterly destroyed. For there is nothing more
unnatural, the^ to see children dishonor and disobey their parents: and
inferiors their superiors.

Such may aptly be compared to the Viper, that gnaweth out the belly of her
Dam, and seeks her own life, with her Dams death: so contrariwise, the word
of God does highly commend Joseph for his great love, benificence, and
obedience, Genesis 46.29. etc. and 48.11.12. Luke. 2.5.
extended toward his father Jacob, and his brethren, who both helped and
liberally nourished them, and prayed for them. Our Savior Christ also was
obedient to his parents, even until death. Deuteronomy. 5.16.
So that the Lord (no doubt) will bless obedient children with many happy
days and years, to his glory, and their souls comfort.

And to the end to inuit and stir up children, to honor their parents, as
before is showed: Exodus 20.12. Ephesians. 6.2.
the Lord adds this promise: That thy days may be long in the land which
the Lord thy God gives thee. And as S. Paul does note, that it is the first
commandment with promise. For albeit there be a promise added to the second,
yet is the same common unto the whole law: but this is peculiar and especial,
to all such children as honor their parents: for herein has God declared how
highly he commends the obedience and honor that children yield to them. But
the Lord spoke to the Israelites properly of the land, that he had promised
them for an inheritance, which should be unto them as a testimony and seal of
his goodness and love toward the^. It is therefore as if he should have said: To
the end, that living upon the earth, thou may long enjoy the earnest penny
of my goodness and grace toward thee. But now seeing the whole earth is blessed
to the faithful, the promise of long life upon the earth, is unto us also a
blessing of God. First, because we can not live long, without participating in
many and great benefits of God, even in respect of the preservation of this
present life. Secondly, because the faithful may the longer employ themselves
to serve and glorify God. In consideration whereof, we see what the Church in
old time said: The dead praise not the Lord, Psa. 115.17.18
neither any that go down into the place of silence: But we will praise the
Lord from henceforth, and for ever. The same does Hezechia King of Judah also
note in his canticle: Esaias. 38.19.
The living, the living, he shall confess thee, as I do this day: The father
to the children, shall declare thy truth. In as much therefore, as long life
is promised as a blessing, God does continue is to obedient children, so long
as it is a blessing unto the^. And hereupon does S. Paul join together these
two sentences: That it may go well with thee, Ephe. 6.5.
and that thou may live long upon the earth. As also when God takes away
such obedient children before they be old: yea, before they come unto man's
state, whether it be, least malice should corrupt their hearts, or to prevent
some great calamities, wherein they might peradventure be entangled: or upon
whatsoever other considerations, to receive them into a better life, he does
faithfully perform his promise unto such children, because he deals better
then promise with the^. But as contrariwise, this promise threatens such
children as will not honor their parents, with short life: so does experience
declare, that many such children are of short and wretched life. But if
contrariwise, such disobedient children do chance to live long, so far is long
life from being unto the^ a blessing, that to the contrary, it is an
enforcement and increase of woe, because they enlarge their just comdemnation,
so as they had been better to have died in their youth. But howsoever it be,
God so disposes hereof, that by the effects we may perceive, that they which
honor their parents are blessed, and the others accursed. Eccle. 3.2 etc. And
although some parents do not perform those duties toward their children,
enjoined the^ from the Lord: yet such children as live wickedly, must know,
that they are not exempt and free from blame, and guiltines before God. For
though they can say, (as the children in Ezechiels time said:) The fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge: we say, that
though the occasion be offered of such ungodly and wicked parents, yet the
cause of destruction is still in the children themselves. And besides that, it
is sure, that the soul that has sinned, shall die the death. Seeing there be
some young men and maids, who notwithstanding the great profaneness of the
most, the manifold corruptions offered abroad, the ungodly examples abounding
at home, are so mightily preserved by the seed of grace, that they escape
safely in an holy course of life, lamenting when they see the least occasion of
evil, rejoicing in the least occasion of good things. The rest, who please
themselves, and hope to shelter their sins under their parents defaults, are
plainly left without excuse, and are justly guilty of the blood of their own
sins. Labor therefore ye young men and maidens, to wipe away the tears of
grief from your fathers eyes, and stay the mournful and sorrowful spirits of
your tender mothers, and consider in your selves, if ye have any nature in
you, and have not buried the use of common reason, what a shame it is, to be a
shame unto your fathers, to who^ ye ought to be a glory: think, ye wanton
wits, that have not cast off all natural affections, what a contempt it is, to
be a contempt unto your mothers, to whom you have offered, as it were, a
despightfull violence, in that ye are a corrosiue to her grief, when as ye
should have bin a crown unto her comforts. Learn therefore ye children, that
it is one special property of a liberal and ingenious nature, to be careful
so to live, that in time ye may be a glory to your fathers, and a joy to your
mothers: which the Lord for his Christ's sake grant. These precepts and
admonitions before said, are as a Su^marie of the duties of children to their
parents. And therefore it rests, that they understanding them, do pray unto
God to give them grace, to put them in practice to his glory, and their good
and salvation. Lastly, let them remember, that God is not more inclined to
hear any prayers, then such as parents do power forth for their children. As
they are therefore to fear their curse, for offending the^: so must they by
honoring and pleasing them, seek to be blessed in their prayers, which are
blessings ratified unto them in heaven, as the blessing of Isaac to his son
Jacob, do manifestly declare. Genes. 27.28.29.

What duties Masters and Mistresses owe to their servants.
The householder is called Pater familias: that is, a father of a family,
because he should have a fatherly care over his servants, as if they were his
children.
THis duty teaches them, that they are become in stead of parents unto their
servants, which duty consists in four points.

1. First, that they refrain and keep their servants from idleness.

2. Secondly, that by diligent instruction, and good example, they bring up
their servants and households, in honesty and comely manners, and in all virtue.

3. Thirdly, that they ought to instruct their apprentices and servants, in the
knowledge of their occupations and trades: even as parents would teach their
own children, without all guile, fraud, delaying, or concealing.

And lastly, when correction is necessary, Masters and Dames ought moderately
to use their authority over their servants. Ephesians. 6.9.
that then they give it them with such discretion, pity, and desire of their
amendment, as loving parents use to deal with their dear children, remembering
always, that they have a master in heaven, before whom they must make an account
for their doings. These four points are in effect spoken of before in the
duty of parents. For so much as masters and householders, are to their
servants and prentices in place of fathers, they are hereby admonished, that
they ought not to withhold and keep back their due wages, to exact of them,
to oppress them, or to reward their well doing, Iam. 5.4. Col. 4.1. Job.
31.13.14.15. Deuteronomy. 24.14.15.
and good deserving slenderly: but to be careful of their servants good estate,
as of their own, not only in providing for them wholesome meat, drink and
lodging, and otherwise to help them, comfort them, and relieve and cherish
them, as well in sickness, as in health, Mat. 8.5.6. Luke 7.2.
liberally to reward their good deseruings, as far as christianity,
liberality, and equality shall bind them: but also that they be careful
that they live honestly, God made every week one day of rest, wherein servants
should be as free as their masters. Genesis 2.2.
virtuously and christianly. And further, they may not grieve their servants
with overmuch labor, but always remember, that they are not beasts, but men:
so that they ought quietly to govern them, and also quietly to chide the^,
when they shall neglect their duty, least they be provoked with over hard
words, remembering that they also have a Lord and master in heaven, with whom
there is no respect of persons: As the laborer which works but one day, is
worthy his hire, even so much more the servant which laboreth every day. Luke
10.7. As David did limit Ioab that he should not kill Absolon, so God has
bound masters, that they should not oppress their servants. 2. Sam. 18.5. Job.
31.13.14.15. For a good man, says Salomo^: Pro. 12.10. will be merciful to
his beast, and therefore he ought to be more merciful to his servants, being
his brethren.
Ephe. 6.9. And let them bountifully reward the just and faithful labor of
their servants, and pay them their covenants in a fit and convenient time,
least being compelled by necessity, they should steal.

Masters ought not as Tyrants, to use their servants as their Horses or Asses:
but to deal with them lovingly and christianly, because they are all members
of one body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head. There be some masters, that use
their servants and prentices more like beasts then like men, and their own
members, for which their so doing, let them assure themselves, they must yield
to God their Master a straight account Oh that christian masters and mistresses
would learn, and so practice the example of Jobs good and upright dealing with
his servants, which was far from rigor, where he says: Jf I did contemn the
judgment of my servant, and of my maid, when they did contend with me, (that
is, when they thought themselves evil entreated by me,) What then shall J do,
when God stands up? (If I had oppressed others, how should I have escaped
Gods judgment?) and when he shall visit me, what shall J answer? He that has
made me in the womb, has he not made him? (which moved him to show pity and
favor unto his servants, because they were Gods creatures, as he was:) has
not he alone fashioned us in the womb? Hereby then may those masters and
dames see their wickednesses, who will not hear their servants speak, but upon
a simple surmise and brainsicknes, do evil entreat them by cruel stripes,
when in truth there is no just cause. Reuiling words and unreasonable
fierceness does much more hurt to servants, then good. Phil. 16.17.
Masters and Mistresses ought therefore to use their servants and prentices
with mildness and equity, as every one shall deserve, for they must remember,
that they have all one God to honor and worship, one Prince to serve, one law
to keep, and one land to inhabit, and one death to fear: and therefore they
must speak unto them, as unto brethren, and sisters, and deal with them, as
with christians. And let them always remember this, namely, that God will
never deal mercifully with the^, if they make not greater account, that their
servants do serve him more carefully, then them^elues, and sanctify his
Sabboths. Exodus 20.10. Deuteronomy. ^.14.
And therefore that master is not worthy to be served, which can not afford,
that his servants should serve God, as well as himself. He must give unto
God, that which is Gods, and then he may the better take that wihch is his
own. For, 1. Tim. 5.8.
He that cares not for his family (says Paul) is worse then an Infidel:
because Infidels care for their family.

As it is the office of a good householder to carry the burden of care,
travel and labor: so it is the duty of his wife, to be faithful in keeping
and well ordering of his goods, house, and to see his, her own, and their
childrens best apparel brusht, and handsomely laid up, to be patient, and
careful to see her husband do well: and both their duties, is effectually to
give good examples, to be diligent, to entertain peace amongst their family,
and to see all things neat and handsome, and to keep due order and measure.
For as the Sun in the firmament gives light to all the Regions round about
him, Servants do rather imitate the works they see their Masters do, then
the words which they hear them speak. Pro. 29.21.
and by his bright appearing, expels the darkness, comfort and cheareth
the world: even so likewise should householders labor to banish sin and corrupt
religion out of their dwellings, and to be a lantern of godly life, to comfort
and shine to their whole family, that so they may direct their lives after
their good examples: Phil. 2.15. Matthew. 5.16. A Master ought so to behave
himself with his servants, that he be not too familiar with them, which many
times breeds contempt, but to admonish them often, and therewithal not to
discourage them from well doing, not to be too severe, nor too partial, but to
moderate all by discretion. For like as the Centurion, Luke 7.8.
who had many servants under his authority, and they were all at his beck and
Commandment, most ready to obey him, in any thing that he set them about,
and this good order and submission he had brought them unto, by the reason
that his said servants were dear unto him: that is, he made a special
reckoning of them, and was as a father unto them: so likewise all masters are
in conscience bound to esteem and account well of their servants, and to use
their authority that they have over them, mildly and christianly: and then if
their servants do perceive that they are dear unto their masters, Ephesians. 6.9.
so may the masters in time work them like wax to their own mind: except
they be such as have sold themselves to work wickedness. It is very
convenient that a master of a family should so dispose and order his affairs
and business, that he depart and absent himself from home, as little us may
be: for it is an old saying and a true, That the eye of the master does make
the horse fat, and the ground fertile: for all things are well and fitly done
when the master is present. Such housekeepers as have much, and yet spend
little, are called niggards: and they that have little, and yet spend much, are
holden fools, spend-thrifts, and prodigal wasters: and therefore they ought
to live in such sort, that they be not noted mizers for their keeping, either
prodigal for their spending. The covetous miserable niggard passes great
toil and travels in gathering of his riches: danger in keeping the^: law in
defending them: and torment in departing from them. But a wise man is not
careful so much for riches, and how to live long; as to live well, and die
well. Some householders are so pinching and sparing, both toward themselves
and their neighbors, that although they have much wealth, yet they cannot find
in their hearts to take part in any frugal and good measure of those
transitory blessings, which God in mercy has given them: but feed grossly and
very niggardly, and clothe themselves very meanly: keeping a beggarly house, so
that (as the common proverb is) a man may as soon break his neck, as his
fast. So that the state of such a worldling and covetous rich man is most
miserable, to whom God has bountifully bestowed great wealth upon, and yet
has not the grace to use his riches well, both to his own comfort, and also
to the good of his neighbor: but heapeth up riches (as the Psalmist says) and
cannot tell who shall gather them. Psalm. 39.6.
This shows, that it is the plague of God that befalls upon such a
miserable covetous worldling, when he has plenty of al things, The covetous
man in gaining riches, loses himself.
and yet wants a liberal heart to employ and use the^ rightly. And therefore
the holy Ghost, in the book of the Preacher, is not content once or twice to
find fault, and to check this as a great vanity and abuse, but speaks of
it five sundry times: where in one place he there says: There is an evil
which I saw under the sun, and it is much among men: A man to whom God has
given riches, and treasure, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of
all that it desires: but God gives him no power to eat thereof: but a
strange man shall eat it up: this is vanity, and this is an evil sickness.
Eccl. 2.24. and 3.12.13.22. and 5.17. and 6.1.2. and 8.15.

Such masters and mistresses as would have their necessary affairs and
businesses dispatched well, and in due time, That which thou can do
conveniently thy self, commit it not to another.
may not always trust to the doing thereof by their servants: but they must
either see it done, or rather dispatch it themselves, if it be such a thing and
business as they can and may well do. For such a lowlines is always joined
with the fear of God, that they that are humbled with religion, (though
honorable and worshipful in calling) do not think themselves too good to do
any good thing. Genesis 9.20.


This undoubtedly is a thing greatly to be wished for: namely, Masters ought to
make good choice of their servants.
that all christian masters and householders, (when they go about to hire any
servants) that then they would be no less careful and inquisitiue of their
honesty, godly conversation, and how they have profited in the knowledge of
God his religion, as they be to inquire and know what they can do, and what
skill and cunning they have in that Art or Science which they profess, or else
what qualities they have: and so doing, no doubt (they being careful to hire
religious and godly servants) their work and businesses, that such servants
shall take in hand, the Lord will much better prosper, and give good success
unto, then otherwise if they shall hire and entertain irreligious and profane
servants: as may plainly appear by the example of Jacob and Joseph, two
religious and faithful servants, Genesis 30.26.27. etc. and 29.2.3 4.5.6.23.23.
Esaias. 6.6. It is a rare thing for a master to bring his servant to be godly,
who is not godly himself.
whose masters and their substance was blessed, increased, and multiplied for
their sakes. As householders ought to have care over the bodies of their
servants: so much more over their souls. One compares the master of the house
to the Seraphin, which came and kindled the Prophets zeal: so he should go
from wife to servants, and from servants to children, and kindle the^ in the
zeal of God, longing to teach and utter his knowledge, as a Nurse to empty
her breasts.

It is lamentable to think, how that al masters, for the most part, not only
such as are profane and ignorant themselves: but also some that would be
counted great professors, and would seem to have great knowledge: yea (and
with grief may it be spoken) some preachers also that have had servants
dwelling with them 3. or 4. years, or more, who as they were ignorant in the
grounds and principles of Christian religion, when they came first into their
service, so they went from them as ignorant therein, as they came: and all for
want of catechizing, being a principal duty, which not only Ministers, but
also al christian masters in conscience are bound to perform to their
families. But of this matter I have sufficiently entreated of in my last
editio^ of the Use and necessity of catechizing: and therefore I will of
purpose here omit to speak of it.

Another says, that a master in his family has all the offices of Christ:
for he must rule, and teach, and pray: rule like a King, Revel. 5.10. Act.
16.31.33. and 18.8. 1. Cor. 1.16. Luke. 22.32.
and teach like a Prophet, and pray like a Priest. To show how a godly man
should behave himself in his household: when the holy Ghost speaks of the
conversion of any housekeeper, commonly he says: That the man believed, with
all his household. As Peter being converted, must convert his brethren: so the
master being a Protestant and a good christian, must endeavor by all good
means, that his servants may be such. For therefore God said, that he would
not hide his counsel from Abraham, because he would teach his family. And
surely al duty of servants, Genesis 18.17.19.
which is not done of conscience, is but eye service, and fails at most need:
as Ziba betrayed his master, when he should have defended him. 2. Sam. 16.1, 2,
3, 4. Phil. 11.12.16.
Therefore before Onesimus was converted, Paul said he was an unprofitable
servant: but when he was converted, he calls him more then a servant: because
such a servant is better then many servants. Genesis 2.
Though Laban was wicked himself, yet he rejoiced that Jacob his servant was
godly, because God blessed him the better for him. Joshua says, I and my
household will serve the Lord: Iosu. 24.15.
Showing that masters should receive none into their houses, but whom they ca^
govern, as Joshua did: and if any have crept into their doors, then they must
put him forth again: for David says, I will not suffer a liar to stay in my
house. He says not, a swearer, Psalm. 10.6.7.
nor a thief, but a liar: as if he should say, I will rid him out of my
doors, They must keep no idle, profane, superstitious, nor disordered
servants in their house. Act. 10.2. Luke. 2.41.
before he be a swearer, and a thief: for a liar will grow to a swearer and a
thief in a day, as a dicer grows to a beggar in a night. Therefore it is
noted of Cornelius, that he himself feared God, with all his household. This
is reported also of Joseph and Mary for an example, that they went up every
year, with all their families, to worship at Jerusalem, that their children
and their servants might learn to know God as well as they. These examples be
written for householders, as others are for Magistrates and Ministers, and
Soldiers, that no calling might seek further then the Scriptures for
instruction. Wherefore, as you are masters now, and they your servants, instruct
them, and train them, as if you would show what masters your servants should be
hereafter.

Next unto servants labors and instruction, must be considered their
corrections. As Paul says, Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: so we may say, Masters and
Mistresses, provoke not your servants to wrath: that is, use such reproves,
and such corrections, that you do not provoke them, but move them, that you do
not exasperate them, but win them: for reuiling and reproachful words, and
immoderate fiercenes, does much more hurt then good. And therefore the law of
God did charge the master, that he should not inflict above forty stripes
upon his servant, Deuteronomy. 25.2.3.
least he should seem despised in his eyes. For while a child, or scholar,
or servant, does think that he is reproved for love, or beaten with reason, it
makes him think of his fault, and is ashamed: but when he sees that he is
rebuked with curses, and beaten with staves, as though he were hated like a
dog, his heart is hardened against the man which corrects him, and the fault
for the which he is corrected, and after he becomes desperate, like a horse
which turns upon the striker: and therefore let masters know, that God even
then chides them, whenever they fight or chide in such rage. For though there
be a fault, yet some things must be dissembled and winked at: and some things
must be forgiven, and some punished with a look: for he which takes the
forfeit of every offense, shall never be in any rest, but vex himself more
then his servant.

But above all, we think the charity and tender affection of masters, Masters
ought to have a tender care of their servants in their sickness.
and love of servants to their fellows in their sickness, is especially to be
used and showed: at which time the sick are to be severally lodged from the
whole, and to be cherished and nourished with more choice and dainty meat.
For the performance and care of this duty, Matthew. 8.5.6. Luke 7.1.
the Centurion is commended in the Gospel, which duty very unchristianly is
neglected of many masters. The master of the house should not disdain, or show
himself so scornful or unkind, as not to visit his sick servant: for if
brute beasts rejoice to see their masters cherish and feed them, as we may
daily see in dogs: how much more may we believe, that men and reasonable
creatures are much delighted and comforted therewith? Whereupon it comes to
pass, that good and faithful servants, liking and affecting of their masters,
understand them at a beck, and obey them at a wink of the eye, or bent of the
brow, not as a water-spaniell, but as the hand is sturred to obey the mind, so
prompt and ready is the dutiful servant to obey his loving and kind master.
For as the hand is said to be the instrument of instruments, being it (indeed)
that serves to feed, apparel, and keep clean the rest of the limbs, and
parts of the body, which are also called instruments: so is the servant said to
be an instrument of instruments, because he keeps all the instruments of
household occupied, not only to live, but to live well, wherein he differs
from all the other instruments. For where they are things without soul, he is
divinely enriched with a soul, and herein differs from the hand, for that
the hand is fastened and united to the body, but he is separate and disioyned
from his master, and is also different from Artificers: for Artificers are
instruments of those things which properly they call workmanship: but the
servant is instrument of the action, which also is distinguished from
workmanship. So that the servant, if you will rightly understand him, is, a
lively and several instrument of action.

It is very meet and convenient, that the Mistress or Dame, The wives
behavior with servants.
do not make her self too familiar with her servants, or household folks,
least they should be too bold to talk, to jest, or irreverently and
unmannerly to behave themselves toward her, and so modestly and wisely to
bear her self among her servants, that they may fear, reverence, and so
stand in awe of her as the Mistress and mother of the house.

And as it is not comely or beseeming, The master must correct his men, and the
mistress her maids.
that the wife should take upon her to rule and correct the men-seruants: so
likewise it is not comely or meet that the husband should meddle with the
punishing or chastising of ye maid-seruants: so that it is most meet and
acceptable to the offender, that the master should correct the men, and the
mistress her maids: for a man's nature scorneth and disdaineth to be be beaten
of a woman: and a maids nature is corrupted with the stripes of a man.
Therefore we read, that Abraham would not meddle with his maid, but committed
her to his wife, and said: Do with her as it pleases thee. As if he should
say, It belongs not to me, but to thee. And these are the duties which
masters must perform in their life time. All which must be shut up, with
setting order for all things at their death, with especial exhortations and
prayers for religion, for uprightness in their callings, for peace and order
after them, according to the example of Hezechiah, David, and of Jacob, and of
Joseph: Esaias. 38.1. 1. King. 2.12. and Genesis 47.29.30. and 49.29. So that it is
the duty of Christian masters to have a care, not only that their families
be well and christianly governed while they live: but also that after their
death, love, peace, quietness, and good order may be continued in their
posterity.

The Servants duty toward their Masters.
A servant is he that has a master, and is not his own man, or else he that is
at the beck and commandment of an other. Romans 6.16. 2. Pet. 2.19. Ioh. 8.34.
THis duty consists on 3. points: First, that servants and prentices do from
their hearts, cheerfully, and willingly perform the labors and works, that
their masters, mistresses, or dames, shall command them.

2. Secondly, that they be faithful in things committed to them by their
masters, mistresses and dames, that so they may keep their goods.

3. Thirdly, that they be careful to observe the vprightnes of manners, that
the wife, the sons and daughters, or other fellow servants, be not corrupted by
their bad counsels, or lewd behavior.

Ephesians. 6.5.6.7.8. Colos. 3.22.23.24. Tit. 2.9.10. 1. Pet. 2.18.19.20.21.
These points are plainly proved by these places of Scripture quoted in the
margin, whereby servants are straightly charged, reverently, and faithfully to
obey their bodily masters, mistresses, and dames, in all things which maybe
done without offense to God. And this obedience and service must be done with
fear and trembling, in singlenes of heart, as unto Christ, 1. Tim. 6.1.2. Luke
17.7.8.9.
being moved with a reverence to God ward, as though they served God himself,
and that as well in the absence of their masters, mistresses, or dames, as in
their presence: not constrainedly, as it were forced or compelled thereto, but
heartily and with good will, as the will of God, and as they that serve the
Lord, and not men: not only in respect of the earthly reward, but because they
know, and are assured, that of the Lord they shall receive the reward of
inheritance, in as much as they serve the Lord Christ. So that hereby all godly
servants, may in few words learn what duty they owe to their masters,
mistresses, and dames: namely, to love them, and to be affectioned toward
them, 2. King. 5.13. The property of a good servant.
as a dutiful child is to his father: to be reverent and lowly to them in
all their words and gestures, to suffer and forbear them, to obey with ready
and willing minds all their lawful and reasonable commandments, to fear
them, and to be loath to displease them, to be faithful and trusty to them
and theirs, in deeds and promises, to be diligent and serviceable, to speak
cheerfully, to answer discreetlie, not over boldly to dally with their
masters wife, daughters, or maidens: to be loyal and dutiful to their
masters, mistresses, and dames: as Jacob was toward Laban, Genesis
30.27.28.29.30. and 39.5. etc.
and Joseph toward Potipher. And they must carefully endeavor to do and
procure, to the uttermost of their ability, that which may be to their
masters, mistresses, and dames honesty, credit, and profit, and that as well
when they are absent and out of sight, as when they be present and look on.
This is a quality and property belonging to every good servant, both men and
maids: to wit, that whatsoever goods or necessaries of their masters,
mistresses or dames, they shall have charge of, and is committed to their trust
and keeping, that they carefully see such things so well and orderly placed,
and laid up, that if there shall be at any time any just occasion to use any
necessary in their custody: yea, if it be in the night season, and that
without a light, they then not only can say, in such a place it lies, but
also if they be required, they can presently fetch the same.

Servants must take heed that they do not wittingly and willingly anger or
displease their masters, mistresses, or dames: which if they do, then they
ought incontinent and forthwith to reconcile themselves unto them, and to ask
them forgiveness. They must also forbear the^, and suffer their angry and
hasty words, and in no wise to answer again spightfully or scornfully,
neither yet upon any such occasion to run away. For the Angel taught and
willed Hagar the servant of Sarah, when she fled from he^ mistress, Genesis
16.7.8.9.
that she should return and humble her self under the hands of her mistress.
So did Saint Paul make agreement betwixt Onesimus a vagabond and theeuish
servant, Phil. 10. etc.
and sent him again to his master Philemon, from whom he was sled away.
Servants and prentices therefore, according to the rule of Gods word, must
patiently bea^e, and forbear their masters, mistresses, and dames, and do
whatsoever lawful thing they shall command them, not being against a good
conscience. How far forth servants ought to obey their masters.
And therefore they must remember, how far forth they are bound to obey their
masters, that is, Vsque ad aras: that is, so far as a Christian religion
suffers, and so far forth as they may do it with an upright conscience: for
otherwise, if their masters shall command them to do any thing that is
dishonest, unlawful, wicked, unjust, or ungodly, then they must in no wise obey
it: 1. Sam. 20.28. etc. and 22.17. Dan. 3.18. Act. 4.19. and 5.29.

The conditions of a good maid-seruant, are, that she ought to be careful,
faithful, patient, neat, and pleasant: that she be cleanly, quick, and
handsome, and of few words: honest in her word, deed, and attire: diligent in a
household, and have skill in washing, baking, brewing, sowing, and spinning,
but chiefly in holding her peace.

Servants must lay apart all evil conditions, pride, unfaithfulness,
brawling, murmuring, Ephe. 4.25.29.
lying, swearing, and filthy communication, picking, stealing, and tales
telling.

If servants would carefully mark and learn, and so diligently practice these
three short lessons following: so doing (no doubt) they might both procure and
purchase much quietness to themselves, and also win and get the great good
will and liking of their masters, Matthew. 8.9.
mistresses, and dames, thereby: First, that they would cheerfully go when
they are bidden. Secondly, that they would come willingly and readily when they
be called. And lastly, that they would remember to shut and sparre the doors
after them. The neglect and omitting of this last duty, if such as be
housekeepers will carefully observe it, they shall then find, that they
sustain both loss and hinderance by it.

Aid amongst servants for help and case of one another necessary.
And because it sometime happens, that one servant is too much charged with
labor and work, and another of his fellows has more ease then work, one
therefore should so help another, as we see by use in our own bodies; when
one leg is weary, we can rest it on the other; or when the right hand is
over labored, we can ease it with the left: and when intercourse of love and
courtesy entreates and persuades not this favor and kindness amongst them,
then should the master himself command the negligent and loytering servant,
to help and ease the weary, and him that is well employed and ouer-charged.

Servants must to the uttermost of their power, seek the commodity and
benefit of their masters.
Again, servants are to be admonished and put in mind, that they do not (as
some do without all conscience) make spoil and havoc of their masters
goods, wittingly, and willingly, neither yet that they suffer any of those
things that they are put in trust with, through their heedlesnesse and
retchlesnesse, to be mard and lost: but specially that they do not make spoil
and waste of such broken meat as remains after their meals, or at other
times: which doing is not only a hinderance to their masters profit, but also
a great offense to God, who commands that such broken meat as remains, to
be gathered up and saved, that so nothing be lost: John. 6.12. Therefore to
conclude, let servants and pre^tices, both men and maids, assure themselves,
that as they deal and behave themselves to their Masters, Mistresses, or
Dames, and their goods, whilst they are servants: so likewise the Lord in
justice will cause their servants to deal and behave themselves to them, when
they shall come to be masters or dames themselves, so punishing sin with sin.
Matthew. 7.2.
And as religious and godly masters be very wary and circumspect, when they
hire and entertain any servants into their service, yt they be such as are
godly, honest, and religious, or at least such as will be tractable and obedient
to such good order and godly government, as is, and shall be used and exercised
daily in their houses: but contrariwise, such masters as be profane and
irreligious, have no care or regard whom they hire, or receive into their
houses, so they will fit and serve their turn for gain and profit, though
they be never so lewd, vicious, or ungodly in word or deed: so likewise, such
as are Christian and religious servants, ought also to be very wary and
careful, that they do not place themselves with any such masters, as are
profane and wicked, or in such towns and parishes where there wants good
means, and exercises both of preaching and catechizing, that so they may daily
profit and go forward in that good course which they have begun: whereas on
the other side, such servants as are without God, irreligious, and ignorant of
the means of their salvation, care not where, or with whom they dwell: nay,
they will not with their good wills, come to dwell either in that town, or with
those masters, where they shall be restrained and kept from swearing, dycing,
carding, tabling, profaning of the Lords day, and other such wickednesses: who
in thus doing, do fly from God, and the means of their salvation, and so
seek and follow after their own destruction.

FINIS.

