The Copye of the letter following which specifyeth of ye greatest and
marvelous visyoned battle that ever was seen or herd of

And also of the letter yt was sent from the great Turk unto our holy fader
ye pope of Rome

depiction of cavalry battle

depiction of letter being delivered

The Copye of the letter how yt the most marvelous and wonder full field was
foghten / which of late has been seen in the land of Bergame..

Also ye copy of ye letter yt ye great Turk sent to our holy fader the Pope.

Bartholomeus de clear ville
to his beloved friend ye lord of veronoys hu^fray bon messagier. Salute
Not long agone it has been seen in afelde in land of Bergame / and
duryngly perceived.iij. or iiij. times in a day out of a certain wode or
forest is come a great company of men of war on foot / to ye number of xij.M.
in goodly array / under ye obeysans or commandment of v. noble captains of ye
which each of them ware aco^panyed with v.M. men of war well appointed on their
right side / and on their left side they were acco^panyed with an innumerable
company of men of war on light horses. Between these men of war that be on
horsbacke or on foot in goodly array was a great number of bombardes cour^a^s /
slyngis and other great pieces of artylery And against this goodly hooste before
named apered another more goodlyer stronger / rycher / and in noble array far
passing and exceeding the other noble company / accompanied with semely men and
noble captains rychely besene as noble of birth / ye wyche ij. noble pertyes
held speech with each other and within a lyttel while after come out of the
wode before named with great triu^phe.iij. of.iiij. men on horsbacke / and
because that these fornamed personages ware or seemed to be appointed like nobell
princes therefore they ware taken in sight als royal kings / the wyche ware
accompanied with one person right triu^phantly. Riding before them excellynge
all ye other and could not of no beholders be ymagened what man's person this
might be / but ye other did him great honor and reverence. This same and self
parsone went witht another personage that abode him on ye way to speak with
hy^ ye which seemed to be knouwe for a king accompanied with a great number of
many noble princes and lords rychely besene / but they yt seemed to be next
unto his person they seemed better to be ambassadors than other men wtin a
littel while after this king gave a marvelous spytfull regard showing yt he
was very angry and impatient be his cou^tenans / drawyng of his gau^tlet of
stele and with an yrful cou^tena^ce casted it up into the air in token of
battle. when he had so done with great haste he returned unto his army where
he had a marvelous goodly company stondynge in a noble array ready to embatayle
with their ennemys than was there herd a great noise of trompettes / clerons
tromles with other instruments / and an orryble voyse of artelery in such manner
that it seemed to be ye noise of hell ye which was very feerfull. Also there
was seen a great many of baners and standards pight in ye field right rich to
behold on both parties / and than was there foghten a field or battle the
most cruelle that might be thought he man's mind ye which is not well to be
believed so maruelously as it was don an half hour after that all things had been done and eueryche departed there ware of us some bolder one than a another
yt had beholden this great battle or foghte^ field and went to ye fornamed
place for to behold and se whether they could se or find any thing or toke^
left behynd of them that had foghten yt marvelous field and when they come to
the place before named there they se so many and innu^erable number of swyne yt
they maruayled sore of that wonderfulle sight these swyne abode there but a
little while in ye place where ye foghte^ field had been / but they departed
into ye fornamed wode or forest and ware no more seen Master augustyne
bienuenu and I Bartholomeus decleremont with many more other gentylmen have been
at ye fornamed place and seen all these fornamed things when altogeder was
done and endyd there was none other thing lest but ye footsteps of men and
horses with foroughes of waynes and carts / and ye trees sore bront and torn
asonder with the fire of their ordenance or artilery yt had been shote thourough.
I show you plainly lord vnfray yt he alone ought not to be afraid yt has
seen this / but also they yt here of it / I ensuere you yt this is as true as
god is in heaven yt created man of earth in every word as I do write. and I
certefye you that some of them yt have seen this be fallen into a great sekenes
and in peril of death for great fear / And I would write other things to you
but this is so marvelous and ferfull yt I to you no thing ellis do vryte at
this time / but that I me to you reco^mend in my hertyest manner.. etc^..

Written in ye castle of ville clear / in ye year of our lord.M.CCCCC.xvij. in
ye monthe of Ianuarij.

The Copy of ye letter that was sent from the great Turk unto our holy fader
the pope of Rome
MArboryn Ramosyn sone of the great king Olifernes be the grace of ye great
god Mahoun de descendyd of ye hye line captain of Tartaryne Baron of Turkye /
prince of ye hebreus. Emperor of parygo^ne of the lands of hungary and of
wale ricque / of ye land of Sury unto paradys terrestre. atcheuer of
Constantynople / and of the christian lands give knowledge unto the great priest
of Rome yt we have understand yt you and your young king will war upon us
through ye broders request of the Rodes / but we believe not that the great god
has given your so much power / wherefore we co^mande you to ouerse this
letter and turn from your great folisshenes / and cause for to sease
ye.iiij. knights of the Rodes / yt is to understand Amaxqueron / Potell /
Propha^ne / and Gerson / or else we will comme and visit you with.lxvi. noble
kings of ours / and will do with your temple of Rome as we have done with sant
Sophys temple at Constantynople and from thens unto the monte of Synay and in
many other places through the help that we have of our great god mahounde
Also we send word unto your alyed young king that we will stryke of his head
in ye best cite of his royalme. and because ye should knouwe that we be able
enough there to we send you here.iij. gifts the first is plate gold / the
second is clothe of gold / the third is rich orient perles with precious
stones. and as for this time present / no more to you butt the great god
Mahonde keep and preserve you

Written in our great cite of Chain / in ye year.vi.M. and of our reign
the.x. year
Emprented in ye famous cite of Andwarpe Be me / John^ of Doushorowe


