AN ANSWER And true discourse to a certain Letter lately sent by the Duke of
Alba (in manner of a pardon) to those of Amsterdam, to be by them conveyed and
distributed unto the other Towns in Hollande.

Set forth by certain true lovers of their native Country, namely desirous to
live under the due obeisance of the King of Spain, according to the old
customs and privileges of their said Country: Faithefully translated out of
the Dutch into English, by T.W.



Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton.

To the Reader.
Having of late diverse and sundry times been urged to write, declare, and put
in light the just occasions, moving us to put on arms, and to stand in
defense against certain our strange and foraine enemies: of whose force,
unjust, and cruel tyranny, we have also given to understand al Christian
Princes and Potentates, nations and countries. And having also sufficiently
answered and put to silence such injurious and slanderous Books, writings,
and libels, as our said adversaries had put in light, whereby they thought and
sought to make us odious unto al kinds of people: our hope and confidence was
that they would have once abstained from their slanderous writings, seeing it
so smally served their purpose: which for a long time they seemed to do. But
at the last, perceiving yt since their tira^nous regiment began, ye longer, ye
more it became loathsome unto all people: and that there was small hope to
obtain to their former authority, force, and regiment, by force of arms, do
now return to their accustomed prancks, and would feign under pretense of
pardons, and letters of favor (through false accusations) bring us in hatred
with all men, and by untrue persuasions seem to purge their own factes,
thereby alluring the people unto them, and so by littel and littell reduce the
towns and countries revolted from them, to their vile yoke of servitude.

And to that intent have they of late put forth a certain letter under the
name of ye Duke of Alba, offering thereby pardon and forgiveness unto the said
towns of al their tra^sgressions (as they term it) co^ditionally, that they
should willingly submit themselves to their obeisance and subjection. Which
letters were by means of them of Amsterdam dispersed into diverse towns in
Holland.

Notwithstanding, we are assured sufficiently that no person of understanding
and discretion, much less towns and countries, will be moved by these their
cautelous and most false and slanderous Books, to return from the free and
loyal obedience and ^^ruice of our most natural Lord and King ^he king of
Spain, under whom ye Prince ^f Orange bears the government, to ^he
shameful and accursed servitude of a ^traunge generation: yet to the intent to
make the truth manifest unto all men, and ^o detect the false and subtle
practices and ^euises of our enemies, we could not but answer unto the said
letter. Desiring al such as regard the common wealth of their country, the
preservation of his wife and children, his life and goods, to read this with
indifferency, and not to suffer themselves to be seduced by the false
propositions of our sworn enemies, but rather with all their power to advance
ye justness of our cause and delivery of our country, from the unsupportable
yoke of this strange nation.

Don Fernando Aluarez of Toledo, Duke of Alba, Lieutenant, Governor and
Captain General.
Trusty and well-beloved, it is well enough known that the king our soueraign^
Lord is one of the myldest and most gracious Princes that may be found, yet
have the Rebels endeavored themselves with lies and false persuasions, to
persuade diverse towns to the contrary, putting a doubt in their heads, to the
intent to seduce and allure them from the obedience of his majesty, as they
have done: whereas in deed (as commonly the truth will not remain unknown) it
has appeared what has been done with the towns of Gelderland, Friesland,
Ouerissell and Vtrecht, which were revolted, who of their free accords
uncompelled have put themselves under the obedience of his majesty, who has
not touched any one Burges or inhabitant of the same, but has suffered him to
remain in his former estat, enjoying and possessing their own goods, as they
did before their revolt. But has used rigor only against such towns as have
offered weapons and stood at defense: And the like grace as aforesaid we
intend to extend toward all ^^ch other Towns in Hollande as in like ^rder
will submit them selves to the obey^^nce of his Majesty without attending the
^o^ming of his army, which we in the name and behalf of his Majesty, do
firmly pro^ise and assure by these presents: whereof ^e thought good to
advertise you, to the ^ntent ye give knowledge to the Towns whom ye hope will be
reduced: admonishing them further to have a regard to this occa^ion offered,
not slacking the benefit there^f, and to return to the obeisance which they owe
to the Kings Ma. their natural Prince and Lord, whose grace and favor they
with ^ll the Burgesses and Inhabitants of the same, ^o presenting them selves
within xv. days after the receipt of your notice and insinuation, shall
receive, without thinking on or calling to remembrance any matters past:
whereof ye may firmly assure them on our behalf, and we promise you by these
our letters by us subsigned, that such shall be performed and accomplished
without default or contrauention. Showing them further, how greatly they err,
if they think to withstand the Kings power, and what evil success it will
have if they obstinately persiste and will try his Majesty's power and force
Trusty and well-beloved, the Lord be with you. Written in Nymmeghen the x. day
of February 1572. after the style of the Court, Signed F. A. Duke de Alba: And
lower was written Bevtij. The superscription was as follows. To our trusty
and well-beloved the Borrowmaisters, Schepens and Rulers of the town of
Amsterdam.

Collected and conferred with the true and original copy. By me VV. Pieters,
Secretary of Amsterdame.

An answer to the letter lately sent by the Duke of Alba, (written in manner of
a pardon) to those of Amsterdam, and to be by the^ conveyed to all the Towns
there about.
THE confidence and assured persuasion that we have always had and yet have
of the kings natural disposition, has besides many other weighty reasons and
considerations moved us, that we can not ascribe or impute this unreasonable
and tyrannous regiment, the open subversion of all good customs, rightes,
vsances, privileges and liberties of ye towns and whole Country, used by a
strange Nation, now of late, contrary to the Kings promises, letters, and
oath, by mere force brought into the same, upon the Kings Majesty. For seeing
we have effectually found him a lover of his subjects, a mild hearer of the
complaints and cries of the poor and suppressed, a tutor of the just, and a
defendour of the liberties and rightes of the country. How can we then
believe by any means, that he of his own free will, should permit (much less
command) that these his natural base Countries should thus pitifully be
suppressed, and by violence of a strange Nation, brought to everlasting
subversion and ruin? For at the first, not being conquered by the sword, but
through friendly alliance and agreement first joined with the famous house of
Austria, and afterward with the Kingdoms of Spain, and so from time to time
have used their entire affection and faithful service, as well toward his
Majesty, as also to his most noble Auncesters, with singular industry and
diligence. Namely in the last wars with France, it has manifestly appeared,
wherein they neither spared charges nor pains: but to the maintenance of the
same, in short space levied iiij.C. millions of Gold, and likewise in all
other matters, declared toward his Majesty all due obedience. Also his
Majesty has again at al times showed a Fatherly and benign disposition
toward the said Countries. How could he then have stopped his ears from the
cries and lamentations of his poor and true subjects? Or how could he shut
his eyes and not behold the lascivious and wilful dealings of a strange
Nation? or his heart be shut up from having compassion over such a miserable
destruction of his Towns and Country, so flourishing and prospering at that
time, as no land in Christendom more. Where as the States of the whole land,
as well in general as particular, yea the chiefest of the Nobility and Lords
themselves with humble Supplications, Remonstrances, Ambassades and many other
means, have obediently requested to be hard indifferently, and to be released
of such a tyrannical yoke. No certainly, we know and believe that our King of
nature is the most gracious and mercyfullest Prince that may be found. But
seeing we know this, we conclude resolutely, that this is not his doing nor
will, which by the Albanish faction has of late ben done, but they give the
King to understand slanderous tales by them falsely devised, keeping him fast
in Spain, to the intent he should rule according to their appetit, abusing his
name, seal, and blankes at their pleasure, giving out commandments in his
name such as best serve for their purpose: which thing is so plain and
notorious, as no man is of so simple understanding and judgment, which does
not see, yea feel it. For they perceiving about vi. years past, the Nobility
and Gentlemen of the country, to take to heart the state of the same,
presenting Requests to be dismissed from the Inquisition and tyranny of the
new Bishops, then could they begin to say, that to the Kings natural good
inclination toward his subjects, and their good obedience, great wrong was
offered: as who would say, it was not the Kings mind nor pleasure that his own
Lands should be charged with such a tirannicall servitude as the Inquisition
is, and that he never thought it, which they published under the Kings letters
and seal, which they sent not only unto certain towns and congregations,
but likewise to certain of the chief Lords and Nobles of the Land. Then
within a short while after (thinking the time fit to serve their turn) they
published new Letters and Edictes in the Kings name, expressly to the
contrary: wherein his Majesty willed and straightly commanded that the new
Bishops, the Counsel of Trent, and Inquisition should be planted, upon
pain of his extreme displeasure. Within a while after, they considering a
great alteration like to happen, and some commotion toward amongst the
people, not findinge them selves sufficiently strong, they once again called
in the same and in the kings name made a new agreement, confirming it under his
Seal. But within a while after (beeinge provided of a power) the Kings letters
under his great seal, was by them broken and violated, and the commons charged
with new oaths and taxes. Then began the Gallows, scaffoldes, and poles, to be
erected, the swoordes whetted, and the fires kindled, and then they began to
murder, burn, and hang, all the kings true subjects without end or measure:
yea the most noblest Lords of the country were forced to flee or to be
murtherid. Now well knowing that they king has no pleasure in these doings,
that his true subjects should thus unjustly and tirannously be handled, as he
himself has often declared, and as we are fully certified, do therefore (not
against our king, but against certain presumptious strangers, which have
advanced themselves to invade our country without right or reason,) take the
sword in hand to defend and deliver our bodies from their bloody swoords, our
goods from their gryping hands, and our wives and daughters from their unchaste
desires, knowing thereby for certain, that we do our King herein both good and
faithful service: the truth whereof being uprightly related unto him, we hope
he will take in good part. Therefore we do not esteem our selves for rebels, as
this writing does unjustly charge us, but the Kings true and faithful
servants, and so will remain to the death, seeking nothing more than to defend
his heritage from the execrable tyranny of strangers, so as the same be not
compelled to give themselves to any reuolting or Rebellion. We also deny that
which they further allege. That we with lies and false persuasions seek to
raise a slander upon the King, to the states and commons of the country,
thereby to allure his subjects from his obedience, and draw them to us.
Undoubtedly any reasonable person, may easily consider this to be a false
accusation, as all the other are wherewith they burden us, and that they
themselves are culpable of the same: being manifest, that they have always
wrought with open lies and false persuasions to set these countries at debate
with ye King, by false accusations, thereby seeking occasion to invade the land,
and so to bring it under their subjection. This is easily to be considered out
of the request for ix. years which in anno 1552. the King himself did propone
unto the general states of the la^d within the town of Valencia: namely that
the means whereby to maintain ye wars against France any longer were at an
end, and that his majesty knew not how to levy any more money. Desiring
therefore that they would appoint some amongst them, which were expert in the
state of the country, to find some means to succor ye matter. Wheruppon an
assembly of their Deputies was kept at Bruxels, where after many deliberations
it was finally concluded, and to the King was granted ye sum of eight hunderd
thousand Gilderns a year, for the space of nine years, whereof forthwith
should be levied upon the sale of re^ts xxiiij. hunderd thousand Gilderns for
the mayntaining and paying of xviij. thousand footmen, and eight thousand
horsemen, whereof the one third part to be strangers, and the rest
inhabitants of the country, and that for the space of vj. months: over and
besides twenty ships of war for seven months. And further according to
the particular instructions thereof made, to bring ye same to effect, there
were certain necessary specified, without which it had been hard to persuade
the common people. Namely, that the states of the land should have the
administration of the money in their hands, and pay the Soldiers according to
the instructions which should be delivered unto them on the Kings behalf: and
further they to appoint certain persons which should have the mustering of the
Soldiers. This devise did please his majesty meruaylous well, and he
heartily thancked them for the good assistance and inclination they showed
toward him. Which afterward (as appeared) was the greatest and notablest
service which might have been done to his majesty and the country, for thereby
his majesty in the extremity of his necessity was so helped, yt the King of
France was greatly amazed at it. This was the only occasion whereby not only
goodly victories against the enemy were obtained, but likewise that in ye end
a peace was concluded to the great advantage and honor of his Majesty and
countries. All this notwithstanding, there were not a few amongst the
Spaniardes, (Whose example some of other countries followed) who sought by all
means to persuade the King, that this kind of order did greatly extend to the
abasement and dishonor of his Majesty, for that the states (as they
pretended) did hereby school the King, and would limit and set him orders at
their pleasures: which by no means was to be suffered, for that ye same did
tend to an open rebellion; with many other like persuasions which they by night
and day propound to the King, to the intent to incense him against the low
countries. Whereas their pretense was none other than to satisfy their
insatiable avarice, and grieved them yt they were barred from the handling of
the money. This notwithstanding they have since attributed the misery of this
Country, which through their unreasonable tyranny is now happened, unto the
request of nine years. So as it is easily to be perceived yt they are those
which with their feigned tales and false persuasions have gone about to set debate
and strife between the King and his faithful subjects: which also did long
before sufficiently appear, in the time of the most noble Emperous Charles,
for to the intent they might come to their pretense, and bring into the
Country such placards under pretense of Religion, whereby they might be Masters
of our goods and substances, yea over our lives, wives and children, they with
false illusions did persuade the good Emperor, that the doctrine of Martin
Luther did condemn all jurisdictions both spiritual and temporal, and did
give free liberty to all men to rob, murder, and burn, and every one to
live at his free liberty: as is expressed in the Emperors placard published
at Worms in Anno 22. and since in these low countries. Through occasion
whereof, so much innocent blood has been shed in these low countries, as it
is to be verified, that since that time to this day, there has been executed
for their conscience sake, some with the sword, gallows, fire, and water,
above one hunderd thousand persons, all under pretense that they were followers
of such perverse doctrine as in the said placard is invented. Who sees not
than openly that they with manifest lies and open untruth do seek to destroy
and bring althings under their subjection? Have we not also seen of late in
the proponing of the tenth penie, how they have helped themselves with false
practices? For when they perceived that they could not persuade the states and
the Deputies of the towns to condescend, they declared they saw evidently
that it was not to be done, and therefore was it not their intent effectually to
levy the tenth penie as they had proponed: but yet to the intent they should
show their dutiful affection and inclination toward his Majesty, they
requested that it might be granted upon condition, notwithstanding that it
should never be levied nor put in execution. And hereof have they given to the
states of Henaulde and some others, further acts and letters. This
notwithstanding, they have since by a mere force urged the execution of the
tenth penie, because they had written to the King of Spain (as they said) that
the same was granted. These are the false and double pranckes, which they use
and seek, thereby to bring this country into the kings displeasure, and so
finally to utter ruin. Yea we see that they in this their letter can not
forget their wicked tricks and false lies, saying that we seek to bring the
towns from the true obedience of his Majesty, and to allure them to us as we
have done. They them selves do certainly know that neither our meaning nor
intent is such, nor never was, as appears, by all our writings, reasons,
protestations, yea by all our acts, works and proceedings. Yea, so far it is
from us, that there is not one town or village, no not one man to be found,
which is escaped from these strange tyrants, but he does acknowledge the king
for his Lord, and will be obedient unto him in all respects, and likewise will
spend his life and goods in his service, yea with a more feruentie than ever
before: which they shall be ready to show effectually, so sone as it shall
please the Kings Majesty to discharge them of this insupportable yoke and
tirannie. So that it is most evident that we have not diuerted any towns from
the Kings obeisance, nor seek to do, but to the contrary, they are those that
under the pretense and shadow of the kings name, does practice to get them
from the kings obeisance into theirs, to the intent to exercise their force
and tyranny over them.

Do we not see how they have brought a great part of Sapine from the kings
obedience under the subjection of the inquisition? So that they alone do rule
and goouerne over Uillages, Lordships, towns, and Countries, without
acknowledging the King: Yea they have already so played their parts within the
kingdom of Spain, that neither burgess, commoner, nor noble man, no not the
king himself, dare do any thing against the authority and force of the
Inquisition. They have their Courts, their Officers, Promoters, Serieants,
Spies, Traitors, and Familiars, which will be subject neither to the kings nor
their countries jurisdiction, in so much that they are esteemed and feared more
tha^ the king: like as has appeered sufficiently by some great personages not
necessary to be named, and yet daily does among the noble men and burgesses,
whom they daily apprehend and put to death, without having regard to the kings
superiority or custom of the land. This is the government which they would
feign bring into this country, the which because we withstand, we are termed
rebels, as if we did withstand our king. Hereby they give openly to
understand, that they seek to ascribe the kingly name unto themselves: knowing
well that we have not stirred against the king, but against their outrageous
tyranny, which we will maintain so long as one drop of blood remains in us.

And yet further do they proceed with their Spanishe prankes, rehearsing here
some Towns which they (to get them the more credit) have left vnspoiled,
alleging that they have spared all those which have offered no defense,
concluding thereby that to all those which would willingly give themselves
under their subjection (which they term the Kings obeisance) no harm should
be offered. Now, it appears evidently, that all the Towns (in this Letter
comprehended) have already sufficiently declared, what their meaning and intent
is, namely to withstand the tirannie of these blood suckers, and that to the
uttermost: and to that intent did willingly receive garrisons of Souldious: but
being forsaken of those garrisons, and being not able any longer to resist, the
Burgeses did surrender themselves into the hands of those whom they took for
their enemies. Have now the Spanards of remorce and pity spared those Towns,
as they would feign make us believe? What occasion had they the^ before or
since to set on fire so many fair places and Uillages in the Country? who
never hurt them: and althoughs they would yet could not offer any resiste^ce.
Why have they chased so many a poor man out of his possession, destroying his
house and ground? Yea, what occasion had they to show themselves so cruel
and furious against the Town of Machlin? sparinge neither Churches nor
Cloisters, but made hauoke of all to the uttermost. Did not they of Machlin
surrender them selves so soon as the garrison was departed out of the Town?
it is manifest, yes. And that which is more, they never would suffer any
alteration of Religion, nor yet permit any preaching of the Gospel. What has
all this profited them against the gryping hands of these merciful giuers of
pardon? The like has happened to Dirmonde and Audenaerde, whom they first put
to ransom, and yet afterward utterly spoiled and sacked. Over and besides
this, the Town of Mons in Henaulde was taken in by force: the Commons whereof
would neither assiste nor help the Soldiers to defend the Town against the
Albanistes, (which since they have repented) nor yet would permit any
alteration in Religion. Which Town was afterward again surrendered by
composition into the Duke of Alba his hands, upon promise by oath and
letters, that none of the Burgeses should be harmed: which promise
notwithstanding, when they were entered, and al things as they would have it,
hanged up a number of them, and God knows how the rest shall speed.

And here in Hollande, how have they used them of Rotterdam, who never were
revolted from them, nor yet had commenced any alteration either of religion or
government? yea never thought of it: and yet at their joyful, have they not
murdered the Burgesses in great number, contrary to their promise? And
afterward at their departure out of the town, had not they concluded to set
it on fire, the most part of the^ being departed? to which purpose they had
provided a great deal of straw and other stuff, and would have brought it to
pass in deed, if the Bailife and other good Burgesses had not let them,
who perceiving themselves to be the stronger party, began to take some courage,
and to withstand them.

Note further I pray you what faith or credit is to be given to their promise
which they vow so surely, as may be seen by the horrible murder committed
by these bloody hounds at Naerden near unto Harlem: where upon like promise
made (as aforesaid) the Burgesses of the City suffered, them to enter, upon
hope of safety of life and goods. The Spaniardes being entered, caused the
Borowmaster and the commo^s to resort to a certain great house standing on the
market place, under pretense to swear them to be true to the king. The poor
simple people having dispossessed themselves of their armor and weapons,
coming to ye place appointed, were there like a sort of Lambs most cruelly
murdered, in such sort as few escaped. One Cornelius Gissebert being then
Borowmaster, was murdered by ye hands of ye Duke of Albaes own son, and many of
their daughters they ravished in presence of the dead carcases. Not contented
with this, they ran to the other Borowmasters house, where finding him sick
in his bead, murdered him. Besides this they spared not so much as the poor
impotent persons that they found in the hospital, with other most execrable
deeds, as hanging up of men by the privy members, and women by their breasts.
etc. Which outrageous cruelty there committed was (as they themselves
confess) ye occasion of their evil success at Harlem, alleging the words of
Judas, Peccaui, tradens sanguinem iustum. And a certain Spaniard taken before
Harlem, before his death confessed, they thought to have done the like at
Harlem.

These things considered, is there any to be found so foolish and mad, that
would give credit to their words? and suppose with himself, that they have
spared the towns for pity and holiness? Whereas it is evident, that such
Towns as at their first entry they did not altogether spoil and ransacke:
have afterward been so burdened and raunsomed* as men have been forced to
pay three times the vallue of their houses and goods. And now they declare,
that they do intend to show the like grace as is aforesaid, unto the other
towns in Holland, which henceforth will of their own accord yield themselves to
their obeisance. Certainly the grace will be great that they will show, they will
for a time dissemble the matter and look through the fingers, until such time
as they shall be masters of the Towns, and then at their pleasure will apprehend
and lay hold sometimes of one dosen here, sometimes of another dosen there, of
the chiefest and substantialest, and as they see opportunity cause the^ to be
hanged up: which will be thought by them a singular grace in so eschaping from
being burned alive. And so having all the other Towns likewise under their
subjection, their cruelty will then first begin: for then will they build
Bulworkes and Castles in all firm towns, and begin to take and apprehend the
poor Burgesses by heaps, sending some with Galleyes into Spain, some to be
sold as slaves, other to be hanged on trees and Gallows, and so used as a sort
of sheep brought to ye shambels. Then follows the displacing of Magestrates
and rulers, taking away of privileges, dividing the government amongst
Spaniards and Italians, bringing in the bloody counsel, and Inquisition,
which is ten times worse than it has been used in Spain, exacting the
twenty, and the tenth, yea the fifth and the third penie, and so fulfill their
appetites upon our goods, yea, with our wives and daughters: to conculde to
bring the whole country under the miserablest slavery that ever has been
heard of. This sure is the grace that they of their mere mercy think to use,
for what grace or mercy is there otherwise to be looked for at their hands, if
they should become victorious over ye country as over their enemies, and
recover those towns which have rejected their yoke? seeing they have used such
cruel tira^ny, oultrage and insolentie in those towns, which at the first have
as friends received them, and showed them all friendship, help and
assistaunce. Enquire of ye towns of Maestricht, Shertoghenbosch, Wtrecht,
Tourney, Valencien, Lyle, and other more where they have lain in garrison, what
grace they have there extended toward the commons of the same? And whither
there be any kind of oultrage, insolentie, spite or cruelty to be devised,
which there has not been used? So as many of their commons have in great
nombers been piteously murdered, as within the towns of Lyle, Valencien, and
Tourney, has notoriously ben seen, and would have set on fire and spoiled
diverse of the notablest towns, as we have rehearsed of Rotterdam, and as was
aparant at Wtrecht, where they were determined to have done ye like. Yea let us
see how they have done at Amsterdamme, (which Town was well affectioned
toward them). Let us consider what good fruits they of Amsterdam have reaped
by it. These have first exacted of them a hundredth thousand Gilderns, upon
condition to have no Soldiers: afterward, they were the first that were
condemned in the payment of the tenth penie, and consequently have so charged
and burdened them, that the Town is in a manner undone.

But for what respect will they be so favorable and merciful to our Country,
to grant this favor toward us? It must proceed either in respect of our
persons, or theirs. As touching their own persons, they must be moved to it
of nature, or in respect of their gain and profit. It is notorious that of
nature they are not inclined to mercy or kindness to use such singular grace
toward us. For if men consider what cruel and inhumain factes they have
committed in the kingdom of Naples, with in the Dukedom of Milan, in the
Indies, and in all parts of these low Countries where they are become
vanquishers: yea in their own native Country, by robbing, murdering, burning,
rauishing of women, cutting of children out of their mothers bellies and such
like abominable deeds, under the color of rebellion and heresy (which they
always allege for them selves) no occasion will be thereby found why any man
might account them pitiful and gracious. Then this their pity and mercy must
proceed out of a respect for their own gayn. But that can not be, for they
think that the Towns which are declined from them, have so done, because they
did not use sufficient cruelty against them, but spared many which now are
become their chief enemies, according to the proverb which their Vargas does
use, Nimis magna clementia, nos perdidit: This Vargas is the chief of the
Inquisitours in the low Countries.
that is to say, Too much mercy, has spilled us. Now therefore they make
their rekoning thus, that if they may once again obtain to be Masters, they
will so tame and yoke the Country, that they shall not need to be at great
travel or charges to keep the inhabitants thereof under their subjection.

Now, seeing we can not expect any mercy or favor at their hands for respect
of their persons? Let us then see whither they might be thereunto moved for
respect of ours: certainly much less. For, besides that the Spanish Nation are
of nature lofty and proud, and do contemn all other Nations, seeking the
superiority over all, they do bear a singular and privy hatred against this
our Nation of the low countries: which hatred (as commonly it is seen) is
bred of a jealousy. For they seeing that our natural Princes and Lords, the
Dukes of Braba^t and Earls of Holland, etc. have matched and allied them
selves with Spanish women, heirs of the kingdoms of Spain, and by that
means obtayninge the government over them, sometimes have ordained
Netherlanders to rule in ye regiment of Spain: as in the time of the Lord of
Cheures, and the Cardinal Adrian borne in Hollande (who afterward was elected
Pope of Rome) has been seen. This has not a little grieved ye Spaniards, that
they should be ruled by Flemings, (for so they term all the Netherlanders) And
hereout it happened, that within a while after that Charles the Emperor (of
noble memory) as lawful heir did succeed his Grandfather Ferdinandus king of
Spain, the whole country of Spain, especially the kingdom of Arragon, began
to rebel against Charles their natural Lord, wrongfully prete^ding that the
succession of the kingdom belonged not unto him, and to that end sent for a
certain Duke of Calabria, which was of the ancient house of Arragon, who then
lay in prison, offering him the kingdom: which he denied to accept.

Notwithstanding, shortly after, by the good fortune and policy of the
Emperor Charles, all those matters were brought to a quiet end: yet ever
since that time have the Spaniards borne an inward grudge and malice against
our nation, as they have always well declared when soever they had any
opportunity, but especially against the Nobles of the Country, whom they
perceived to be in special grace and favor with the Emperor Charles (of most
famous memory) and the Kings Majesty that now is, inue^ting al manner of
means to bring these Countries into the displeasure of their Majesty's: which
(besides the examples aforesaid) does evidently appear by this last
proposition of the Emperor Charles, who departing out of these Countries
toward Spain, leaving the same to his Son our sovereign Lord, said: he
did sufficiently perceive, that the Spaniards sought by all means to incense
him, and bring into his hatred his subjects of ye low Countries, according to
their accustomed envious nature which they bare toward the country, but he
should not credit them: but to the contrary, hold these Countries for special
recommended, as those who in his most necessity (above all others) had
declared toward him most obedient faythefulnesse, and had reserved the Crown
on his head: requesting they would show the like toward their young King, and
that he should minister Justice to all men, according to reason, defending
them against the rigor and violence of their enemies, without giving credit to
their evil willers and adversaries, with many other wholesome admonitions, which
some Lords presently living, heard him speak.

Furthermore, if we consider in what estimation we are with them, we shall soon
perceive whereof this hatred and malice is further sprung. It is manifest, that
(by reason of the neighbourhed which we have with the Germans and other nations
addicted to the Gospel) they have always esteemed us for Lutherians and
heretics. I mean not only of those that have cast off the Popes religion,
but in general the whole Nation, perceiving our people of nature not to be
given to many ceremonies, and little esteeming the Apish toys and tromperies
which they have learned of the Sarrasins, Moors, and other Heathen people. We
see what an Apes play they use in the time of Lent, in scourging of them
selves, with other mockeries, which they use at our Lords sepulcher (as they
call it.) This they exteeme for ye greatest holiness which may be. Now, they
perceiving that our country men, yea they that are most bent to the Roomish
religion, do ieste and mock at these their doings, esteeming them as
childrens toys and mere hypocrisy. This also does kindle in their hearts an
vnquench able hatred and envy against us, that they which account themselves
so wise and fine witted, should of our Children, Wives and simple people be
esteemed as Hipocrites and superstitious fools. And so by reason thereof, they
do esteem us all in general (few or none excepted) as Heretics and
Lutherians.

It is also manifest, that they do hateand persecute the Lutherians more then
the Jews, Turks or any other transgressors that live in this world: for with
the Jews, Turks, Moors and Sarasins they use great familiarity (for that ye
most part of them are spronge out of that race) but such as they esteem as
Lutherians, they think them not worthy to enjoy either Air, Water, Sun,
Moon, nor yet any other Element: yea they do persecute them by all the means
they can devise.

And to look for any grace or pardon at their hands for respect of our own
persons, (seeing they hate us above all other creatures in the world) it were
mere madness: yea they think they do God good service when soever they may
cruelly murder any of us. Besides this, they account this whole Country as
rebellious, saying plainly, that in all the low Countries, there is not one
Town but has forfeyted to the King their liberties, yea life and goods, and
have purchased unto them the displeasure and wrath of his Majesty. The one for
denying to receive the Spanish garrisons: The other for neglecting the
execution of the Mandamentes and Placcards, in matters of Religion, and not
punishing the Heretics and offenders sufficiently. The third, for that they
have not sufficiently aided and assisted the Bishops, Inquisitours and
Spaniards. Others, for not granting to the demand of the x. penny and other
unreasonable requests: Some other because they would not abide the
unsupportable violence of the Soldiers. In fine, there is not one Town nor
Uillage in all the low Countries, which is not to be charged with loss of
life and goods: as is to be perceived out of their own allegations propound in
the name of ye Duke of Alba, touching the x. penny, saying, that such was
demanded to the intent that the Lands and countries which were fallen into
the displeasure of the King, might thereby be reduced to his favor. Therefore
we need not to look for any grace or favor at their hands, and all that
which they do allege and say is to be exteemed for none other then subtle
practices, to bring the simple and unwise under their yoke, and after being
Masters over them to use them at their pleasures, wherein they will have no
such precise regard to those that have offended, as to those which hereafter
might offend, or with whose goods and possessions they might be made rich for
ever. So that there is none, being of any power, authority, or countenance, or
having any goods, that shall escape free, for he that will stryke a dog, may
soon find a staff. And undoubtedly, this is ye true nature and common use of
all Tyrants that have subdued any Towns, specially being before revolted from
them, that they never think their rule nor life to be in suertye, until such
time as they have made away such as they do suspecte, might, or would
withstand their power.

Therefore all they which by servitude (helping the Spaniards against their own
allies, contrary to the duty which they owe to their natural country,) do in
any wise hope thereby to get their grace and favor, surely shall be the first
that shall find themselves disceyued: for it will not be so precisely asked
what they have offended, as wherein hereafter they might or could offend. Much
less may they look for any grace or favor which before have revolted and
withstoode their tyranny, and now upon hope of pardon shall turn and become
enemies to their native country, for such they will esteem as double
Traitors, of whose truth they never can be assured, thincking always, that
spying their commodity they will revolt again. And what soever else they
here proponed touching their grace and favor, is nothing else but mere
deceit and subtlety: so that none (having his understanding and right senses)
will believe these promises, but rather with life and goods, and by all
possible means, help to defend his Country and the liberties thereof.

And because it shall not be thought that this warning does proceed of
affection rather then of a truth, let us first mark what kind of pardon they
do propone, and then what assurance and certainty they do offer first they
say. That unto those which return again to their obeisance shall be given
perpetual grace and favor as is given to those which already are turned unto
them, being left in their former state, using and enjoying their goods and
other things as they did before their reuolte. Hereby they give to understand,
that at this present their goods are detained as forfet, and that the Duke of
Alba and the Spaniards do esteem themselves as Lords and proprietaries of the
lives and goods of the indwellers of the same towns, like as before the
reuolting of the towns, they have diverse times made their vaunt, yet will they
now of a special grace and favor grant them so much, as that for a while they
shall enjoy the use of their goods, until such time as they find better
opportunity to put in execution that which long has lain in their minds: for
by the words before recited, is not expressed the reservation which they keep
to themselves: Namely, that the Rebels and heritickes and other whom it
shall please them, should be punished according to the nature and disposition
of their offenses. Besides this, no mention is made of the nobles and the whole
cuntrie. So as all those that have any goods, houses or lands, lying without
the towns, can by no means by the content of this letter be assured, only the
inhabitants of the towns should by this means be used as executors and
accusers of the nobles and country. Then I pray you mark what kind of
assurance here is given. Which we in the name and behalf of the king do
certainly promise and assure you by these presents, and thought good hereof to
advertise you, to the intent you give the same further to understand. etc.
Assuredly this is a proper assurance, upon which one merchant will scarce lend
another two pence: much less whole towns and countries adventure their lives
thereby, for what have they not promised us in the name and behalf of the kings
majesty, and have afterward broken and infringed the same? as if they might
make a jesting stake of the kings majesty at their pleasure, which
undoubtedly they do. How often have they promised these Countries, that they
should not be burdened with garrisons of Soldiers? That the Inquisitio^
should not be brought into the country? yea how solemply, and with what a
countenance, did they promise and vow to the nobles and country ye agreement
made in August and confirmed by the Duches of Parma. And in these last wars,
when have they at any time kept promise? nay rather when have they not openly
and without any respect broken and violated ye same? They had faithfully promised
ye town of Rotterdam, they would but pass through ye same without hurting any
of the Citizins, and as soon as they were within, they began to murder
execrably, as if they had been a sort of ravening Wolves and murderers. They
had promised the town of Mounts in Henault that they would not harm any one
Burges, upon which condition they entered the town, where they apprehended a
great number and hong them up. But I pray you how have they dealt with the
Counties of Egmont and of Horn? what fair promises had they made unto them,
yea confirmed with the kings letters and seal, making them believe al things
were forgotten and forgiven, that the king did favor and was bou^tifull to
them, and that nothing should be concluded in the counsel without their advise,
with many other like words, wherewith they persuaded these good noble men that
all things were well, and so got them into their hands, to the intent to
dispatch them away most miserably, setting their heads upon poles, as if they
had been murderers or traitors? What faith or troth was kept with the Lords
of Barow and Montigny, who were by the Duches of Parma and all the Lords and
nobles of the country (for pacifying the state thereof) so sole^ply sent in
Ambassade to ye kings Majesty? The Turks and faithless heathens which know
no God, do esteem it an abominable deed to endammage Emassadours or
Co^missaries, being by all natural reasons to be esteemed as holy:
Notwithstanding they kept those Lords as prisoners a great while, and in the
end pitifully murdered them without law or Justice. After this, what faith
have they kept with their own soldiers, being under the regiment of the
County Lodron, who served him so long at Valencien? Did not the Duke of Alba
promise and swear to them, that the offenses passed (to wit because they had
demanded to have their payment) should be forgotten, and thereupon gave them
his letters and seal, causing them to be written up a new, and to take an oath
to the king. And that which is more, caused the^ to come from Valencien to
Antwerpe under conduct there to receive money, whereas he with his Spanish
soldiers environed them, and in great nombers caused them to be hanged one
after another: the rest which escaped hanging, he caused to be chased and
driven away without payment? Who then would seem to be so mad or bewitched, to
attribute credit to any of their promises, except he were weary of his life
and welfare? For if they have in this sort disceyued the most notablest and
chiefest Lords of the country, if they have so cruelly without reason
murdered the Ambassadors sent by the Gouerna^t and nobles to the king: and if
they have not kept promise with those towns which never resisted nor altered
religion, if they have been so unfaithful to their own soldiers, through
who^ they were become Masters of the Country. Should we then whom they utterly
hate, (and as they say,) have rebelled against the king, maintaining (as they
allege) the Lutheria^ doctrine, been their mortal enemies, and effectually
declared the same, be kept promise with, then surely the world had need be
altered and new changed.

But we perceive evidently by their own words, that they never mean to do it,
for they themselves do not offer any assurance for accomplishme^t of their
promise, but only charge them of Amsterdam to give notice thereof to ye other
towns, and in their behalf to promise this. Seeing (says the Duke of Alba)
that we do promise and assure you by this letter signed by us that so it shall be
done etc. Now would they have the town of Amsterdam wholly take upon her to do
that, which so many towns should hereafter bewayl and lament if they keep not
promise with them. It might afterward be said: wherefore were they so foolish
as to credit the^ of Amsterdam (their enemies) seeing the Duke him self made
them no promise? In conclusion it is notorious, that these be but mere
disceiptes to disceiue the simple people, for the proper words of the letter do
declare evidently, that ye Duke does not assure or promise the Towns any
thing, so that they cannot charge him with any promise, though he observe
nothing, but only them of Amsterdam, who have promised it on ye Dukes behalf.
And think you that they of Amsterdam have their excuse to seek? No I warrant
you: for they may say, we have not broken our promise, seeing we have not on our
own behalf, but in the Dukes name only promised you. This disceipt was
plainly seen by the above rehearsed soldiers of Valencien, for the Duke of
Alba did make the promise, and the County Lodron brake it, and yet neither of
both thought they committed any offense herein, seeing the one was not bound to
perform that which he had not promised, and the other would not by his
promise bynd the Cou^tie of Lodron.

All this nothwithsta^ding, though they should by any manner of oaths or bonds,
(possible to be devised) confirm any promise, yet would they think themselves
in no point bound to perform ye same, because of their common rule: saying,
there is no faith to be kept with heretics: as in the counsel of Co^stance
(whereas Johannes Hus and Hierome of Prage, who upon the kings oath and letters
of safe conduct came thither and were there burnt alive) it was concluded for
an article of the faith, and all they condemned as heretics, which kept any
promise with heretics. Besides yt, the Pope of Rome can at all times absolve
the^ of their oaths and promise, as daily it is used, so as they be no more
bound to the same, than if they had never spoken it. Therefore, no wise people
will be seduced with such deceitful lies, but rather to ye last drop of their
blood, duly and manfully help to deliver their native country from these
bloudthirsty Tyrants.

Lastly, they produce a new trick, seeking to make those afraid which are
fearful and of small courage saying, that they greatly err which think to
withstand the kings power, and that it will fall out evil with them, if they
remain obstinat and will try his majesty's power and force. First we have
protested and by these presents do proteste, that we never did nor will
withstand the kings power. Likewise are we well assured that our king according
to his accustomed cleme^tie, would not use his power and force to destroy and
bring to ruin his own subjects, which always have been so faithful to him and
his ancestors: But these strange tirants which under the kings name go about
to bring our native country under their subjection, those will we resist to
the uttermost and last man. And as for their power (whereof they so much host)
we nothing fear, neither it needs not yt we tarry long to try their force,
who have already for ye space of v. or vi. years sufficiently showed the same:
so as they now scarce know whither to run or wind themselves, and therefore
come they now with this their pardon, perceiving their force not to prevail.
But before, when all things went as they wished, they seemed as though they
would have devoured the country in one minut. And perceiving that the strange
soldiers (which serve only for money) ran from their garrisons they thought
all had been finished and done, and so wrote both into Spain and Duytchland.
But now being come to those that offer resistance, and are determined to
defend their liberties with the sword: it quickly appeared through God his
providence, what their power was. For then they lost their best Captains and
Soldiers, and the Lord God has defended our just cause, and made a scorn of
their great power and force. Their old Spanish soldiers (the like of whom
they thought were not in the world) remained there slain as well as ye other. And
now they have tried that there be men left in the world yt will fight for their
native country. So that we (continuing in the fear of God, and perfect unity
amongst our selves) shall have no need to fear the haultie words of those who
have so long beaten their brains against the weakest town in Holland, wherein
at the first was neither store of vittuals, munitio^, nor soldiers, (and
whereof they had so great an advantage by reason of the Yse, that they accounted
it a Town of no force) are yet driven backward, and come to shame and
confusion. But now, seeing the water is open, and the town (through GOD his
grace) greatly strengthened and furnished of good soldiers, and al manner of
good provision and munition, think they to make us afeard with their boasts and
threatenings? Nay, nay, good Burgesis, let us be of good courage, and nothing
regard their bragges, but trust in the Lord our God, who hitherto has so
wonderfully assisted us, defending our native Country to the uttermost with
our substance and blood. Let us manfully stand in defense of our Wives and
children against these bloudthirstie enemies of our honors and common weal:
and to ye end direct our lives in all union and concord, to the intent that we
may enjoy our old liberties and privileges, and leave them behind us, together
with a good name and fame to our childrens children, our neighbors and
friends. Surely trusting in God, that he will once turn his wrath from our
sins, and behold us with his merciful countenance, and reduce our poor
oppressed country to his former state and prosperity. Also we trust that the
Kings Ma. our soueraing Lord, piteously considering this insupportable tira^ny
and force, of those which so proudly abuse his name and title, to the
destruction of the country daily more and more: will of his natural clemency
grant us, that we being delivered from these tyrants and suppressors, may once
effectually show, and apparently declare the just faith, hearty affection and
seruitiable obedience, which we are ready (even to the death) to show to his
Majesty, which we in all humble manner require of his Majesty. Also we
heartily pray unto almighty God, that he will grant his Majesty a long and
healthful life, and prosperous reign. Written at Delft, the xii. of March.
Anno 1573.

FINIS.

