

Quam b^ne clare Pat^r, designant nomina vita
B^na tuam, nom^n quam bent vita tuum? Simon Passaeus sculp^ Land:

N^m quod sis fidus divini cu^tor age^^i
Agrico^e sirimo nomine nomen hasse*
E^ ^u^niam Anglorum Pat^^ es^ doctissime Pateum
^^^^^ius s^artem nominis Abba dedit
(...) ^^coris cus Tos, ingentioz i^^s^
Vi^as o titulis (...) Abbate diane ^uis.
JACOBS WELL And ABBOTS CONDVIT Paralleled Preached, and Applied, To the Use of
the City of Canterbury. BY JAMES CLELAND D.D.

Printed at London for Robert Allot



JACOBS WELL, AND ABBOTS CONDVIT, Paralleled, Preached, and Applied (In the
Cathedral and Metropoliticall CHVRCH of CHRIST in CANTERBVRY) To the USE of
that City; now to make glad the City of GOD

BY JAMES CLELAND, Doctor of Divinity.

S. JOHN 7.37. JESUS stood, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come
unto me, and drink.

CHAP. 13.8. JESUS said, If I wash thee not, thou have not part with me.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Allot, 1626.

REVERENDISSIMO IN CHRISTO PATRI, D. GEOEGIO ABBA TO, Diuina Prouidentia,
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primati and Metropolitae, Regiaeque
Majestati, a Secretioribus Consilijs, etc.
IACOBVS CLELANDVS Scotus, Hoc Grati Animi Monumentum ponebat.
SAPIENTISSI MVS REX SOLOMON, alijque Viri Prudentes quamplures, (ARCHI-PRAESVL
AMPLISSIME) qui latentes and abditas rerum naturalium causas inquiruut,
fluminum perennes ortus, fontiumque scaturigines Oceano referunt, inque eundem
Oceanum aquas refluere, and naturali velut impetu remeare monent. Nec mirum hoc
cuiquam vidcatur, cum consonum sit rationi, experientiae, Sacris Literis, and
Placitis Philosophorum. Ex limpidis enim Fontibus, strepentes oriuntur amnes;
ex amnibus, torrentes rapidi; ex torrentibus fluuij seraces; fluuijque in
Oceanum plenis exuberant ostijs; vnde primum per varios terrae meatus
promanarunt. Est quippe rerum omnium quidam velut orbis, vt cuncta vnde
deriuantur, huc per vices reuerti naturalis ratio desideret. Imprudens ego
itaque and ingratus fuerim, si Fontes hos alterius nomini aut numini, quam Tuo
offerrem and dicarem, vt qui Te potissimum iactant Authorem, Tibi reddantur: Ac
velut aquae magno illo Mari emissae Oceanum ipsum repetunt; ita Fontes isti, in
Te spontaneo industriae meae Voto refluant. Ingratus ego in quam, quia
benificentiae Tuae Fontes, non minus aduenis, quam indigenis, gratis patent,
and inter illos, mihi praecipue riguo fluxu asperginem perennem effundunt.
Quapropter iam quod a Priscis in dedicatione quorundam Monumentorum, memorisque
animi testificatione vsurpatum est, LVBENS MERITOQVE, Fontes hos (Clementiae
Tuae) cum maximis gratijs repono. Neque ego tantum, sed vniuersi etiam and
singuli, non horum modo, sed futurorum aliquando temporum Ciues Cantuarienses,
hoc Tibi Beneficium acceptum referent, rependetque gratias vnusquisque and suo,
and Ciuitatis nomine nunquam intermorituras. Ciuitas denique ipsa Cantuaria,
tanti Beneficij gratijs rependendis iam impar, vel hoc nomine ingenue
profitetur, vt conscia suae tenuitatis, non voluntatem sibi, aut memoriam
Beneficij Tui ( Fontis vtpote) sed facultatem referendi deesse. Sicque SVMME
ANTISTES,

In freta dum fluuii current, dum montibus vmbrae
Lustrabunt, conuexa polus dum sidera pascet,
Semper honos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt.
To the Christian Reader.
RIght Christian and courteous Reader, Ahijah the Prophet, taking hold of
Ieroboams new garment, rent it in twelve pieces 1. Kings, 11.30.
. Elijah sermoned on the little barrel of meal, and cruse of oil of his
Hostess^ the Widow of Zarephath 1 Kings, 17.4.
. And his Scholar El^^ha did the like preaching upon the pitcher of oil of
the Shunamite Woman 2. Kings, 4.7.
. By these visible signs the Prophets would more deeply print their message
into their hearts to whom they were sent. So our Savior Christ, sitting on
Jacobs Well, took a fit occasion to give the Woman of Samaria a taste of that
Spiritual Water of life Ioh. 4.14.
. Whereof he himself is the everlasting and vnexhausted Fountain, in asking
of her but common water. After these examples, especially this of our good and
great Doctor Christ, at first when I saw my Lord Archbishops Conduit in
Canterbury, and being entreated then to preach in the Cathedral Church of
Christ there, I chose Jacobs Well for my Text, and drew deep, bringing out
hence more then ordinary and vulgar Water. Wherefore I hope that I cannot
seem, or be taxed by any sound judgment to have fetched water out of mine own
brain unto this Text, nor from the words thereof to wring out blood, by
forcing them, following so good a pattern. Howsoever, who is a thirst, or
would be washed, let him come to drink and wash himself thus at Jacobs Well,
in assurance;

Limpidius nihil est, Lector, nil alsius isto
Font leuare sitim, sieve lauare iuuat.
JACOBS WELL, AND ABBOTS CONDVIT, Paralleled, Preached, and Applied To the use
of the City of CANTERBVRIE.
S. JOHN c. 4. v. 6. Now Jacobs Well was there.


THe Patriarch Jacob after his Genesis 33.18.
twenty years service with his Uncle Laban, when he came from Padan-Aram, and
pitched his Tent before the City of Sychar, there he bought a parcel of a
field, wherein he dug this Well, and gave it unto that City. JESUS in his
second going unto Galilee, Multum ille and terris iactatus and alto, Quae regio
in terris Christi non plena laborum. Aeneid. 1. princ.
being wearied with his journey, sat thus on this Well, to make glad the City
of God. Not long ago, our Arch-Patriarch Abbas qui praeesse dignus est
Ecclesiae, semper meminisse debet quod dicitur and nomen Maioris, id est,
Superioris factis implere, Christi enim vices gerere in Ecclesia creditur,
quando ipsias vecatur praenomine, dicente Apostolo, Accipistis Spiritum
adoptionis filiorum in quo cla^amus Abba Pater. Gregor. Mag.
Abbots, at his second coming into Kent, erected a costly Conduit here, and
bestowed it unto the use of this City of Canterbury.

Now these three Founders or Benefactors, together with their charitable works
or Wells, are briefly comprehended in this little sentence I have read unto
you, and all these in a Spiritu Sancto factum est, vt^de^m Scripturae locus
multis sensibus sit soecundus. Augustine. l. 2. de Christiana doctrina.
threefold sense. Whereof one is concerning Jacob, and his Well, in the Litera
gesta docet; quid credas mysterium: Analogia quid agas.
letter. The second is of JESUS, and as he is the Fountain of life, these two
mystically; and so Jacobs Well, may be resembled to Genesis 28.12.
Jacobs Ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it reaching unto Heaven; or
unto Ibid. 30.37.
Jacobs Hasel-rods partly pilled, and partly covered. Our third sense is of my
Lord Archbishop, and of his Conduit, by analogy, or proportion with Jacobs
Well.

To parallel these two chiefly, I have chosen this Text, at this Time, and in
this Place; and to proceed methodically, we must begin at the Letter; Wherein
we may observe these five occurrences, according to the number of words of my
Text, and conform to so [Struct tra Georgij D. Archiepiscopi C^ntuar. In vsum
Ciuitatis Cantuariae. Ann. Dom. 1621.]
many short lines, graven for Title or Inscription on the Frontispice of your
Conduit. First is Structura, the Work it self, [a Well:] the second is the
Founder [Iacob:] the third is the Place, [There:] the fourth is the Time,
[Was:] fist and last is, In vsum Ciuitatis, which I refer to this particle
[Now;] seeing. Singuli sermones, syllabae, apices, puncia in Diuina Scriptura
plena sunt sensibus Hieron. in cap. 3. Ephesians. Non apices, non literae, non
syllabae, non verba, non nomina in Euangelio diuinis vacua sunt mysterijs.
Petrus Chrisol. sermon. 16.
in Gods holy Word, there is no superfluous jod, every title or circumstance
has some pith, and serves to some good use and purpose.

As in these five small words, consider first Situm, (according to the rules of
Architecture) the Site and Place of Jacobs Well, modelled, or rather folded up
in this local demonstratiue, [There:] yet explicated more at large for
History and Geographie, before and after my Text. For first the Place is
bounded out, as being interjacent between Judea and Galile Inter duos montes,
Bethel scil and Dan, sitae est ciuitas Sichem, quae hodi^ Neapolis vocatur,
amoenitate and delitus nullo loco inserior. Haud long a porta Australi est
iste Fons Jacob, in via quae dacit Jerusalem. Brocard in descrip. Terrae
Sanctae. cap. 7.
, in the midway between them both. Secondly, the name of the Shire was
Samaria, and of the City Sychar, which was a chief City of that Country.
Thirdly, the Vicinitie or Neighborhood of it, is laid down, as being near
unto the possession; that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. Fourthly, and lastly
is described by the departure of our sweet Savior from his own Country and
Countrie-men, passing this way of De hoc consilio and proposito suo vide
Rupert. and Cyrillum lib. 2. in Ioh. c. 77.
purpose, to drink of the Brook for his refection, and refreshing of others,
as was De torrente in via bibens. Psalm. 110.7.
prophesied.

Where by the way, Augusti^us praeclare sermon. 92 de Temp. Praedium, inquit, non
tam Iosepho, quam Christo arbitror derelictum, cuius siguram S. Joseph
Patriarcha portauit, quem vere Sol adorat, and Luna and omnes Stellae
benedicunt. Ad hoc praedium ideo venit Dominus, vt Samaritani, qui haereditatem
sibi Patriarchae Israel vendicare cupiebart, agnoscerent possessorem suum, and
conuerterentur ad Christum, qui legitimus Patriarchae haeres est factus.
observe that Prophecy made of Jacob to his son Joseph is more lively
verified in Jesus, than in Joseph himself: viz. Genesis 49.22.
He shall be as a fruitful branch by the Well side; when never did Joseph take
personal possession in this place, but by Hebr. 11.22.
Faith, or by translation of his bones, and in his posterity; and they alas!
how often interrupted, and at the last, as now, quite exterminated. For
notwithstanding this was Jacobs purchase, Joseph's inheritance, by promise, by
legacy, by prophecy conformed to the faithful; yet beside the sacking of
this City of Sychar by Jacobs sons, and the abandoning of the same by Jacob
himself, it was Judge. 9.
first freed by that ambitious bramble Abimelech, then the whole Region being
perverted by the caluish Religion of 1. King. 13.
Jeroboam, in defection whereof this City was suddenly 1. King. 12.25.
destroyed.

Whereupon I wrap up this brief description of Place again with these three
notes. One is, Sic omnia verti cernimus atque alias assumere robora Gentes,
etc. Aeneid. 2. Clara fuit Sparta: magnae viguere Mycenae, Neenon and Cycropis,
neenon Amphionis arces. Ovid. Metam. 15.
that there is no certainty of continual prosperity in the most settled
Estates of the World, whereof let Sychem and Samaria be witnesses: or if these
be not sufficient proofs, as being of a too ancient date and of a too distant
abode from us, Quocunque aspicio, nihil est nisi pontus and aer, fluctibus hic
tumidus, nubibus ille minax. etc. idem. Vide Valor. Max. lib. 2. c. 6. Ammian.
Marcell. lib. 7. Sabellic. de subita fortutuna. li. 7. Apul. lib. 7. Metam.
cicero de Not. Deor. Boet. lib. 2 de consol. prosa 2. and Plin. lib. 7. cap.
40. prae cateris elegantius.
then look round about our Neighbor Countries at this instant, as in
Germany, the Palatinate, etc. and you shall see how the Cities and whole
Shyres there are persecuted, harrosed and dispeopled. Although we dwell safely
and confidently, (praised be God) every man under his Vine and Fig Tree, from
Dan to Bersheba, from Kent to Kentyre, from the South of England, to the North
of Scotland, yet let no man pretend to exempt himself from miseries but
through the mercies of God. Think not our selves secure otherwise, because we
live in a mighty Land of two Nations; no, we live in an Island, therefore in
danger of the Sea; in a Christian Island, therefore in danger of the Turk; in a
Protestant Island, therefore in danger of the Pope; in a Chief City of the
Island, therefore in danger of the Devil. For mightiness of State, frequencie
of strangers, multitude of people, curiousness of arts, heaps of riches,
sumptuousness of buildings, store of provision, strength of munition, make
Cities settle upon their lees, and yet not they, but their abuses. Ezech. 16.33.
O harlot Jerusalem, Nahum 3.1.
O bloody Niniueb! they be the words of the Prophets Ezechiel and Nahum: Diana
at Ephesus, Lais at Corinth, Mahomet at Constantinople, Antichrist at Rome,
but here at Canterbury, omniabene. Far be it from me to forget the honor
of this City; as the Spirit said to the Church of Thiatira, Revel. 2.20. and
as Ego cum Augusto, qui affirmauit se facilius passurum detrabi aliquid, quam
Ciuitatis Romanae vulgari honorem. Sueton. in Augusto cap. 40.
August. of the City of Rome; yet I must tell you, that as the great
sicknesses, Dedit hanc contagio labem and dabit in plures.
so the great sins ordinarily are from hence derived to the Country.

My second note is, Polibius. Bodin. de Repub. lib. 4 c. 7. Delicta qui non
vetat, cum possit, iubet, Senec. Traged.
that sin privileged, and corruption of Religion authorized or wincked at,
though but in Policy, yet are they the bane and ruin of the most flourishing
Commonwealths and Churches of the World. Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and
Israel to be robbed? Was it not the Lord, because they had sinned against him?
And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and
to destroy it from off the face of the earth. 1. Kings 13.34. Kings and Princes
may suffer diversity of Languages, of Laws, of Policies, of Statutes in their
States, because they are but external things, and concern but men's outward
actions, which change and vary according to the variety of occurrences, but
they must beware of toleration or conniuency of false Religion without Gods
just judgment against themselves and their Kingdoms. For the Lord shall
strike through Kings in the day of his wrath; He shall judge among the Heathen,
Ps. 110.6.
he shall fill the place with the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over
many great Countries; which are his four punishments whereby he punishes his
enemies. Psalm. 110.6.

The third note is, that neither the Church of God inuisibly, nor the Spirit
illuminating that Church infallibly, is bound to any Place, City, or Sea,
there to reside in the succession of persons: for Joseph's possession was
inhabited by Idolaters, Ose. 4.15.
Bethel became Bethauen, Turks and Mahumetans have surprised the Holy Land,
Antichrist sits in the 2 Thessalonians. 2.4.
Temple of God, the faithful Isai. 1.21.
City is turned Harlot; in a word plainly, Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis,
Ara cynaedis Seruit, honorandae diuum Ganimed bus oedes, etc. Mantuan de calam:
suorum tempor. lib. 3. fol. 393.
Rome, is become Babylon, Lest Nequis blandiatur sibi de loc 9, Bern. ad Guil.
Abb.
any should flatter themselves in the inherent bolinesse of the place. And thus
we leave wandering at large about the Place, and settle our selves in view of a
little Monument in the place, where our blessed Savior did vouchsafe to sit.

Secondly, consider, in this place there was a [Well] or a Spring: for every
Well is a Spring, although every Spring be not a Well. A Vbi de terra promanat
aqua, si in promptu sit atque superficie, fons dicitur a fundendo: si autem in
allo vel profundo loco; dicitur puteus, sed ita, vt fontis nomen non amittat.
Aug. tract. 15. in Ioh.
Spring or a Fountain may be in superficie, easy to come by: A Well is in
profundo, deep to be drawn at, and so was this. For as the Woman of Samaria
said, Puteus est profundus, the Well is deep; Non comperta superbis, neque
nudata pueris; sed quae incessu humilis, suceessu excella, and velata
mysterijs, crescit cum parvulis, Aug. lib. 3. Confess. c. 5. Diuinus sermo,
sicut prudentes mysteriis exercet: sie plerumque superficie simplices refouet
habet in publico vnde paruulos nutriat, seruat in secreto, vnde mentes
sublimiu^ admiratione suspendat. Gregor. Epist. ad Leandr moral. in Ioh affix.
fronti.
so it is indeed a Deep, and yet a shallow ford, where the Lamb may wade, the
Elephant swim? therein are mysteries to exercise the wise, and Histories to
be understood of the simple; z wherein not only the Learned may satisfy their
deep desires, but also the ignorant may increase their knowledge.

Thirdly, know the chief Founder of this Well or Fountain was the Patriarch
[Iacob] whose name was reuerendly rehearsed by the Samaritans at this Well,
though they were strangers to him, to his Faith and Religion, making only a
benefit of his temporal commodity; and this his name, Jacob, will be
remembered to the worlds end, wheresoever the Gospel shall be Preached, as our
Savior Mat. 26.13.
said concerning the woman with the box of Ointment. His name is like a good
Ointment (as Solomon Ec. les. 71.
says) the sweet perfume whereof is not only fresh and redolent at this
present, Multa viri virtus animo, multusque, recursat Eius honos, haerent
infixi pectore vultus.
but also shall be for ever in this world, and in the World to come.

Many there are who by carnal proiects as building and purchasing for their
Posterity, think to make their houses famous, and their memories eternal, as
David well observes, Psalm. 49.11. These are like Nero, of whom the Historian
says, Erat eius aeternitatis perpetuaeque, famae cupido sed inconsulte.
Sueton-in vita Neron ca. 55.
He did affect eternal fame, but he took no wise course to effect it. It is
like David's censure in the thirteenth verse of that Psalm, This their way
utters their foolishness. And no marvel, for God deals with them as the
Ephesians dealt with Erostratus, who would be famous by burning the Temple of
Diana; As they enacted a Law, that no man should speak of Erostratus, so
Almighty God enacteth a Law of oblivion against these carnal minded men,
Their memorial perishes for ever. q Others are, who think to perpetuate
their name and fame by erecting a Montiment of Marble, Brass, or Stone, when
his life was rotten, as his corpse after his death, and his memory can smell no
sweeter above ground, then his body under it. For who can imagine that a
sumptuous Tomb a painted Scutcheon, or a golden Epitaph can cover a putrified
carcass, when all that knew him will say, he was a wicked man. Assure your
selves, Hoc enim v. number est, in relus humanis opus, cui nulla tempestas noceat,
quod nulla consumat vetustas: c^etera, quae per constructionem lapidum, and
marmore as moles, aut terrenos tumulos in magnam educcos altitudinem constant,
non propagahunt longam diem: quippe and ipsa ^atereunt, Se^ de consol. ad
Polyb. cap^^lt.
it is only a Christian Faith, and charitable good works that make men attain
unto true honor and memory. Impensa monume^ti superuacanea est, momoria
nostra durabit si vitam meraimus, Eras. l. 8. Apotheg.
A man's good life will move every man's heart to be his Tomb, and turns
every man's tongue into a Pen to write his deathlesse Epitaph.

As lo here, the Holy Ghost by the pen of Saint John the Evangelist has
registered Jacobs name for bestowing this benefit of his Well; which it thus
called, Jacobs Well, First, either because he purchased it from the Amorite
with his Sword and Hic illius arma, hic currus suit, Aecid. 1.
Bow: Secondly, or because he and his Family used to drink of it: Thirdly, or
because he was possessour of it: Fourthly, or because he dug it: Fifthly, or
yet, because many Euentibus vt 1. Lucta. 2. Fletibus. 3. Latebris. 4.
F^^dereicto. 5. Statua posita
changes and chances happened unto him at it. As one from his wrestling there:
another for his shedding of tears there: Thirdly, for hiding himself there:
Fourthly, for making a covenant there with God: Fifthly and lastly, for placing
his Image upon, or near unto it; howsoever let us look to the Time, our
fourth occurrent.

Fourthly, this imperfect pretertense, Erat, Was, imports the continuance and
perennitie of this Well, holding out from Jacobs time till our Saviors sitting
on it and after. For this tense comprehends all the other tenses, the
present, the preterperfect, and the future, Th. Aquinas in Ioh. c. 1. Quod
futurum est (inquit) nondum est actu; Praesens autem hoc quod sit actu, non
designatur fuisse; persectum designat aliquid extitisse, iam esse determinatum,
etiam desuisse. Imperfectum cero significat aliquid faisse, and nondum esse
determinatum, aut desuisse, sed adbuc permancre.
as Thomas Aquinas, Caietan, and diverse others School Doctors Comment upon
that Verb substantive Erat, in the beginning was the Word.

Of which circumstance of Time, we may observe this lesson, it is better,
Erat, to have had, and yet have, then to hear Fuit, or Erit. For if the
Evangelist had said, Fons fuit, that would have insinuated the benefit was
past, and is no more, and so argued the Samaritans misery; seeing miserum est
fuisse, as the Trojans, Troes fuimus, speaking of themselves, that sometimes
they gloriously flourished, though afterward they were victoriously vanquished
by the Grecians: whereupon Virgil writes, Iam seges Est vbi Troia fuit, The
soil where Troy did stand, Is now become Corn land. Nor is Erit, it will be,
or shall be hereafter, so good as it was and is still. For although Erit, may
seem to carry some show of an houering hope of future consolation, yet is it
not half so comfortable as to enjoy a present benefit, in regard many things
may happen between hope and having, according to the Greek Multa cadunt inter
calicem supremaque labra,
Proverb, (...). Many things may happen between the cup and the lip. And we
say in our common speeches, While the grass grows, the Steed may starve; It
is ill hoping for dead men's shoes; And one Bird in hand is worth two in the
Wood; a little in re and esse, is better then much in spe and posse: a small
thing in present possession is more, then a great deal in reuersion. All to
teach us, that now having present possession, and full fruition of a Jacobs
Well, we should show our selves thankful to our Benefactor, and beware not to
misuse or abuse his Benefit or Impuris ne quis manibus ^adid^s^e Lyeo,
Hun^sontem temeret strepitans hoc murmurat ^nda.
Conduit.

So now, Fifthly, to make right Use of Jacobs Well, (as I referred this effect
to that particle, Now, in my Text) consider with me, that a Well of water must
needs be a benefit of a great commodity and good USE for them that live,
dwell, or travel in a dry, hot, scorched Country, such as was Sychar. There
the water of that Well was necessary, pleasant, and Omne tulit punctum qui
miscuit vtile dulci. Horat. in Act Poet.
profitable. And what matuaile? seeing Water of it self is Necessary, as
appears by the Etymology of the Latin word In Aqua constare omnia Thal^s
dixit, apud Clem. Alex. lib. 2. Strom. p. 391. Ambros. l. 1. Hexam c. 2.
August. lib. 8 de ciuit. Dei, c. 2. Eustath. Iliad 0. p. 1403. number. 10 Plutar.
de Plaeitis Philosoph. Cic de Not Deorum. Coel. Rhod. lib 17. c. 21. Alex. ab
Alex l. 3. c. 2. Seruius in Aencid. 11. Philo Iudaeus lib. 1. de vita Mosis,
Aegyptios aquam eximie coluisse, principium vniuersae generatiou is eam ce
sentes, confirmauit.
AQVA, AQVA omnia nascuntur: or as Festus says, AQVA juuamur: or as Lactantius
AQVA sunt omnia, from which all things proceed. Water is so Necessary, says
Vitruuius, in his eight Book, entitled De Aquarum Inuentionibus, that all
things are made, and compounded of it, according to Homers Hemistich, (...);
which moved Pindarus to begin to his Hymns thus, (...), etc. Water is the
best thing of all. What is more Necessary then water? No, not a Friend, for all
the Proverb. Who can live without it? The first and greatest cause that moved
the Israelites to quarrel and mutine with Moses, was for want of Water; or
else for the bitterness of their Water, as Exodus 15.24.
Marah, Exodus 17.7.
Massah, and Meribah can witness. Read but the seventh Chapter of Judeth, and
there you shall see, how the inhabitants of Bethulia, were ready to yield up
their City into the hands of their enemy Olefernus for lack of water, if God
of his goodness had not prevented them in providing water for them
miraculously.

Secondly, so pleasant is water, that Solomon Prou. 23.25.
likeneth good news fetched out of a far Country unto cool waters comforting
a thirsty soul. One and the same word, in the sacred Fountaine-Tongue is set
for an Eye, and for a Well, or Fountain; and even (you see) the Eye is of a
watery constitution, to teach us not unfitly, that as the Eyes are necessary
and beautiful springs to grace the Aequem Greci (...) nomine appellauerunt
ornamenti, cum and nos a perfecta absolutaque elegantia, Mundum, Plin. lib. 2.
cap 4.
Little World of our bodies; so Fountains of water are as Eyes to beautify
and solace the Greater World, of the Earth. Therefore the Lord to encourage his
people in the Wilderness promised to bring them unto a good land, A land of
Brooks of Waters of Fountains, Wels and Depths that spring out of the
Vallayes and Deuteronomy. 8.7.
Hills.

Thirdly, Water is most D. Hierom in Epist. ad Oceanum de Schola Rhetorum
Aquarum lauds eleganter praedicat.
profitable, to all things, as appears in that God made good use of it from
the beginning of the world. In the Creation, Gone. 1.
the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters: and God said, Let there
be a firmament in the midst of waters: and let divide the waters from the
waters: Genesis 6.7.8.
He drew the first living creature out of water: and he watered the earth
with water to make Man: by water he destroyed the world: he drowned the Exodus
14.
Egyptian army by water, and freed the people of Israel from their enemies by
water. Ioh 2.
JESUS the Son of God, turned water into wine. Math. 3.
He was baptized by water: Mare. 6.
He walked upon the waters and commanded them: and Joh. 4.6.
Jesus being wearied with his second journey into Galile sat thus on Jacobs
Well, to rest and refresh himself and others: yea even Psalm. 46.4.
To make glad the City of God.

Now Jacobs Well was there Ingredior sacros ausus recludere Fontes. Virg. Geor.
2.
.

Iam incipiunt Mysteria Augustine. tract. 15. in Ioh.
: Now to draw deeper then hitherto, and to fetch out of this Well other then
vulgar and ordinary Water, consider Christ himself is Jacob and his Well. For
he is Fons Vitae, THE FOVNTAINE OF LIFE Psalm. 36.9. Isa. 12.3.
, and as the Prophet Isaiah says, 12.3. Out of this Well, Isa. 12.3.
haurietis aquas in gaudio Saluatoris, with joy shall ye draw water of
salvation. By Water, is understood Learning, Wisdom, and Knowledge in
general, as S. Origin, Theodoret, and Basil the Great, interpret this Text of
the Evangelical Prophet. So Moses spoke to the people of Israel, Deuteronomie
32.2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the
deaw. Moses himself is thought to have had his name from his Learning, rather
then from that he was drawn and dragged out of the Flags, and Moses quasi ex
Aqua emersus: Moy enim Aquam Aegyptij vocant. Clem. Alex. l. 2. Strom. p 369.
^oachim a parentibus in circumcisione, Melchi vero in coelis, vt dicunt Mystae.
Water. For Moses was learned in all the doctrine of the Egyptians: and the
Egyptians themselves figured their mystical doctrine under an Hierogliphicke
of a rainy and ouercloudy heaven.

Hence the fabulous Poets imputed all their enthusiasmes, or so daine
inspirations, unto certain Wells and Fountains Nec Font labra prolui
Cabellino, sic vt repent Po^ta prodirem. Pers. in Prolog. Vnde Pater sitiens
Eunius ante bibit. Propert. cleg. 2. lib. 3. and multi alii.
. So the Athenian and Roman Orators compared their Eloquence to streams of
water, calling it, flumen orationis, vbertatem dicendi; dividing it, in grandem
alueum, modicum, and exilem. Likewise the ancient Philosophers were named
commonly Fontes Philosophiae, Wels of Learning; as namely in Moral
Philosophy, Water is taken for the four Cardinal Virtues.

But now above all other Arts and Sciences, out of this Well, ye shall draw
the doctrine of Divinity, briefly comprehended in the Holy Bible, more
summarily contained in the name of JESUS, which is the sacred Fountain of all
Learning. For in him are Colos. 2.3.
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: and as Jesus the son of
Sirach said, Ecclus. 24.31.
I will water abundantly my Garden-bed; and lo, my Brook became a River, and
my River became a Sea. And true, Christ is the little Well, that became Flumina
magna fluunt paruis de Fontibu^ orta.
a River, and ouerflowed with great waters: He is even Ezechiels River, Ezech.
47.
which issued from under the threshold of the Sanctuary, at first it did arise
but to the ancles, then to the knees, afterward to the loins, and at last
became a River that ouerflowed. Surely this made the Woman of Samaria say, John
4.
Puteus est profundus, The Well is deep, and so soon as she had tasted of
the water of it, left her water-pot, and went her way into the City, and said
to the men of Sychar, Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I
did: is not this the Christ? And she said to Christ himself, Sir, give me
this water, that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.

Ho Isai. 55.1.
then, every one that thirsts, come ye to these waters, and he that has no
money: come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money, and
without price! Come, this is Christ's call, Nulli praclusa gratia est, omnil us
patet, omnos admittit, omn^s inuit ^t, ingenu^s, libertinos, sernos, Reges, and
exules. Non eligit domum nec censum, nudo homine contenta est. Senec. de Ben.
lib. 3. c. 18.
generally inuiting all persons of what age, rank, degree, estate, or sex
soever in time of Grace, as particularly only to the Elect in day of Glory,
Come, says he, meaning your selves, and that you send not; To me, that is,
not to any other, neither to Angels, or to Saints, but only to Him, the
Fountain of Life.

But because many have forsaken this Fountain of living waters, and dug to
themselves Ier. 12.
Cisternes which hold no water of salvation, it shall not be amiss to discover
unto you these foul Cisternes, or muddy Wells, before I give you a taste of
this wholesome water of Jacobs Well in a spiritual sense. These Cisternes are
called in the Scriptures, the 2. Rec. 2.
Samaritans Well, or otherwise, Nehem. 2. Jude, 5. Exodus 15. Ierem. 9.^. Pe^^.
2.
Fons Draconis, Fons Amaritudinis, Fons Sanguinis, Fons Lachrymarum, which are
of a far contrary nature and different relish to that water, of this Sacred
Fountain. For they were stopped by the Prophet Ezechiel, when Sannacharib came
to besiege the City of 2. Paralip. 32. and 4. Reg 18.
Jerusalem: I mean these muddy Wells are the Roman dirty Cisternes which are
stopped and filled up with their own selfe-merits, Saint merits,
Supererogations, Satisfactions, Vide Taxam. Camerae Apostoli^ae and Claud.
Es^encaeum. in Titum.
Pardons, Indulgences, and such trash and tromperies.

The Papists I say, (to speak more plainly) endeavor what in them lies to
slander the pure Fountain of Gods sacred Scriptures, with imperfections Voie
l'Insufficience, and Imperfection de l'Escriture Saint de Sieur de Perron,
Euesque d'Eureux. contre Tilenus l'an 1598.
and obscurity Bellarm. passim.
; to stop them up with Traditions, Glosses, frothie Legends, and Lying
fictions, of Miracles. They have puddled and polluted with Salt, Oil, and
Spittle, the Sacramental water of Baptism, being the Fountain of our
New Birth. So have they stuffed the Sacramental Fountain of Christ's body and
blood, with a mass of Idolatries, Adorations, Eleuations, Genuflexions, and
such mimicke tricks, driving the Laypeople Pigh. Hierar. Eccles l. 3. c. 3.
Coster. Enchirid. c. 1. Lindan. Panop. lib. 1. c. 3. etc. Detorquentes (inquit)
quo volunt sacra Scripta.
as unclean beasts, from the Mystical stream of his precious Blood in the
Cup. To be brief, What sacred Order, or Ordinance have they not stained, or
defiled more or less, with the filth and dung of their own idle Inventions,
and blind Superstitions Superstitio fusa per gentes oppressit omnium fere
animos, atque hominum imbecillitatem occupauit Cic. de Diuinat. 2. Coeca
superstitio sese in caligine condens obscuris vera inuoluit, quo falsa reponit.
?

To discern then the one Well from the other; that of the Samaritans, from
this of Jacobs Well, observe these five properties of the Water drawn out of
Jacobs Well, subject to our five external senses. One is the clearenesse of
it, to the Eye: another is the harmonious Sound of it to the Ear: the third is
the sweet Smell of it, to the Nose: the fourth is the pleasant Taste, to the
Palate: the fifth and last is the Touching or feeling, to our Therein our
Fingers feel, our Nostrils smell, our Palats taste his virtues that excel. It
shows to your Eyes, talks to your Ears, etc. Du Bartas in his first weeks
work.
Fingers.

First, concerning the Clearness of it, it is certain Nunquam floriferis Fons
purior, the cristall was never clearer, fairer, and finer to the sight then it.
For the words of the Lord, Psalm. 12.
are pure as silver tried and purified seven times in a Furnace. And as it is
said in the Revelation Revel. 22.
; He showed me a pure river of Water of life, clear as cristall proceeding
out of the Throne of God. Nay this water of this Well is so clear, pure,
neat, and transparent, that it will not admit mixture with any other water; no
more then the quiet, calm, and gentle Lake of Geneua will have acquaintance,
with the raging, rouing, and roaring River of Roane, which runs through the
Lake: nor no better will it sort, and agree with other Waters then the fresh
River of Arethusa can sort with the salt Sycilian Per salsa fluentem aequora,
dulcorem incolumen seruare, nec vllam illis immisceri labem Aen. 3.
Sea.

Whereupon here it may be doubted, or demanded, whether we may use humane
Learning, Arts, and Sciences in our Sermons and divine Discourses? whereunto I
answer that in citing of humane writs for illustrating points of Divinity, it
is not so common, as commendable, if it be done without vanity and
ostentation, making choice of the best Authors for better understanding of the
Text, and more clear declaration of the truth. Sit illa Imperatrix caeterae
illi Mediastinae; so being, Dame Sara sits in the Chair of State, Agar and her
Handmaids may attend and serve her. This was the judgment of Origin in his
seventh Homily upon the tenth Chapter of Leuitious, saying, Quaecunque hene and
rationabiliter dicta inucnimus apud inimicos nostros, oportet nos mun dare and
resecare omne quod emortuum and inane est, hoc enim sunt omnes capilli capitis,
and vngulae muberis ex inimicorum spolijs assumptae, Origendeco citato.
When any of Israel took a maid in battle, he first pared her nails, and
shaued her head, before he married her; so we must pare away in humane Learning
all things noxius before we captive it to the use of Christian Religion. And
with him agrees Saint Augustine in his second Book of Christian Doctrine,
Chap. 40. We Philosophi si quae vera and fidei nostrae accommoda dixerunt, non
solum formidanda non sunt, sed ab iis etiam tanquam ab iniustis possessoribus
in vsum nostrum vendicanda. Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3.
rob the Egyptians of their jewels, when we convert Arts and Sciences to the
use of Theology. Clem. Alex. quam multus est de hac re, l. 1. Strom. c. 2.
Clement of Alexandria, Saint Basil the Great, Gregory of Nizanzen,
Tertullian, Arnobius, Lactantius, l. 5. c. 1. eas optime conciliat multis
rationibus.
Lactantius, Saint Hierome, and diverse others of the Fathers illustrate their
doctrine with authorities of Heathen Authors Sidon. Apollin.
vt nescias quid in eis primum mirari debeas, eruditionem populi, vel scientiam
Scripturarum. Art thou greater then, then our Father Jacob, and the Fathers,
which gave us the Well, and drank thereof himself, his children, and his
cattle. Christ himself reasoned many times from things earthly, to things
heavenly, Romans 1.
and Saint Paul writing to the Galathians 3.6. argues the case from the
positions of Lawyers and Politicians: particularly he cites three several
sentences out of profane Poets, Aratus.
Acts 17.18. Menander.
1. Corinthians. 15.33. Epimenides.
Titus 1.22. Yea he became a Jew, that he might gain the Jews, etc. and so
made all things to all men, that he might by all means save some. In my
opinion to this point, the Spider is never the more commendable because he
weaueth his web out of his own bowels, neither is the Be despised, because
she gathers her honey out of diverse flowers.

Consider again the color of our water, Aqua in diuersas plerumque se mutat,
species aut inter arenas slaua, aut inter caules spumea, aut inter nemomora
viridantior, aut inter florenta discolor, aut inter lilia fulgentior, aut inter
roseta rutilantior, aut in gramine liquidior, aut in Palude turbidior, aut in
Font prospicacior, aut in mari obscurior, Ambros.
which although in the Well or Spring, it is always uniform and of the same
color alike, yet in the course and running of it, there is nothing more
variable and changeable then it, according to its Objects. As on the sands it
is of golden color; amongst the rocks and stones it is froathy; along Meadows
it is green; in running through Gardens, amongst Flowers it is like the
Rainbow; so in the Word of God, there are diversities of gifts but the same
Spirit; diversities of administrations, but the same Lord; diversities of
operations, but God is the same who works all in all, 1. Cor. 12.4.

There were diversities of gifts amongst the Apostles, as boldness in Peter;
profoundnesse in Paul; loftiness in John, compared to an Eagle; vehemency
both in him, and his brother James, surnamed the Sons of Thunder; seruencie
of spirit in Simon the Zealous.

Diversities of gifts amongst the Fathers, whereof some construed the Scripture
literally, as Hierome; others, Allegorically, as Origin; others, morally, as
Gregory the great; others Rathetically, as Chrysostom; others dogmatically,
as Sextu^ Senensis Biblioth. Patrium lib. 3. p. 187.
Augustine; all of them (as worthy Enar. symbol. Nicene. Tom. 1. fol. 393.
Melancthon is bold to deliver) in the main Articles of Religion,
Apostolically.

So were there diversities of gifts among our modern Writers, as Luther wrote
on the walls of his Chamber with Chalk:

In colloquio de Erasmo.
Res and verba Philippus, res sine verbis Lutherus.
Verba sine re Erasmus, nec res, nec verba Carolastadius.
Who more compendious then Calvin? more eloquent then Beza? more judicious
then Martyr? more copious then Zanchie.

Yea, there are diversities of gifts amongst those of this Reverend Society,
which I resemble to the twelve Fountains at Exodus 15.27.
Elim; or rather, to Jacob and his twelve Sons the Genesis 46.27
Patriarchs; or more fitly for our purpose, to Jesus with his twelve Apostles;
meaning Master Deane and the twelve Bis sex coelefles, medio Jove, sedibus
altis, Augusta grauitate sedent.
Prebends; whom I commend thus, according to the graces and gifts of God
bestowed upon them severally and In eloquendo est aliqua diuersit as: densior
ille hic copiosior i^le concludit arctius, hic latius: pugnat ille accumine
semper, hic frequenter and pond^re; illi nihil detrabi potest, huic nihil
adiici, curae plus in illo, in hoc naturae, Quintil. lib. 10.6.1.
diversely, in one consent of faith: as sweetness in Socrates; subtlety in
Lysias; sharpness in Hyperides; shrilnesse in Aeschines; powerfulness in
Demosthenes; gravity in Aphrican; smoothness in Loelius; copiousnesse in
Carbo; learning in Palaemon; the stately style of Agraecius; the methodicall
discourse of Alcimus; the mincing-like of Adelphius, and the flowing tongue of
your Learned Lecturer, whom I may justly name (...), that is to say, fluuiosum,
such is the volubility of his speech, and other diverse gifts.

Likewise there are diversities of gifts amongst the six Preachers of this
Church, whom I name under these Titles of six other old Orators; as
adstrictior Caluus; numerosior Asinius; splendidior Caesar; amatior Coelius;
grauior Brutus; plenior Tullius.

And (with permission) there are diversities of gifts amongst us Non omnia
possumus omnes Nihil est ab omni part beatum, Hor. lib. 2. carm Od. 16. ex
Pindaro Euripide, Theog.
ordinary and rural Ministers, who come hither now and then upon entreaty;
Alij sensu ampli, sed non ore; alij sensu inopes, sed ore torrentes; alij neque
sensu ampli, neque ore; alij sensu ampli and ore. Some have bad utterance, but
a good conceit; others an excellent utterance, but a mean wit; some neither;
and some both. One p surpasses in expounding the words; another is excellent
in delivering the matter; a third happy for cases of conscience; a fourth
exquisite in determining Schoole-doubts. In a word, some be judicious to
inform the understanding, others powerful to reform the will and affections.
All these diverse gifts are from above, coming down from one and the same
Fountain with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. James
Chapter. 1. Ver. 17.

Secondly, Turn and hearken to the purling noise of this our Water, Ebullit
animus me us verbum bonum, Psalm. 46.
boiling and bubling up at the Springs head. Fontibus atque antris, gaudens and
montibus, Echo! Frangit inexpletas, iterato murmr voces.
Hear how the water gusheth, flows, and streameth out on every side, how the
Psalm. 19.
sound of Gods word is gone out into all Lands. This sound was prophesied by
King David, commanded by Christ, practiced by his Apostles, and ever to be
performed by their Acts 2.46.
Successors. We should all pray, praise and preach the Lord with one accord.
And in very deed, Patriarcharum vinculum, Prophetarum vehiculum, Apostolorum
resugium, Martyrum solatium, Author lib. ad fratres in heremo sermon. de pace
This is the life of a Christian, the bond of the Patriarchs, the Chariot of
the Prophets, the refuge of the Apostles, the solace of Martyrs, a sign and
token of the Church Militant here on earth, and an holy exercise of the Church
Triumphant above in Heaven. Without which eloquence is but vain, Prophecy is
imperfect, Knowledge is nothing, Faith is dead, the works of mercy are
rejected, Martyrdom it self is not accepted, all other gifts and graces of
the spirit are but as a sounding brass and tinkling Cymball.

Thirdly, The smell of Jacob is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has
Gen 27.27.
blessed: and the Water of his Well excels all other Waters in sent
whatsoever, whether they are naturally sweet, Ecclus 39.13.
or by art and composition. For Aliter olet flos vuae, aliter flos oliuae,
aliter flos rosae, aliter flos lilii, aliter flos violae, aliter redolet spica
etc. Gregor. homil. 5. in Ezechiel.
although the Rose has its proper sweet smell by it self; the Lilly by it
self; the Violet, the Pinke, the Gilly-flower, and so the rest by themselves,
yet are they not put together for sweet sent comparable to the water of this
Well. Nor was that Well near to Missenum, which Cardanus de Subtilitate.
Cardanus writes, smelled so sweet of Cizinum, as if it had been compounded of
the root of Iris, of Saffaron, and of Myrrh; nor was that most fragrant and
odoriferous Fountain of Caburra in Mesopotamia, so sweet and comfortable to
the smell, as Jacobs Well. Although the foolish Antiquity imagined their
fabulous Goddess Home Juno fer tur terris magis omnibus vnam, Posthabitam
coluisse Samo.
Juno sat ofttimes on that Well, and therefore caused it smell so sweetly; yet
it is certain, our true God JESUS sat thus on Jacobs Well, and so made it
smell far sweeter. 2. Cor. 2.14.
And thanks be unto God, which always makes manifest the savor of his
knowledge by us in every place: for we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ,
in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the one we are the savor
of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto life; and who is
sufficient for these things? 2. Cor. 2.14. etc.

Fourthly, Psalm. 34.8.
Taste also how good is the Lord; how this water exceeds all other waters in
taste to the palate; even the waters of Coaspi and Eleui fluuiorum fic adeo
suaues aquae fuisse dicunturr vt ex cis Reges biberent vnde and dici possent
fluuii Regum, ab illo vsu: qua de re Aelianus var. bist. l. 12. c. 40. Herodot.
Plin. lib. 31. cap. 3.
Coaspes, and Euleus which the Persians esteemed so much. For allthough the
waters of these two Rivers prolonged the lives of the Kings of Persia, yet they
made them not to live for ever; but whosoever drinks of our water, it shall
be in him a Well of water springing up into everlasting life. So whosoever
drinks of any other water, thirsts again, Rupert. in 4. Ioh.
and the oftener he drinks the more is he dry; But whosoever drinks oc this
water shall never thirst. What say I this water is better in taste then all
other waters, when it is more pleasant to the palate, and more profitable to
the heart then Clitorio quicunque sitim de Font leuaret Vina fugit, gaudetque
meris abstemius vnd^s.
Wine, even then that wine called; Monembraticum Cretense, or that Vinum
germinans Scalig. exerc. 99. page 339.
virgins, which were in so great account amongst the Ancients? for the first
cup of wine is pleasure, the second cup is loss of senses, and the third of
repentance; or as Solomon Pro. 25.
says, At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, or a
Cockatrice Basiliscum dicunt suo aspectu corrump^^e suos spectatoros., Basil.
in c. 3. in Esa. p 685. Ambros sermon. 10. in Ps. 118. Lucan lib. 9 Plin. l. 8.
c. 21.
where our water is that Nectar and Ambrose which Homer said the Heathen Gods
did drink; or it may be called the Nepenthes of alluring Helena, which
bewitched all displeasure, and it made men forget their greatest troubles and
vexations, as was fained of the River V^^g. Aen 6.
Lethe. Let us give this water then to him that is ready to perish, and to
those that be of heavy Prou. 31.6.
hearts. for this water is more cordial then any distilled hot water soever;
nay, it is more healthful, light, and of easy digestion in the stomach,
seeing it is a Well of water springing up into everlasting life. And seeing the
nature and property of common and ordinary water is, to ascend again so
high, as from whence it descended at Repetunt proprios quaeque recursus,
redituque suo singula gaudent, Boet. 3 pros. 2. de consol.
first, it is no marvel our Savior said, I came forth from the Father, and am
come into the world: again, I leave the John 16.28.
world.

Moreover, this is likewise the nature and property of good water only to
taste of water, and to have no other relish in the mouth; Sicut aquae nullus
inesse debet n^c succus, vel sapor, vel odor, test Plinio, lib. 15. c. 23. ita
aquae idiuinae gratiae nullus admisceri debet sapor vel odor terrae, sed Coeli
ac Dei ipsius vnde venit. Amor Dei nihil aliud quaerit praeter Deum, cuncta
spernit, cuncta despicit, omnia sibi vilescunt; quia ei solus Christus
dulcescit. Ber. sermon. 9. in Caena Domini.
so this Water of Jacobs Well tastes only of God, and of no other thing, not
of the World, of the Flesh, or of the Devil. z It is true, some water is
brackish, and tastes of Salt, some of Steel, or of Iron, some of some mineral
or of other; but the water of Jacobs Well is most sweet, and tastes only of
Honey, as was prophesied, Psalm, 81.16. And with Honey out of the Rock,
should I have satisfied thee. Brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant,
how that all our Fathers did drink of that spiritual Rock, and that Rock
was Christ. 1. Cor. 10.1.

Fifthly and finally, the Feeling of this Water is not only sensible to the five
senses, without, but also it is common to the common sense of Fantasy within
Nihil in intellectu quod non suerit prius in sensu. Aristotel. Scalig. ex^rcit.
18 and 307. a duersus Cardanum.
. For this Well is the Poole of Bethesda, having five Porches, by which
whosoever goes into it with Faith, he shall be cured from all diseases,
sicknesses, sorrows, and sores soever Omnia Jesus Christus est nobis si
volumus: curari desidenas? medicus est; schribus aestuas? sons est; grauaris
iniquitate? iusti^la est; auxilio indiges? virtus est; mortem times? vita est,
etc. Ambros. lib. de virginit.
. JESUS is the Well, and He according to the number of the five letters in his
Name, and so many wounds on his precious Body, may be justly called ENTAIAON,
or the Name of five letters, bearing this word YEIA in Greek; Salus in Latin;
Salve in English; as that ENTATION, which in former times, was mysteriously
revealed unto King Antiochus, surnamed the Savior, for the saving and
delivering the bodies of his Reuclin. lib. 3. de Caba!. Eusebius. in vita
Constantini lib. 1. c. 25.
people; whereas JESUS saves both the bodies and souls of his people; His
own, and of others; once, and for ever; and therefore most worthily to be
called our Savior.

Thus having discovered Jacobs well plainly enough, so that we can distinguish
it from that foul Well of the Samaritans, we must consider now, one of the
first, chief, and necessary means to save us, is by washing with the water
of it. O Aqua quae Christi Sacramentum essc meruisti, quae lauas omnia, nec
lauar is. Tu incipis prima, tu comples persecta mysteria. Ambros. in Luc. 22.
Christ himself assures us this in a double asseueration thus; Ioh. 3.5.
Verily, verily, except a man be borne of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God. Where Water is an outward necessary mean to
our Regeneration Com. Catechist
, so the Spirit is an inward cause, and therefore both be joined in our
Baptism. For Anglicana confess. artic. 27. and art. 25.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession, and mark of difference, whereby
Christian men are discerned from other that be not christened: but it is a sign
of Regeneration, whereby as by an instrument they that receive Baptism
rightly, are grafted into the Church. And as Sermon. 14. de Passion. Dom. cap. 5.
Leo speaks, incorporated into Christ: Ephesians. 5.30.
flesh as it were of Christ's flesh, and bone of his bone: the Spirit in this
our New birth is in stead of a Father, the Water in Maldonat. in locum.
stead of a Mother. Therefore in this sense the Scripture terms Baptism a
Tit. 3 5.
Bath of Regeneration, Ep^ ^ 26.
whereby God cleanses his Church, unto Act 3.38.
remission of sins: and hence may we say and sing of Jacobs Well, as
Paulinus ep. 12. ad ^euerum.
Paulinus wrote of the Fountain of his Baptism.

Hic reparandarum generator fons animarum,
Viuum diuino flamine flumen agit:
Sanctus in hunc coelo, descendit Spiritus amnem
Coelestique sacras igne maritat aquas.
Hence Non li^uit Israelitis, nisi lotis, purgatis, and p^aeparatis, manna
vesci, etc. Quid igitur hinc dicemus? Nisi quod oportebat fidei Baptisma lauari
omni victure, omni Euangelica doctrina, m^ndos puresque animos nostros: sacere:
ita vt omnimo alierigeni mores and Algyptiaca cita, vitiorum scil. omnium turba
nos deserat, and demum depurato, desaecateque animo coelestem ^ibum esse
accipiendum. Haec omnia Nyssenus (...) vita Moysis.
moreover we may easily observe, there was never any Sect or Religion, true or
false, Christian or Ethnicke, in which they did not use to wash, before ever
they entered into their Congregation. As in the Law of Nature, it was written
upon the door of Diana's Temple, (...): in the Law of Moses, it was commanded
under the pain of death, that none should come into the Tabernacle, before
they washed; and for this purpose, the Lauer (made of women's Looking glasses)
was set at the door of the Tabernacle. Exodus 30.20. and the Jews at this day
wash before ever they enter into their Synagogues. So you see in all Christian
Churches the Font is placed at the great door and first entry, as commonly in
every Cathedral Churchyard, (as here) there is a Conduit, signifying we must
all be washed by the water of Baptism. The Turks likewise wash before they
go into their Mosquees: and the Idolatrous Gentiles washed, before ever they
could be admitted unto their superstitious Sacrifices Macrob. Satur. l. 3. c.
1. Virg. Aenei 6. Ovid. Fast 5. Persius Satyr. 2. Ex principe peeta declarat.
Augustine l. 21. de Cuit. Dei, c. 13. Seruius praeterea hoc explicat. E^ de hac
re videndus Clem. Alexand. l. 7. Stromat.
. After whose example, and imitation, those of the Roman Church sprinkle
themselves with Holy Water, at their first coming into their Synagogues Ter
socios pura circumfluit un la, Spargens rore leui. etc. Virg. Beller. tom. 2.
page 2. De Aqua benedicta. etc.
. Seeing then, washing has ever been in use, in all ages, among all nations
and people whatsoever, why should we not wash before all our spiritual
exercises, and divine action? especially in regard, JESUS at this time has set
open a Fountain for Judah, and Jerusalem to wash in?

Yet before we come to our washing, observe these five differences of the
water of this Fountain, from the water of any other Well or Fountain. First,
One is, other water can only wash our bodies and outward things; whereas this
water can wash both bodies and souls, the whole man within, as without Isa.
43. Ezech. 36.25.
. Secondly, Another difference is, no other water can wash clean without Soap,
Ashes, Lie, some scouring balls, or such tersiue helps; but this Water of it
self alone washes very clean. Thirdly, No other water washes so clean, but
there remains some spot, stain, or blot behind, yet this water leaves none;
and which more is, it makes all things fairer and cleaner then they were at
first. Fourthly, Other water washes out only these spots that are easily
done, whereas this water works with all pain and labor while all be clean.
Fifthly, What is made clean with ordinary water, is soon fouled again; but
whatsoever is washed and made clean with this water of Jacobs Well, shall
never be defiled afterward. Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I
cleanse you. Ezechiel. 36.25. Nunc lauabo, vt rem diuinam faciam. Plaut. in
Aulul. act. 5. s^ 1.


And where can I begin better to wash you, then at the Face, which is the
most eminent and apparent part of the Body, thereon to see our spots? If any
then does abuse Gods Image, and attempt to control, or correct his
workmanship, adding to that Face, which S. James terms natural, the borrowed
feature of an artificial Face, suffer not me, but S. Ambrose, to tell you,
that this dawbing, painting, and parietting of the Face, is in some respect
worse then Adultery it self. Ambros. lib. 6 Hexam. c. 8. Pollux. l 5 c. 16 At
hui^smodi mulieres sec^^ndum Locrum, n^n sacien sed laruam gestare. itat ur
etiam a Coel. Rodig. l 29. c. 7.
. For in this foul fact, persona vitiatur, the person only is polluted, but in
that ungodly and unnatural painting, natura laeditur, even nature herself is
more then too much spoiled and corrupted. Wash off then for shame these painted
colors, and counterfeit complexion from thy foul Face, with the water of
Jacobs Well, or else they will be rubbed off with Fire and Brimstone. Terque
seven. flamma, ter aqua, ter sulp^ure lustrat. Ovid. Metam. 6.


In the Face there is a most vile, oughly, and deformed blemish, called
Impudency, and it is seated on the Forehead. Which although it defiles many a
man's Brow, yet is it perceived but of few, and least of those especially, who
are most infected with it. Contrary to this is Ver cundia cum sit omnibus
aelati us, person^s, temporibus, and loc is apta, tamen adolescentes
iuuenilesque annos maxim^ d^cet. Ambr. l. 1. Offic.
Shamefastness, which shows the differing constitution of a modest, sober,
and wise man, from shameless, sensual, and senseless creatures, not worthy
the name of men. For as the Shameless man has lost all good manners, honesty,
and civility, so the Shamefast man is careful of his credit, and is afraid of
a just reproof in all his actions Ita enim Philoso* hi apud Gellium Noct.
Attic. l. 19. c. 6. (...), Pudor just vituperationis est tunor. Quam
sinitionem sequitur Damascen. l. 2. fidei orthod. c. 15. and Thom. Aquin. 2.2.
quaest. 116. art. 2.
: and if he fail at any time, in his thoughts, words, or deeds, a lovely blush
recalleth him into the way of virtue, and shows it self on his Front. There
Shamefastness dwells, and may be thus described, as it was pictured* or
drawn by a cunning hand, above four hundred years ago, and the Table yet
sound, and the colors fresh. Vercoundia est virga disciplinae, expugnatrix
malorum, propugnatrix veritatis innatae, specialis gloria conscientikae, same
custos, vitae decus, virtutis seeds naturae laus, and insigne totius honesti.
Bern. sermon. 86. in Cant. Vide etiam Alciati ^mbl. 196. in Pudoris statuam.
She is the Daughter of Fear, (even of that Fear of God, which is the
beginning of Wisdom) the Sister of Continency, the Discouerer of Simplicity,
the Lamp of Chastity, the Defender of Purity, Consciences Glory, Fames
Keeper, Life's Honor, Virtues Seat, Natures Praise, Honesties Cognizence. Yet
as lovely as she is, she is but little set by in this sensual Age, which
has a Brow of Brass, there being a number of men and women, whose Forehead
refuse to be Ashamed.

This foul vice of Impudency, may be fitly compared unto a certain disease,
named in Latin Vitiligo, which Apuleius in Magiae sua.
Apuleius describes to be a thick, gross, stinking, corrupt humor, bred in
a man's body, and breaks out at first on the Front. Varro Varro auctor est,
Titium quendam praetura functum, marmorei signi sacem habuisse propter id
vitium, Plin. l. 31. c. 2.
writes of one named Titius, who had been a Praetor of Rome, yet being touched
with this evil, was more like an Image of Marble, a block, or a stone,
without all sense and feeling, then like a man. Whereupon Lucilias said justly,
haec odiosa mihi Vitiligo est. Conform to this filthy, loathsome disease
amongst the Ancients, there is a sickness that reigns now adays amongst us,
which is very like to that in sense and sound, or in name and effect, called
Vitilitigatio, that is to say, Vitiosa Litigatio. No doubt, Vitiligo, and
Vitilitigatio, are two Twins, Daughters begotten of the same Father and
Mother, both bred up at one breast; which make me say plainly, haec odiosa mihi
Vitilitigatio, I love not Law Suites. Not that I condemn the Law, or think
the Law is sin; God forbid: nay the Law is holy, just and good, as Saint Paul
said, Romans 7.6. But Vitilitigatores Hi sunt qui causas protendunt adbibiti,
impediunt praetermissi, obliuiscuntur locupletati. Hi sunt qui emunt lites,
vendunt intercessiones, deputant arbitros, iudicanda dictant dictato
conuellunt, attrahunt Litigatores, protrahunt audiendos, retrahunt transig
nies. Sidon. Apol. sed elegantiuc* Orig. s^per i^lud Exo* 8. Percutiam omnes
Terminos tuos ranis.
tantum extimesco, I am so much afraid of Wrangling Lawyers, Who sell us under
sin, and are not ashamed of whatsoever injustice they have committed against
the Law of God, and of man. But I wish they would wash this filthy stain from
their faces or foreheads in time.

Under the Brow we should all wash our Eyes the seat of tears giving so much
cause of them, and of many Eye-sores. Oculi nos in omnia vitia praecipitant,
mirantur, adama^t, concupiscunt, Qumt. decla. 2. Oculi sunt in amore d^^es.
. We should even wash them with our Tears, as the only Collyrium or Eye-salue
to cure all the sore Eyes in this World, and able to wipe all the tears from
our Eyes in the World to Revel. 7.17.
come.

Next to our Eyes, we must wash our Ears: for the Eye and Ear, are like
Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil, Vasa iniquitatis bellantia, Instruments of
cruelty in their habitation Genesis 49.5.
of corrupted Ears I may empannell a whole Jury, yet not one of them good or
true. As Midas Auriculas Midae quis non habet? Pers. Sat. 1. Sic de Petron. 9.
Ears; Malchu's Ears, who will hear but with the left Fare, Peter having cut
off the right Qui statuit ^liquid part inaudita altera, Aequum licet statuerit
haud aequus tamen, Sen. in Medea.
Ear; Athenian Ears; curious; cryticall; and hypocritical Ears, etc. which
all should well be washed.

And so should our Mouth be well washed, as full of Ulcers, Cankers, Swellings
and Sores. Therein is poison of Aspes under the, Psalm. 58.41.
Lips; Teeth are as swords; jaws as Pro. 30.14.
Knives; the Tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly member which defiles the
whole body, and sets on fire the course of James 3.6.
nature, the Throat is an open Isay 59.7.
Sepulcher, and so require all to be thoroughly washed.

If the Mouth be thus foul, and needs to be washed thoroughly, what
requires the Heat, out of the abundance whereof the Mouth Mat. 12.34. Mark
7.21.
speaks? Out of this evil treasure, nothing but evil can be produced. The
Heart is wicked and deceitful above all Ier. 17.9.
things: who know it but God the Searcher of all Heb. 11.
hearts, which prohibits me further inuestigation of her wickedness.

I will wash my hands in innocence then O Lord, and so will I go to thine
Psalm. 26.6. Date manibus famuli limpha^. Et manibus puris sumite Fontis aquam.
Altar. Thus the Divine should wash his hands-with King David, Psalm. 26.6. and
every Lawyer should say with the Prophet Esaias 33.15. I will shake mine hands
from holding of bribes. For As Saint Bernard says, magnum est homini seculari
mundas habere manus, It is much for a Layman to keep his hands clean, so (me
thinks) a Clergiemans hands should not be foul any ways.

Likewise we must all wash our feet as well as our hands; otherwise they
cannot be kept clean. For even the feet of the best and godliest men in this
life, are often dabled or defiled, trampling in the World.

A Minister in his most Angelical calling, may gather soil in his Philosophi
antiquiores, quique doctrinam eorum sequuti sunt, pedes pro contemperssima
part posuerunt, esseque in anima pedes^affectus voluptarios Veneree
mollitrdini mancipatos.
feet if not by his ignorance or negigence, yet through the dirt of the World;
therefore he must shake the dust of his feet before he go into the Pulpit.
Magistrates, Justices, and others in Authority are to be feared and suspected
they are foul in their feet: for though no corruption (perhaps) cleave to
their own hands or feet, yet may it be brought into the house, by some dirtie
complayner or other; by some clay Clyant, and foul causes: or else privately
fetched in by some rigorous Seriant, by some crafty Clarke, or cunning
servant, walking in foul ways. Tradesmen in their Trades cannot sweep their
shoppes so clean, but they leave some dust of deceit, some slurtish corner of
double-dealing Qui cauet ne decipiatur vix cauet, etiam cum cauet, and cum
cauisse ratus, seapius author captus est, Plaut. in Cast. Nam-Plenius aequo
laudat vaenales qui vult extrudere merces, Horat. lib. 2. Epist.
which are to to be wiped and rubbed from their feet, (that is to say properly)
from their affections Quis metus aut pudor est vnquam proporantis auari, Iuuen.
14.
. For the feet are taken for the base and earthly affections of the mind,
which moved Saint Augustine to say, Pes meus, affectus meus; eo feror quocunque
feror S. Aug. Homil. 50. Tom. 10.
. And in this sense, Jesus said to Simon Peter, he that is washed, needs not
save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit, John 13.10.

Let us then wash our feet, I mean, the affections, passions and perturbations
of the mind; yea, the whole man within and without, up and down, to and fro.
For ye know, Vas non potest been lauari, nisi concutiatur, nisi fex
expellatur, nisi postea mundum seruetur. God when he threatened to wash well the
Vessel of the Earth to make it clean from imperfections, he said by his
Prophet Isaiah 24.19. Confractione confringetur terra, contritione conteretur,
commotione commouebitur, agitatione agitabitur. The earth is utterly broken
down, the earth is clean dissolved, the carth is moved exceedingly, the earth
shall reele to and fro, thereby to make it clean and neat. Naaman the Syrian
was willed to wash himself seven times in Jordan, and that rather for our
instruction and example, then for his own benefit. For his sickness was only
a Leprosy in the body, where our souls and bodies are both leprous with
sin: and if he but for one Leprosy washed himself seven times, how much
more ought we every time we sin to be sorry for it and if we do not wash
our selves seven times for seven sins, seeing the most just of us all (as
Solomon witnesses) may seven times fall in one day, Prou. 24.16.

Oh how ought we then to wash and bath our selves, and that even seventy
times seven Matthew. 18.22 Hoc est, 490. Origen^sed melius Maldonat in locum,
vicibus innumerabiliter innumerabilibu^. Toties quoties. Aug. sermon. 15. de
verbis Dom.
; whether we look upward toward God whom we have offended, or downward upon
Hell, which we have deserved, or backward upon our sins committed, or
forward upon judgment to be feared, or without us upon the deceitful world
which we have loved, or within us upon our polluted conscience, in assurance
of heart, our sins thus thoroughly washed, are purged and made clean with the
pure and living Water of Jacobs Well.

Now Jacobs Well was there.

Behold now for our Application, and third sense, how my Lord Archbishop Abbots
Conduit sorteth by Analogy with Jacobs Well, and what proportion or
correspondencie is between them two, according to the five former occurrences
in the letter; Non tota res totae rei necesse est similis sit: sed ad ipsum ad
quod confertur, similitudinem habeat oportet, Author ad He^en. lib 4.
especially in these circumstances will serve most fitly for our best
instruction.

As first consider (Situm) your Conduit is seated in the midst of this City,
between two famous Churches, though somewhat nearer to the one, then to the
other, and that rather done of purpose, then by chance in my conceit. Vrbs
peruetusta proculdubio illastris, Nec adeo magna (vt inquit Malmesburiensis)
nec exiliter parua, quae and terrae positione soli affinis maxima vbertate, and
integro murorum ambitu, fluuijs irrigua, nemorum opportunitate inclita,
praeterea Maris vicinitate piscium foecunda, etc.
Wherein look to the City it self, and you will see it is builded in the
sweetest Air, between two little Hills, amidst the richest soil above the
Valley of fatness, Larga vbi foecunda rerum vndat copia cornu; where is Gods
plenty without ploughing or sowing, reaping or keeping; you are fed like the
fowls of the Air, and grow up as the Lillies of the field, a thousand times
more happily, then if Corn grew at your doors, or Cattle grazed in your
streets, near enough the benefits, and far enough from the dangers of the
Seas, in the best place of the chiefest Shire of this Country, even in Haec
tantum alias inter caput extulit vrbes, Quantum inter viburna Cupressi.
Canterbury, the Metropolis or Head-Towne of Kent, if not of All England. In
this City there be Hospitals and Almes-houses for the entertainment of old,
aged, decayed folks, and a Nurserie of young Orphans; a Bridewell for the
correction and employment of idle persons; a Kings Free School, where youth
may drink in the first liquour of wholesome Learning; and amongst many other
Works of Charity, now here is Jacobs Well, or Abbots Conduit, flowing forth
abundantly wholesome and good water, To the Use of this City; But above all
other Monuments, here is the Cathedral and Metropoliticall Christi Templum in
medio quasi vrbis sinu, tanta maistate, vt se in Coelum erigit, vt procul etiam
intuentibus Religion^m incutiat. Erasmus in Peregrin^nd Religionis ergo.
Church of Christ, Eccl^sia mira^di operis, Beda
which is a wonderful piece of work to the beholders; and near unto it,
within the walls of the City, there are Twelve Parish Churches; wherein weekly
on the Sabbath and Holidayes, (as daily in the Cathedral Church,) the fresh
springs of our hope and comfort, by Reading and Preaching the Sacred Word of
God, as by streams and so many Conduits do continually refresh and make glad
the City of God. O sortu^atos nimium sua si bona norint Cantuarienses.
Oh happy then are you of this City, if you knew your own happiness!

Secondly, This Conduit is built within the City, and not without the Town;
Hinc commodius mundius, suauius, minoreque sumpi^^ ciues victitant, nec iam
facile, siti cogente, in hostrum potestatem incident cum obsidentur.
thereby to your greater Use, ease and delight in time of Peace, and to your
less danger in time of Wars. For the Genesis 26.15.
Philistines could not show their spite in any thing so much to the Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, as to stop up their Wels. Neither (that we may
speak of latter times) did the Sleidan. com. 18
Romish Philistin in any thing so deeply discover his malice, as when he sent
Poysoners to corrupt the Wels of the Protestant countries in Germany.

Thirdly, And this Lauda and latare filia Sion, quia ecce ego venio, and
habitabo in medio tui, ait Dominus. Zach. 2.10.
Conduit is sealed in the midst of the City; thereby to convey more
conveniently the current or streams thereof, unto the chief streets of the
Town, and there to serve every man more readily to his private Use. In this
point, Art imitated Nature, which affects always the midst, as the Sun is
set in the midst of the Planets, and the Heart as the Fountain of life and
heat, is placed in the midst of the members.

Fourthly, In that it is erected Vide quid de hoc dicat Bellar. lib. de
Beatitud. Sanctorum ca. vlt.. Respondeo Sanctor. Baron. Eccle. siast. Annal.
Tom. 2. ad an. 290. ex editione Romana.
between two famous Churches, named Saint Georges and Saint Andrew's, (both
worthy Patterns it not Patrons of these two mighty Nations England and
Scotland; Nos gentes natien^sque distinguimus, Deo vna domus est mundus hic
totus. Minut. Faelix.
thereby to teach us, that as heretofore these two Kingdoms lived in one
Continent (although much different by their fatal division,) both by Sea
divided from people adjacent, both of one Language, both worshipping one God,
both of one Faith, both of one Baptism, and both of one Communion, so now
(praised be God) they live as one People, under one King, and one Law. Yea, as
Water is a symbol of Amity, Peace and Concord, so the seating of this
Conduit, between these two Churches, Iam vero vt quaeque nobiscum maxim
amicitia, sponsione, foedere, pactione coniuncta est, ita nobis maxim
communionem beneficiorum, praemiorumque ciuitatis continere videatur, Cic. pro
Cornel. ^albo.
signifies we are not to build up a Babylon through our confusion and former
Feuds, but to reedifie one Church in one Union and Communion ever hereafter.

Fifthly, In that this Conduit is seated somewhat the nearer to Saint Andrews
Church then to Saint Georges, it is (in my opinion) to reveal that old
Prophecy foretold of the Patriarch Jacob, now accomplished in our King James
For although his Majesty is not half a birth, as was Jacob, but one only
Son, cutting short thereby all dispute of Titles Genesis 25.23. Romans 9.9. and 12
and Birthright with Elder Esaues; yet as God said to Rebecca, two Nations are
in thy womb, and the one shall be mightier then the other, and the elder shall
serve the younger: so in the person of our Princely Jacob, were two Nations
borne, to wit, Scotland and England; whereof the elder may be said in some
sort, to serve the younger, in so far as England being In hoc dissimiles, ^d
coetera poene gemelli.
Mayor or Melior, is now come under his Majesty's government, being then of
only Scotland, and so Minor. Howsoever this observation holds in the
general, it is certain, Vsus communis Aquarum est etc. Ovid. Metam 6.
this Conduit is patent or open in particular unto Tros Tiriusque sibi nullo
discrimine habetur.
Scottish as to English, and to all Forrainers or Strangers, as to the
Inhabitants of this City.

Secondly, Consider [Structuram,] the Work it self, in Matter and in Form;
in the Principal and in the Accessorie, and ye will find them wholly To the
Use of the City. Gaze not only upon it, as little children look upon their
painted Book, but think, as there was no Pin in Salomons Temple, which was
not serviceable to some holy Use, In omnibus Timan this operibus plus
intelligitu semper quam pingitur: and cum ars summa sit, ingenium tamen vltra
artemest. Plin. lib. 35. c 10.
so is there not any thing in this Conduit, which is not profitable for our
instruction.

The Fabrike or Architecture it self is Horat. de Art Poet.
Monumentum aere Annare and perennare in perpetuas aelernitates (...).
perennius, a Monument more durable then brass: and seeing Monuments are so
called, as monentia mentem, monitors of the mind, let me be so bold as to
admonish you (Citizens of Canterbury) that you be thankful toward our
Benefactor; at least, beware that you be not thought unthankful. Ingratus est
qui beneficium: se accepisse negat quod accepit, Ingratus est qui dissimulat,
Ingratus est qui non reddit; Ingratus omnium qui oblitus est. Seneca 3. de
^^rn. ficijs.
He is unthankful (says Seneca) who is unmindful of a benefit which he has
received; unthankful that requites it not; unthankful that denies it; but
most unthankful that dissembleth it. Such is this favor, that we can never
requite it, nor can we dissemble it (the very stones of the walls of it will
cry out, and the water of it will murmur and mutter against us) yet let us
never forget the Gift nor the Giver. Let it not grieve us to speak good of his
Name, Non mibi si cunctos Helicon indulgeat annos, Et superet Pymplea sitim,
largeque voluntis, Vngula sedet Equi, reseretque a^rcana pudicos Phoemonoe
fo^tes
nay seeing our words are not able sufficiently to express his praise, (quid
nisi vota supersunt?) let us pray for his health and prosperity.

Another monition is, that you of best means or wealth would open your Wels to
the Rabbini egenum and pauperem de insirmo and quasi aegritudine attenuato^
exponunt, non de vulgatis pauperibus. (...) enim egenus, otiam apud nos sumitur
pro infirmo, vnde apud Epiph. and Can. 8. Chaloedonens. Concilii (...).
Hospitium pauperum and in firmorum.
poor members of Christ. If you cannot build a Conduit, yet you can refresh
the poor. And you know if our Savior promised a reward for a cup of cold
water, given in season for his sake, Si poculum frigidae aquae iustificat
misericordem, quanta retributio omnia distribuentem pauseribas excipiet? Nilus
Episc. admo 185
what is a cup o^ cold water in comparison of a fair costly Conduit full of
good water? When any of the Poor sit hungry, thirsty, weary or cold at your
Wells or doors, pretend not a Statute to spare your purses, as the woman of
Samaria refused water to our Savior, to save her pains. Cast thy bread upon
the waters; for thou shall find it after many days. Si been quid facias fac
c^o: nam cito factii gratum erit, ingratum gratia tarda sacit.
If thou intendest any good work for a public benefit, to the Church or
Commonwealth, delay it not, nor remit it not to your Heirs or Executors, lest
you should seem to dare trust them better with your goods, then your selves,
and so consequently, the work prove theirs rather then yours. Romans 12.1.
God loves a living sacrifice, and 2 Cor. 9.7.
a cheerful giver: and it has been an old rule in liberality, He gives
twice that gives quickly, whereas slow benefits argue unwillingness, and
lose their worth. Let us do good then in our own time, that we may have some
pleasure or profit of it our selves, and so prove the sons of Jacob, and
imitators of my Lord Archbishop Abbots in his good works.

Lo Iamque opus exegit, quod nec Io^is ira, nec. ignes, Nec. poterit ferrum,
nec edax abolere vetustas. Ovid. in fine Metam.
His Grace has accomplished this his charitable Work, and other good Deeds in
his own days, which neither time nor malice can ever abolish or extinguish.
For the Materials of this Conduit are durable; the Form of it Foure-square;
the Water-cockes about it, in number five; and the five lines for Inscription
on the Frontispice, are of fine Gold; all which are symbolicall, and signify
Psalm. 11^.
his memory shall remain for ever. Revel. 10.1^.
Now, when timber, stones, brickes, and books, shall all be wor^e and
dissolved, the Books of Heaven shall be opened, where all the Monuments of His
pious works, are written in a most indeleble Character, and shall be
recompensed with an invaluable reward, even an eternal Crown of glory. Mean
time, all you who hear me this day, let my counsel be acceptable unto you:
consider, I beseech you, that only your good works, will be your companions
to Heaven, they shall be your honor in life; your comfort in death, and your
Crown at the last Resurrection.

Look likewise to the Pictoribus utque Poetis, Quodlibet audendi, semper fuit
aequa potestas. Horat. in Art Poet.
painting upon, and about this Conduit for ornament, and you may perceive,
Paludamenta haec, these rich Coats at Arms tell you, Genesis 49.9.
that Jacob was the first Inuen^er of Hem^^rie, in assigning Arms, unto his
twelve sons the Patriarchs: as to Arma antiqua manus, vngues, dentesque
fuere. Lucret.
Judah a Lion; to Dan a Serpent; to Neph^ali an Hind; to Benjamin a Wolf; and
so to the rest. Lege cautum est, solum Imperatorem concedere posse, ne quis sit
mil^s qui non est d^ genere Nobilium. Ius Nobilitandi ad solum Regempertinet.
Ibid.
Hereby also signifying none should presume to assume unto himself Arms, but
expect them of the Kings Majesty only, as the Princely Jacob within his
Dominious. Otherwise, if men buy them, and show themselves unworthy of them,
quid tanto hiatu dignum? they are to be mocked for them; and their Armories
are no more to be esteemed, then a painted Sign before an Inn.

Virtus colenda est, non Imaego virtutis. Nec aliud est col^re virtutem nisi
eam comprehendere animo, and tenere. Lactant. lib. de falsa Relig. c. 20.
Above the Arms you may observe the speaking power of Pictures; and the lively
Images of the seven Virtues; whereby the ruder multitude may even by their
sight learn to know, and to embrace Virtue. I am deceived if any other thing
or course could have been used more likely and sitly to prevail IN VSVM
CIVITATIS Cantuariae, to the Use and Benefit of this City, then these Images.
For herein, the gross conceit is led on with pleasure, and informed while it
feels nothing but delight. And if Signa propter imperitum vulgus formata
refert ex Paganorum sententia. Arnob. lib. 6. Dicebant n. illi Imagines esse
veluti Libros Plebeculae: Porphyrius praesertim apud Eusebius. lib. 3 de praepar.
ad Euangel. Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures. Quam quae sunt^t coulis
subiecta fidelibus. Horat. vbi supra.
Pictures have been accounted the Books of Idiots, behold here the benefit of
an Image, without offense. It is no shame for us to learn wit of Heathens;
neither is it material in whose School we take out a good. Lesson: yea, it
is more shame not to follow their good, then not to lead them better. Prove
Longum iter est per praecepta, breue and essicax per exampla. Senec epist. 6.
your selves then Wise men, Just, Strong, and Sober, conform to these four
Figures, or Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, Temperance, thus
placed in order.

Next to them abide Fides appellata est abeo quod fit duae syllabae, quarum
prima est a facto, secunda a Deo. Dicis quod crodis, fac ergo quod dicis and
fides est. Augustine. sermon 22.
Faith, Idem de Spiritu and Litera. Magis videtur Dei fill us qui nouit a quo
speret, quod nondum habet, quam qui sibi tribuit quod habet.
Hope, and Charitas dicitur a Graeco (...) quod est gratia, lepos, amicitia;
cu^ enim cognatio i^ter bomines vna sit, vitaque species, nihil magis decens
est hac hominum mutua Charitate. Charitas Via Dei ad homines est, and via
hominis ad Deum. Augustine. ibid. de Spiritu and Litera.
Charity; but the greatest of these three is Charity. When the three
Goddesses, say the Poets, strove for the golden Ball, Paris adjudged it to the
Queen of Love. Lo here are three celestial Graces, in an holy emulation, if
I may so say, striving for the chiefdome, S. Paul gives it to Love: The
greatest of these is Charity. And me thinks these Three Theological Virtues,
may fitly be compared to the three great Feasts of the year: Easter,
Whitsontide, and Christmas. Faith, like Easter, believes Christ dead for our
sins, and risen again for our Justification. Hope, like Pentecost, waits
for the coming of the Holy Ghost, to bring us to Heaven. And Charity looks
like Christmas, full of Love to our Neighbors; full of Hospitality to
Strangers; and full of Charity to the Poor.

To this end and purpose, there is a little Bell hung up in a Tower above all
these seven Virtues, thereby to ring into our ears on every market day this
advertisement, Remember the Poor, or be charitable. In this sense, that Bell
Anagogically may be called Exodus 28.34.
Aarons Bell, thus joining Dictis factae praecedunt, imo sine factis dicta
nihil prosunt. Nam ideo and Dominus fieri voluit, sic doceri, ne sine bono
opere verborum inutilis esset and superstitiosa iactatio. Ambros. sermon. 76. Qui
dicica^ and non faciu^t, sunt Era sonantia and cymbala tinnientia, 1. Corin.
13.1.
good words to good works, or fair speeches to virtuous actions; and so a
Golden Bell and a Pomegranate, a Pomegranate and a Golden Bell, that as the
delight and pleasure of the one serve to the sight, so the sound of the other
should pierce into the ear.

Mat. 5.19.
Whosoever shall do and say these things (says our Lord) the same shall be
called great in the Kingdom of Heaven. And as Saint 1. Pet. 5.4 10 and 11.
Peter said in his first Epistle the fifth Chapter and fourth Verse, Ye shall
receive a Pulchra Amaranti Coronae in Coelis reposita illi qui se recte
gesserit, Clem. Alex. l. 2. paedag. 214. alludens ad hanc Petri immarcessibilem
gloriae Coronam, (...) siquidem and herbam and immarcessibilem significat: de
hac fusius, Dioscorid. and Plin. lib. 21. cap. 8.
Crown of glory that fades not away, as in token thereof here a Gilded
Crown in the top of this Conduit. Therefore, Denique vt Tertull. ad Martyr. c.
3. Bonum Agonem subituri est^^^^ quo Ago^ethetes Deus vnus est, Xystarches
Spiritus Sanctus, Corona Aeternitatis brauium, Angelicae substantiae, Politia
in Coelis, gloria in sacula saeculorum.
finally, to conclude, the God of all grace who has called us into his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

