AN EPISTLE DISCOVRSING upon the present Pestilence.

Teaching what it is, and how the people of God should carry themselves
toward God and their Neighbor therein.

Reprinted with some Additions.

By Henoch Clapham.

LONDON Printed by T. C. for the Widow Newbery, and are to be sold at her shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Ball. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir Baptist Hickes, Knight: all necessary saving
gifts from above.
GOod Sir, before I returned last into England, I did publish a certain
Epistle, wherein I noted how certain amongst us had laid the grounds of
Brownisme, while their zeal (beyond knowledge) had labored our Churches
reformation.

That coming into the hands of some of them here in and about the City, they
welcomed me home, with an aduisement given to some their disciples, that I
should neither be heard Preach, nor privately conferred with, nor have any of my
books read of them. Their reason was, that Cl. would bring people to all the
corruptions of the English Church, and finally to Romes church.

But when there was some extraordinary cause of opposing to Romish platformes,
let the Traitor W. Wat. speak of his conscience, if the Accused did not rather
oppose to such wickedness then his Accusers?

As they bgun to malice without ground (for now they shame to meddle with
their dombe Presbytery, and half faced Deaconry, with some other things not
to be maintained) so, they have not therewith stinted the bitterness of their
spirits, but now must please them (whom otherwise (...)

(...) But some will say, that meat and drink, Chirurgene and Physic,
helps and does good to many, who never call upon the name of the Lord,
specially in the name of Christ Jesus, I answer: 1. Tim. 4. 4. 10.
The living God is a Savior of all men, specially of them that believe. His
mercy is upon all the creatures. Not the vilest Barbarian, but he suffers his
comfortable Sun and Air to shine and breath upon. When the mercies of God
are called into question, every mouth shall be stopped. But howsoever he is a
Savior of all men, yet he has a special salvation for the faithful, as S.
Paul teaches Timothy. Howsoever he affords blessings to all, yet in a
special form he blesses the Believer. For as they call for his saving favor
in the use of all his creatures, so they have it in their much and little, in
their health and sickness, in their life and death. These use the Creature,
with assurance of a peculiar blessing, when the other eat, drink, and apply
it with a peculiar curse; Now, we are not to labor for the temporary blessing
sauced only with a common mercy, (for then we go no further then the dog
in his eating of grass, for easing his stomach) but to labor with the Lord
by prayer for his special blessing our conscence in the use of these
creatures: leaving the issue tempotarie to his will, which is holy in all
things.

A true Christian walks thus in common diet, and usual infirmities, how much
more does it stand him in hand, to look to his carriage toward God, in
respect of this Pest or Pestilence? A theists, mere Naturians and other
ignorant persons, do hold it to be a natural disease, proceeding from natural
causes only: as from corruption of air, caused by unseasonable Planets above,
or else from carrionly stinking smelles here below. Who while they look not
higher then the earth, or not higher then the Planets, do stick in the
Creature, forgetting the Creator (called the Psalm. 84 1.
Lord of hosts) who commands or forbids, sends out, or stays the course and
operation of creatures and corruptions. As God is the Lord of Hosts, so Psalm.
101.
He makes a flaming fire his ministers, sometimes for consuming, sometimes
for preserving. For by it, Nebuchadnezzers executioners were destroyed, when
the three young Nobles of Judah were in midst thereof preserved.

Addition expository and Apologeticall to the first Section.
GAlenistes] So called of Galen a Greek Heathen Physician. This kind of Plague
or Pestilence is of him termed Loimos, respecting only Bodies bursting out in
corruption, which may be cause sometimes of corrupting other bodies: specially
such as are inclinable to and capable of such corruption. And this is it, that
some Christians understand, when they say, that the Pestilence is as a Candle,
and bodies as straw, some wet, some dry, more or less capable of taking fire.
And this is true, but not all the truth, nor yet in the first sense which is
Divine, whereof I shall speak somewhat after. To stick therefore in this
consideration, is to speak rather after the manner of Naturalls then of
Divines. And who dare speak rather after the manner of man, then after the
vncontrowlable form of the Holy Ghost?

The dead creature can give to him no life:] Because the dead creature cannot
of it self vinifie the body, therefore the Christian is taught to look up to
God the Author of life: who, as he has promised to every Belieuer the thing
that is good calling for it by prayer; so, such a praying belieuer ought to
expect the verity of his promise, seeing he is faithful that has promised:
for, Godliness is profitable to all things, which has promise of the life
present and of that is to come, 1 Timothy 4, 8. without Godliness, many are
partakers of some Spiritual and all sorts of Corporal giuings, without divine
direct promise, and therefore such giuings do finally turn into bitterness,
vexation of spirit, and the just heaping up of judgment.

SECTION. II.
THe word Plague, is originally a Greek word: for Plege it is termed in
Revelation. 16. 9. and of the Latins Plaga, in English valuing a blow or
stripe. Which, as it may have a more general use, so, it is not applied to
this particular disease of the Pest, otherwise, then because it is a blow or
stripe inflicted on mankind. By whom? By God, although mediately by spirit, or
corruption, or both. The language of God and Adam in the old Testament, does
term it Deber (as in Exodus 3. 3. Deu. 28 21. Psalm 91. 36 2. Sam 24. 13.) of
Dabar to speak, whether it be a speech of life or death. And so it is termed I
doubt not because it is an effect of the Lords Word for sin, according to his
threatening in Deuteronomy. 28. 21.

Let the word be so considered in the two sacred languages of the old and new
Testament, and the Plague is no other malady, then a special blow inflicted
on mankind for sin. I speak not of it, as it seizes on beasts, seeing it
comes to them by Mankindes sin. Sin is the cause why the Lord (according
to his word) smites Mankind, whether corruption be in the way or not. Does God
send out a Spirit to smite (as David's people in 2. Sam. 24. were smit by a good
Angel, but Job before with a bad) the Spirit smites not but upon the Lords
word, smite or touch: in which respect it is called Negagn in Psalm 91. 10. of
Nagagn to touch: Although the term Negagn may well imply a plague or stripe
less piercing and killing.

The stroke of God, it is for sin. And smites he with his own finger
immediately, or mediately as by the hand of an other? Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord, nor will I meddle with what he does
beyond the words revelation. In Leuiticus 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. he threatens
variety of plagues for sin; but concealeth the particular means which he
will use for accomplishing that word. In other places we read of his Angel
smiting people til the Lord did stay, but that ever he made Corruption his
messenger I read not: and yet I doubt not but God may have used corruption in
the ministry of his Angel, for correcting or confounding the corrupt creature.
But why in such discourse, has the spirit of God still mentioned only God for
Agent, and the Angel for Instrument? Because we should in such cases, look
first to God, as he that is all in all: secondly, to the ministry of his
Angels, who are appointed to preserve such from the plague as commit themselves
Psalm. 91. 1. 11.
in their ways to the protection of God all sufficient. A doctrine full
opposite to our practice, who cast our eye more to acryall corruption, then
unto God and his Angel smiting.

Addition Expos. and Apologet. to the second Sestion.
THe word plague] Seeing there can be no true dispute where the thing to be
disputed upon is vncertainlie or doubtfully understood, I therefore in the
second Section, have labored to clear what the Plague may be. Plague (and so
Pestilence) is a word of large use, but in this dispute applied to a certain
disease extraordinarily mortal and deadly: yea, a disease now amongst us,
confessed by our Physicians, to exceed the compass and reach of all their
natural reason and reading. No marvel, seeing that which is primordiall and
principal in it, is spiritual and invisible. What that is, the Divine
Scriptures do teach, when not only they show that Sin is the provoking cause
(and specially, sin universal) but also do show that it is a stroke
inflicted from without, and that by the ministry of an Angel, appointed so by
Iehouahs express word: for which the Hebrews do use the very same letters
(Deber) for word and Pestilence. And hereupon it is, that the Hebrews turn the
word Deber by Logos, in Psalm. 91. so well as in other places, which in English
is word or speech: for as Gentiles without God could not reach hier the^ nature
herein* so the Hebrews (to whom the lively Oracles were committed) did pass by
that, as being but the effect; and looked (as we ought) to God be his Angel
smiting. Nor is it for other cause, that the Holy Ghost tells us of Aaron and
David's interceeding by prayer, in Nom. 16. and 2. Sam. 24. and not of any
corporal flight or natural courses.

The Greek translation, in Psalm. 91. 3 does read for these our words; From the
noisome Pestilence, these words Apologou tarachodous, which valueth this, From
the word that be-muddeth: from whence I gather, first the Angel smiting
according to the Lords word gone out: secondly, an effect in the body so
smitten, and that is, the blood and powers commoued and bemudded: like as a
poole smitten with some instrument of weight, should have the mire and mudde
thereupon raised, to the troubling of all. Original sin has conveyed into
our humane nature corruption as mudde: this is in us as settled, until the
Angel smite, and lo thereupon all the body is out of order. Because we
should not creep on the earth herein with Galen, Hippocrates and such, we have
not only the scriptures to teach us the former Super-naturall stroke, but also
diverse so smitten, have felt and heard the noise of a blow; and some of them
have upon such a blow found the plain print of a blew hand left behind upon the
flesh. At the funerals of sundry such, I my self this sickness time have
preached. Such a stroke, was to put us in mind of Iehouahs Angel smiting; and
such a blewnes, may put us in mind of the muddie corruption in our humane
nature.

The Angels stroke so is the Cause, the plague-sores and marks arising and
appearing are the effect. The first not infectious; and therefore the Angel in
Egypt went from house to house in Egypt, and from Dan to Bersheba, and
Jerusalem in Judea, with his sword drawn. The second is infectious sometimes
more or less. The first absolutely mortal and deadly, as Hezekiah was told:
and therefore such regaining health and life, have new days added, as Hezekiah
had years. The second is not absolutely deadly, because but natural in the
form of deriuall, as it befalls in other corrupt cases.

SECTION. III.
Sin being the cause for which he smites a people with Pestilence (sin
poisoning earth, air and all) some will demand, if so it cannot be prevented
or cured with change of place and use of Physic? By changing place they
think they may, Pron. 22. 3. and 27. 12.
because it is written, A prudent man sees the plague and hides himself. And
by physic they suppose they may, because that sundry (of their knowledge)
have so escaped.

For the divine proverb, they abuse it two ways. Once in understanding the
word Plague for Pestilence. Though every pestilence be a plague, yet every
plague is not a pestilence. Nor does the original word properly signify the
one or the other. It is Ragnah, valuing the Latin Malum, in English Evil, as
in an other form it is aptly turned into: Prou. 14. 16. For the Translator,
howsoever he leave the proper signification of the word, he yet speaks to
good purpose, seeing the holy Ghost there speaks of such an Amos 3. 6.
evil in the city as the Lord does: that is, of such a punishment as the Lord
inflicteth; called an evil of mankind, though properly a correction or
punishment of evil And secondly, such Excepters abuse the Proverb, in saying,
they may fly from the place with the prudent man. Solomon says not that such
a one flies, but that he hides himself. A man may cover or hyde himself
without flying. If thou say that a man cannot hide himself from the plague, I
say likewise that thou cannot any more fly from the plague: Go where thou will and his right hand shall find thee out: If thou were with Jonas first
under the hatches, and after with the Whale in the bottom of the Sea, he will
find thee out. The wings of the morning cannot carry thee beyond his reach.
What is this hiding or covering thy self then? It is no cover corporeal, but
spiritual: even the same that is spoken of in Psalm. 61. 4. where safety is
assured to him that coucheth under the Lords wings.

The prudent hearted sees a plague or judgment coming toward a people for
sin; what does he then? He commits himself in his Christian way, to the
protection of the Almighty, who has promised to be a shield to such as put
their trust in him: Psalm. 91. 6.
that such a one shall not need to fear that pestilence that walks in
darkness, nor the plague that destroys at noonday. For walking in his way,
that is, in the way God has called him unto, and leaning upon the Lords
promise, what need is there of local flight or cover?

Secondly, for their physical experience, I thereto make this answer: Sin
being the cause of the malady, (as also of every malady) it is for none to
make physic their staff, nor yet their first mean, lest they sin the sin
of 2. Chro. 16 12.
Asa: much less seek to Idol-wizards, which was the sin of 2. King. 1.
Achaziah. Besides, they see many preserved in the midst of the plague, who
have used no physical means: what will they make the cause of their
deliverance? No other thing, but the divine pleasure of God, who has forbid
his Angel to smite them. Is Physic then in this and all other plagues to be
avoided? No: as Isai. 38.
Hezekiah (howsoever having promise of recovery) did mean time suffer a lump
of dry figs to be applied to his boil (having in nature to heat, mature, and
digest) so we are not to neglect such natural means as reason and experience
have found out to avail against natural infirmity [Deo non obstante] the
Lord not crossing nature. Otherwise, we shall be found te^pters of God, leaving
our way: rather then faithful keepers of our way.

Reason of using natural means (where God bars them not up) is this:
Whether the air be infected without us, there never wants infection within
us, which is ready to take an head against our heart, if the Lord do not
bridle it. As God smiting us with other maladies (threatened in the law so well
as Pestilence) does not only say, Let it be, whereupon the malady grows, but
also has that his word working upon preiacent corruption effected by our
sin: so, he looks that his word be satisfied by humbling our selves in
prayer and fasting, and that natural corruption have the power prevented or
destroyed by natural means, he ^ffording them. To say, I shall live so long as
God has appointed, though I never use physic, it is as good as this, I shall
live so long as God has appointed, though I never eat nor drink. As meat
and drink is for the hungry, so is physic for the diseased: for to the
necessity of natural physic, our Savior alludeth, when as for establishing
his spiritual physic, he says: Luke 5. 31.
They that are sick need the Physician. God has created the Word, Prayer and
Fasting for repelling and killing sin, the Material cause of Gods anger: and
he has created physical creatures for preventing and curing natural
corruption, the material cause of our malady and natural sickness. So both
be the good creatures of God, and both to be used to his glory. The first for
helping and healing our soul: the second, for helping and healing the body.
God sometimes blesses the first without the second, to show that he is not
tied to means. And he sometimes blesses the second without the first, to show
that we ought not neglect the means. But as we have both sinful souls and
corrupt bodies, so we should use both, for benefiting both.

Addition to the third Section.
IN the Pestilence there falling out a twofold consideration as before, the
first Supernatural, the second Natural, it so follows, that the
supernatural cause be salued by that which is spiritual; the other by that
which is natural, Hezekiah did both in Isa. 38. First, he in all truth of
spirit did humble himself in prayer, and secondly, did apply a lump of
^igges, the second becoming effectual, when God in the first place had
accepted of tears and mournings. Our Naturians should never therefore promise
or insinuate health and life by the second, but by putting people in the mind,
that they must labor with God for satisfaction for the first. That this is our
Churches judgment also, let it be considered, first, in that the Magistrates
and Ministers have appointed public and universal fasting and prayer, by way
of humiliation before God for sin: secondly, in that also they have published
natural means in respect of natural corruption. How intolerable wicked then
have they been, who priuatlie and in Gods most holy place, have given out that
Clapham has been herein singular and odd by himself. They be rather odd
that understand not themselves.

SECTION. IIII.
But seeing the Lord In Psalm. 91.
promises deliverance from the plague, to all such as rest under his wings and
walk in his way, it may be asked, how comes it to pass that some Believers
die of the pestilence, and some unbelievers escape it? I answer, the Lords
promise being ever fast to the Believer (for he is faithful that has
promised) there is in Believers so dying, a want of faith for apprehending this
particular deliverance, this temporary mercy. Though they have not lacked faith
for their eternal justification and final salvation, by virtue whereof their
flesh rests in hope of an happy resurrection, and their spirit is gone in
comfort to God that gave it: yet has every one perishing on the pestilence
been found, not to apprehend this particular promise. To say that the psalm
speaks only of a spiritual plague and a spiritual promise, is to conclude
the same of Leuit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. and of all the like places. Then the
which, what can be more absurd? under literal promises and mercies, menacies
and curses, spiritual things are also intended, but not only. The first
shadoweth out and leads to the second. And because still there is the same
use, the outward evils so well as the second are still abiding. When we have
received Christ by faith, we have promise of Romans 8. 32.
all things also: (promises of this world and of the world to come.) But when
by faith we have apprehended the greater, lo we are often found to doubt of
the lesser. In not doubting of the eternal, we should not doubt of the
temporary. But doubting of the lesser and loosing it by doubting: we see what
we should do in the greater, if God should leave us to our own standing.

That many wicked escape in midst of strongest pestilence, first, it is not
because they have any promise, but because it pleases God both to them and us
to be in many things, many times, better then his promise: teaching them and
us therein, how good he would be to us in all things walking in his way, and
vndoubting the promise.

Secondly, the wicked so escaping, are ordinarily such as have walked boldly
through the sickness, bragging of their faith in God, touching deliverance from
pestilence: showing plainly that they had a faith in God for apprehending
promise of deliverance. Though they have not had faith for apprehending things
spiritual and eternal, yet for laying hold on this particular temporary. And
such a faith, is ordinarily countenanced with such a mercy, as that temporary
repentance of Ahab, Manasses, and Niniuets, was graced with particular flitting
mercies. God teaching such therein, how much more he would draw near unto them
in all goodness, if so they had in them a right continuing faith, and continuing
repentance. And therewithal checking his children for doubting the lesser,
having faith in him for the greater.

Addition to the fourth Section.
THere is in belieuers so dying, a want of faith.] That is, some want in faith.
S. James willing us in she want of knowledge to have our recourse unto God in
prayer, Iam. 1. 6. etc.
he tells us that we must not waner; for if we do, he concludes, that we are
not to think that we shall receive any thing of the Lord. From whence I
gather, that lack of faith is cause we are denied any thing necessary our life
here. Some will object, There is some want of faith, some doubting, some
wavering in the best child of God, therefore none can assure himself of
receiving any good of God, whether corporal, or spiritual. I answer, it is
one thing what we ought to do, another thing what we do. Secondly, it is
enjoined us in Leuit. 26. and in Deuteronomy. 28. that as we would have blessings
temporary, and avoid cursings temporary, we should obey the commandments;
and the best are found daily to break the commandments, have they therefore
no assurance of blessing? If they look into the measure of obedience (literal
or spiritual) as it is in themselves only, they have cause to look for no
good thing. This want then in all things, is to drive them unto the Lord by
Christ Jesus in all things. Objection. God will not exact such obedience, such
faith, except we could so obey, so believe. Answer. The Romanists indeed say
so, but they and others must remember, that it is equal for him so to exact,
seeing (as we were set out of his hands in Adam) we were enabled so to believe
and obey. Thirdly, as there is no promise of God but it is delivered under
condition, and there is no condition kept fully of our part, and therefore no
flesh that may be able to rejoice in Gods sight: so, it pleases him sometimes
not to impute the want in faith and obedience to his children (for if he
should, we could not breath one day) but to accept them as Perfect and just,
Job. 1. 1. 8. Ezekiel. 14. 20. Luke. 1. 6. Otherwise, S. James should leave us
little or no hope of receiving any thing of God by prayer. Fourthly, in case of
temporary blessings, it pleases God to give an extraordinary strength of
faith, by the which devils and mountains of difficulties are often removed: so
well as unto his children he besides gives an extraordinary strength of faith
for Eternalls, called of the Apostle to the Colossians Coloss. 2. 2. full
assurance.
Plerophoria, with allusion to a Ship carried with a full sail.

To say that the 91. Psalm speaks only of a spiritual plague.] To say that
the legal promises and menaces are only spiritual, is to teach a doctrine
that the Ancient church was never acquainted with, nor yet any modern writer
that I know of. Let such a, b, c, divines go read Tremellius, and Fr. Iunius
their notes on Psalm. 91. and of the rest, that on the fifth verse: A pauore
nocturno] id est, ab vllis apertis, occullis, internis, externis, corporeis aut
spiritualibus malis, vllo vnquam tempore; wherein they teach that the promise
is of deliverance from any evils, open, hid, internal, external, corporal or
spiritual.

It is not because they have any promise.] Here I speak of the wicked in
general:

Showing plainly that they had a faith in God.] Here I speak of some
certain wicked. Here some say I speak contraries: first, because I teach
that the wicked have no such promise: secondly, that some such have a faith or
belief in God touching such deliverance. I see a diverse thing in these
wicked-ones, but no contrary thing delivered. That they have no promise of
having good by so much as a bit of bread, my maleuolent brethren grant, that
some of them have belief in God for temporary blessings, yea, and sometimes of
eternal happiness, who can doubt, except all wicked should always despair of
all things? If I had said, they have justifying or saving faith, I had spoken
contraries, seeing promises of this life, and that to come is made directly
and properly unto them. What kind of faith I spoke of, it may appear when I
term it a bragging faith, that is, a presumptuous belief without any ground
of promise. These that come to our Savior in the last day, saying, Have we not
prophesied in thy name, cast out Devils, etc. had they no faith touching
temporaries? It Is very silly. They had (as Scholars usually speak) a
temporary faith, and persuasion: and my writing can no way entend any other.
And thus men crow before the victory.

That temporary repentance of Ahab, Manasses, etc. A great quarrel arises from
the poor word Manasses, that I should number him with the temporary
repentant. If they had not liked the word, they might easily have wiped it out,
and so have kept peace with the book.

That I understand so of his repentance, observe what I have to say. In the 2.
King. 21. the history of his life and death is set down, and no speech of any
repentance. And thereto is annexed, that Amon his son did evil in the sight
of the Lord, as did his father Manasses. And Amon is neither there nor
elsewhere noted repentant, but carried out of the world in judgment. This
connexure of Father and Son, causes me to think that the repentance spoken
of in 2. Chron. 33. (in which respect he is preferred to his son) to have
been of the Prophets then held but as temporary, and fitted to time. If it be
a good argument of Salomons true repentance, that Rehoboam and his people are
said to have walked three years in the way of David and Solomon, 2. Chron. 11.
17. (for that Solomon should not so have been matched with David, if he had not
died well to the Church-ward, as did David) if I say, that be good for proving
his true repentance; then I see not why Manasses his repentance may not be held
as no true repentance, when he comes to be so conjoined with Amon, that never
truly repented to the Church-ward. I say to the Church-ward, because it is
possible for a man to vnsatisfie the Church, and yet of God be saved: as also
to dye innocent to the Church-ward, and yet of God condemned for some secret
abomination unrepented of. But if any hereafter will logomachein, contend and
wage war about a word, it is not my purpose easily to follow them.

SECTION. V.
FAmine, sword and pestilence, are a Trinity of punishments prepared of the
Lord, for consuming a people that have sinned against him. 2. Sam. 24. 12, 13.
S. John in the opening of the fourth Seal, does number them thus; Revel. 6. 8.
Sword, Hunger and Death: the Sword ^leying, Famine staruing, the Pestilence
effecting death, but death with a witness, as the most ready destroyer. David
being put to his choice, does distinguish them into two sorts; the first being
a Fall into the Enemies hands, and that he refuses, because the Churches
adversary would insult without all mercy. The other two should be a Fall into
God his hands, and that he chooses, because his mercies were great. And of
these two (Famine and Pestilentiall death) he chooses the latter; why? Some
think, because himself might be relieved of Famine, and so not die: and he
coveting to die with the people, would therefore choose the pestilence which
would as well seize upon him. This is somewhat, but I see it not in this
scripture. After he had seen a fearful fall of the people, he coueted Gods
hand to be turned against him: but that he was of such mind before that Fall,
it should not seem; first, because his heart (before Gad the prophet came to
him) was smitten with the sight of his sin, whereupon he repented: secondly,
because in his option of the pestilence, he expreslie expected some great
mercy in the midst of judgment. But the direct cause of electing this Plague,
was (I doubt not) divided (at least) into these two respects: the first, aiming
at the easiness of death: for to die of famine is a more lingering torturing
death. And herein appeared David's Charity. The second aiming at the Churches
enriching with necessaries already possessed: for famine would have devoured
up all her maintenance. And herein was both love and policy. David being a
Prophet, he could not have fewer godly respects in his option.

Of all these three plagues, Sword, Famine, and Pestilence, I conclude the last
to bring with it the most mercy. If the Adversaries sword destroy, o the
mockings, proud insultings, filthy prostitutions, cruel oppressions,
accompanying that sword? The sword of Romish Babilonians was pressed to have
been drawn within and without us. How great was the Lords mercy to shut that
up in the scaberd? Famine was threatened upon the death of our late sovereign
Elizabeth; for the Rascalitie of our land hoped, as Drone-bees, to have spoiled
our Hyues, as an insatiable Hell or grave to swallow up all. How merciful was
God unto us, that with a crosse-wynd did rather take them unto Tyburne, or
consume them in wars without us? Yea, how was his mercy great unto us, in
putting far from us both the former plagues, and in smiting, to smite us with
this pestilence: that so falling, we fall before his hand that is a merciful
Father, in the midst of judgment remembering mercy; leaving us not to lingering
deaths, whereby we might be more pained; and giving that we have possessed to
his Church, whereof we have been members. Yea, where in three days the Lords
Angel did smite to death 70. thousands of David's people: lo his great mercy
to us ward, he has not so smitten yet one thousand in full three days. O that
the living would lay it to heart, and praise God for his mercies.

SECTION. VI.
GOd of necessity being to punish us; and then in stead of sharp rods, to
smite us with the pestilence; and in the pestilence to destroy so leisurely,
it should teach us (King, These that stumble at the word Priest, do it without
ground: seeing Priest is derived of Presbyter, as Bishop of Episcopus, and
Deacon of Diaconus. Nor makes this any thing for the Romanist that will be a
Jewish carnal Sacerdos, or Sacrificer.
Priest and People) to be humbled under his hand in the free confession of our
sins, admiring his lenity and fatherly kindness. God give us grace speedily
to be humbled.

And the Lords mercies to us, should force us to be more merciful one to
another. It should teach Magistrate and Minister (with David) to bide by their
charge, and to entreat mercy for the sheep of his pasture, till the Angel
put up his vial of pestilence. To augment our spiritual devotions in the
openest places, as did David, who built an alter in 2. Sam. 24. 48. etc. 2.
Chro. 3. 1.
Araunahs threshing floor on mount Moriah, the place chosen of God for putting
his name there, whereon after the Temple was builded. Yea, to put our
sacrifices between the plague and the Church, as David did between the fallen
of Israel and Jerusalem, that so the plague may not creep any further. Yea,
the mercy of God to us, should teach us all to be helping one to an other, not
to please our selves in all things, to lay down our lives for the brethren,
living and dying in good works, to the sick and needy. The ninetienine are
to be left that stand not in such need, and the sheep that is ready to
perish, we ought to seek up. Happy is the soul, who (when his master
comes) is found so working: and thrice happy is the soul, that has the
body cut down in such a work of mercy.

True it is, that for certain Leuit. 11. and 12. and 13. and 14. and 15.
Chapters.
bodily uncleannesses and maladies, people under the law of Moses were to be
severed from the Church, more or less: and yet now no commandment unto us;
why? For that they were a part of the Ceremonial law. This may appear, first
from the rites, secondly, from their significations. In certain uncleannesses,
they were to wash themselves with water, and then (not before) to be held
clean for company. For the Leprosy, it was censured only by the
Ecclesiastical Minister; and this he did not till he saw it, and sometimes
not till he had made some fourteen days trial; and special rules he had for
the trial. Who will say that these rites were not ceremonial and abolished,
besides that the Priest had no fear of the leprous-plague during all the time
of his probation? For their signification, it respected the degrees of
excommunication for Souls uncleanness. Which not only appears by many 2.
Cor. 6. 17. Coloss. 2. 21. Tit. 1. 15. Jude 23. Revel. 3. 4.
speeches in the new Testament, alluding to such uncleannesses, but also, for
that the new Testaments church has power only to excommunicate for defects in
the soul; as the ancient Synagogue did for wants in the body. These then that
will maintain their flight from the Leuitical law, do in their fact pronounce
all they fly from to be Excommunicate; yea, with the black Kerem or Maranatha
to be excommunicate to the death, for not loving the Lord Jesus; for to them
such a censure only belongs, 1. Cor. 16. 22. Thus such Fleers are left of God
to belie scripture, and to abuse their brethren; which is a worse plague then
that they fly from^ If they meet now with the Pest in the country, let them
tell me, if so they can die with such peace of conscience as if they died in the
city, performing works of mercy to the sick and needy. But if they feast and
rejoice in the country while the iron enters Joseph's soul in the City, let
them know that God may serve in the last dish sauced with his vengeance.

We have sinned together, and the hand of God has come upon us together: let
us therefore humble our selves together before the Lord in fasting and prayer.
Let Nehe. 1. 4. 5. 6. etc.
Nehemiah and Dad. 9. 3. 4. 5. etc.
Daniel, Magistrate and Minister, confess their sins and the sins of their
people, and let all the people subscribe, saying, Amen. It is not change of
place, but change of life that must healp us. Lord, for thy son sake, remit all
our offenses; give us grace to turn unto thee with all truth of repentance;
and for thy holy names sake remove this same deserved Pestilence from us. Amen.

Addition to the 6. Section.
FOr the Leprosy, it was censured only by the Ecclesiastical Minister. The
Minister was to find out the truth of leprosy, for giving true information
to Magistrate and people, and upon the experience of a fretting leprosy to put
the Person out of communion, to burn the garment, to pull down the house,
Leui. 14. and 15. First, it may be a question whether in the new testaments
Church there be a Leprosy of such form that can be so tried: secondly, whither
by fretting was meant infectious. And if: yet whether the Pestilence ought so to
be proceeded withal, seeing the Minister now neither is so commanded to try
it: nor in garments nor in houses it can so be found. For if; then all our
garments must be burned, the houses pulled down, and the Persons
excommunicate, which unto me (and I think to every one) would seem absurd,
and be the ruin of City and common wealth.

Epilogus.
THe Pestilence being in scripture phrase, an extraordinary stroke of God by
the ministry of his Angel, whereupon oftentimes visible corruption arises,
and all for sin: it leads you (Beloved)

First, to cast your eye up unto God the first Mouer whether S. John, the
Angels of the Churches. For now, no less then before they be ministering
Spirits sent forth to Minister for their sakes, which shall be Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. 14. And yet (as before) they are appointed of God sometimes
to punish man for going out of his way.

Thirdly, we are called to repent sin, which did move

Fourthly, seeing it seizes upon old and young, rich and Romans 5. 14.) and
therefore the duty of all to be humbled, least the Niuinites condemn us.

Fifthly, the Angels of the Church (from the like in the second they are to do,
by the terror of Moses law, which brings with it to the infidelious and
unrepentant, curse and condemnation. Andin so doing, they may with good
consicnece make that prayer, Thy will be don in the earth (that is, of people
in the earth) as it is done in heaven, that is of the blessed Angels that
attend the word of the father in heaven.

And thus with my hearty prayer unto God, first, for the remission of all our
sins: and secondly, for his grace to stablish us in every good work for the
glory of his name, I commend you unto him that is able to present our bodies
and souls faultles before the throne of judgment, who spread his wyngs of
saving protection over us and his whole Church for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

