Error on the Left Hand. THROVGH A FROZEN SECVRITIE: Howsoever hot in
opposition, when Satan so heats them. Acted by way of Dialogue. 1 Betw.
Malcontent and Romanista. 2 Betw. Mal-content Romanista and Libertinus. 3 Betw.
Malcontent and Libertinus. 4 Betw. Malcontent and Atheos. 5 Betw. Malcontent
and Atheos. 6 Betw. Malcontent and the good and bad spirit 7 Betw. Malcontent
and Mediocrity.


By HENOCH CLAPHAM.

Prou. 4. 26. 27. Powder the paths of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
ordered aright.

Turn not to the Right hand, nor to the Left, (but) remove thy foot from
evil.

Horat. Epist. 18. VIRTUES est Medium vitiorum, and vtrinque reductum.

LONDON, Printed by N. O. for NATHANIEL BVTTER. 1608.

To the Reader.
AGainst my book ( touching Error on the Right hand) certain fiddle-faddle
Spirits do take exception.

Some say there be certain forms of speech far unworthy the pen of a
Preacher. I grant that somethings be much unworthy, both my writing and many
their hearing; howsoever the Schismatikes think the things Ezec. 1^ 5. 16. 17.
5 16. 17. 25. 26. and 23. 3. 8. etc.
not unworthy their Doing. Ezekiel was forced to speak more grossly then he
would; when from filthiness of the body, he would delineate the souls
uncleanness for Idolatry. The like also did Saint John. Let the Reu. 17. 4
Factious be ashamed of so doing, and we will be ashamed of so writing and
hearing.

Some say that in the Diologicall speeches, I seem to point at certain
particular persons, upon whom some of my speeches cannot be truly fasteded. I
grant; first that I have aimed at some particular persons, so well as they in
their Dialogues of the Barwicke Soldier, the Host and Chaplain etc. with many
such Martinicall libels, have done right often. But as their magnaticall
one-eard Inuectiues were set on fire from hell, for destroying the Church
peace, so, I doubt not but my fervent breathings, will be found to have been
kindled by the coals of the Altar, for the consumption of Schism Let them
consider the parable of Iothams trees, that gathered together for electing a
King; when as none but the brabling Judge. 9. 8. etc.
Bramble would accept of the offer. That parable will fit them, as if it only
had propounded unto them. Secondly I answer, though all there spoken, cannot
be auerred of every person in a faction, (by reason no faction is at unity in
it self) yet it may sit close to some other they think not of, in the same
faction: and potentially, though not actually, concord with the lewd spirit of
that whole Corporation.

Besides, to such as say, that Arianisme was long since confuted by the
Fathers, and what need Clapham meddle with it, etc? I answer: first by
Retortion: So Donatisme, Anabaptisme, Reordination Nicolaitisme, Atheism etc.
were confuted by the Fathers (so was the very adultery, murder, etc.) what need
any preacher then iterate these arguments? The answer to the last, will fit So
Mr. More in his tables does record.
the first. Secondly, I answer: Our heretics have added unto the ancient
teaching such conclusions as of old were not dreamed of. And had I not one
Arrian Anabaptist, and ano there, a luish Arrian, both burnt at Norwich
by travail abroad found out that, I might seem unto many to speak but in
dark parables. Search all the books that I have writ, and that is from Anno
Dom. 1595. hitherto, 1608.) and consider if still I pronoked not all the
Factious, specially on the right hand, howsoever hitherto unanswered of any.
Which doubtless they would have done, had I not too truly pressed them.
Thirdly I answer, I know none that condemn my labors, of that kind, but
suchas be either open foes, or hypocritical brethren. If open foes, then no
marvel though they ball and bark against me, whenas they rail against the
whole body of the Church. If Hypocritical brethren, who let some Factious have
their hearts, and for maintenance sake let us have their bodies only, I way
not of their doom no more then of Laodiceans devotion: for what is such an
Hypocrite, but an Ambo between two, a bifronted Ianus looking two ways, and a
Neuter faithful to none? The opposite side do spit at them, and can we do
less then spurn them?

In this book is acted Error on the Left hand. In the forefront whereof I
have Marshalled the Romanist, as one who primordially through a frozen
security, did decline toward Libertinisme, establishing such devises, as unto
flesh and blood might be most acceptable. Unto which side also, if I had
reduced the carnal Familist, (for there be a second sort more spiritual) I
suppose I had done him no wrong. But sit as they shall, naught be they all, and
it is the naughtines of their opinions that I specially dart at.

As for the Malcontent, I make him the Nicka-fidge here (running from one
faction unto another) as I did the Flyer in the former. Who also here does at
last meet with Mediocrity; and so (after some dehateme^t) become an honest man.
Worse I wish to no Flyer, nor a straw the worse to any Mal-contented. Dei est
non errare, hominis errare, insipientis perseuerare in errore.

Great Jove the short of Iehoue.
Jove himself is only free from falt:
The rightest man with Israel does halt,
But froward fools in sollie will persevere;
Though tentimes braid, a fool he will be ever
If thou can well relish the Matter, but not the Manner of handling: (for
every one does quickly conceit a Dialogicall Prosopopeia) I then refer thee
to my Antidoton, my New Ierushalem, my Manual of the Bibles doctrine, together
with diverse of the heads, sparsed in my Bibles brief, in my poem Aelohim,
and five parts of my labors of Salamons Song; not to mention any of my
imperfect works printed abroad over immaturely.

But to help the slow conceited (for these two books of Dialogues were
penned, almost altogether for such about the city of London, who are
ordinarily toyled with the Factious) it must first be observed that the maine
thing I drive at, is, to unfold the principal argument, whereby every sort of
Schismatique does fabricate unto himself a new society or Church. Secondly, to
show, how that principal argument is laid at home by our Mal-content,
whereupon others build their rendings from us. Thirdly, to disclose such their
argument, by that form of introducting them, in their mutual brablings,
wherein, as sometimes one of them confuteth another, so, much of their
extrauagant speech is so absurd, Vt recitare, idem est quod refutare, As the
bare repetition is a sufficient refutation. Lastly, my drift is, in the person
of Mediocrity, to establish a Mean; Which held and kept according to knowledge
may keep our people from flying out into extremes, as they would avoid the
gross and leaud consequents ensuing their breach from us.

Had not some learned (in authority) observed so many points (at least) in my
former book it had not obtained a pass to the press: For sure I am, that it
stood upon more sufficient examination, then all the books which besides I have
diuulged. So much is sufficient for reasonable spirits. As for such as be
wilfully malicious and ignorant, nothing will content them; Pro. 26. 4.
Neither will I answer such a foot to his full, lest I become like him. Neque
Jupiter omnibus pluens placet, neque abstinens. The Lord deliver our Church
from evil.

Amen.
From my House at Norburne in East-kent, this 8. of June. Anno Dom. 1608. Thine
in the Lord He. Cl.

THE FIRST DIALOGVE between Mal-content and Romanist.
First, it must be conceived, that Malcontent sitting under a tree, in the
Hie-way, he thus alone expostulates with himself. Malcontent. O Mal-content,
how unhappy art thou in this life, whither shall thou go, and what will become
of thee? Go to the Brownist, shall I do so? In them and their proceedings, I
find no unity, no concordance; Their hand being against all, and the hands of
all against them. The Geo. Io.
brother of that Churches Pastor, has writ a great book against them, their
unsettled resolutions, bloody excommunications, and hie-handed tyrannies; as if
the Pastor were a Pope, taking more upon them (for the measure of strength they
have) then do all the English prelates. In so much as, howsoever he persuades
people to join with the cause of Separation, as himself had (and therein
since has died) yet, at no hand to join with his brothers congregation: for
manifold reasons there alleged.

Since which time, one (whose Mr. Sm.
name soundes upon an Anuile) has drawn certain Principles and inferences,
touching a true visible Church; where in he quoteth scripture for another form
of discipline, then that which the Brownist practice, and most of us have
taught in our sermons and writings: He purposing as it seems, to receive
others into communion with him, who shall separate, as he has* and so show
themselves willing to be ruled by his discipline. Aes me, which side shall I
lean unto? Both of them hold a set form of discipline to be contained in the
word. Both of them allege (for the substance thereof) the very sarue
scriptures; but both of them differ exceedingly in the sense of such Scriptures.

Another side, having no Baby for their leader (although his sir name begin
with a Him and his words I have alleged in my preface to my Manual.
B.) he holds both with the government at home by Lord Bishops; as also, with
that of Layelders abroad; as being in the scriptures neither commanded, nor
forbidden, but things in themselves of an indifferent nature. So he holds, and
yet denies to subscribe, for sundry reasons. Shall I separate with the first
two? or shall I continue in the Church of England with the third?

But miserable man, how shall separation, or not separation be good? If I
separate from the Church as Antichristian, then the Anabaptist take hold upon
me, and says* that I must separate not so much for the prelaticall discipline;
as for that the spirit of Antichrist there breaths Antichristian doctrine.
Yea that the Church becomes to be Antichristian: for that their grounds of
faith therein held, be principles opposite to Christ. And in my conscience, if
the first be granted, the second will ineuitably follow.

If I separate not, but continue still in the Church, I shall in my work
justify that which I have condemned in word. In word I have condemned the
Tippet, the Surplice, the Corner-cap, the Cross in Baptism, and the like for
marks of Antichrist. But forsaking my ministry, I may live in some other
calling, and so be put to the use of no such ceremonies. Yea but if I have a
child, I must bring it, where before I will not, it cannot be baptized without
the cross. Come I to the Common service, I must sit in the sight of a
Surplice; and come I to the Communion, I must there kneel and receive at the
hands of one that uses the ceremonies. And be I called to be a Churchwarden*
I must take an oath to present the sincere-sort* that omit, or speak against
such ceremonies. I am divided in my self, what shall I do? H. I. his
followers do say very well, that this persecution is worse then that of Queen
Mary's: for that made an end of a man quickly; but this grants life with a
continuing misery. Woe is me, how is my soul pained within me? Though
heretofore Ifumed against the author of that book, entitled Error on the
Righthand, yet now mine affections be cooled and calmed: for well I see, that
there is nothing yet right amongst them. And at home I know not how to live, as
I would not be held an Hypocrite or turne-coat. The evasion must be by some
third means, and that as yet I know not. Rest poor head, rest* rest against
this trees root, and take a little nap in the shade.


He being asleep, Romanista passes by, and espying Malcontent asleep, be
staieth and so speaks. Romanista. What fast asleep? who may he be? By his
habit he should be some Scholar or Citizen. Whoo I know him, it is
Malcontent, whose head is full of whirligigs, and whose pen spins naught but
Cob-webs. Stay, his lips move to and fro, as does my dog Grim, when as he is
ready to chunder and bark sleeping.


Malcon. sleeping. Fire, fire, Elias fire.


Romanista. He is calling for fire from heaven, as did Elias: But it will burn
as fast, I think* as did our Uault-gunpowder, that should have blown up the
Parliament House in Westminster, together with all the heads of the Country.
But stay, some politic retch now or never: for an inch of policy, I hold
better then an ell of Divinity. In the time of discontent it is best working
upon Malcontent: for upon conceit it is then most easy to work. I remember a
Dialogue in Erasmus his great Colloquium; where one passing by the hie-way, was
desire us to fasten some strange conclusion upon the conceit of his fellow
Passengers. Hereupon he stops his course, with his eyes upon the firmament
fixed, gaping, gazing, crossing, blessing, trembling. The passengers thereupon
stay, look up, and wonder whereat he should so wonder. Anon, as with much ado,
he tells them what a fearful sign he saw in the firmament, a Dragon* a
terrible thing in description, I warrant you; hereupon he startles* holds up
his hands and wondreth at all the rest, that they should say they see nothing.
Anon, one of the^ thinking scorn, but he should see as much as another, he
also affirms that he saw such a terrible wonder: Afterward, some and some,
every one said he saw it, and trembled. In this dialogue (some have thought)
that Erasmus flouted people in England, for conceiting a certain great prelate
in the Churches firmament, beyond that they should conceit, etc. But howsoever,
I will take advantage of the time, and see if so I can work some strange thing
upon him. I hope it the rather, because one of this spirit (a Sole* sincerian)
being of late conuented before a great Prelate of this land, he offered, that if
he the said Prelate, could prove but one point then in hand, he would without
more ado turn back to the Church of Rome. whereupon the Prelate spoke to this
effect: I, is it true indeed? are you now ready to go a poping? what a poping I
had thought there had bin many grounds of oppositio^ between us and them
(howsoever this stands) y^ would have kept you from poping: well, I will break
one cudgel of my invention upon him. There, there, he is awaking, I will stand
as butter would not melt in my mouth, gazing, crossing, trembling.


Malcon. awaking. Ha, ha, what a yawning keep I, and out of what a troublesome
sleep awake I? But hushed, who is here* what ailes the man? I think he is
dast. Honest man, what is the matter with you?


Romanista. An, an, an. Credo in deum patrem omnipotentem.


Malcon. Surely the man is mad or in an ecstasy.


Romanista. Pardon me Lord, parden me, and I will returre to the holy Catholic
Church, the mother of peace and unity: For I must needs confess that I have
sinned much in following blind Zeloists, setting al oustre with Samsons Foxes.


Malcon. Ha, blind Zelosstes, surely he has been on our fide, *and in truth,
that is of no side: For howsoever we all agree in the term Reformation, (as
the Separistes do in the term Replantation) yet in the particulars of
Reformation, we are (amongst our selves at as much odds, as the Separators
be, about their form of Replantation.


Roma. I go Lord, I go; yea, I run to do thy will.


Malcon. Fall you a runinng? nay then have after you. I will know what the
matter is, ere we thus part -- Nay I have hold of you friend, stay, I pray you
buskle not, stay there, stay and let us breath a little. -- -- -- Now I be*
seech you, tell me what you are, and how it fares with you?


Roma. O Sir, do not tempt me, you know well enough, that I have had an
apparition.


Malcon. Surely not I. But if you have had an apparition, I pray you let me
be acquainted with it.


Roma. O Sir, as I drew near unto you, behold certain splendent beams far
more full of splendor, then the Suns beams) did suddenly shine upon me;
wherewithal I saw one like the Son of man, sit by you with his hand in yours,
who turning his head aside, said unto me; Zeloist, hereafter thy name shall be
Romanist: and for gaining peace to thy wearied soul, thy name shall be entered
into the Catalogue of Holy Romes Confessors.


Malcont. But stay, stay, this can be but some notable delusion: for what
holiness can there be in Romes religion?


Roman. O Sir, he told me, that you would not submit your self to the truth,
but upon palpable reasons. I was this morning, as you have been, and yet are,
a desirer of Reformation. But all in vain, to seek after a reforming of
Israel, being once schismed from Judah. To keep us at home, from going up to
Rome, the place of the High Priest; lo, Dan has been builded at York, and
Bethel at Canterbury. As the vpstart ministry of Jeroboam did make their
people believe, that all was naught at Jerusalem; so this ministry of Harry the
eight, sowes all false rumors of the holy Sea of Rome. Stand not (Sir) mazing
at the matter. I hated the Church of Rome till now; but the holy Angel no
sooner breathed upon me, but my bowels yearned after her presence, yea, me
thought such a light flashed vpom my senses, as therwithall, all intricate
scruples vanished. There was a book published by Doctor S. Hars. concerning
falsehood of certain Priests about London, in counterfeiting possessions and
dispossessions, specially practiced upon the bodies of young tender damsels.
That book made me loath the holy Priesthood, as being but false packing
companions. O sir, I repent my credulity; for new it was revealed unto me, that
such as came to be examined, and so deposed by the Prelates of England, they
were but such, as sought profits and pleasures, amongst the Protestant
Libertines, by so reuiling the eldest sons of their mother. Her discipline
was too strait for the^.


Malcon. Were I assured, that you had such a Revelation, I could be contented
to reconcile my self with you, unto the Church of Rome.


Roma. O sir, must you put your fingers into the wounds, and see also the print
thereof, before you can believe? well, ye Angel has told me a secret of yours,
upon the rehearsal whereof, you are to haste^ your soul unto faith. What if I
tell you, what was in your mind, when you were now sleeping?


Malcon. That would move me much.


Roma. Then this; your mind ran of Elias.


Malcon. It Is very true.


Roma. And upon that part of Elias his story, wherein he called fire from
heaven. Why gaze you so at me? Speak, is it not true?


Malcon. True? yea, as true as the Gospel. Now I perceive that you have had a
Revelation, and a Revelation most true. Even as Daniel brought Nabuchadnetsars
dream to his mind; so, have you brought that into my mind, that till now I had
forgotten. O man of God, thou art more welcome unto me, then thousands of gold
and of silver. But reverend father, for so I must henceforth call you.


Roma. Good sir, give me no such title, for if I take titles to my self, my
Creator will destroy me. Ego quidem Minimus Seruorum Dei: the least place in my
mothers house, is too good for me.


Malcon. Well brother, I would entreat you to resolve me of some objections,
that so I may stand firmer in the Faith.


Roma. Set we on forward, and propound what you will, but always with an
heart, willing to receive the truth.


Malcon. How shall that Action be made good, which commonly is called, The
Gunpowder treason.


Roma. Uery well sir, it being but an attempt against Heretics, for
maintenance of the Catholic faith. David slew the Ammonites, for but cutting
the hair and garments of his servants; and shall not the Pope cut short
heretical princes, for cutting off the heads, and quartering the members of
his Ambassadors? Did not Joshua turn the walls of Jericho upon the heads of
his foes: and did not ye High Priest, pull Athalia the queen out of the
Temple, and so hew her in pieces? The Pope has excommunicated and accursed
this people of England for a Babel (and the Brownists will witness that is is a
Babel) and therefore, as the Psalmist says of Babel, I say of this synagogue
of Gospellers, O worthy to be destroyed: blessed shall he be that rewards
thee, as thou have served us. Blessed shall he be, that takes and dasheth thy
children against the stones.


Malcon. But they will say sir, that our Savior did never so avenge himself.


Roman. True sir, because in his place, he was but a private man. But this other
is done by public authority. Otherwise you fall upon the rock of Anabaptisme.
For they reason thus; Our Savior and the Apostles used no swords; therefore
not to be used of any Christians.


Malcon. But they will say, that the Pope is as private a man, as Christ was.


Roma. That is to be denied; for though Christ carried no sword, yet he
allowed his successor S. Peter to carry two; and said that there should be a
time to use them. Now, our holy Father the Pope succeeds him, so verily as
did S. Peter: and so the sword Civil, and the sword Ecclesiastique are both in
his hands. Now, when we are too weak for them, S. Peter and his successor must
put up the sword left they perish with it: but when we are able to ouertop
the^, out must the sword; for as the Apostle says, the sword is not carried
for naught. O father Garnet, father Garnet, how glorious is thy martyrdom, and
how miraculously shines thy physnomy upon a straw!


Malcon. Do you think it came by miracle? I heard a Preacher in London say,
that it was a miracle not worth a straw.


Roma. Give them leave to rail for a season. Honorable and learned persons
have seen it, and commended it to the Pope: and I doubt not, but one day it
will be canonized for a Saint: it arising from a drop of blood issuing from
that holy Priest, S. Garnet. Glorious be thou Saint Garnet with thy twelve
Apostles. Happy souls we, if we may live to follow ye.


Malcon. Thus Sir, we are come near to a town. May it please you to rest
there an hour, and I will pay for your dinner?


Roma. I thank you Sir. But go you no further?


Malcon. Yes sir, I should to London to night.


Roma. So should I. Every thing sorts well, I see, for the good of body and
soul.


The second Dialogue between Malcontent, Romanista, Libertinus and the rest.
Malcon. NOw beloved Romanista you are welcome unto mine hosts house. Mine host
what have you ready for us?


Host. Nothing sir, but fish; for this is Ember-weeke.


Roma. I like that best of all. I pray you let us have it quickly. But mean
time, where shall we be?


Host. Pardon us gentlemen, for we are not provided of rooms. There is a
parlour, all that we have. There is no body within, saving one Libertinus
that came lately from Rome. A very familiar gentleman, and one that will be
glad of your companies.


Roma. Master Malcontent, let us in and aboard the gentleman for some news. By
your leave sir, we are bold (upon our Hosts speech) to trouble you.


Libert. No trouble Gentlemen, you are heartily welcome. I had rather be here
with two such native consorts, then at Rome confronted with all the English
house of students. Pol, Aedipol, by Jove, they be the most hunger bit slaves,
that be between this, and the furthest confines of Canibals. I muse not,
though they will be ready to bound themselves for England, with th'aduenture of
a turn and a half at Tiburne; for better die here quickly, then live there in
continual misery. They may beshrew Robin Parsons their Jesuitical father,
for he it is, that licks the fat from their fingers. Come mine Host, lay the
cloth, In Faith thou would be a notable fellow for courting the Nuns.


Host. I think my wife will become one ere long, she is given so to observe
fasten-daies. I warrant, our Parson is not acquainted with half so many as
she. And I am sure, that I can find few of them in Allens Almanac.


Roma. Master Malcontent, we must give idle-headed fellows leave to talk they
know not what. Viatoribus atque Poetis. etc.


Libert. I protest mine Host. Saint Peter's Church at Rome, is nothing so well
maintained as your Church. Doctor Board, that worthy Physician in Harry the
eights time, he saw it in extreme ruin at that time, as appears in his
chapter Daemoniacus (were not our Peter pence then well paid to Rome?) and (by
the hand of a Gentleman, that never drew blood violently but by fair play) it
is bad enough now, to make a tithe-barne for Islington.


Roma. His tongue runs as round as her wheel of Islington.


Libert. Now mine Host, introduce our viands, tot-quot and omnes, ac nos
iugutabimus profecto. Gentlemen, we that have travailed external Regions,
delight in discourse. And get I but once the London ordinaries on my back, I
hope to saciate the stomachs of young Gallants and brave Caualleroes, with
Italianat-discourses. Hey, terey, a surso, so flounced Friar Bartholmew, and
fetched his Capretto aloft, when he saw Madona Speranza ready to enter his
shriftplace. By the head of Tamberlane, they are the maddest laddes in a
country. Thus much for a preface to dinner. Come mine Host. Can thou marshall
thy dishes in order? Come bashful slave, I will usher thee.

This Plase, shall have that place and so make place to the rest. This Pike,
amongst fishes is the Pope (devouring all, but devoured of none: sometimes
indeed the little frog leaping from the hillock upon his caput, does with her
forelegs scratch out his eyes) he shall have Locum maxim supremum. What, an
Ecle? As little hold to be taken of her tail, as of a Jesuits tongue: stand
thou under the shadow of Lupus-marinus, Pope-pike. As for you Master Codsh^ad,
in next affinity with a Monchs-head (as it goes with monchs in these days)
stand you there alone, as the word monch signifies: howsoever Jerome says you
have forgot your name, since you came to live, in turba, amidst the routs of
people. The Codde (they say) deuoureth the oilie Anchouns or Capelinos,, as the
idle Monch is the consumer of the fat Beef and mustard. What Seignior Ruff,
all in your ruff? Give me that dish of Maidens, these two shall stand
together; till the Ruff have devoured all the damsels dowry. As for you sir
Carpe, take up your place by my hostesses trencher, till the giddy-headed
Auditor catch you, that may carp at the preacher, til himself prove but a
pratler. What mounser Smelt; feel at your nose mine Host, you may smell it.


Host. Bones of me, you have hurt my nose


Libert. I bid you but smell it, mine Host. Well, because thou smelst of mine
hosts nose, and my hostesses old suet (as strong as Ciuet) stand there below,
where mine Host Blowse must sit. Now bring in your cheese, and every one choose
where he list.


Roma. Sir, you are as good as a fiddle to this feast.


Malcon. I would sir Libertinus, I had as light an heart as you.


Libert. You may easily have it, if you will enter into my religion.


Malcon. Your religion, what is that?


Libert. First, I do believe that there is a God.

Secondly, that his son came into the world to save sinners, by suffering in
our nature. And S. John says, Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, is of God: but I do so confess, therefore I am of God:
So are you, and you, and you, and my hostess Blowse, in so confessing that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. And therefore lawful for me to hear
Papist, Protestant, Anabaptist or any that so profess. This point I learned of
a William, that sometimes lived in Netherland; who running from the English
Church here, to the Brownist; from the Brownist to a particular faction of his
own, whereto he did bap tize himself; from that to one sect of the
Anabaptists, where they baptized him again; from that to another sect of the
Anabaptists etc, finding no rest in any, till he settled (from that place of S.
John) to hear all, to walk with all, and to hold all true Christians that
confessed Christ as before.


Roma. The Devil confessed him to be Christ and the son of David, and so to
be come in the flesh: therefore you must understand S. John better.


Libert. Yea, these varieties of understandings, causes varieties of sects,
and therefore I leave them to such as love to contend. Mine Host, Love (as the
Apostle says) believes all things and extends it self to all, as my stomach
extends to all these dishes, saving the Smelts.


Host. Smelts, quoth you, I shall never see smelts, but I shall remember you. I
pray thee wife come; here is a gentleman able to cheer thy heart.


Libert. Come sweet Hostess; and because once you were a pretty maid, there is
a pretty Maiden for you.


Host. She was pretty (sir) but that ne uer loved the Friar.


Hostess. I pray you let the Friars alone, and fall to your fish. I wis, it
was never good world since Friars went down.


Host. I warrant you sir, the Friars did easy penance to my wife, which makes
her so much respect them. But since I read of ye Minykin Friars y^ in their
Cloister at the city Minykin, did handle the virgins in that sort, I have been
able to keep tack with my wife.


Hostess. As true a book, as that of the Jesuits play at Lions in France.


Liberti. Hostess, on the faith of a gentleman, such things are not unlikely
to be acted of them. I have seen some of their fashions in my travels Talk
what they shall of religion, when all comes to all, they iump with me in
Religion, excepting their treasons. I will tell you a pretty story of some of
them, then judge of their Religion. The Scene of my discourse shall lie at
home. In Wisbich castle there were many Priests and Friars of sundry fashions;
what time the foul railing schism fell out, between the secular Priests and
Jesuits. Let these fellows have gone to bowls in the castle yard, as viually
they did; you should have had some of the^ to play for their Devotions, that
is, for so many Pater-nosters, so many Aues, and so many Creedes. If you had
asked, how these should have been paid? they would have answered; the loser
shall pay them on his bare knees. For when he went to say over his own
devotions; then he was after that, to say over so many of the Paters, Aues and
Creedes as he had lost; and that in the behoof of ye winner. This is my tale:
now judge of their religion: for my part I think y^ most of their religion to
be but merely This caused the Author to cast Popery on the left hand, as
begetting Libertinisme.
political, for keeping people in a timorous obedience: otherwise, for the
learned of them, let them be alone by themselves, they can turn that into glee
and gladness, which the Lay-lort must tremble at in sadness. Machiauel could well
say, that the bringing of people into such servile fear, it fainted their
hearts in fight, whereby the Empire still lessened. But he should have further
observed; that howsoever it decreased the Empire, it was the means to
strengthen the Popedom.


Roman. Master Malcontent, a word in your ear. We do not well to stay the
hearing of such vile speeches against our holy mother the Church. And it is no
contending with him, for fear he bring us into question. Follow a little
after, as nothing were. And if you overtake me not in the next field, I will
stay at the great gate beyond it. Hostess I must rise; my friend may stay a
little, and he will pay for my dinner. Gentleman, I thank you for your
company. Mine Host farewell.


Host. Farewell heartily sir. Ha, ha, hay; is it so? See you not how my wife
sneakes after him. She must have a little of his Benediction before he go.


Malcont. Why, do you know him mine Host?


Host. Yea, that I do. There is never a tooth in his head, but it has cost me
an Angel. My wife went orderly unto Church, before she fell in his company.
His name is Romanista: is it not?


Malcon. Romanista? how came you to know that name?


Host. I have known it this half seven years. But if any be in company,
then I may not know him, under pain of my wifes curse.


Malcon. O monstrous! he made me believe that his name was Zeloista, till
within these three hours, and that then it was turned unto Romanista, by an
Angel that appeared unto him.


Libert. What, what? let us hear that again. I pray you sweet Gentleman out
with it, that so we may end the meal with laughter.


Malcon. I have told you the general; you shall pardon me for the particulars.
But now I smell, he is a notable Cony-catcher.


Libert. Ha, ah, ha: Had he seen an Angel to day? I hold my life, it was an
Angel created in the Tower, of y^ Mintmasters. If he have got no angels from
you, it is well. Ha, ha, hay; this was an Equiuecating Angel, that never came
in heaven, nor means to do. They be the notablest lads for apparitions and
revelations of Angels, that ever any sect afforded.


Host. Stay, hushed: my wife having done her devotion to her Saint, she now
returns.


Libert. Come good Hostess. Sit down a while.


Hostess. Master Malcontent (for so I take your name to be) the Gentleman that
is gone, willed me to put you in mind of what he spoke in your ear.


Malcon. Well forsooth.


Libert. Do you know the gentleman (Hostess) that is now gone?


Hostess. No acquaintance sir, it may be I have seen him.


Libert. Me thinks (by his looks) he is an Angellike man.


Hostess. He has a sweet Angellike voice, in my judgment.


Libert. I do not think (Hostess) but he conuerseth much with Angels.


Host. But I think my wife never had an angel out of his purse.


Hostess. What a profane man my husband is! The gentleman talks of Angels in
the good part, and he answers touching Angels in the ill part.


Host. Surely wife, I would take them in the good part, if I could get them.
Master Malcontent, me thinks you are malconceited. Pluck up a good heart, man,
and be frolike. Here M. Libertino, to all good fellows, and let the world
slide a.


Libert. Heartily mine Host, as heartily as ever I turned my back upon Romes
walls.


Hostess. I hope sir, it is a place of all delight for a soul to live in: I
think in my conscience sir, one cannot be damned that lives in it.


Libertinus. Certainly yea; he cannot be damned whiles he lives there. But die
he once there in possession of the Cities sins, I will take ^ ^^lfe penny for
all the part he shall have in paradise.


Hostess. Surely the Pope will not suffer any of his loving subjects, to go to
the Devil, for he has the keys of Hell, and will keep his own out.


Libert. He will no doubt do it, when he has been at hell, and taken order
with the three-headed porter about it.


Hostess. And I pray you, has he not been there already?


Liber. No forsooth, not this Pope, but he is preparing to go thither, so fast
as he can.


Hostess. Mary, and I will pray for his good speed. For then I hope every true
Catholic shall fare the better by it. Good Lord, he has to do with heaven,
and he has to do with hell, and he has to do with purgatory, and he has
to do with Limbo.


Libert* Nay, sweet hostess, I heard a Friar in Rome say in the Pulpit, that
one that was no Pope, did above 1500 years since, open the gates of Limbo, let
all the souls out, and ouerturn the place


Hostess. And had he not the Popes license to do it?


Libert. He never spoke with any Pope about it.


Hostess. And has not the Pope since cursed him?


Libert. Yes forsooth: He cursed him every time, wherein he cursed Queen
Elizabeth.


Hostess. Well, then let king James take heed he do not anger him: And I would
pray you sir, to beware how you speak any thing against holy mother Church, or
any of her children. While I was of your mind, every thing went cross: Marry
since I reconciled my self to holy mother Church, my hens lay bigger eggs
then they did, and I take two pence for good ale now, where I took but a penny
then, I thank Saint Campian, and S. Garnet for it. Well husband, I see your
flearing well enough; These gentlemen can give audience in all humbility; but
you will be a flouting Hmybeel, as the man said. Well gentlemen, I will take
away, for I see you have done.


Libert. I pray you do, mean time what is the reckoning?


Hostess Five shillings, sir; and you are heartily welcome.


Libert. There it is* Deo gratias. I thank you mine Host, for your good
company.


Malcon. I pray you sir stay, there be three shillings toward it, and I desire
I may walk with you a while.


Libert. Well, I will take your moneies for this once. As for walking with me,
I am right willing, if with any conference I may hestead you.


Malcon. Yes sir, seeing you have bin behind the Seas, and seen the papists
and their doings.


Libert. I have seen them, and heard them, and laughed in my sleeue at them.
But which way lies your way?


Malcon. Toward Westminster.


Libert. Have with you at the nearest. Host, and Hostess farewell.


Both. We thank you heartily, kind gentlemen.


The third Dialogue, between Libertinus and Malcontent.
Libert. NOw Mr Malcontent, what is it, you will propound?


Malcon. I desire (sir) to have notice of the state of Rome in these days vile
things be diuulged on it; if it be so bad, it were too bad.


Libert. It was never famed for worse then it now is. First, for the state of
substance* it is generally very beggarly. Traffficke, as some other Cities in
Italy have, it has not. Indeed many travel thither as Pilgrims, and there be
allowed to stay for certain days: but as the number of such Pilgrims now, be
scarce one for an hundred that passed thither of yore: so, ordinarily they be
but of mean degree, and ere they come thither, their purse has cast her
calfe: For the small time of their abode then there, somewhat comes out of the
coffers of the scarlet Cardinals. Which spent, they put up their pipes and
pack away. They might come out full, but they return fool and empty.
Secondly, for the state of Pope and Cardinals, it is altogether pompous and
princelike: the Cardinals having hinges enowe in their door to turn upon, and
the Pope besides other means has a mighty allowance annually from the
Curtizans scalding-tubs: for no occupatio^s in Rome more common* then Venery,
and Penury. Thirdly, for the state of their religious houses, let the vaults
and secret preambulatio^s under earth tell y^. Fourthly, for their public
devotions, the forms of them be Pagan-like; the multiplicitie of them, be as
Sisyphus stone, always rolling, but never at an end. In a word, it is an Egypt
for slavery, a Babel for bondage, a Bethel for idolatry, a Tophet for confused
noise, a Gehinnon for bloodshed, a Sodom for all spurcicity, an Hell for
da^natio^.


Malcont. If the head be no better, what shall become of the body?


Libert. And whereas they plead Unity, and tax all other Churches for
Distraction; I protest, a man shall find more emulations, heart-burnings,
vituperies, bloody practices, amongst them (with mutual oppositions one
against another) then amongst all other Christians in the world besides. Every
school man stands so for his own school doctrine, (as Thomists for Thomas,
Scotists for Scotus, and sic ad infinitum) as the like division never yet has
been raised between the Aristotelians and Ramists. Then go to the friery
Orders, and the Augustine condemns the Dominik, and the Dominik him. The black
friar vituperates the gray and white, and either of them again preferres
highly his own order. The Jesuit condemns the Secular, for an Apostate; and
the Secular priest again, auerreth that the Jesuit aberreth from his orders,
and is now become a Statesman and Factor for Spain. As for the bloody
Inquisition, they plague all, and all curse them, what shall I say?


Malcon. Nay you have said enough, and yet but that, which I often before have
heard. I beseech you sir of your counsel: I have been one of them, which have
stood here for the new discipline, holding that we have for popish and
Antichristian. And seeing this discipline would not be had, I lastly resolved
to separate, and so enter into that course, which is called Brownisme. As I
thus resolved, there comes a book into my hands, touching Principles and
inferences of a true visible Church. This book teaches a Separation as do the
writings of the former: but when he comes to the discipline, he then differs
much from the former; and so from the most of our Reformistes, here at home,
so well as from the Church of Scotland and the like.

First we have held, that the Pastor might only administer the Sacraments: but
the author of this book, holds that the Doctor may administer them also.

Secondly, we have taught, that the Elders were to be employed in Church
government only (I mean in the discipline) but he affirms further, that
they are all of them apt to teach; and so to assist in doctrine.

Thirdly, we have published, that the Church is to give the officers their
Calling; meaning thereby all the men of the Church were to give their voice:
but he intimates further, that women and children are to give their consent
also for such election and calling.

Fourthly, we held Excommunication to be the casting out of a contumaticus
person; and that to the excution thereof, there appertained only, rebukes, the
word and prayer; as all spiritual: but he infinuates further, that some bodily
punishment also is to be annexed.

What shall I say? in many things he is cross to the discipline, which before
has been applauded: and yet the man (they say) an honest man, reverend and
learned.

In the neck of this book, I met with another, called Error on the right
hand. The author thereof being sometimes entangled about Discipline, (and yet
it must be confessed that many years he has in print checked ours, for the
which we ever carried an hard hand over him) and during such time of the
entanglement about that point he travailing into foreign parts, and there
abiding some years (where all sorts of factions were daily in his eyes and
ears) he, (about some nine years since) came over, and in London continuing,
has all this while conflicted with factions, and not a little vexed us. The
foresaid book he now publishing, it plainly euinceth, that if separation be
made from the Church of England for Antichristian, then will ineuitably follow
an endless wandering from faction to faction. These two books have put me to my
wits end; I know not what to do: and to subscribe unto this Churches Canons and
orders, I cannot: Once, for that I am known in these parts to have set my
self against them. Secondly, for that I hold some of them to be repugnant unto
the word of God. Could I get out of these briers, I were an happy man.


Libert. And are you so ignorant, that you cannot do that? within this noneth I
helped a kinsman of mine out of this pit; who since has subscribed, is now
beneficed; and yet in nothing harmed his conscience: for still his opinion in
private lives with him, and helpful he is to such as be distressed about that
opinion. The Apostle wills us to serve Kuri^ (the Lord) which some do read,
Kair^ (the time) And were it not, that sometimes we are to fit the time in his
humor; the Prophet would not have said, There is a time wherein the prudent
shall be silent, nor would Salamon have said; There is a time for all things
under the Sun; but this is one thing under the sun, therefore a time for it;
yea, a time to be silent from some good, and yet not to ever throw the maine
good and our good.


Malcon. I like this speech well; for indeed, pearls are not to be cast before
swine who will but turn back and all to rend us. Tell me sir, how I may without
equivocation come out of Joseph's pit, and I will give you forty* shillings
toward a velvet pair of breeches.


Liberti. Then if I do it not, call me cut.


Malcon. And I will do it, and more then that.


Libert. Then thus to work, sir, have you printed any thing of your diverse
opinions?


Malcon. Not any thing that has my name at it.


Libert. Then carry it away closely, and henceforth conceal it; But further,
have you been much noted abroad, in the land, for such a Contradictorian?


Malcon. No sir, for I was no man of extraordinary gifts.


Libert. Then that damme is closed up. There be some which I know, that if
their case were such, they would presently subscribe, specially in secret. Your
best then is, to lean this place where you have been noted, and so to repair
unto another.


Malcon. But how then shall I do for subscription?


Libert. The subscription runs, that you must ex animo protest that every
thing they propound is agreeable to Gods word, and in nothing re pugnant.


Malcon. True.


Libert. Now sir, they can propound nothing so erroneous and wicked, but it
does agree with some part of Gods word: As for example, if they propound any
thing for Christian, which is indeed Antichristian, it does agree with the word
of prophecy, who foretells that such evils shall be. If they propound
obedience to the beast in Revelation the 13. it agrees with the word of
Prophecy, which says, such evils shall be propounded; And in such sense you
only subscribe, namely, that all their evil agreeeth with the word of
prophecy: and not y^ you mean, that their evil is good; otherwise then
respectively, as it is a fulfilling of the holy Prophecy. Muse not at the
matter, the case is plain, the pearl of your meaning is not to be cast before
them, no more then Abraham would deliver his preservative meaning unto the
licentious Pharaoh: nor Christ would deliver his Reseruatiue meaning unto them
of Emmaus, when he looked another way. A certain Doctor once being demanded,
what he thought of Q. Elizabeth's supremacy: he unto them replied; I desire
(my Lords) to know what you think of it. They answer, we do believe ye within
her own dominions she is over all persons and in all causes, Civil and
Ecclesiastique, supreme. He answers, And my very good Lords, I do truly
believe the same. Whereupon (it is said) he escaped. Now sir, what was it he
believed? not that the Queen was so supreme,; but he believed that the Lords
so believed.


Malcon. Me thinks this should be equivocation in him, and yet the former I
reasonably affect.


Libert. Tut, if every close help we use, for euading dangers, must be called
equivocation, then we will condemn Patriarchs and Prophets, Martyrs and
Confessors and all godly policy. Whereas contrariwise our Savior has taught
us, yea, commanded us to be subtle as serpents.


Malcon. Without all question, it must be so, and I do verily believe you: But
another thing, sir, if I come to be beneficed, I must once within a month
after, publicly read in my cure, 39. articles of religion, concluded upon by
our Convocation house, and thereto must then signify my assent, and there be
some that I like not.


Libert. That's nothing, for upon the former ground you may say: All these agree
with Gods word: Or you may say thus; beloved, here be articles, that I must
read, whereto I assent, and of whom I affirm that they be gooly. Now, you say,
there be such holy articles but not that all the articles are such and holy.


Malcon. O, how happy was I to meet with a man of such prudence and divine
experience! O, that all my brethren were acquainted with this sacred policy.

O sir, you must beware to whom you communicate it: Otherwise, it may come to
the Bishops ears; and they would fetch you about again, and not only you, but
all others, that yet keep their places, who seem to lean to the new
discipline. Take heed therefore of that, lest otherwise the latter error be
worse then the first.


Malcon. I thank you for your good counsel: for indeed they be but
hollowhearted toward us. Well sir, here is what I promised: and if you come to
my lodging, (that is at N.) I will bestow a supper of a crown on you. be it to
night or any night within this seuennight.


Libert. I thank you master Malcontent; And I will be at your service in what
I can. There lies your way and here is mine.


Malcon. Farewell prudent Libertino.


Libert. As much to you reverend Gentleman.


The fourth Dialogue between Malcontent and Atheos.
Malcon. MAster Atheos, I am glad I have such a Chamber-fellow to night: that
bed I take to be the better, and it is that (as mine Host says) which you had
last night. On this other therefore I fix my rest.


Atheos. And it please you (master Malcontent) you may for all that use this,


Malcon. I thank you sir, but this shall suffice. One thing Mr. Atheos, as we
we are preparing for bed: your discourse this supper time, I marked well, and in
my poor judgment, you spoke more for the souls immortaltty, then I ever
heard. It appears well, that master Cuffe, is not the only man of our age,
for handling that Argument, yet in the heel of our discourse (let me make my
self no wiser then I am) I could not collect, what (after the bodies death)
became of that soul, except it then entered into some other body, Uegetatiue,
Sensitive, or Rational.


Atheos. Sir, over while you live, observe when he that dilateth upon an
argument, does insist in his own person, or in the person of another. The
immortality of the soul was mine own, but the passage of it into some other
body, ye I delivered in ye person of another, namely of certain ancient
Philosophers very judicious and learned. And hereto some have of late the
rather inclined, for that these great Politicians which penned the scriptures,
do call Judah a Lion, Isachar an Ass, Dan a Serpent, Herod a For, with the
like, as either having had the spirits of such beasts within the^, or else, for
that their spirits were destinated (upon ye bodies death) to enter into such
Beasts.


Malcon. It is somewhat which you say, and more then I ever heard before. But
me thought you inferred further, that the stars have life.


Atheos. Uery true; else how should they give life to inferior bodies? Plato
ye Philosopher, read him well. The like do to Clemens Alexandrine his Stromata,
toward y^ end: and he a famous divine amongst the Greeks within 200 years
of Christ. Read (not to mention, Trismegistos, Iamblicus, Porphyry, Proclus)
the writings of the great Physical clerks, Paracelsus, Quersitanus and
others; and you shall find (by plain demo^stration) that every Mineral has
his life and spirit: And as y^ Galenists have granted, that the cor ruptio^ of
one creature, is the generation of another: so neither can this be, if so a
life and spirit were not conveyed from the dying body into another. Whereupon
else comes it, that notwithstanding all sorts of daily dyings, there is yet
a plentious conservation of every creature in this kind?


Malcon. Surely, it must needs be so. And I now perceive, that is impossible
for a man that pores much upon the Scriptures, should ever be a wise man.


Atheos. Tut, the writers of the scriptures, were very politic men. The summer
of Trogus Pompeius, notes Moses to have been a very pollitick Captain, and
Joseph a notable Magician, who well knew, that such an itchie people as Israel,
would never be kept under, but by propounding some forms of Religion, whereby
they might be imbusied in these religious devotions, as time should not afford,
(over and besides that) any leisure to look into their Captains purposes.
Unto which religion, they being once fashioned, in hope of a reward, at the
hands of one they called GOD, they afterward, neither durst do otherwise, as
they would avoid certain torments, in a place they called Hell. What was it
that Mahomet else intended in the device of his Alcoran? And has he not
thereby, purchased to himself abundance of Kingdoms, with subiugation of very
many Christians? And this the rather, by observing a want in the others
policy, (at least, in the exercise of their policy) when as he leaves no
liberty to his people, for calling so much, as any one point of their religion
in question, but die therefore he must. Whereupon follows that differences they
have none; and so are at all times amongst themselves united, and fit with one
heart and spirit, to fly confidently in the faces of any their adversaries.
Whereas distraction in our policy, weakeneth our affections one toward another;
and infirmeth the whole body against our foreign Adversary.


Malcon. O wonder, what a fool have I been all the days of my life! Some
what I learned to day of another; but that far short unto this. I have but
two kine to my paile, I would (with all my heart) spend them (yea, and maggot
my Sow) that I might but hear you read lecture upon such points, but one
forthnight. Now sir, I would I might entreat you, to use some words of prayer
at our down lying; and then we will give out selves unto rest, till the
morning: for this days business, has awearied both body and soul.


Atheos. I will; then thus: Thou subtle nature, that (as a stream) conuaies
thy self through every creature and which mouest diversely, according to
diverse matter, giving form and being to the same accordingly, preserve thou us
in our forms this night. And what time the Elements and principles of our
body, shall through their mutual wars, overcome some one of his fellows, do
thou so appetite thy like from some other similar creature, as we presently
may add that spiritual Mumia unto thee, whereby thou may be abled to
recover thy former standing, to the taming of the rebellious Element or spirit.
Nor be thou careless (at the time of these Elements downfall) to transplant
the immortal spirit, into some Iouiall or Herculean body, be it in the
Spheres or the Center; that so this WE, may become a more excellent WE. Amen.


Malcont. Marry, Amen, I never heard such a prayer in my life. I would beg of
you sir, that to morrow morning I might hear you, to comment upon this prayer:
for surely surely, there is much hid mystery in it.


Atheos. I will, Natura inspirante. But now to our rest, and Good night.


Malcon. Many good nights to you sir. O happy day, well spent.


The fifth Dialogue, between Malcontent and Atheos.
It must here be conceited, that thundeer cracketh, and lightning flasheth
about the chamber, as they be settled to sleep. Atheos. FIre fire, the house is
a fire. It cracks, it cracks, heaven falls, house falls, earth falls. Woe is
me, what shall I do?


Malcon. Lord be merciful. -- -- Lord be merciful. -- -- -- Jesus have mercy
upon me. What a crack was this that shaked all? O Lord forgive me my sins,
what a light run through the chamber! Master Atheos, M. Atheos, where are you
Master Atheos? Lord help me: Is he gone? I am afraid the lightning has taken
him away. What M. Atheos, where are you man?


Atheos. Peace, -- -- peace.


Malcon. A Gods name, where are you? Let me come to you man.


Atheos. I am under the bed, under the bed.


Malcon. Where, which bed?


Atheos. Here, here.


Malcon. Body of me, I have run my head against the post.


Atheos. Has it done, has it done?


Malcon. Has what done?


Atheos. Is the lightning and thunder gone? for I have shut ears and eyes.


Malcon. It is gone I think: for I neither hear nor see any thing. Only I
feel a bad smell.


Atheos. It is no matter for smell, so the thunder and lightning be gone. Pull
me out by the hand, I pray you. There. there; so, now I am well.


Malcon. I pray you sir, from whence might this thunder come?


Atheos. It comes from that region of the air which is middle-most. And is no
thing else, but a sudden bursting asunder of a cloud: the tearing of whose
womb in pieces, you might sensibly hear. The cloud consists of viscous
vapors, which rolling about, do in fire beget a stone in the womb of the
cloud; the heauiest part of the matter falling into that center. But as the
whole body of the cloud cannot be a like condensed and firm; so, a breach in
time is made, for venting that stone or pellet. The resemblance of this
lightning, this crack and thunderbolt flying, you may see in a piece of
Ordinance, where you have a sudden flashing light; a terrible crack, and the
pellet flying out.


Malcon. Yea but sir, who is the Lord of this firmamentall Gun? For some one
must set it on fire, and level the shot at some mark.


Atheos. It has no other Master, then nature, that so moves. As for y^ shots
fall. it is merely casual.


Here another c^^ck must be conceited etc. Atheos. A, a, a, a, a.


Malcon. Lord bless us, what news? M. Atheos, M. Atheos? Body of me, I am
down upon some body. Who is there? Speak a Gods name. Is it Master Atheos?
Speak man, speak man. Mine Host; ho, a candle for Gods sake, ho. What, you
cannot sleep I am sure. A candle quickly.


Host. Here Is a candle Master Malconte^t. How do ye both? Here has been a
shrewd nights change. Aes me, what see I? Master Atheos slain.


Malcont. God be merciful unto us: see how his face is burnt, and no hair
singed; his legs broken, and no skin pierced. I cannot abide to behold him any
more. O Lord forgive me, O Lord forgive my sins.


Host. What shall we do master Malcontent? for the hand of the Lord is upon
us.


Malcon. Alas, we have no other thing to do, but get down into some other
room, and betake our selves to prayer.


Host. I beseech you, then let us do so.


Malcon. Take the candle sir, and lead the way. O Lord, lay not my sins to
my charge. I acknowledge thee to be God, and a just God. Oh, extend thy mercy
unto us.


The sixth Dialogue between Malcontent, and the good and Bad Spirit.
Malcon. NOw I am apart, sequestered from all mankind, solitary in this Arbor.


^ad spirit. Not so apart, but thou shall hear rung in thy ears, the
judgments of God, which attend thee for thy abominations.


Malcon. What art thou that speak so?


Bad spirit. He whom God has appointed to haunt thy Ghost, and to pursue thee
unto judgment. Hearst thou, hearst thou, thou giddy head, thou Apostaticall
wretch, thou hypocrite, thou Atheist (that have said in thine heart, there is
no GOD, there is no judgment) now the hour is come, that GOD will be avenged
on such a wretch? why startlest thou back? why looks thou aghast? Thy
conscience cres out of thee. Thine own conscience condemns thee. And vile
hypocrite, God is at hand to judge thee. Hypocrite, blasphemer, strebrand of
hell fire. All too late to quake and tremble. Knock thy knees together with
Belteshar, the hand writing is come out. No place is left to repentance; no
mercy, no pardon, thou art damned, thou art damned.


Malcon. O Lord God, what shall become of me?


Bad spirit. Hell, hell, hypocrite hell; nothing but hell.


Malcon. O Lord of heaven, is there no recovery?


Bad spirit. None, none, Hypocrite, thy teacher is judged, and thou must
follow. Come away, into this Well cast thy self headlong. So thy conscience
will leave gnawing, fretting. Or take y^ line, that goes from the one post unto
the other, and in that tree hang thy self. Why stayest thou? Eat and drink
thou can not, settle thy self to any calling, thou can not; Joy in any
thing, thou can not. Therefore life is now to end. Faith thou have none; all
Hope is gone; charity is far from thee; and pray thou can not. Therefore
now, now, even now, the very time to be damned.


Malcon. Am I quite forsaken? O Lord is there not one drop of mercy?


Bad spirit. Not one drop, hypocrite, wherewithal to cool thy black,
blasphemons tongue. An end, an end. The heavens look black upon thee. The air
draws it self from thee. The earth trembles at the weight of such a
Reprobate. Hell, hell, lo how it gapes for thee.


Malcon. O Lord God, if there be no mercy with thee, why did thou not slay
me together with Atheos?


Good spir. He spared thee, to the end thou should repent.


Bad spirit. Repent, he cannot repent. The eye of his judgment is out. His
heart is hardened. He is a wandering star, a cloud without water, a tree twice
pulled up, a despiser of government. A speaker evil of them that be in
authority. S. Jude says he is damned.


Good spi. Bad spirit, thou slanderest Jude, he foretelles indeed, that in
these last days, there should be such damnable ways, wherein the most would
walk to final destruction. But that no such should come out of these evil
ways, he affirms not* nay, he intimates that some should. And therefore he
wills the sanctified, to have compassion of some, in putting difference;
saving other with fear, pulling them out of the fire.


Bad spirit. Ho, ho, but this hypocrite is none of these few.


Good spir. Bad spirit, God never told thee y^. He sends forth his good spirit,
for wit nessing to a man's spirit, the forgiveness of his sins: yea, the good
spirit is sent to seal such assurance. As for the evil spirit, there is no
one scripture that says, how he is sent forth of God, for sealing to a soul
the assurance of damnation.


Bad spirit. Oh but this runnagate from all religion, he cannot repent.


Good spir. Of himself he cannot; but that same God that spared him, when he
smot the eother, can give him repentance, which he denied to the other.


Bad spirit. He can do it; but he will not do it.


Good spir Satan thou takes too much upon thee, thou art ignorant what God
will. A lier (as well as a murderer) thou wast from the beginning. The Lord
reprove thee.


Bad spirit. He has sinned the great sin against the holy Ghost.


Good spir. That sin lies in an Apostasy, or Departure: First from the
principles of true religion, once truly held, as in the Hebr. 6. 1. 2. 3. etc.
Secondly, in a Departure from all such Christian fellowship, as wherewith
before he had joyful communion, Heb. 10. 15. First thou can not prove y^
ever he was so deep in, with that mystery of Faith and holy communion, and not
proving that, thou can not conclude, that his fall is so far, as from the
uppermost step of these stairs that ascend to the throne of Gods mercy.


Bad spirit. He is fallen from the very highest step, and so not one step of
mercy for him.


Good spir. Nay Satan thou now lie, and the Lord again reprove thee, all the
ground of Faith was not gone, for he desired Atheos to pray.


Bad spirit. And he said Amen to a monstrous prayer.


Good spir. He said Amen he knew not to what; and such in effect was his
confession. But whatsoever Atheos intended by Nature, poor Malcontent had in
mind, that there was a God to become unto, and that by Christ Jesus only. His
head indeed was intoxicate with Vanity, but not therefore the Verity pulled up.
Besides, whatsoever thou may suspect, by his evil company he last day kept;
thou yet can not prove that he had freely resolved to forsake all charitable
Communion with his brethren in the former grounds of faith. This departure from
Faith and Fellowship, is not acted upon a stickering giddy conceit, but upon
mature deliberation: and then also done, vnconstrainedly and freely.


Bad spirit. Let it be, he have not acted that sin fully: yet if he live but a
little longer, it will be come to the full. Therefore the best to prevent it is
to hang himself presently.


Good spir. As thy self art, so is thy counsel.


Bad spirit. Let him not do that, and yet he has sinned sufficiently for a
thousand damnations.


Good spir. Who knows not, Satan, that one sin is sufficient, where grace
from above comes not? Therefore the third time I say: The Lord which has
chosen this brand out of the fire, even he reprove thee. Zach 3. 2.


Bad spirit. Nay where thou co^mest thou meanst to be vmpire, there is no
talking with thee, the last word thou will have, and therefore I go.


Good spir. Malcontent, Malcontent?


Malcon. Who calls Malcontent?


Good spir. One that wishes thee well.


Malcon. O but I wish not my self well; nor can I; for I have sinned,
grievously sinned, and my heart is disquieted within me.


Good spir. Do thou grieve Malcontent, do thou grieve?


Malcon. O Lord, I grieve because I cannot grieve.


Good spir. Art thou burdened Malcontent, art thou burdened?


Malcon. Never did soul carry such a burden. Sin upon sin, sin upon
sin, and more sin, and no end of sin.


Good spir. Go then unto Christ who can ease thee.


Malcon. Sweet Christ I know can ease me, but will he ease me?


Good spir. Doubtst thou whether he will ease thee? Never was Shepherd so
willing to take up the poor sheep on his shoulders, that had spent the
strength in the briers, and so to bring it to the fold; as he is willing to
take up a poor soul, and to bring it home from wandering. Let the Priest pass
by, and suffer the sheep to porish; Let the Leuite pass by, and stretch out no
hand to help; yet Christ (with the Samaritan) and sooner then the Samaritan
will bind up thy breaches, get thee up on his shoulders, settle thee in his
Inn and feed thee more tenderly then Joseph fed weak Iaacob.


Malcon. O but I cannot look him in the face, I am ashamed, my face is
confounded there is nothing right in me.


Good spir. The more thou dislikest thy self, the better he likes thee, down
upon thy knees and pray: if it be never so little, yet pray.


Malcon. Well so, I am down, what shall I say? my heart is cold, my tongue is
frozen, Lord help me I cannot pray.


Good spir. Call for his help, and he will help thee.


Malcon. O sin, sin, stops my mouth, I cannot pray: heavenly Father for
Christ his sake, teach me to pray. O, here at this heart it is, lies heavy, and
as cold as lead.


Good spir. With the poor Publican, knock y^ same breast, wherein sins spaune
lies. Cast thy self upon the earth, shake up thy unto ward affections.


Malcont. Hard heart, will thou not melt? melt heart, melt: Lord for thy sons
sake, take a way my hearts hardness, my hearts unbelief, my hearts
untowardness: Oh, oh, ho, lord that I could pray, as sometimes I have prayed.


Good spir. To desire grace, is the beginning of grace, and to sorrow because
one cannot pray better, is an infallible degree of true repentance. Blessed are
these that (so) hunger after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. A co^
trite heart the Lord will not despise.


Malcon. I hate Papisme, I loath Libertinisme, I abhor the very remembrance of
Atheism; but a three fold cord of iniquity they be, which cannot be easily
broken. Error on the right hand is as Salomo^ teaches in Eccl. 7. 18. a sin
that consists in Being just overmuch, and wise overmuch, whose judgment is to
make such Zeloists desolate, but Error on the Left hand, is a Being wicked and
foolish over much, whose judgment is to hasten a man's perishing, before mature
time, Eccles. 7. 19.


Good spir. Thou meritedst to have perished, but God would not thou should
perish, for his own names sake: for by thy conversion he will have his mercy
made glorious; and therefore being converted, see thou also do help to
strengthen thy brethren.


Malcon. It shall be my duty, with Saint Peter so to do: but will the Lord
pardon me? whia, my sins be extremely large.


Good spir Thy sins cannot be so large, as his mercy is large: For thy
multitude of iniquities, he has a multitude of mercies, and in the pardoning
of thee much, thou may love him much.


Malcon. Love him, Oh that I might die for him! shed my blood for him! lose all
that I have in the world for him!


Good spir. That affection of thine is the fruit of true love. And (as S. John
says) God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him.


Malcon. O Lord, I thank thee for sparing me from sudden death: I have
mocked at that kind of prayer heretofore. but now Lord I see what a mercy it
is, not to be taken away suddenly; how soever we should indeed always so
live, as always ready to die; but Lord, we are not always (nay seldom) so
prepared; and therefore an exceeding mercy of thineto give a poor sinner some
time to look about him, and to prepare for death: but sweet Lord howsoever I
fear and tremble at the very remembrauce of Faction and Schism, I yet am so
deeply plunged with scruples and doubts, about sundry things in the Church of
England, as I know not what to do, without further direction.


Good spir. Repair to Mediocrity: and so fare thou well.


Malcon. GOD grant I may fare well, for my poor souls health. O Mediocrity, I
heretofore have scorned thy precepts, because I had no mind to keep any mean,
accounting all mean, but an haulting between two opinions. I go Lord I go:
Forthy sons sake, bless Mediocrity for speaking, and me for hearing, Amen.
So be it.


The seventh Dialogue, between Malcontent and Mediocrity.
Medeoc. WHo knocks there?


Malcon. One, that desires to speak with you. Your servant told me sir, that
you were amongst your Bees, and I have made bold to interrupt your business.


Medioc. Neighbor Malcontent, I pray you come near. Will you sit down by me?
Me thinks, from the consideration of this poor little creature, many excellent
meditations may arise.


Malcon. But, will they not sting a man, that sits amongst them?


Medioc. Not at all, except a man provoke the^ by cross carriage toward them.
And then no marvel they cast out a dart: for the least creatures have their
splen and their gall. And this I will tell you further, if she can draw her
sting back again, the^ all is well enough with her, howsoever she have tickled
her molestor. But if she leave it quite behind, then through want of choser to
inflame her unto duty she becomes a drone and loiterer, living upon the
spoil of others. All which may put us in mind; First that a Christian is to be
zealous in a good cause, but so as he ouershoot not the compass of his own
good. Secondly that a man ouerlashing in zeal, does finally grow to be as cold
as a clock, a plain loiterer, living, upon the undeserved pains of others:
For extremity of zeal, ordinarily is turned into extreme security. We are
therefore to spend our zeal to day* as we may be fervent in the Churches
quarrel to morrow.


Malcon. A wise observation and godly.


Medioc. Now sir, when such a one becomes a plain loiterer, they want not
discipline (and that a sharp one) for proceeding with such a party, mark these
two bees, you shall have a present instance; see you how that blacker be is
got upon the jack of the other? see how she tugs her forward, now she tu^bles
down with her from the stone, now she flies up again, having left the other
for dead.


Malcon. Surely she is dead indeed.


Medioc. Whia, this was an idle be* and seeing she would not work (as the
Apostle urges) she shall not eat amongst them. May not both Church and common
wealth learn from hence, that it is shame to suffer loiterers to the
consumption of their labors? Now sir, mark again how some come forth to fly
about for more provision: Others again, see how they come with their thighs
laden with matter for effecting of honey. And in the third place observe, how
some others help to bear in their burden. From hence may we not learn, that
as every Christian is to have his calling and therein to be painful; so, the
stronger are to support the weaker, one bearing another burden, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ?


Malcon. How dull have I been in contemplating the works of God!


Medioc. Now sir, all these maintain Unity in the bonds of peace; and so their
small beginnings increase to a mighty lump: whereas on the other side, the
greatest things by discord and dariance, do come unto nothing. Furthermore, as
they have a governor to go in and out before them, so they do camp round about
his person as willing to be slain before y^ their anointed be touched. And may
not the observation hereof bring confusion of face unto such as not only make
away, but also themselves join in traitorous violences against the Lords
anointed, our dread Sovereign king James? Besides, how may it plainly
demonstrate the leaud spirits of some Zeloists, who being called to inuiron the
Church, as the Tribes with their tents in the wilderness environed the
Sanctuary, are not only, not such, but in deed and in word, and in writings
incompasse her with firebrands, setting all on fire. Though the Lord had his
holy fire in the Temple; yet it was the Devils wildfire (by Nabuchadnetsar)
that set the Temple on fire.


Malcon. Well, now I perceive that the smallest creatures do go before me in
obedience to their Creator. Reverend sir, as I heartily thank GOD, for the
good I have this way already received, so I beseech you to give me patient
hearing, while I propound my souls sorrow unto you; and that shall be in so
few words as I can. I have sinned against our Church mightily (I am afraid) in
having bin unto her not a Be, but a spider, in drawing all into the evil
part, for nourishing my poisonfull judgment. My humble desire is, that in
propounding some doubts, which yet (as stumps) remain behind vnpulled up, you
would vouchsafe unto me some reasonable resolution.


Medioc. With all my heart, and the Father of Christ Jesus, exhibit a
plenteous blessing.


Malcon. Amen, I beseech him. The first question is, how may I be assured that
the ministry of our Church, is one with that ministry which Christ left unto
the ministration of the new Testament, that is, of the Gospel, or glad tidings,
through Faith in Christ, opposite (in respect of the form of justification) to
the works of the Law. The doubt arises; First from their diversity of titles;
the one called Bishops and Deacons; the other called Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Priests, Parso^s Vicars. Secondly, our Bishops seemto have greater
dignities and prero gatiues in the world the^ the other had.


Medioc. To the first I answer: The house of Joseph made no separation from
their master; nor the Jews from Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah:
howsoever Pharaoh altered the first and Nebuchadnetsar gave bad ones to the
second. Names are not of the essence or being of things, otherwise, false
Christ's should be true Christ's, and false Prophets, true Prophets, because
they be invested with y^ commendable titles of Christ and Prophet. And yet no
such evil in our names, (for what is Archbishop but chief ouerseer? Lord
Bishop, a ruling ouerseer: Priest (the corrupt word of Presbyter, as Bishop of
Episcopos) signifies only an Elder (which phrases of Bishop and Elder were
given to the Apostles also) The first in respect of ouerseeing Church or
Churches; the second in respect of their years sufficiency, before they
entered into the work of the ministry. As for the term Parson, you may call
him Pastor if you will (the Law gives you leave) the term Parson arguing
rather the nature of his Maintenance, then of his Office. The same may be said
of Vicar also: and therefore he that in Lancashire said God has given me a
living, and the devil has given me a name: argued therein more precipitate
zeal then sadness of learning. I wonder why Phanatique spirits, (so well as at
this) do not brabble with their Parents for giving, and with themselves for
bearing, such names (as Richard, Robert, Roger, Hercules, Diana, Mar-prelate
(for so one was baptized) and these and thousands more, be not only, not in the
Bible, but, many of them rapt from heathen Poets, and what not? But they have
little to do, that will contend with their own shadow.

Secondly for the greater dignities and prerogatives, which our Bishops have in
the world: I answer, the Apostles had right to far greater dignities 1 Cor. 9.
1. etc.
then ours be possessed of, the Apostle had right to every vineyard 2 Cor. 8.
20. 21.
he planted, to every flock he had fed; and that is, right to maintenance
from multitudes of Churches, and countries. If it be replied, y^ Apostles had
it not, no, not y^ Arch-apostle S. Paul: I answer, y^ was not because it was
not their right; but because the people would not give unto the^ their right.
If here it be objected, but our Bishops have not so labored and converted y^
people from whom they have such dignities; I answer, the first had to do with
mere Infidels without the Church, but ours with Christians within the visible
face of the Church, and therefore no such cause nor need. But as the Apostles
having ordained Presbyters (or Priests) to every Church, for y^ near over
sight thereof, did notwithstanding care for all the Churches, and 2 Cor. 11. 28.
visit them as opportunity was offered: 1 Timothy 1. 3. Tit. 1. 5.
so it is y^ duty of ours, and their maine duty. If any one fail herein, Est
quidem error personalis, non legalis, the fault is in the person, not in the
function confirmed by Law.

As for their Prerogariues, what have they, wherein the Apostles exceeded not?
If they incarcerate persons, by authority derived lawfully from our Prince (a
thing which Infidelious Princes would not commit to y^ Apostles, nor yet to any
Christian* is therefore y^ sword unlawful to a Christian?) in the room thereof,
the King of kings collated a far greater power upon them: In so much as
thereby, S. Paul ^mot Elymas the sorcerer with Acts. 1^. 6
blindness; and S Peter smote Anamas Act. 5. ^.
and Sapphira with present sudden death. When the times begun to be ordinarily
Christian, then the Lord took away that extraordinary prerogative, and
conferred upon his Church, the ordinary means, for protection and correction
of bodies. A weak and despised Church they would have her; who being destitute
of extraordinary power, would have her robbed of that which is ordinary also.
The Prophets could foretell, that Kings of the earth should bring their honor
and glory unto it, and these cannot abide it. Yes (they will say) we would have
the Church, not her ministry to have it. I believe it, they would have
themselves and their lay children euected, and the ministry dejected. Even as
they expound that precept, Tell the Church, to be, tell Tom Tynker, tell Dick
Cullion, tell Ione the oyster-wench, with all the rest of their Ignorants (such
a Sanhedrim the Jews never had) so, y^ bringing of glory and honor unto the
Church, must not be at all (or almost not at all) to the ministry (for they
be but vassalls) but to her Laicall members, as being the only vessels, capable
of glory and honor. They would have all power and dignity in their own hands,
that so the ministry (standing both in Need, and Awe of them) they might be
topped and ouertopped at their pleasure; not daring once in their Sermons to
touch their corruptions, as they would not have their good Masters and good
Dames, to withdraw their Alms from them. So indeed it would come to pass (as
it did in Ezechiels time) we should be glad to preach for a crust of bread*
and an handful of barley.


Malcon. Indeed sir, I must needs say, it would come to no better. Experience
every where, will give testimony unto it. But I beseech you (sir) another
question; how shall we clear, that the Surplice is not an Idolothyte?


Medioc. By the definition of an Idolothyte: for, an Idolothyte is, whatsoever
is dedicate or consecrate to an Idol by way of devotion: But none of our
Surplices have been so devoted, therefore none of them Idolothytes. If any can
fetch out a Surplice, that has been by the Papists consecrated to their
Idol-idle*masse; such a one may be termed an Idolothyte, and it skils not
though it were burnt. As for ours, they be not such, though like to such; no
more then the Animal-offerings of Israel under the law* were Idolothytes;
howsoever like to the oblatio^s of Egypt, out of which they made their exode
and passage. But that which is more; if the idolatour had abused it, may I not
use it? The Apostle teaches otherwise: unto the Corinthians, he lays down
the case Cor. 10. 23.
thus: Of cattle offered up to the Idols, some part comes to the offerers; and
from them sometimes, that part comes to the flesh market. Some infidel buys
of it, dresseth it, and sets it before thee. Let thy conscience make no scruple
to eat of it, how soever it was Idolatrized for as the earth is the Lords (not
the Devils) so, the fulness thereof is his* and created for the use of his. Yet,
this prouiso withal: If any one at table with thee, do point at it, and say*
certainly this is an Idolothyte, I like it not; then because of his conscience
(not because of thine) let it alone: for the Lord has things know besides in
the earth for thee to feed upon. Otherwise, thou eating of it and giving
thanks to God for it, why should another speak end of thee? Hence it is
plains, that the children of God may lawfully use any creature in the earth,
howsoever it have been by others profaned. Only, in case of another weakness,
he is to forbear, even from his own right. This Prouiso, I know, is the maine
of all their speech, who keep such a stir about the poor garment: but in
pressing this prouiso, they must take with them this* they must confess
themselves to be but (as yet) very young Christians, and not fitted to be
Pastors over flocks of people: no more then they were fit for ministerial
function, which were but Neophyts, newly come from heathen Idolatry unto
Christianity: for, such were they, of whom the Apostle speaks. And then it
will follow; first, that they have sinned, in meddling with the strongest
function in the congregation, being but as yet nouices in the faith. Secondly,
that they deserve to be sharply censured, for making their people weaker then
they ^ound them* who at first, could brook the Garment well, but now must
(...)* as if it were an Idolothyte. And if they say, they know their own
Christian liberty therein* but many about them will be offended: I answer,
there be none about them, that can (as the former Neophyts) plead tolerable
infirmity. All about them be Christians borne, of Christian parents, in the
profession of Christianity, for some thousand years and upward. Let them see
to it then, if such their exception do not grow; not from infirmity, but from
wilful peeuishnes; as willing to stick, rather in their own preiudged opinion,
then to ^eeled forward unto Christ. With the Apostlo to the Colossians, I say
thus; If they be dead Colos. 2. 20.
with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why, as though they lived in the
world, are they burdened with traditions, as touch not, taste not, handle not?
we say, (to show the liberty wherewith Christ has made the^ free) they ought
to wear it. They answer, that they may not. We say, besides the former
reason, the Christian Princes commandment (propounding it, but as a garment
for seemelines and order) it ought to move their conscience, to the use of it.
They answer, it does not. Propou^d what we shall, they still with the
superstitious Colossians, do return us a not: as if their only study were, to
cross Christ, to cross a Christian King, and to cross the Churches
affirmative, with their Ethelothreskia, their Negative Not.


Malcon. I wonder, how (reading that place to the Corinths, so often as I have,
so well as this last to the Colossians) I could never enter into the Apostles
true meaning; which now (after these few words of yours) are so plainly
evident, as the Sun at Noone-daies. God have the praise for it. I beseech
your patience (sir) a little longer, for my further assurance in the faith. In
the next place, somewhat touching the form of the Letany. Phrases and Clauses
I know there besu^dry, which some except against, but he that brings Charity
with him (I doubt not) may with the Be gather honey, where the Spider
conuerteth all into poison. The like may be said, of exceptions against some
other prayers. But that which seems to bring with it some equal exception,
is, the many repetitions of one and the same thing, as, Good Lord deliver vt,
etc. we beseech thee to hear us good Lord, etc.


Medioc. I know that some do call this often Repetition, by the name of
vainbabling, as if our Savior in Math. 6. had condemned it. Our Savior there
does not condemn Repetitions simply, but Respectively; that is (as himself
there expounds) when me^ think, that for their so doing, they deserve to be
heard of God. Otherwise, doing it (not with persuasion of merit, but) with a
simplicity of heart to God* ward, we do but as our M Christ himself did in
the Garden, who three times over repeated the self same prayer to his father.
Or as the Prophet does in Psalm 136, whose burden of his song is, For his
mercy endures for ever; and this 26 times together: even so often as there be
veries.


Malcon. Stay good sir. The point is plain enough, but I have been as an
horse and mule void of understanding: and to the blind, Suns light is but
darkness till scales fall from Paul's eyes, by the Ministry of Ananias. There is
one question (sir) which is as Goliath, not able to be removed.


Medioc. And yet little David, with a small pebble-stone, may knock down the
monster. Bring him forth of the ca^p of the Philistines, and see if his own
sword, cut not off his own head.


Malcon. GOD give the truth to prevail timelily with me and all his people.

Then this it is: How shall we subscribe to our translation of the scriptures,
namely, that it contains nothing Repugnant to the word?


Medioc. I answer, something in the translation may be diverse to the
Original, and yet not Repugnant to the word. Nam diuersa non sunt opposita.
understand you that?


Malcon. Very well: and most true it is.


Medioc. Secondly, I answer by another Question: can there be any subscription
in this life, made unto any one Churches translation?


Malcon. Surely, that must needs be; else, there will never be any uniformity
or orderly communion; where every one shall be left to their own private
interpretation and meaning.


Medioc. What should let then, that there cannot be a subscription to our
Church?


Malcon. Because some learned in the tongues, do find some wants in it.


Medioc. By that reason, there can be no subscription to any Translation, I
mean, the septuagint, for the old Testament.
Greek, Latin, English or any. For what translation (that I say no more) ever
was there, is there, or ever shall be, which shall not savor of man's weakness?
Tell me; is there any Church so privileged in this life, as she shall not err?


Malcon. Doubtless no. And therefore the whole Congregation of Israel, had her
sacrifice appointed for sin, done of Ignorance. Leuit. 4. 13.


Medioc. Then it unavoidably follows; y^ either subscription is due to every
true Churches translation, or else to none at all. And if to none at all: then
much less to the Pastors sermons, or to the churches constitutions or
Articles; seeing all these do depend upon the judgment of men also, which
have their wants and Ignorances.


Malcon. It must needs be so.


Medeoc. This puts me in mind of one, who within these few years said thus
unto me: what if I poue that there is no true bible etc? God took him soon
after away, I hope for his own good; but sure I am, for the Churches good.
Good friend, our mother church knows what she does herein; but these
excepters are blind in their manner of exception* leading the highway unto
Atheism For thus they must argumentate.

No lawful subscription (in such sort as our Church urges) can be made to
any Translation, in any thing dissenting from the Original.

But every Translation in some things dissenteth from the Original:

Therefore no Translation to be subscribed to, as our Church urges.

Then hereupon will follow;

1 No such subscription is due to any Bible, saving to the Hebrew for the Old
testament, and the Greek for the new.

2 These Not-subscriptors, besides may join with some Romanists, and seem to
have as lawful exception against the said Hebrew and Greek also. If they know
what I mean in this, the^ let them be ashamed of their ignorant peeuishnes. If
they know not; then with the Apostle I say, Let the ignorant 1. Cor. 14. 38.
be ignorant.

3 (Not to say any thing of our Savior, and some others of his Disciples) Then
they will bring the credit of S. Luke into question; who introduces S.
Stephen, saying* that 75 souls went down into Egypt, whereas Moses
mentions only 70 Act. 7. 14, Genes. 45.
souls. Nor can Beza deny, but that all Greek copies he met with, do read
75. As also the Syrian and Arabian, and the Latin, with Jerome and Augustine.
And herein indeed (to speak only what is probable) S. Stephen followed the
Greek translation of the old Testament, called the Septuagint (of the 70, or
72 Rabbines, that translated it so, at the request of the Egyptian King,
Ptolemy Philadelph) which translation in our Saviors time was most vulgar, and
best known to the Jews themselves.

And therefore followed of S. Stephen: Master Broughton stands stiffly for this.
that I speak nothing of others; nor yet here, what the Septuagint might
intend by 75: nor, how in very many places, they differ from the Hebrew.

4 Then neither may there be such Subscription to any Sermons, Articles of
faith, Ecclesiastique constitutions, Leitourgie or the like. For man failing in
his work, upon the Canon or Rule of faith, then likewise (if not much more)
he is like to fail in his manner of building upon that rule of Faith, yea, not
only in manner, but in the matter also.

5 Then necessarily follows, that no such subscription is at all to be made;
but every mole is left to dig in the earth, as pleases his own blindness. And
in such liberty, they may go shake hands with Segnior Li bertino; and of
Libertines become Atheists, and of Atheists Devils incarnate. This is not M.
Perkins his golden chain, but the black chain that leads and draws unto
perdition. And thus is it not evident, that men then begin to be phrenetike,
when they begin to be fantastique: and the despising of the mothers counsel,
is of God punished, with extreme blindness.


Malcon. Oh Lord, how have I been mislead by Satan! All seemed fair that I
followed. But now to thy praise O God, I more and more see, that it was but
Satan transformed into an Angel of light, that so mislead me; and the fruit
which I cropped was but the forbid-fruit the ruin of such as cover knowledge
beyond knowledge, which Solomon (upon his Repentance) calls a Being-ouerwise.


Medioc. The Apostle therefore commands, that no man presume to understand,
above that which is meet to understand; Romans 12. 3
but that he understand according to sobriety: all one with his Mottie, that
writ upon the error on the right hand.


Malcon. I pray you sir (by the way) know you the Author of that Book,
entitled, Error on the right hand?


Medioc. I do.


Malcon. And what think you of his book?


Medioc. The man is so near and dear unto me as I cannot speak what I
think* but I should be held partial. Yet this I dare say; as he had
experience in himself of the Flyers error: so* in the persons of others, he
(by experience of disputation) did well observe; that if the first positions of
Malcontent did hold current; then (not only would follow the Brow nists
separation, but also) would follow, the main positions of the Anabaptist, and
if of the Anabaptist, then also of othres.


Malcon. Was he not then at some times carried away (or entangled) with
Anabaptisme, Arianisme etc? Some conclude, that by his book, he should.


Medioc. Uery wittily and conscionably, I warrant you, as if certain of the
Fathers (as Epiphanius, Augustine) should have been tainted sometimes, with all
Schisms and Heresies of their times, because they writ against all Schisms
and Heresies of their times. A conclusion good enough for Tom-Scull, sometimes
of Immanuel College in Ca^bridge. But to leave this By, and to return unto y^
main, namely, the Subscription before discoursed of. It seems somewhat hard,
that subscription by our church should be pressed, to all her conclusions
agreed upon in common, as agreeing to the word of God.


Malcon. It is so indeed. Neither does the former book (entitled, Error on
the right hand) decide that point; as to to me it seems.


Medioc. When you shall read it with a less partial spirit, you shall
observe, what yet (it seems) you have not: specially, by the positions added
to y^ heel of that Book. But to leave y^ and to come unto the Scriptures, for
helping us out of the Atheistical consequents, that follow their reason, of
not subscribing. You remember, that of Job it is thus recorded; He was an
upright and just man, one that feared God and eschewed evil. And the word Tam
turned upright, is in propriety, perfect: was he such a one before God
absolutely if so he should have been examined by the perfection of the Law?


Malcon. Only Christ could be such a one.


Medioc. Well, in the first of S. Luke it is testified touching Zecharias and
Elizabeth (the parents of John Baptist) that both were just before God, and
walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. Did S. Luke herein,
testify truth?


Malcon. It were blasphemy to say the contrary, seeing therein he was but the
pen* man of the holy Ghost.


Medioc. Were both of them, so just, and had both of them so kept all the
commandments as in nothing they had offended?


Malcon. Doubtless no: for all have gone out of the way, and all need grace and
free pardon for sin; else Christ unto such died in vain.


Medioc. How then were they just? and how then did they keep all the
commandments?


Malcon. Justice and perfect obedience was imputed unto them, because their
hearts were upright in the maine of their conversation, howsoever they failed
in the By, through imbecility and weakness.


Medioc. And if God lay not the By to his childrens charge, where the maine of
their carriage is just; what are we, that we should once dare to lay the By unto
his churches charge, (being a whole corporation of his children) and besides,
to make it an argument of brawling with our mother, Solomon says; The eye that
mocketh the Father, and despises the instruction of the Mother, let the Ravens
of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it.


Malcon. You in your wisdom have enforced me to cut off the head of mine own
doubt.


Medioc. Why alas, does not our Church hold, that she erred in this life, and
could she be thought to hold a subscription against her own Tenet? She does
not press inch subscription in an high absolute sense, as if in none of her
words, or writings, she failed from the perfection of the word (one of her 39
articles cleares that, so well as all her Apology does, against the pride of
the Church of Rome, in that point, but she presses conformity ( Secundum quid)
according to that is due unto her in this world, as she has received of God,
to be a faithful Dispensator of his will. Nor otherwise could we put a
sufficient difference between the Canonical scriptures and our writings. For
private conceits, as you may have yours, and I may have mine, a third, may have
a third, and so on without end; must these be causes why every of us must
exclaim one upon another: and all of us agree in one to disturb the Church?
So there shall never be communion, never any order, and so consequently not any
peace. If she be a mother, let her keep her place, remembering still, that here
she is but as Israel in the wilderness: and if we be not bastards but true borne
children, let us know our place, and not with Corah, Dathan Abiram, rise up
against the congregation our mother: for if we do, the earth will desire to
swallow up our glory, and we shall be but as they that went down to the pit.

Oh Malcontent, Malcontent, if Queen Mary's scortching Beams were upon us
again, we would (a thousand times) be thankful for the least cooling shade
that our Laurel government affords. But it is in such fulfilled, whereof
Moses long since sung; He that should have been Deuteronomy. 32 25
upright, becoming once fat, has spurned with his heel. Had not Manna been
so plenteous they would not so soon have lothed: and had not their mother
been so familiar, she had not been so soon despised. Nam nimia ingurgitatio
facit ineptum; and nimia familiaritas parit contemptum.

They still have in their mouths; we must grow in grace, grow in knowledge,
grow in obedience: but when we examine their growth, behold they go from good
unto bad, from light unto darkness, from obedience to disobedience, from some
order unto none, from some unity to all sorts of faction. First warring with
their mother, then iarring amongst themselves; and lastly, a loathing unto all
men. So grew Israel in the wilderness, from discontent unto faction, from
faction unto Schism, from Schism unto rebellion, from rebellion to life's
confusion, till the earth was weary of them, the Sanctuary lothed them, and the
Lord slew them.


Malcon. O Lord how nere this comes unto me! and how may I seal to the truth
thereof, from mine own experience! Reverend sir, I have been thus troublous
unto you; but God (I doubt not) will reward you for your labor.


Medioc. If we will be zealously painful, let these little bees teach us to be
painful in unity, against the common adversary, painful in showing love,
bearing one another burden: painful in preparing honey, not in building of
cobwebs, painful for the common good, no one seeking alone his own particular:
So the adversaries mouth shall be stopped, the church be comforted, all our
souls shalbesatisfied with good, and we (in all burli-burlies of the world)
may hold up our head, in the assurednes of our redemption. As for them Psalm.
129. 5. etc.
that hate Zion they shall be ashamed and turned backward (as Apostates) they
shall be as the grass on the house tops, which withers ere it comes forth
(to any goodness) whereof the mower fills not his hand, neither the gleamer
his lap, (for indeed they be* tee hie spirited to be dealt withal) neither
they which go by, say (unto them) The blessing of the Lord be upon you, we
bless you in the name of the Lord. And if they be once past the Churches
Benedicitie, how shall they come out of Satan's snares unto amendment of life?


Malcon. O how the Lords love has abounded toward me, thus timelily to to
deliver me! what shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits unto me? I
will out of my heart, (as out of a saving cup) pour forth praises unto the
Lord, yea by his grace in the presence of his people, I will pay my vows of
thankfulness unto him.


Medioc. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, let them prosper, that love thee (O
Zion) Psalm. 122. 6. etc.
peace within thy walls (dear mother) prosperity be within thy palaces: For
my brethren and neighbors sakes, I will wish thee now prosperity, because of the
house of our Lord God (it being the place of public worship) I will procure
thy wealth.


Malcon. And Lord for thy sons sake give me grace to be as painful for her
peace as I have been for the breach of her peace: That so thy blessing by her
mouth may come upon me, and thy bles sing again by my ministry may be doubled
upon her.


Medioc. Now my Bees begin to gather themselves to their rest: and we will
retire into the house to refect nature. The questions already propounded and
resolved, although they have been but few, yet adding discretion unto
judgment you may refer all other scruples to the same heads of doctrine, at
least for settling your own soul in a peaceable progress. Come friend, let us
walk in; but by the way, see you this plant Colutea? break a branch off
disorderly, and plant it in the earth carelessly, and yet it will prosper. See
you this Anthora? plant it near to the poisonfull Aconitum, and it attracts
the poisoned nature Again, here is the herb Arum, of ye root thereof starch is
made: but let the Laundres provide well for her hands: for it will chop, chinke
and blister them exceedingly. From these and the like, many excellent
meditations may arise, and such (if we mark the scriptures well) was the
practice of y^ holy Prophets. But as a bow continually bent, does lose his
strength: so Prou. 25. 26.
Solomon wishes that in having found honey, we should but eat that is
sufficient, lest other. wise it fall out, we vomit it up. Ac modus se^per
adhibe^dus est appetitui.


Malcon. And all I can say is, * Wisdom will Math. 11. 19.
be justified of her Children, when * Folly will not depart from a fool,
though Pro. 27. 22.
he were brayed in a morterwith a pestell.


PROVE. 13. 20. He that walks with the wise, shall be wise, but a companion of
fools shall be afflicted.
A Pastoral Epilogue, between Hobbinoll, and Collin Clout.
Collin GOod Hobbinoll, why hangs thou so thy head; have lost some sheep, or be
some la^bkins dead?
Thou Whilome sung unto thy oten pipe, as Fary* queen could not but love and
like.
What mean these dumps?

Hobb. Oh, Collin-clout, ays me,
Some of my Lambs, that erst were full of glee,
Now droope amain and squat aside the hill,
As having sucked from Dams, some fatal ill:
Or from the grass, have lickt the venomd web,
Which has them brought unto so low an ebb.
Black Will (that used to lead them with his Bell)
His heart is broke, to see they be not well.
And, that is worse, the cause is yet unknown,
From whence these evils, untimely evils be grown.

Collin. And what shall Collin have, if he can tell
From whence it comes, and how it shall be well?

Hobb. O Collin, there is a kiss, and it shall bind
Me to perform the promise is behind;
Speak loving Boy, I long to hear thee speak.

Collin. Ey, ey, but you your promise once did break,
Give me your hand, that you will pitch and pay:
Now, what is your promise?

Hobb. Hearken what I say.
I have a nest of Turtles, flidgd well ny;
Hark, hearken Clout, one of them now did cry:
Tell me good news, and thou shall have the^ both.

Collin. But fetch them first.


Hobb. Clout, Clout, you are very loath
To give me credence before thou have thy pay:
Well, well I Will fet them.

Collin. See you do not stay.
I trust him? no: against Christmas he did say,
He would me give a dozen points to play,
But when yoole came, he dodgd me off with twain*
And said he should but sin, play to maintain,
Come, set them down. Now hearken forth:
See Hobbinoll, on th'outside of that dale (my tale
In shadowie plots, the Vipers, Deadly vvolfesbane, or, Aconite.
Monks-cowle groes;
Which with his yellowe flower full trickly shoes,
His leaves (but darker) snipt like to the vine,
But trust me Hobbinoll, too bad for swine.
Some of thy flock, too greedy of that shade,
There lickt and cropped, till they were sickly made.
And to say sooth, with such a trick as that,
Pers lost ten Ewes and Lambkins, that is flat.

Hobb. Aes me; but what will help them to recover?

Collin. Give me my doves. This vale now walk we over,
See thou that Hill? see thou that helmet flower, Anthora, the antidote.

Whose stalk is hollow as a kex? In it is power,
T'expell the venom of the others bane,
If now in time, it off the sheep be taken.

Hobb. How, how good Clout?


Collin. Dig it up Hobbinole.
That double-root, now stamp thou in a bole,
And put the juice to milk made somewhat warm,
Then geet them with an horn; and fear no harm.

Hobb. For every sore, no doubt, a salve there is,
But sin blindes sheepherds, that they do amiss.
But well I wot, hereafter I shall watch,
If in such shades my sheep do poison catch.
Collin farewell, I must about this gear,
Till they have drunk this draught, I live in fear:
But prove all well, that sheep and I may joy,
I (better while I live) will love my Boy.

An Epilogue to such Scholars amongst us, who by their places in our Church
(and in respect of the treasure they receive out of her dowry) ought to defend
our writings against Schism and Heresy, and not underhand, and in corners,
to suggest evil against us, for strengthening the hands of the Factious* their
private Favorites.
In Segnior-ambo.
SIr Ambo takes a Pension of his Mother,
But fees the Fugitive that calls her whore,
To us one hand, to him he gives the other,
A Proditor behind, a Friend before.
But mark, whilst he, thus does himself delight,
Both sides do damn him for an Hypocrite.
In Segnior-drypate.
Sir Dry*pate reads, and carps, and hems, and spits,
No marvel though he have purged out his wits:
For little 'twas, when wit was at the full;
And yet it is true, he has no little skull.
But let him bite no warrior of our Kirk,
For fear my purposd Satyrs do him Iirke.
In quendam Fig-fag.
Se, see how Figfag stirs, and moves and strouts,
Hark, hark the silly Sire, how trim he flouts.
Boys, girls and fools, applaud him for some body*
And yet his carps do prove him but a Nody,
But say not so, lest that when he shall read
Iambick girdes, he swound and fall down dead.
In homunculum Snuff.
Sniffesnuff must judge, not knowing what it meant:
For Barley* broth is Snuffes chief element.
Put him besides the cushion of his cup.
And all his liquid* sense is dried up.
But lance no further Busy* bodies Tumor,
For every fool, must needs be in his humor.
To the loving Reader.
Beloved, if GOD grant means, I am purposed to draw into form, a description
of the true Church and false, of the true Christ and Antichrist, according to
that model and measure of grace, which of God shall be administered unto me.
Mean time, the perverseness of time has forced me to write as already (in these
two books) I have. Accept my labors, with as right a hand as I give them, and
then I doubt not of thy loving acceptance, at least, of thy readiness to help me
in my weakness, by publishing thy better means, for public vtility. If thou
can bring Algummim trees to the work of the Temple, I pray thee do it: my
Fur shall give place, and how can thou require more of me? Farewell.

FINIS.

