THE TRVE ANCIENT ROMAN CATHOLIC. BEING AN APOLOGY OR COVNTERPROOFE AGAINST
DOCTOR BISHOPS REPROOF of the defense of the Reformed CATHOLIC.

THE FIRST PART.

Wherein the name of Catholics is vindicated from Popish abuse, and thence is
showed that the faith of the Church of Rome as now it is, is not the Catholic
faith, nor the same with the faith commended in the Epistles of St. Peter and
St. Paul, and that confirmed by the testimony of the ancient Bishops of Rome,
and other Writers of that Church.

By ROBERT ABBOT Doctor of Divinity, Master of BALIO^^ College in Oxford.

August. cont. Faust. Munich. l. 29. c. 2. Maneat nobis aduersus ill^s potius
pro veritate certamen, quam cum ill^s in falsitate concordia. LONDON, Printed
by William Stansby for Ambrose Garbrand, and are to be sold at the sign of the
Windmill in Paul's Churchyard, 1611.

TO THE RIGHT HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, PRINCE OF WALES, DVKE OF CORNWALL
AND ROTHSAY, EARL OF CHESTER, Knight of the most Honorable Order of the GARTER.
MOST gracious and renowned PRINCE, such is the malice and fury of Antichrist,
Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 38.
and his army of Priests as Gregory calls them, in oppugning the religion and
faith of Christ, as gives cause to us that fight for Christ, to stand
continually (...) our guard, and to be ready still in arms, to entertain the
assaults that are continually made against us. They carry themselves now
toward us the more eagerly and angerly, for that they see themselves deceived
of the prey which they long hoped for, imagining before this time out of the
troubled waters of this State, to have fished somewhat for advantage to
themselves* Which expectation being by the mercy of God wholly frustrate, they
imitate the Dragon in the ^ Revelation, casting out of their Revel. 12. 15.
mouths, by calumniations and slanders, and all outrage, and importunity of
malicious contradiction, even floods of waters to carry violently away, and to
drown, if it were possible, the woman, even the Church of Christ amongst us,
that has escaped their cruel and bloody hands. But thanks be to God, that has
given us means to set mounds and banks against these raging floods, that
howsoever they threaten, yet they hurt us not, nor endanger any, but such as
rashly adventure to swim in unknown waters, or being desirous of curiosity
and foolish humor, to see their own shadow in the river Tyber, whilst they
admire themselves, cast themselves headlong to be drowned therein. Now in
that service of the Roman Antichrist Doctor Bishop, our Countriman, has very
industriously done his part, and has labored, if not to excel, yet to equal
almost any of his fellows, in the subuerting of wayward and unstable souls,
and in animating of men to obstinacy against the truth of God. Who having to
the Kings most excellent Majesty disgorged against us, the venom and poison of
his corrupt and wicked heart, and being by me duly chastened for his disloyal
and traitorous attempt, to delude by false suggestions, his Liege and
Sovereign Lord, seeing his impostures and frauds most plainly discovered and
laid open, has since added drunkenness Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
to his thirst, and sought to fill up the measure of his former iniquity, by
wilful railing at those things which he knows to be true, and having no
other way to revenge the impeaching of his credit, greatly touched, as he
conceived, by the answering of his book, has in a latter book run upon me
furiously, and laden me, so much as in him lies, with odious imputations of
abusing, falsifying, misconstruing, misapplying, both Scriptures and Fathers,
like the ungracious Thief at the bar, who convicted by most clear and
apparent evidence, yet still impudently cries out that all is false. But by an
Advertisement written for the time concerning that book of his, I have made it
manifest that that cry of his is but a cry of course, the breath of an obdurate
and evil conscience, by which he stands condemned in himself, desperately
Tit. 3. 11.
bent against his own knowledge to pervert, to forge, to face any thing to
serve his turn; which plainly appearing so to be, little reason had I to
trouble my self to give any further answer to it. Nevertheless, because the
further answer of the chief part of it, has fallen within the compass of my
intention; of describing the true ancient Roman Catholic, and no difference
there is but that whereas I might otherwise have walked at mine own liberty, I
now tie my self to follow him, I have yielded so much to him, that whereas by
comparison I formerly showed that the new Church of Rome in faith and religion,
is far estranged from the old, it may now more fully appear that so it is,
and that M. Bishop contending for the contrary has done it only for his belly
and for his credits sake, having made the deceiving of souls his occupation to
live by, and being ashamed at these years to confess that he himself
hitherto has been deceived. Which work I most humbly desire, may go forth
under the protection of your Highness, whom according to that eminent wisdom
and knowledge wherewith God has endued these your younger years, I make the
Judge of this quarrel, and therefore the first part thereof I now tender at
your Highness feet for a testimony of my loyal and dutiful affection, and
for acknowledgement of my devotions unto almighty God, for the preservation of
your Highness, and the continuance and increase of his graces and blessings
toward you, that your Princely name may more and more grow great, and may be a
terror to that selfe-exalting Kingdom and Monarchy of the great Capitolian
Priest, at length to work the utter ruin and confusion thereof. Which as we
believe not to be far of, so we hope that in that glorious revenge of the
cause of almighty God, your Highness shall have a chief and an honorable
part, and that God will strengthen your arm, and give edge to your sword to
strike through the loins of all them that are the supporters of that
Antichristian and wicked state. Which with all other additions of honor and
renown, both with God and men, I will never cease to further by my prayers
unto almighty God, so resting always,

To your Highness service most humbly and affectionately devoted. R. Abbot.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Thou have here, good Christian Reader, the first Part of the work which I
promised, The true ancient Roman Catholic. Thou may remember that in my
answer to Doctor Bishops Epistle to the King, I challenged the name of
Catholics from the Popish abuse thereof, and showed out of the true explication
and use of the word Catholic, that neither the Church of Rome can be called
the Catholic Church, nor the faith of the Roman Church that now is can be
called the Catholic faith, and therefore that very fondly, and by a mere
usurpation they take unto them the name of Catholics. After this I entered by
occasion to a comparison betwixt the new that is, and that that of old was the
religion of the Church of Rome, consisting specially of three parts. In the
first I showed that neither the Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans, which is the
brief of the religion which they at the first received, and contains as I
showed out of Theodoret, all manner doctrine of faith, nor yet the two Epistles
of S. Peter, whom they make the founder of their Church, do contain any
defense of the doctrine now taught at Rome, but do teach only our religion. In
the second I set down sundry definitions and doctrines of the ancient Roman
faith, delivered by the Bishops of Rome and other Authors, that have witnessed
the doctrine of that Church, wholly consonant and agreeable to that that we
teach, and altogether impugned by the Roman Church that now is. In the third I
declared that there were sundry heresies, condemned of old by the Roman Church,
which the Church of Rome now embraces and defends. The points of this
comparison I then set down only positiuely, the occasion requiring no more,
not respecting what cauillations the adversary might bring for oppugning
thereof; the matter being by that light that I gave very clear, that the
Church of Rome is not now the same that it was of old. This matter I afterward
thought worthy of a larger treatise, and purposed when opportunity should serve
a more full prosecution of it, thinking it would be a great comfort and
establishment to the consciences of many men, perhaps to some an occasion of
better mind, when they should see in that Church of Rome, that now is such a
plain repugnancy to that that of old was, which notwithstanding takes upon it
impudently to have been always the same, and to be the only certain rule
and oracle of true faith. In this mean time Doctor Bishop fearing lest his
silence should make his cause suspicious, and therefore thinking it necessary,
whether right or wrong, to say somewhat, publi^^eth A Reproof of the defense
of the Reformed Catholic, setting under this title a Gorgons head to affright
all men concerning me, as having abused Gods sacred word, mangled, misapplyed,
and falsified the ancient Fathers sentences, so that whosoever has any due
care of his own salvation, can never hereafter credit me in matter of faith
and religion. Concerning which hideous outcry of my falsifications, I refer
thee to the Advertisement, which I have added to my third part of the defense
of the Reformed Catholic, where thou shall see that as he has laid himself
open, so I have scourged him accordingly. But in that Reproof of his, very
little is it that he has said for justifying what he himself had before
written, not being able indeed to defend any one point thereof: only he found
somewhat whereof to cavil concerning my debating of the name Catholic, and
the comparison which I made betwixt the old and new Roman Church, and thereof,
as touching the matter of substance, he has framed his book. To this
therefore I have addressed my description of the ancient Roman Catholic,
forbearing that more orderly course which I had intended, for the performance
of this work, and choosing rather to follow him step by step, as formerly
I have done; only beginning where he comes to the purpose, and leaving all
his vagaries and affected discourses to be more briefly touched in the end of
all. Of this work I have yet finished but only one part, wherein I have at
large discovered their vain ostentation of the Catholic name and faith, and
showed plainly that the Romish religion now accords not with S. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, no, nor with his other Epistles, which M. Bishop calls
to assist him, because he finds nothing to help him in that Epistle to the
Romans. In all which I have been careful, gentle Reader, to give thee
satisfaction by the clear testimony either of some learned Bishops of Rome, or
of some other famously approved and commended in that Church. Being now
required a service of another kind, so that I cannot yet go forward with the
rest, I have thought good to publish this in the mean time. If I have promised
any thing in this that is not here performed, expect it in that that is to
come. Assist me, I pray thee, with thy prayers unto almighty God, by whose
grace I hope in due time to supply that that is wanting now*

The Contents of this Book.
CHAP. I. THat the Church of Rome does vaine^y and absurdly challenge to it
self the name of the Catholic Church, and has no privilege from God, either
of superiority in government or stability in faith. CHAP. II. The comparison
betwixt the Papists and the Donatists, is justified and enlarged. CHAP. III.
That the name of Catholics is abused by the Papists, and is in their abuse a
Donatisticall and hateful name, of faction and schism: that being in that
sort substantiuely and personally understood, it was not used for three hundred
years after Christ, and therefore being abused may be left again: that
Popery properly so called, is nothing but additions of latter time to our
religion. CHAP. IIII. That the Church before Christ even from the beginning was
a part of the Catholic Church, and that the faith and religion of the new
Testament differs not in substance from the old. M. Bishops proofs for
Popery out of the old Testament are showed to be ridiculous and vain. In the
end is a brief defense of the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. CHAP.
V. That faith and religion cannot be safely grounded on the example of Fathers
and forefathers, and that the Popish agents and factours do in this pretense
also abuse the credulity of ignorant men. CHAP. VI. That the reasons of Popery
where there is not a mind preiudicate, are not urgent or forcible, and that M.
Bishop was justly censured for that in repeating a rule delivered by the Kings
Majesty, for judgment of true religion, he left out some words thereof. CHAP.
VII. Of the flourishing and best estate of the Church of Rome, and of the
testimony of Theodoret, concerning fullness of doctrine, contained in the
Epistle to the Romans, and that the Apostle there condemns Popery of
idolatry, in worshipping Saints and Images. CHAP. VIII. That justification
before God consists not in proceeding from faith to works, but in the
continuation of faith to faith, and that this faith notwithstanding cannot be
separated from charity and good works. CHAP. IX. That the justification of man
before God, is the imputation of righteousness without works. CHAP. X. That
eternal life is merely and wholly the gift of God, and cannot be purchased by
merit or desert. CHAP. XI. That concupiscence or lust is sin, even in the
very habit and first motions of it. CHAP. XII. Of the spirit of adoption,
giving witness to the faithful, that they are the sons of God. CHAP. XIII.
That the good works or sufferings of this life, are not meritorious, or worthy
of the bliss of the life to come. CHAP. XIIII. That the Epistles of St. Paul
are loosely and impertinently alleged by the Papists, for proof of their
Popery, as namely for Justification before God by works, for Free Will,
against certainty of salvation and particular Faith, for the Merit of single
life, for Monkish vows, for Purgatory and pr^yer for the Dead, for Images and
invocation of Saints, for the Mass and Real presence, for the Authority of
the Church of Rome, for Pardons, for Traditions, for the perpetual visibility
of the Church, for Satisfactions and works of supererogation, for seven
Sacraments, etc.
THE TRVE ANCIENT ROMAN CATHOLIC.
CHAP. I. That the Church of Rome does vainly and absurdly challenge to it
self the name of the Catholic Church.
Answer to Doct. BISHOPS Epistle. Sect. 3.

HEre M. Bishop propounds briefly to his Majesty, the sum of his
Petition, etc. to, It is therefore a mere Usurpation, etc.

Doct. BISHOPS REPROOF. Page 89.. 1.
MAster Abbot is now at length come from his extrauagant rouing narrations,
unto some kind of argumentation. Here he will give a proof of his valor: here
we shall soon try whether he come so well furnished into the field, that he
need not to doubt of the victory, as (...) he (...)ed of himself, on whether
his special skill and force die not rather lie in r^^ling at us, and in (...)
Reader, then in any sound kind of re(...) (...) out of St. Aug(...) (...) of
the lord Catholic, we ^^llingly ^^mit off, to wit: That religion is Catholic,
that faith is Catholic, which is spread over all the world, and has been
always embraced and practiced, even from the Apostles time to our days; and
such is the religion which I would have persuaded his Majesty to receive into
his Princely protection. To this what says M. Abbot? marry, that his Majesty
has already received it. How does he prove that? not by any one plain and
round argument directly to the purpose, but from the Catholic religion,
falls to the Catholic Church, and so spends the time in most frivolous
arguing against the Roman Church, of which I made no mention at all. Does he
not deserve a Laurel garland for the worshipful ranging of his battle? and
is he not like to fight it out valiantly, that thus in the beginning flies
from the point of the Question? Prove (good Sir) that his Majesty imbraceth and
maintains that religion which is spread over all the world, and that has
continued ever since the Apostles time; and then you may justly say, that he
vpholdeth the Catholic religion, according to your own explication out of the
ancient Fathers. But because Mr. Abbot saw this to be impossible, he gave it
the s^ippe, and turns himself to prove the Roman religion not to be the
Catholic, and perceiving that also as hard to perform as the other, he
shuffles from the religion and faith, of which the Question was, unto the Roman
Church, that is, from the faith professed at Rome, to the persons inhabiting
the City of Rome, whom he will prove not to be Catholics, and the Roman Church
not to be the Catholic Church. Do you mark what winding and turning, and
what doubling this simple Minister is driven unto, ere he can come to make any
show of a silly argument?

R. ABBOT.
I Do not marvel that my narrations seem to M. Bishop to be extrauagant and
rouing, who having set up his own mark, thinks all to be extrauagant and
rouing, that flies not by his aim. Albeit he is beholding to me for those
extrauagant and rouing narrations, because they have ministered him matter
toward the making up of a pretty handsome book, which must have been much
shorter if he had been tied to the substantial points of his own defense. As
for the victory that I ominated to my self, thanks be to God, I have obtained
it; being become Master of the field, and M. Bishop enforced to leave the maine
battle, contented now only out of a corner to thrust an ambush that he may
make some show that he is not quite spent. I triumph over him in his own
conscience, being privy to himself what desperate shifts he has been feign
to use, to how cruel a rack he has been forced to put himself to make men
believe that he has strength enough left to save himself. It is but risus
Sardonius, whereby he iesteth at the simple Minister driven to winding and
turning and doubling; it is indeed for his behoof to have it taken so, but
the Ministers proceeding is direct and orderly, familiar and sensible to every
man's understanding, inferring by due course the very point that does require
proof. The Minister is not so simple but that he can easily discerue the
pitiful case of a Popish Masse-monger, who being troubled with a vertigo or
some other distemperature of the brain, thinks all to be winding and turning
about him, when there is no turning at all but in his own head. The issue
betwixt him and me was, Whether his Majesty do (...) and maint^ine the only
true Catholic and Apostolic faith. To prove that he does so, it was necessary
first to explicate what is meant by the Catholic and Apostolic faith. Of the
Catholic Church it is that the faith is called The Catholic faith. For there
has been one and the same faith from the beginning, as shall afterward
appear, but it could not be called the Catholic faith, till the Church became
the Catholic Church. If of the Catholic Church the faith be called the
Catholic faith, then to show what is meant by the Catholic faith I was first
to show what is meant by the Catholic Church. This I did, and (...) occasion
thereof taxed, as due order required, the (...) of the Pope and his accomplices
in usurping to themselves the name of the Catholic Church, and thence terming
themselves Catholics; that having destroyed their ridiculous and foolish
claim, there might be thereof no let to the collection whereat I aimed, that
the Catholic faith is the faith of the Catholic Church; that the Catholic
Church though becoming Catholic by being spread over the whole world, yet
contains as a part thereof (even Aug. de Catechiz. rudib. c. 19. Velut totus
hom^ dum nascitur etiamsi manum in nascendo praemittat, tame^ vniuerso corpori
sub capite coniuncta atque compacta est, quem admodum etiam nonnulli in ipsis
Patriarchis in buius ipsius rei signum manu praemissa nati sunt, etc.
as an arm or hand come out of the womb before the rest of the body) the
whole Church of God from the beginning of the world; that of this whole body of
the Church from the beginning to the end there is in substance but one faith
and religion toward God; that therefore what was the faith of the Patriarks
and Fathers from the beginning, the some and no other is now the Catholic
faith; whence it follows, that seeing we retain the same says and religion,
whereby the Patriarks and Prophets and other Fathers from the beginning served
God, which the Papists do not, as by instance and comparison I then declared
and remains now to be made good; therefore not the Popish faith but our faith
must needs be holden to be the Catholic faith. This process is clear, the
Reader sees in it neither winding nor turning: and therefore it was but a
simple shift of so learned a Doctor against a simple Minister, to mock his
Reader with a tale of flying the point in Question, where it has so direct and
express conclusion. He says that they willingly admit of St. Austins doctrine
that that religion and faith is Catholic which is spread over all the world,
etc. but I brought nothing out of Austin concernin^ Catholic faith and
religion; I only noted out of him why the Church is called the Catholic
Church. And therefore preposterously and idl^ly does he here urge me in that
sort; Prove (good Sir) that his Majesty imbraceth and maintains that religion
which is spread over all the world, etc. and then you may justly say that he
vpholdeth the Catholic religion. For of the Catholic faith and religion, the
conclusion follows after in due place; why then does he thus prevent the
time, and like Dauus disorder ali, but that he loves to fish in troubled
waters where his deceiptfull baits may be the less seen? But if we must
needs speak here of Catholic faith, I will return to him his own question:
Prove (good Sir) that the Pope imbraceth and maintains that religion that is
spread over all the world: that Christians throughout the world are persuaded of
that which you call the Catholic faith. Bellarmine has said it, and
Bellarmines ghost maintains it, that the supremacy of the Pope for the
deposing of Kings and Princes, is Bellar. epist. ad Archipre^b. apud Mat. Tort.
Vnum ex praecipuis fidei nostrae capitibus ac religionis Catholicae fundamentis.
one of the chief points of your faith and of the very foundations of
Catholic religion. Prove now (I pray you) and bring us hands and seals for
it, that we may believe you, that the Christian Churches throughout Grecia,
Armenia, Aethiopia, Russia, Palestina and such like, are all become drunk, and
have entertained this for a point of Catholic faith. You will fall ( M.
Bishop) in this proof, and therefore why would you so much prei^^i^ate your
self to require the same of us? But Bellarmine himself shall free us from any
need to travel for this proof, who says that Bellar. de notis Eccles. cap.
7. Si sola vna Prouincia retineret veram fidem, adhuc vere and proprie
diceretur Ecclesia Catholica dummodo clare ostederetur ^am esse vnam and eandem
cum illa quae fuit aliquo tempere vel diuersis in toto mundo.
Though one only Province or Country did retain the true faith, yet the same
should truly and properly be called the Catholic Church (and therefore their
faith the Catholic fa(...)) so long as it could be clearly showed that the
same is one and the same with that which at any time or times was over the
whole world. To prove then that our faith is the Catholic faith, it shall be
sufficient to prove that it is that which once was spread over the whole world.
Now with the proof thereof M. Bishop is choked already, and all that we see
from him now, is but a vain and bootlesse struggling to recover his breath
again. But yet he says, M. Abbot gave this the slip, and turns himself
to prove the Roman religion not to be the Catholic. And was not that ( M.
Bishop) a shreud turn for you, to prove the Roman religion not to be the
Catholic? and was it not very pertinent for me so to do, when you exhorted
the Kings Majesty to the Roman religion under pretense of that name? Yea, but
he shuffles from the religion and faith, of which the question was, unto the
Roman Church. But what, will he have us think that there is a Roman Church
without faith or religion, that a man must shuffle from religion and faith to
go to the Roman Church? forsooth he shuffles from the faith professed at Rome
to the persons inhabiting the City of Rome, to prove that they are no
Catholics, and that the Roman Church is not the Catholic Church. And does not
he shuffle amiss for you ( M. Bishop) that can shuffle you from being
Catholics, and the Roman Church from being the Catholic Church? And he that
shuffleth you from being Catholics, does he not also shuffle the says
professed at Rome from being the Catholic faith? Are these things so divided
each from other as that they cannot in their order be incident to the same
discourse? Surely M. Bishop my shuffling will yield but a bad game to you,
unless you can cut more wisely for your self the^ hitherto you have done. If
you have no better cards then yet we see, you will certainly loose all.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
But let us give him leave to wander whither his fancy leads him, that we may
at length hear what he would say: It is forsooth, That the Church of Rome does
absurdly call her self the Catholic Church, and that Papists do absurdly
take to themselves the name of Catholics, because the Catholic Church is the
universal Church, but the Church of Rome is a particular Church; therefore to
say the Roman Catholic Church, is all one as to say the universal particular
Church. Here is a well shapen argument, and worthy the maker; it consists of
all particular propositions, which every smatterer in Logic knows to be most
vicious: besides, not one of them is good, but all are sophistical and full of
deceit. First, concerning the form, if it were current one might prouely it,
that no one Church in the world were Catholic; take (for example) the English
congregation (which they hold to be most Catholic) and apply Mr. Abbots
argument to it thus: The Catholic Church is the universal Church, but the
Church of England is a particular Church; wherefore to say the English Church
is Catholic, is to say a particular Church is an universal. His first fault
then is in the very form of reasoning, which alone is sufficient to argue him
to be a Sophister, and one that means to beguile them that will trust him:
now to the particulars. His first proposition (the Catholic Church is the
universal Church) is both absurd, because the same thing is affirmed of
himself (for universal is no distinct thing, but the very interpretation of
the word Catholic) and also captious, as having a double signification. For
the Catholic Church does signify both the whole body of the Church, compacted
of all the particular members united and joined together in one; in which sense
no one particular Church can be called the Catholic Church, because it is not
the whole body spread over all the world; for it is totum integrale ( to use the
school terms) and not totum universal, quod dicitur de multis. Secondly, the
Catholic Church ^oth also design and note very properly every particular
Church that embraces the same true Christian faith, which has continued ever
since Christ's time, and been received in all Countries, not only because it is
totum similare ( as Mr. Abbot speaks) wherefore every true member of the
Catholic Church may be called Catholic; but also because each of the said
particular Churches has the same Faith, the same Sacraments, and the same
order of government (all which are as it were the soul and form of the
Catholic Church) which Mr. Abbot acknowledges: and further also confesses
out of S. Augustine, that Christians were called Catholics, Ex communicatione
totius orbis, By having Epistola. 48.
communion of faith with the whole world. If then by his own confession every
particular Church, yea every particular Christian, that imbraceth and
professes that faith which is dilated all the world over, be truly called
Catholic; how fondly then did he go about to prove the Church of Rome not to
be Catholic, and Papists not to be Catholics, because forsooth they were
particulars? Yet that he may be thought not to dote outright, but rather to
dream, he adds: That at least the Church of Rome has no reason to assume to
her self the prerogative of that title, because that every Church where the
true faith is taught, is truly called Catholic, and no one more then another.
I note first, that this man is as constant and stable, as the weather-cocke on
the top of a steeple: before he proved stoutly (as you have heard) that no
particular Church could be called Catholic; now he will have every particular
Church that receives the true faith, to be called Catholic. Neither do we
say that any one Oxthodoxe Church, is more Catholic then another, if the word
Catholic be taken precisely; though we hold, that among all the particular
Catholics, the Roman holds the greatest privileges, both of superiority in
government, and of continuance and stability in the same true Catholic faith,
which is deduced out of the word of God; because that Church is the Rock (
according to the Math. 16. v. 18.
exposition of the ancient Fathers) upon which the whole Church was built, and
against which the gates of hell should never prevail. Again, the Bishop of
Rome succeeds lineally unto S. Peter, Whose faith Luc. 22. v. 23.
( through the virtue of Christ's prayer) shall never fail. Wherefore S.
Ireneus, a most learned Archbishop of Lions in France, and a glorious Martyr of
great antiquity, says: That all Churches ought to agree with the Lib. 3. cap.
3.
Church of Rome, for her more mighty principality. S. Cyprian Archbishop of
Carthage in Afric, affirms: That perfidiousnesse and falsehood in matters
Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
of faith, can have no access unto the Sea of Rome. S. Ambrose takes it to be
all one, to say the Catholic and the Roman Church, in these words: If he
shall agree De ob. Satyri.
with the Catholic, that is, with the Roman Church. So does S. Hierome when he
says of Ruffinus: What Hieron. in Apol. 1, cont. Russi. c. 1.
faith does he say his to be? if the Roman faith, we are then Catholics:
affirming men to become Catholics by holding the Roman faith. Tertullian,
Epiphanius, De Prascript. Epiph. hares. 27. Lib. 2. cont. Parmeni. August.
Epist. 165
Optatus, S. Augustine, d^e prove their Churches to be Catholic, and
themselves to be Catholics, by declaring that they do communicate with the
Church of Rome in society of faith: and do condemn their adversaries to be
Schismatikes and Heretics, because they did not communicate with the same
Roman Church. And which is greatly to be noted, no general Council of sound
authority, wherein the Christian truth has been expounded and determined, but
is confirmed by the Bishop of Rome: And on the other side, no heresy or error
in faith, has sprung up since the Apostles days, that did not oppose it self
against the Roman See, and was not by the same finally overthrown. Whereupon
S. Augustine had good reason to say, De vtil. cred. cap. 17.
That that chair obtained the top of authority, Heretics in vain barking
round about it. This little (I hope) will suffice for this place, to declare
that there is great cause, why we should attribute much more to the Roman
Church, then to any other particular Church what soever; and yield to it the
prerogative of all singular titles, in a more excellent manner.

R. ABBOT.
Whereas M. Bishop made motion to his Majesty; to accept of the Catholic
faith, I took occasion to note that the Catholic faith is so called of the
Catholic Church, and consequently to show that the Catholic Church by the
very signification of the word imports the universal Church, so called as I
noted out of Austin and Athanasius, Aug. de unit. Eccles. cap. 2. Q^am maiores
nostri Catholicam nominar^t vt ex ipso nomine ostenderent qui^ per totum est.
Athanas. quest. 71. Catholica propterea quod per totum mundum diffusa sit.
Quia per totum est, because it is over all or through all the world, and is
not tied to any Country, place, person, or condition of men: Aug. in Psalm. 56.
Corput eius est Eccles^^, non h^c aut illa, ^ed toto orb diffusa; nec ea quae
nunc est in hominibus qui pr^sentem vitam agunt, sed ad ^am pertinentibus ^^iam
his qui fuerunt ante nos, and his qui fut^ri sunt post nos vsque in sinem
seculi.
Not this Church or that Church as S. Austin further says, but the Church
dispersed through the whole world, and not that which consists in men now
presently living, but so as that there belong to it both those that have been
before us, and shall be after us to the worlds end. Now before I could
conveniently make use and application hereof, I was to remove the stumbling
block that lay in the way by the absurd presumption of the Church of Rome,
which like Anian. fabul.
the Ass in the fable of Antanus, that to make himself terrible put on him a
Lions skin; so being become the Ass to carry Balaam the false Prophet, who for
2. Pet. 2. 15. Apoc. 2. 13.
the wages of unrighteousness has set his heart to curse and scandalize the
people of God, to take away the reproach hereof, and to gain to it self a
sovereign authority over other Churches, has labored by all means to
entitle it self to a propriety of the name of the Catholic Church, so as none
should be taken to be a member of the Catholic Church, but only as he is
subject to the church of Rome. Duraeus the Jesuit out of the abundance of his
Catholic wit, has told us a tale, which the old Catholic Church never once
dreamed of, that Duraeus. co^t. Whitak. lib. 3. In nullam plane aliam
Catholicae Ecclesiae nomen and quaecunque de Christi Ecclesia Prophetae
praedixerunt quam in Romanam conuenire possunt.
the name of the Catholic Church and those things which the Prophets have
forespoken of the Church of Christ, can agree to no other but to the Roman
Church. Upon this mad conceit they have made of the holy Catholic Church, a
holy Catholic Roman Church; and whereas the Nicene Council taught us to say, I
believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, they teach us to expound it,
Bristow, Reply to Doctor Fulke, cap. 10. them. 6.
I believe one holy Catholic and Apostolic, that is, Roman Church: and
therefore bind men by a principle of Catechism Ledesm. Catechis. tra^slat.
into English.
to believe all that the holy Catholic Roman Church believes and holds. It
is not enough for interpretation of the Catholic Church in the articles of our
belief, to call it Aug Hunae. proaem. Catechism. Catholica Ecclesiae nomine
intelligo perspicuum and sensui expositum coetum illorum qui baptizativeram
sinceramque Christi fidem profite^tur, and se Beati Petri successori Romano
Pontifici vt Christi in terris Vicario subiectos agnoscunt.
the visible company of them that are baptized, and do profess the true and
sincere faith of Christ, unless it be added, and do acknowledge themselves
subject to the successor of Peter the Bishop of Rome as Christ's Vicar upon
earth. Pope Goodface the eighth having declared it for a new article of
Christian faith, that Extrauag. de maiorit. and obedient. e. Vnam Sanctam.
Subesse Romano Po^tifici omnihumanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus
and pronunciamus (...) esse de necessitate saluti^.
for every humane creature it is necessary to salvation to be subject to the
Bishop of Rome. So extremely they doat in this behalf, as that wheresoever
they read the name of the Church or Catholic Church, they presently sing as
the horse-bals in the poole amongst the apples, nos poma natamus, and like
children that imagine the bells in ringing to sound whatsoever they fancy; so
do undoubtedly imagine that the church spoken of must needs be meant of their
Roman Church. But for the pulling of this visard from their faces, I noted the
absurdity that is implied in that style of the Catholic Roman Church: for the
Catholic Church, say I, is the universal Church; The Roman Church is a
particular Church; therefore to say, the Catholic Roman Church, is all one as
to say, the universal particular Church. Against this M. Bishop as a notable
Logician takes exception as an ill shapen argument, consisting all of
particular propositions, as if I had here intended a Categorical syllogism, in
mood and figure, which no smatterer but himself would ever have dreamed. The
words have plain implication of an Hypothetical syllogism serving to infer
an absurdity against them: If the Catholic Church be the universal Church,
and the Roman Church a particular Church, then to say, the Catholic Roman
Church, is as to say, the universal particular Church. But it is absurd to
say, the universal particular Church. Therefore it is absurd to say, the
Catholic Roman Church. Will he have it reduced for him to a Categoricall
syllogism in mood and figure? Let him take it thus; No particular Church can
be the Catholic Church. But the Church of Rome is a particular Church.
Therefore the Church of Rome cannot be the Catholic Church. Must I prove the
mayor? No particular Church can be the universal Church. But the Catholic
Church is the universal Church. Therefore no particular Church can be the
Catholic Church. So learned a Doctor should not thus have played boyes-play,
but should of himself have conceived these things being clear and plain,
without any new advertisement thereof by the simple Minister. But by this
form, says he, a man might prove that no one Church in the world were
Catholic. But keep your terms aright M. Bishop, and say as you should, that
no one Church in the world is the Catholic Church, and then it is true that by
the same argument it is proved that no one Church in the world (particular
Churches being each and every of them but a part) can be called the Catholic
or Universal Church, which is the whole. And tell us I pray, good Sir, have
ye found that any of ours has entitled the Church of England to the name of
the Catholic Church? If not, why then do you thus abuse your Reader, to put
that for an instance, as if we affirmed it so to be? The truth is, gentle
Reader that M. Bishop seeks to blind thee by altering the terms that by me
were set down, naming a Catholic Church, which imports soundness of
doctrine in any one Church; whereas I mention the Catholic Church, as
importing the universal extent of the whole Church. It follows not indeed
that because a Church is particular, therefore it is not Catholic, that is,
sound in doctrine; but it follows that because a Church is particular,
therefore it is not the Catholic, that is, the universal Church. Let him
direct the argument against the Church of England, as I did against the Church
of Rome, and it shall be as strong against the Church of England as against the
Church of Rome. Let him say, and we will not contradict him, The Catholic
Church is the universal Church; the Church of England is a particular Church;
therefore to say the Catholic English Church, is as absurd as to say the
universal particular Church; or more nearely to his own words, Therefore to
say, the Church of England is the Catholic Church, is the same as to say, a
particular Church is the universal Church. But he turns the conclusion, that
the Church of England is not Catholic, which we hold to be most Catholic,
declaring by that addition that he refers Catholic by a Donatisticall
fallacy to quality of doctrine and faith, because more Catholic and most
Catholic, have no use but only in comparing truth and sincerity of faith. This
co^senage of his the learned see well enough, but he cares not for that,
because his thrift lies in abusing the ignorance of the more simple and
unlearned. This not serving his turn, he comes to the particulars, and of
the first proposition, The Catholic Church is the universal Church, he says
that it is both absurd and captious. And why absurd? Forsooth because the same
thing is affirmed of it self, for universal is no distinct thing but the very
signification of the word Catholic. But what; is it now absurd to express the
true signification of a word? The one is Greek, the other is English; and
though there be no distinction in the thing, yet is there not a distinction in
the tongue? Is the Roman Catechism absurd because it says, Catechism. Romans p.
1. c. 10. sect. 16. Tertia proprietas Ecclesia ea est vt Catholica, nempe,
vniuersalis vocetur.
The third property of the Church is that it is called Catholic, that is,
universal: or might the Catechism say without absurdity that Catholic is
Universal, and must I be absurd because I say, The Catholic Church is the
Universal Church? Surely when words of one language are borrowed to special
use in another, the reddition of them in the tongue to which they are borrowed
is taken with the learned as supplying the place of a definition, and it is
thereby made to appear whether they be properly and rightly used or improperly
abused. M. Bishop and his fellows abuse the name of Catholics and of the
Catholic Church, which English men do not so readily understand. Let them
give the signification of the word, and call themselves universals, and their
Church the universal Church, and then all that have will to understand can
easily see their foolery, and are ready to deride them. But this they hide
under the veil and cover of a Greek word, and we, that the truth may be the
better seen, are necessarily to discover, and therefore just cause had I to
say, The Catholic Church is the universal Church, and he is an absurd man to
tax it as a thing absurd. Yet notwithstanding I wish the Reader duly to
observe how that taxation stand(...) with the other, that the same proposition
of mine is captious. For why is it captious? Marry, because the Catholic
Church does signifi^ both the whole body of the Church compacted of all the
particular members, in which sense no one p^rticular Church can be called the
Catholic Church, because it is not the whole body; and secondly the Catholic
Church does also design and note very properly every particular Church that
embraces the true Christian faith. Where we may wonder that within the
compass of so few lines the man's wits should so extremely fail him. For if
the Catholic Church and the universal Church be one and the same thing, as he
has already told us, and universal be no distinct thing but the very
signification of the word Catholic, then how can it be which here he tells
us, that the Catholic Church signifies both the whole body of the Church,
which is the universal Church, and does also very properly design and note
every particular true Christian Church? If the Catholic Church be no distinct
thing from the universal Church, then it cannot properly note or design every
particular Church; or if it do properly design every particular Church, then
it is distinct from the universal Church. Tell us, M. Bishop, how these things
hang together; for if the universal Church be the very signification of the
Catholic Church, then we cannot see how a particular Church can be properly
called the Catholic Church, because no particular Church can properly be
called the universal Church. As for the exception that here lies against us,
that the Fathers in pointing to a particular assembly, doubt not sometimes to
use the name of the Catholic Church, I showed it before to be no whit
prejudicial to that that we say, because they minded not in so doing to limit
themselves to that particular assembly, but in a particular assembly to
demonstrate the universal Church. For to say in any City for distinction
sake, this is the Catholic Church, what was it else but to say, this is that
Church which is universally dispersed through the whole world? even as when a
man to demonstrate the elements, says; This is the air, this is the earth,
pointing to the air or earth whereat he is present, but therein intending to
demonstrate the whole body of the air or earth, having continuation with that
whereto he points. For as the Apostle directing his speech to the Church of
Ephesus names, Act. 20. 28.
The Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood, and again, 1.
Tim. 3. 15.
the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and ground
of truth, so speaking of a part as to conioyne it with the whole, even so and
no otherwise was it that in noting any particular Church, it was said, This is
the Catholic Church; the whole Church being totum similare, as I said before,
and the whole being subject to be designed in any part. But M. Bishop here
says, that this was not only because the Church is totum similare, but because
each of the said particular Churches has the same faith, the same Sacraments
and order of government. Which is as wisely and discreetly spoken as if he had
said that this was not only because the Church in all parts thereof has the
same faith and sacraments, but because the said particular Churches have all
the same faith and Sacraments. For why is the Church said to be totum
homogeneum or similare, a body whose parts are all of the same nature, kind
and being, but because in all parts thereof there are the same faith and
Sacraments, or to use the words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 4.
One body, one spirit, one hope of calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all.
Surely either M. Bishop was sleepy or else his wits were a wooll-gathering when
he put in this exception. Now then it was not said that the word Catholic is
not or may not be directed to any particular, M. Bishop does therein but
merely calumniate; but I said and showed that it is never rightly applied any
way or to any particular, but with implication of the universal Church. The
faith is called Catholic, because it is the faith of the universal Church,
propagated and spread by the Apostles over the whole world. Particular Churches
are called Catholic, and particular persons are called Catholics, as a man
would say, Vniuersalists, for maintayning communion and fellowship of this
faith, with the Church of the whole world. And as the name of the air or the
earth, being absolutely used imports that whole element whereof we speak,
but yet according to distinction of places we say, The air of London, the air
of Oxford, the air of Winchester, etc. without restraining the name of the
air to any one place more then other, and only meaning that part of the air,
that is in such or such a place; even so whereas the name of the Catholic
Church simply and absolutely used imports the whole universal Church, the
same notwithstanding is found to be distinguished by diversity of places, the
Catholic Church of such a place, or the Catholic Church of such a place; not
limiting the name of the Catholic Church to any one place more then other, and
in true propriety of speech meaning nothing else but that part of the Catholic
Church, that is in this or that place. And therefore I formerly noted and
think not unfit here to be repeated, that as Leo wrote himself Leo. epist.
12. Leo Papa Ecclesiae Catholic^ vrbis Romae.
Bishop of the Catholic Church of the City of Rome, so does Constantine the
Emperor write Socrat. hist. l. 1. c. 6. Constantinus Catholic^ Alexandrinorum
Ecclesiae.
to the Catholic Church of Alexandria; and Austin names August. co^t.
Crescon. l. 3. c. 13. Omnis Africana Catholica Ecclesia.
the Catholic Church of Africa, and Aurelius writes himself Collat. cum
Donat. cognit. 1. c. 16. Aurelius Episcopus Ecclesie Catholicae Carthaginensis.
Bishop of the Catholic Church of Carthag^, and another Aurelius Ibid. cap.
201. Aurelius Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae Macomadiensis.
Bishop of the Catholic Church of Macomadia, and Nouatus Ibid. c. 204. Nouatus
Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae Sitifi.
Bishop of the Catholic Church of Sitif. And so in the fifth Council at
Constantinople we read, Conc. Consta^tinop. 5. act. 1. Supplicatio a Clericis
and Monachis Apostolici throni Antiochenae magnae ciuitatis Catholicae Sanctae
Ecclesiae Dei.
The holy Catholic Church of Antioch: and in the subscriptions of the
Council, Sextilianus Bishop of the Catholic Church of Tunis, and Ibid. Act.
8. in subscript. Sext^lianus misericordia Dei Episcopus Ecclesiae Catholicae
Tuniensis: Megethius gratia Dei Episcopus Sanctae Dei Catholicae Ecclesiae
ciuitatis Heracleae.
M^gethius Bishop of the holy Catholic Church of the city of Heraclea, and
Pompeianus Bishop of the holy Catholic Church of the city of Victoria, and
many other in the like sort. Herein then stands the error, not that the name
of the Catholic Church is used of a particular Church, but because it is
absurdly made a propriety of one particular Church, which was never used but
indifferently of all Churches, and never but with implying the signification of
the universal Church. Thus I am still constant in one tale; what I said before
I said after, and I say it now again, and more cause there was for M. Bishop
to have taken another Cock to himself then to put the weathercocke to me. Now
he himself confesses that no one Orthodoxe Church is more Catholic then
other, if the word Catholic be taken precisely; but what it means with him
if it be taken precisely, he tells us not. If Orthodoxall and Catholic
precisely taken be all one with him, he plays the Donatist as we shall see
hereafter, and in that sense amongst many Churches that may be called
orthodoxal and sound, there may yet be some more sound then other. If in true
meaning it be taken precisely and properly, then it is taken as in the Creed
we profess to believe the holy Catholic, that is, the universal Church, and
so no particular Church, as has been said, and as M. Bishop has confessed,
can be called the Catholic Church, M. Bishop therefore unless he be wilful
must also necessarily confess, that the church of Rome being a particular
Church, deals absurdly in applying to it self the name of the Catholic
Church there, where the word Catholic without all doubt is precisely and
properly taken. But though speaking precisely no one Church be more Catholic
then other, yet we hold, says M. Bishop, that among all the particular
Catholics the Roman holds the greatest privileges both of superiority in
government and stability in true faith. Hold it, M. Bishop, where you have it,
and blind men as much as you can in the conceit of it: but where you have it
not, ye are never likely to obtain it. To us it is nothing what you hold:
what you prove is somewhat; but you may hold with Copernicus, if you will, that
the Sun stands still and the earth turns round, or with Anaxagoras that
snow is black. So the Church of Rome, according to that it was, we attribute
eminency of place, precedence of honor, authority of estimation and account,
but authority of power or superiority of government, we acknowledge none
belonging thereto. We read that other Churches have yielded unto it amity and
love, Romans 16. 16.
The Churches of Christ salute you; but no where do we read, All the Churches
of Christ are subject unto you. And will any man think it credible that such
privileges should appertain to the Church of Rome, and yet that neither St.
Paul nor St. Peter himself should make any mention of them? The one of them
wrote to the Church of Rome it self, they both wrote to many other Churches,
and would they never have remembrance to say any thing of the Lord God the
Pope? Yea St. John did honor to Apoc. 1. 4.
the seven Churches of Asia by writing to them, and would he never speak of
Apoc. 17. 9.
the seven hills of Rome, but only as the seat of the whore of Babylon? Yea
and of those seven Churches of Asia, it is to be noted which Gregory Bishop of
Rome oftentimes delivers, and has Austin therein agreeing with him, that
Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 15. In ^oannis Apocalypsi septem Ecclesijs scribitur per
quas vna Catholica designatur. Praefat. ad exposit. Job. Per septem Ecclesiar^m
numerum vniuersalis Ecclesia designatur. Sic August. Ep. 161.
in them is designed or figured the Catholic or universal Church. And to this
accords Optatus also, when of those Churches he says; Optat. Mileuit. lib.
2. Extra septem Ecclesias quicquid foris est alienum est.
Whatsoever is without the seven Churches is altene and strange. Now amongst
those seven Churches none had any privilege either of superiority in
government, or of stability in faith. There is not one Angel or one Church
questioned for all, as having charge and authority over all, but every Angel,
every Church severally censured by it self, and according to every their works
either allowed or reproved. Since then the principal must have correspondence
with the figure, it must likewise be in the universal Church, that no one
Church has privilege or superiority above all, but every Church accordingly
as it performs fidelity unto God, either stands or falls; either is
accepted or refused. And the less has the Church of Rome to presume of
privilege in this behalf, for that it has special caution given to the
contrary; Romans 11. 20.
Be not high minded but fear; f^r if God spared not the natural branches,
take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold the bountifulnes of God toward
thee if thou continue in his bountifulnes, or else thou shall also be cut off.
This notwithstanding M. Bishop tells us that that which they hold of those
Romish privileges, is deduced out of the word of God. But how? because that
Church is the Rock (according to the exposit^on of the ancient Fathers) upon
which the whole Church was built, and against which the gates of hell should
never prevail. Here is chalk for cheese; we were promised a deduction out of
the word of God, and ins^eede thereof he brings us an exposition of the
ancient Fathers. But M. Bishop, show you self a man of your word; let us see
that which you say is deduced out of Gods word; for as for the exposition of
the Fathers it avails not if it be not deduced out of the word of God. He is
dumb and can say no more; if you will take the Fathers exposition for a
deduction out of Gods word, be it so; otherwise deduce he that can; for M.
Bishop can deduce nothing. Albeit let us ask him, who be those ancient Fathers
that have expounded the Roman Church to be the Rock, upon which the Church is
built? What, M. Bishop, are you afraid to name them? Though you set not down
their words, yet did not leisure serve you to quote them in the margent of your
book that we might take knowledge of them? It is true that St. Peter is
sometimes termed the Rock upon which the Church was built, but who ever said
that the Rock is the Church of Rome, or that the Church is built upon the Roman
Church? The truth is that he belieth the Fathers, and fathereth upon them that
which they never meant. The Rock upon which Christ would build his Church is
often by the Fathers expounded to be Christ himself, and the true faith and
confession of Christ. Aug. de verb. Dom. ser^. 13. Super hanc Petram quam
confessus es, super hanc petra^ quam cognouisti, dice^, Tu es Christus, etc.
adisicab^ Ecclesiam med; id est, super meipsum fi^ium Dei viui, etc.
Upon this Rock which thou have confessed, says Austin, upon this Rock which
thou have acknowledged, saying, Thou art Christ the son of the living God, I
will build my Church; that is, upon my self being the son of the living God.
Hilar. de Trinit. lib. 6. Super banc confessionis Petram Ecclesi^ aedificati^
est, etc Haec fides Ecclesiae fundamentum est; per hanc fidem infirma aduersus
came sunt portae inferorum: h^c fides regni c^lestis babet ^l^ues, etc.
Upon this Rock of confession, faith Hilary is the building of the Church.
This faith is the foundation of the Church, by this faith the gates of hell
prevail not against it; this faith has the keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
etc. Chrysostom says; Chrysostom. in Math. hom. 56. Super hanc Petram, id est,
fide^ and confessionem.
Upon this Rock, that is, this faith and confession. Theodoret likewise
expounds it. Theodor. in Cant. l. 2. Petra^ appellat fidei pietatem,
veritatis profession^, etc.
the piety of faith, the profession of truth. An^brose says; Ambros. in Eph^.
c. 2. Super hanc petram etc. id est, in hac Catholicae fidei confessione
statuam fideles ad vitam.
Upon this Rock will I build my Church, that is, in this confession of the
Catholic faith will I stablish the faithful unto life: and again that those
words of the Apostle, Ibid. In quo omnis structura, etc. Hic sensus est vnde
Dominus a^t, super hanc petram, etc.
In him (that is in Christ) all the building is coupled together, etc. are the
sense and meaning of that which the Lord says, upon this Rock will I build my
Church. And thus the whole number of the Bishops of Palestina in the Council
of Chalcedon understood it; Epist. Iuuenal. and Episc. Palest in append.
Council. Chalced. Super hanc confessionem roberata est Ecclesia Dei.
Upon this confession the Church of God is confirmed and strengthened. By many
other such like expositions of the ancient Fathers it may appear that Christ
I^SVS, even the true faith of Christ (for Christ is nothing to us but by faith)
is the true Rock whereupon the Church is builded, that the gates of hell may
not prevail against it. And to this St. John accords; 1. John 5. 4. 5.
This is the victory that overcomes the world, (...) our faith; for who is it
that overcomes the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the son of
God? If Christ then be the Rock by faith in him, how falsely does M. Bishop
deal to foist in the Roman Church in steed of Christ or of the faith of
Christ? Now if Christ properly and truly be the Rock, then it can be but
accidentally and improperly that Peter is so called, only in respect of his
doctrine and example of faith, expressed and uttered in his confession; Math.
16. 16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. As Abraham is Esa. 51. 1.
the Rock from whence we are hewed, so is Peter the Rock whereupon we are
built: not for that either of them conferreth any thing to us, but only for
that they stand before us for patterns of imitation, whereto we are to
conform our selves, that together with them we may be builded upon the true
Rock, 1. Cor. 3. 11.
that foundation beside which no other may be laid, which is Jesus Christ. But
in this Peter was not alone, the rest of the Apostles as well as he John 6. 69.
believing and knowing that Jesus was Christ the son of the living God. Yea,
and in the place where Peter utters that confession, as the question was
asked of all the Apostles, Whom say ye that I am? so we must understand also,
and so St. Austin affirms that Augustine. in Psalm. 88. Respondens Petrus pro
omnibus, vnus pro vnitate.
Peter answered for all, one for unity, and consequently that all being in the
like case, the words which Christ returns though in token of unity uttered
to one, yet in that unity did appertain to all. Therefore, by the words there
spoken to Peter, Hi^rome concludes that Hieron. in Amos, lib. 3. c. 6. Petra
christus est, qui donauit Apostolis sui^ vt ipsi quoque Petra vocentur. Tu es
Petrus and super hac petram, etc.
Christ the Rock gave, not to one only Apostle; but to his Apostles that they
also should be called Rocks. And in like sort Origin conceiueth it when he
says; Origin. in Math. cap. 16. Quod si super vnum illum Petrum tantum
existimas ^dificari tota^ Ecclesiam quid dicturus es de Ioanne filio tonitr^i
and Apo^lolor^^ vn^ quoque? Quin alioqui number audebimus dicere, quod aduersus
Petrum vnum no^ pr^ualitur^ sin^ port^ inferor^, aduensus caeleros au^^.
Apostolos praeualiturae sin^, ac no^ potius in omnibus and singuli^ ^orum fit
illud quod dictum est, super (...) Petram, etc. Quod si dictum hoc, Ti^i dabo
claues, etc. c^teris quoque commune est, cur non simul omnia, and quae prius
dicta s^nt, and quae sequunt^r (...) ad Petrum dicta, sunt omnium communia?
If thou think that the Church was built upon Peter only, what will thou say
of John the son of thunder and every of the Apostles? shall we dare to say
that against Peter only the gates of hell shall not prevail, and that they
shall prevail against the other Apostles, and not rather that in all and every
of them it is verified which is said, Upon this rock will I build my Church?
In a word he reasons thus, that because that which is said, I will give to
thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, is common to them all, therefore all
the rest both going before and following after as spoken to Peter, is common to
them all. And this the Scripture confirms in that it says, that Ephesians. 2. 20.
the household of God are builded, not upon the foundation of Peter only, but
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and not St. Peter only but
Apoc. 21. 14.
the Lambs twelve Apostles have their names written in the twelve foundations
of the city of God. Yea, it is yet further to be observed out of the Fathers,
that they make Peter in all this matter August. Epist. 165. Petro totius
Ecclesia figuram gerenti Dominus ait; super hanc Petram, etc.
to be are the figure as St. Austin says of the whole Church. Ide^ de verb.
Dom. sermon. 13. Hoc nomen ei vt Petrus appellaretur a Domino impositum est, and
hoc vt ^a figura significaret Ecclesiam. Quia enim Christus Petra, Petrus
populus Christianus.
The Lord, says he, gave him that name to be called Peter, that by that figure
he might signify the Church; for because Christ is (Petra) the Rock,
therefore Peter is the people of Christ. And thus of that which Christ there
says, Mat. 16. 19.
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, Gregory Bishop
of Rome delivers that Greg. exposit. in 1. Reg. l. 6 c. 3. Quod antiquis
^usquam dicitur, m^do universally Ecclesiae dicitur, Quodcunque ligaueris, etc.
it is spoken to the universal Church. Therefore Origin applies the name of
Peter to every man that joins with Peter in the confession of the same faith:
Orig. in Mat. c. 16. Quod si nos quoque locuti quod dixit Petrus, Tu es
Christus, etc. t^nquam non accepta (...) reuelatione a carne and sanguine, sed
luce cordi nostr^ illucescent^ a Patre qui in c^lis est, efficimur Petrus and
nobis dicetur, quod hunc sermonem sequitur* Tu es Petrus, etc.
If we say as Peter said, Thou art Christ the son of the living God as not
receiving revelation hereof from flesh and blood, but by light shining into our
hearts from the Father which is in heaven, we also are made Peter, and it shall
be said to us which follows that speech, Thou art Peter, etc. And anon after
he affirms again, that Ibid. paulo post. Dicta sunt vt doc et spiritus
illius ad quemuis qui t^lis factus fuerit, qualis ^rat ille Petrus: siquidem
nom^^ ducunt a Petra quicunque sunt imitato^es Christi, qui est petra
spiritualis, etc. Christi membra cum sint, ab ^^ nomen habe^t dicti Christiani,
and a Petra Petri.
the spirit of the Gospel speaks those words to every one that is such as
that Peter was: for they take their name, says he, of (Petra) the Rock,
whosoever are followers of Christ who is the spiritual Rock; being called of
Christ Christians, and of (Petra) the Rock being called Peter's. Hereto St.
Ambrose also alludeth, when giving the reason why Peter was so called, Ambros.
in Luc. lib. 6. cap. 9. Vt and ipse sit Petrus quod de petra habeat soliditatem
co^stanti^, fidei firmitatem. Enitere ergo vt and tu petra sis; itaque non
extra te sed intra te petram require, etc. si petra fueris, in Ecclesia eris,
quia Ecclesia supra petram est.
For that of (Petra) the Rock, he had soundness of constancy, and
steadfastness of faith, he uses this exhortation; Therefore endeavor that
thou also may be a Rock, and not without thee but within thee require this
rock; if thou be a Rock, thou shall be within the Church, because the Church
is upon a Rock. To conclude, Origin expounding by way of allegory that which
is written, as befalling upon the death of Christ, that the rocks were cloven
in sunder, makes the rocks to be the Prophets; whom he proves rightly to be
so called. Origin. in Math. tract. 35. Probamus scissas tum Petras esse
Prophetas, primum ex eo quod Christus dicitur Petra spiritualis and rationis
est omnes imitatores Christi dici similiter Petras esse, sicut and lux
mundidicuntur ex eo-quod ipse Dominus ^orum est lux mundi; deinde etiam ex eo
quod ipse Petrus a Domino Petra est appellatus cum dicitur ei, Tu es Pe^rus,
etc. Maxim autem demonstratu^ ex co quod o^nes quibus non pr^ualent portae
inferorum, qui opus nominis petr^ babe^t in se, id est, Apostoli and Propheta,
Petra sunt ipsi, and sunt ^um qui super eis adificantur, etc.
First, for that Christ is called the spiritual rock, and it stands with
reason that all that are followers of Christ should likewise be called Rocks,
as they are called the light of the world, because Christ their Lord is the
light of the world; and secondly, for that Peter is by Christ called a Rock,
when it is said, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, etc. For it is strongly
proved thereby, says he, that all against whom the gates of hell do not
prevail, who have in them the work or effect of the name of Rock, as namely
the Apostles and Prophets, are themselves Rocks, and the foundations of them
that are builded upon them. Thus do the Fathers turn and wind those words of
Christ; they find Christ himself to be the Rock, they find Peter in some
sort to be a Rock, albeit not Peter alone but the rest of the Apostles, yea
the Prophets also as well as he; yea they find every faithful Christian man
to be a Rock by constancy of faith, and by drawing on others through his
example of confession to the acknowledgment thereof, but no where do we find
that ever they took the Roman Church to be the Rock. How unhonestly then does
M. Bishop abuse his Reader, by setting down in gross that parenthesis
(according to the exposition of the ancient Fathers) when as no such exposition
is to be found amongst the ancient Fathers? Albeit it is also to be noted how
unhandsomely this matter hangs together, and cannot be stained in any sort to
serve his turn; for seeing the Church was when as yet there was no Roman
Church, how senseless a thing is it that the church should be said to be
builded upon the Roman Church? Surely that against which the gates of h^ll
shall not prevail, is the Church builded upon the Rock. If then the Rock be
the Roman Church, and other Churches in the beginning were builded upon it, it
must needs follow that the gates of hell should never have prevailed against
other Churches. But they will not deny but that the gates of hell have
prevailed against other Churches. Therefore the Rock is not the Roman Church,
neither were other Churches in the beginning builded upon it. If he will have
the meaning to be that the gates of hell shall not prevail against other
Churches, so long as they continue builded upon the Roman Church, he teaches
us an exposition against himself, that so long as the Roman Church continues
builded upon the Rock which is Christ Jesus, so long the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it; but no assurance have we that it shall always
continue so builded upon the Rock. But he says further that the Bishop of
Rome li^^ally succeeds unto S. Peter. Be it so; and so did Caiaphas succeed
lineally to Aaron; yet did Caiaphas give sentence against Christ. Their own
law says; Non sunt omnes filij Sanctorum qui te^ent loca Sanctorum, sed qui
exercent opera ^orum.
All are not the children of Saints that hold the places of Saints, but they
that practice the works of Saints. Yea but Christ prayed for Peter Luke 22. 32.
that his faith might not fail. He did so, but I ask then with Austin; Aug.
quaest. vet. and noui testam. 75. Pro Petro rogabat, and pro lacobo and Ioanne
non r^gabat vt c^teros taceam? Manifestum est in Petro omnes ^^tin^ri ^ r^gans
enim pro Petro, pro omnibus r^gass^ dignoscitur.
Did he pray for Peter, and did he not pray for James and John, to say nothing
of the rest? It is manifest that in Peter they are all contained; and praying
for Peter he is known to pray for them all. Of them all he prays; John 17.
11. 25.
Holy Father keep them in thy name, I pray thee to keep them from evil. And
what is the means whereby they are kept? Even the same that St. Peter
expresses when he says; 1. Pet. 1. 5.
Ye are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation. If through
faith, then Christ in praying to the Father to kee^^ them, is consequently
understood to pray that their faith may not fail, through which they are kept.
Yea St. Austin makes it common to all the elect, that August. de corrept. and
great. cap. 12. Pro his ergo interpellante Christo ne deficiat fides eoru^, sine
dubio no^ deficiet vsque in finem, ac per hoc perseuerabit vsque in finem.
Christ prays for them that their faith may not fall, and that by virtue of
this prayer it does never fail finally, but perseuereth to the end. If then
Peter in this prayer have no privilege above other, then can nothing in this
behalf be derived to other by privilege from him. Albeit let it be admitted
that Christ here meant a singular favor to Peter, what shall that be to the
Pope? What Art has M. Bishop whereby to derive the effect of Christ's prayer
from Peter to their Popes, from an holy Apostle to a rank and succession of
men, amongst whom there have been so many Atheists, Infidels, Idolaters,
Heretics, so many incarnate Devils and hateful Monsters of mankind? This is a
matter of great weight, and we require some good authority and proof for it,
that what Christ prayed for the Apostle Peter, the same he has prayed for the
Pope also. But in the proof of this he fails wholly, neither can he any way
persuade it unless he meet with either simple or well-willing creditors, who
will be content for payment to take counters in steed of gold. And yet I
would further ask him what faith it was whereof Christ prayed in the behalf
of Peter that the same might not fail? Surely by St. Austins application
formerly mentioned, it appears that it was meant of that faith which is Tit
1. 1.
the faith of Gods elect, that justifying and saving faith whereby Peter should
rise again from his fall, and should resist thenceforth the temptations of
Satan, and stand steadfast thereby unto eternal life. But M. Bishop will not
deny but that many Popes there have been in whom this faith has failed, or
rather in whom it never was; many who have been reprobates and cast awaies,
and their end everlasting death. Of Sixtus the fifth, namely Bellarmine being
asked what he thought after his death, answered as Watson in his Quodlibets
reports, Wats. Quodlibet. Quantum capio, quantum sapio, quantum intelligo,
descendit ad infernum. Qui sine poenitentia vi^it, and sine poenitentia
moritur, proculdubio descendit ad infernum.
So far as I can conceive or understand he is gone down to hell; he that
lives and dies without repentance, goes undoubtedly to hell. In him
therefore and ma^^ other such like, the prayer of Christ did not take effect,
and therefore certain it is that it did not appertain unto them. If M. Bishop
will needs understand it that Christ prayed for Peter that he might be free
from error in judgment of faith; then not to question whether Peter
thenceforth committed any error in judgment, it must needs be that the Pope
cannot be subject to error in that behalf. But they themselves confess that
the Pope as a private man may err, that he may be an Heretic and defend
heresy; only in his Consistoriall sentence and Pontifical decree he cannot
err. Was this then the intent of Christ's prayer in the behalf of Peter, that
howsoever he might otherwise be an Hypocrite or an Heretic, yet when he should
set himself down in his chair to define any matter, he should be like
Balaam to bless where he means to curse, and like Caiaphas to prophecy
without understanding what he says? I dare appeal to M. Bishop himself, if
he be sober, that this was not Christ's meaning in respect of Peter. If it were
not thus meant of Peter, and it can be no otherwise derived to the Pope, but
as it was meant of Peter, then it must follow that because it can in no other
meaning be fitted to the Pope, therefore it can have no reference to the Pope
at all. If he be so absurd as to say that it was so meant of Peter, I will
not stand to disprove a drunken man's dream; I only require proof of that he
says. But because he can deduce nothing out of the word of God, he will make
some flourish with some few sentences of the ancient Fathers. And first he
begins with Ireneus who going in hand to avouch the true doctrine of faith
by the testimony of the Churches, which had received the same from the
Apostles, for auo^ding tediousness brings in steed of many other the Church
of Rome, being a very great and very ancient Church, and known to all men.
Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potent^rem principalitatem necesse
est omnem conuenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt vndique fideles, in que
semper abhis qui sunt vndique conseruata* est ea qua est ab Apostolis Traditi^.
To this Church, says he, because of her more potent principality, it is
necessary for every Church to accord, that is, the faithful every where,
wherein the Tradition which came from the Apostles has been always
preserved. Now take this reason added by Ireneus which by M. Bishop is
concealed, and it will plainly appear why it was necessary for other Churches
to accord with the Church of Rome. For this Church for the renown and
famousnesse of the place, being then the seat of the Empire, was the most
eminent Church in the world, and therefore continuing still in the doctrine of
the Apostles without alteration or change, it was most fit of all other to be
propounded as a pattern to other Churches, whereto to conform themselves; and
with which whosoever accords not, did thereby swerve from the doctrine of the
Apostles. But the case is now altered, because the Church of Rome it self is
now questioned for swaruing from the Tradition of the Apostles; which being so,
that cannot be said to be necessary now, which was necessary so long as she
continued in that Tradition. And thus sarre we find only a necessity of
consenting then in doctrine with the Church of Rome, but for her superiority in
government we find nothing. Yes, says M. Bishop, for Ireneus attributes to
the Church of Rome, a mightier or more potent principality, which what should
it import, will he say, but a superiority of Dominion and government over all
other Churches? But I answer him, that principality does not enforce
sovereignty and dominion; for he himself is holden for a principal man
amongst the Seminary Priests, and yet he has no rule or dominion over them.
Principality imports specialty and chiefty, and notes an honor of
estimation and account, and thus the Church of Rome though having no title of
dominion for ruling and governing, yet had the honor to be a chief and
principal above other Churches. Now principality is always potent, and they
that are chief and eminent above others sway much by their example and
persuasion, and their very names are very auailable to induce other, whom
notwithstanding they have no authority to command, according to that which
Hilary says, that Hilar. Epist. apud August. tom. 7. Plure^ sunt in Ecclesia
qui authoritate nominum in sententia tenentur aut ad sententiam transferu^tur.
in the Church there are many who by authority of names are moved, either to
hold still their opinion, or to alter and change the same. Such and no other
was the potent principality of the Church of Rome, and thus does Ireneus in the
same place say, that that Church Iren. vt supr. scrip. Sit qua est Rom^
Ecclesia, potentissimas literas Co^inthijs etc.
wrote most potent letters to the Corinthians, namely such as were effectual
and strong to move them, and the rather for that they came from such a famous
and renowned place. And that M. Bishop may understand that I do not answer
him by a device of mine, but according to the truth, he shall find that Cyprian
calls the Church of Rome Cypr. lib. 1. Epist. 3. Ad Petri Cathedram and
Ecclesiam principalem, etc.
the principal Church, and yet in the same place he denies Ibid. Nauigare
audent ad Petri Cathedra^, etc. Oportet eos quibus praesum^s non circumcursare,
etc. Nisi paucis d^speratis and ^erditis minor esse videtur authoritas
Episcoporum in Africa constitutorl^. etc.
the authority of the Bishops of Africa to be inferior to the Bishop of Rome.
And thus the African Council acknowledges the Church of Rome to be Conc.
Afric. cap. 6. Primae sedis Episcopus non appelletur Princ^ps Sacerdotum, aut
summus Sacerdos aut aliquid huiusmodi, sed tantum primae sedis Episcopus.
the first or principal Sea, and the Bishop thereof they term the Bishop of
the first or principal Sea, and yet they denied to the Bishops of Rome to have
any authority over them. Yea when Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestmus,
challenged the same by a forged Canon of the Nicene Council, those Ibid. c.
101. Quia hic in nullo c^di^^ Gr^c^ ea po^^imus inuenir^, ex Orientalibus
Ecclesijs vbi perhibetur eadem decreta posse etiam authentica reperiri, magis
nobis desideramus adferri.
African Bishops for the disprouing thereof sent to the Patriarchs of Antioch,
Alexandria, and Constantinople for authentical copies of the said Council,
wherein they found no such matter; and Ibid. c. 105. Vt aliqui tanquam a tuae
sanctitatis latere mittantur, nulla inuenimus patrum Synodo constitutum. Quod
ex part Nicem Concilij transmisistis in Concilijs verioribus tale aliquid non
potuimus reper^^e. Executores Cle^icos vestros quibusque petentibus nolite
mittere, etc.
thereupon wrote to Celestinus that he should forbear to send his Legates to
entermeddle in their matters, and Ibid. c. 92. Non prouocent nisi ad Africana
Concilia, vel ad primates Prouinciarium s^^rum: ad transmarina autem qui
putauerit appellandum, a nullo intra Africam in communionem suscipiatur.
forbad all appeals save to their own Councels, excommunicating them that
presumed to appeal to Rome, and in this recusancy of subjection they continued
afterward for the space of an hundred years until Eulal^^s the Bishop of
Carthage, if it be true which is reported of him and not coined at Rome,
betrayed the liberty of that Church, and submitted the same to Boniface the
second, who doubted not most wickedly to say of those African Bishops, of whom
the learned Father St. Austin was one, that Bonifac. 2. Epist. ad Eulal. tom*
2. Council. Aurelius Carthaginensis Ecclesi^ olim Episcopus cum collegis suis
inf^igante Diabolo superbire te^porib^ praedecessorum Bonifacij atque Celestini
co^tra Romana^ Ecclesiam coepit.
by the instigation of the Devil they had then begun proudly to demean
themselves against the Church of Rome. As for that potent principality of the
Roman Church, and necessity of according therewith, which M. Bishop intends,
Polycarpus knew it Eusebius. hist. l. 5. c. 23. Neque enim Anicet^ suadere
Polycarp^ poterat ne seruaret, etc. quae semper seruauerat.
not, when he would not be persuaded by Anicetus Bishop of Rome to keep the
feast of Easter according to the manner of the Church of Rome. Neither did
Ibid. cap. 22. Episcopis per Asiam qui morem ipsis ab antiquo traditum
retine^dum esse affirmabant, pr^erat Polycrates.
Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus with the rest of the Churches of Asia,
acknowledge any such when they withstood Victor Bishop of Rome in the same
cause, and neglected his excommunication; the same Polycrates alleging for
himself, that Ibid. Ego qui sanctam Scripturam volui ac reuolui, non t^rbabor
illis quae terrendi gratia obijciuntur. Et^nim maior^s mei Deo magis quam
hominibus obedien^^^ esse dixerunt.
having read the holy Scripture over and over, he would not be troubled with
those things that were threatened to him, because his ancestors had taught him
rather to obey God then men. Neither did Council. Carthag. apud Cyprian. Per
totum.
Cyprian and his African Bishops conceive any such when in their Council they
determined the point of the Baptism of Heretics, professedly against the
known judgment of the Bishop and Church of Rome; whether truly or falsely that
skilleth not, only hereby it appears that they had not learned nor did
believe M. Bishops necessity of according with the Church of Rome. Neither did
the Eastern Churches imagine any such principality in the church of Rome, when
as Leo having affirmed it to be Leo. Epist. 62. Ad octauum Calend. Maiar.
Paschalem obseruantiam perducere nimis insolens and aperta transgressio est.
a strange and manifest trespass or transgression to bring Easter day to the
eighth of the Calends of May, he was feign notwithstanding to yield Idem Epist.
93. Studio vnitatis and pacis malui Orientalium definitioni acquiescere, quam
in tantae festiuitatis obseruantia dissidere.
to them therein because they would not yield to him. Neither did Hierome
believe any such who writing purposely in derogation of the Church of Rome
says; Hieron. epist. ad Euagr. Si authoritas quaritur, vrbis mayor est vrbe,
etc. Quid mihi pr^fers vnius vrbis consuetudin^^? quid paucitatem de q^a ortum
est supercilium in leges Ecclesi^ vindicas?
If authority be required, the whole world is greater then one City: what do
thou bring me the custom of one City? why do thou maintain a paucity or
fewness, whence has grown proud usurping upon the laws of the Church?
Neither did Ambrose admit it, who for defense of a ceremony used in his Church
of Millan, says, Ambros. de Sacram. lib. 3. cap. 1. Cupio in omnibus sequi
Romanam Ecclesiam, sed tamen and nos homines sensum habemus.
I desire in all things to follow the Church of Rome, but we also are men that
have understanding, and therefore what is more rightly observed otherwhere, we
justly observe the same. Neither was it acknowledged by the six hundred and
thirty Bishops of the Council of Chalcedon, who affirming Chalcedon. Council.
Act. 15. Can. 28. Antiquae Roma throno quod vrbs illa imperaret iure patres
priuilegia tribuere. ^t eadem consideration^ mo^i centum quinquaginta Dei
ama^tissimi Episcopi Sanct^ssimo noua Rom^ thro^o ^qualia priuilegia tribuere,
recte iudicantes vrbem quae and Imperio and Senatu honorata sit, etc. etiam in
rebus Ecclesiasticis non secus ac illam extoll^, etc.
the privileges of the Church of Rome, to have been given to it by the
Fathers before, f^r that that City was the seat of the Empire, did for the
same consideration give to the Church of Constantinople equal privileges with
the Church of Rome, when the City of Constantinople was honored with the
Empire and Senate as well as the City of Rome, which in the Synod. 6. in
Trullo, Can. 36. Decernimus vt thronus Constantinopolitanus aequalia priuilegia
cum antiqu^ Romae throno obti^eat.
sixth Synod holden at Constantinople, in Trullo by almost three hundred
Bishops more was again approved and confirmed. Now then by the continual
practice of the Church it appears that the words of Ireneus cannot be truly
applied to approve any superiority of government to appertain to the Church
of Rome. As little do the words of Cyprian avail to challenge thereto
certain continuance and stability in true faith, who exagitating the
tumultuous and disorderly courses of certain lewd and schismatic persons
who being censured by the Bishops of Africa sought to patronage themselves
under the favor of the Bishop of Rome, vpbraideth them, that Cyprian. lib. 1.
Epist. 3. Nec cogi^^re ^os esse Romanos quorum fides Apostolo praedicante
laudata est, ad quos perfidia hab^re non possit accessum.
they considered not that the Romans were men whose faith by the testimony of
the Apostle was commended, to whom perfidiousnesse can or may have no access.
Where M. Bishop adding in his translation of the words, or falsehood in matters
of faith, to make the words serve his purpose, thrusts them quite from the
purpose of him that wrote them. It made nothing for Cyprians purpose, that
falsehood in matters of faith could have no access to the Romans; the thing
that he aims at, is, that in matters of jurisdiction, perfidious and
treacherous persons justly punished for their evil demeanours, and thereupon
coming to Rome with lies and tales should find no admittance or harbor
there. M. Bishop though he give to the Bishop of Rome a privilege not to err
in deciding matters of faith, yet will not deny but that he may err in cases
and proceedings of jurisdiction, and in examining and judging matters of fact,
may give countenance to lewd and ungracious men, as he did to the Jesuits
against the Priests. It being then impertinent here to Cyprians occasion, to
affirm the Church of Rome to be free from error in question of faith, either
we must make him speak idly, or else we must construe his words the other
way, that those lewd and evil disposed persons should find no favor or
entertainment there. Which he says, cannot be: not as to affirm an
impossibility thereof, but as to signify how far he presumed of their
integrity in this behalf, and that they would make good the Apostles
commendation of their faith, one fruit whereof should be to resist the courses
of such tumultuous disturbers of Ecclesiastical order and peace, and to yield
no access or ^are to their calumnious and false suggestions. Gregory
Nazianzene well notes that in diverse meanings it may be said of a thing that
it cannot be* Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 5. Significata horu^ (posse vel no^ posse)
co^plura sunt. Interdum dicuntur de virium desectu and certo huius tempore and
respect^ alicuius etc. Interdum vsurpamus de eo quod vt plurimum accidit, etc.
Nonnunqua^ vt rationi non consentaneum, etc. Nonnunquam vt quod voluntas no^
admittat, etc. Praeterea quod nat^rae quidem respectu sieri nequit, praestari
aut^m a Deo potest, si is velit, etc. Praeter haec quod prorsus vel fieri vel
contingere nequit, etc.
First, to note want of strength at a certain time and in some respect, as to
say of a child that he cannot wrestle, which notwithstanding being grown he
can. Secondly, it signifies that such a thing commonly, or for the most part
cannot be; as when it is said, A City that is set upon a hill cannot be
hid, which notwithstanding by interposing somewhat may be hidden and not
seen. Thirdly, that we say cannot be, which is not convenient or agreeable
to reason, as when it is said, The children of the Bride-chamber, so long as
the Bridegroom is with them, cannot fast, meaning that so long it is not
reasonable or fitting so to do. Fourthly it is said cannot be, which the will
admits not or likes not to do, as when the Evangelist says of our
Savior; He could do no great miracles there because of their unbelief,
wherein is a relation to the former meaning, the will not admitting that which
is not fitting or convenient to be done. Fifthly, we say that can not be which
by natural course cannot be, though by the power of God it may be done. And
lastly, we say so of that which in no sort can be, and is wholly and altogether
impossible. It was far from Cyprians meaning that it was a thing wholly
impossible for the Romans to admit the hearing of such persons, (for if he had
so thought, what needed he so much to labor Cornelius the Bishop in that
behalf?) but he would note it as a thing unfitting to that testimony, which
the Apostle had given of them, and which being so unjust he assured himself
they would by no means yield unto. Even in the same manner as Gregory says,
that Greg. Mor. l. 33. c. 22. Iniqui si ap^rte mal^ essent, a bonis omnino
recipi non possent
men openly evil cannot be received or entertained of them that be good; and
as Marcellinus says of a Bishop, that Collat. cum Donat. 1. c. 62. Falsi
crimen nec obijcere condecet sacerdotem, nec committere potuisse credendum est.
it beseems him not to object falsehood to another, nor is it to be believed
that he could commit the same himself; and as Leo says, Leo. Epist. 52.
Priuilegia Ecclesiaru^ Sanctorum patrum Canonibus instituta and Nicena Synodi
fixa decretis nulla possunt improbitate conuell^, nulla no^itate mutari.
The privileges of Churches established by the Canons of the Fathers, and by
the decrees of the Nicene Council, cannot by any sinister practice be
impeached, on by any nouelty changed: and as we commonly say out of the law, Id
tantum possumus, quod iure possumus: Aug. cont. Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 22. Quod
non potest just, non potest iustus.
We can do that only which we can lawfully do, or as St. Austin says to the
same effect; The just man cannot do what he cannot justly do; agreeable to
the words of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13. 8.
We can do nothing against the truth but for the truth. Where, as in infinite
places more, we may not understand a mere denial of possibility, but a
signification of improbability, of indecency or breach of duty, if the thing
be done that is spoken of, even as St. Austin expounds the words of the
Angel to Lot; Genes. 19. 22.
I can do nothing till thou be come thither; Aug. cont. Gaudent. lib. 2. c.
22. Non posse se dixit, quod sine dubi^ poterat per potentiam, sed non poterat
per iustitiam.
He says he could not, which doubtless by power he could, but by justice he
could not do. Now if M. Bishop be pecuishly wilful against common sense to
understand perfidiousnesse of falsehood or error in matters of faith, yet that
Cyprian can be understood no otherwise but according to the same meaning it is
infallibly proved, for that in a matter of faith he with his Council of
African Bishops, as I said before, determines contrary to the Church of Rome:
and of Stephanus the Bishop of Rome says expressly, that he Cyprian. ad
Pompei. Haereticorum causam contra Christianos and co^tra Ecclesiam Dei
ass^rere conatur etc. Imperite atque improuide scripsit, etc. Quae ista
obstinatio, quaeu^ pr^sumptio humanam traditionem diuina dispositioni
anteponere, etc. vnitatem and veritati de diuina lege venientem no^ tenens,
h^res^m contra Ecclesiam vindicat.
endeavored to maintain the cause of Heretics against Christians and against
the Church of God, that he wrote ignorantly and unwarily, that obstinately and
presumptuously he preferred the Tradition of man before the ordinance of God,
that not holding the unity and truth that proceeded from the law of God, he
defended heresy against the Church. Wherein although it be true that Cyprian
did err, yet we cannot doubt but that upon advertisement given him by the
Bishop of Rome, he would have reformed his error and submitted himself to the
judgment of that Church, if he had known that privilege of immunity from
error, which M. Bishop now by his testimony challenges thereunto. In a word
to show the weakness of the foundation whereupon M. Bishop builds all this
fable, Cyprian where he says as the other Fathers sometimes do, Cypr. Epist.
ad Iubaian. and alt. ad Quirin. Petrus super que^ Dominus aedis^cauit
Ecclesiam* suam.
that Christ builded his Church upon Peter, in the very same place disputes
against the sentence of the Bishop of Rome, thereby plainly declaring that from
Peter to the Bishop of Rome there is by his judgment no such privilege
derived as these men so infinitely babble of. Now though his proofs hitherto
be vain, yet those that follow are more vain, beside that he is feign to
report them falsely to give them that little color that they seem to have.
Ambrose, says he, takes it to be all one to say the Catholic and the Roman
Church. Forsooth Ambrose reports that his brother Satyrus having escaped the
danger of shipwreck, and being come to land was destrous in token of
thanksgiving to receive the Sacrament. So it was that the heresy or schism
of the Luciferians at that time, prevailed in those parts, and he was careful
by no means to communicate with them. Therefore, Ambros. de obitu Fratris.
Percontatus ex ^o est vtru^^am cum Episcop^s Catholicis, hoc est, cum Romana
Ecclesia con^eniret.
he questioned with the Bishop whom he had sent for unto him whether he
accorded with the Catholic Bishops, that is, with the Roman Church. He held
it not enough to name Catholic Bishops, because Heretics and Schismatikes do
take upon them to be called Catholics, but because he knew the Church of Rome
then retained the Catholic faith, he would take knowledge of them to be
Catholic Bishops, by this that they joined themselves in fellowship of faith
with the Roman Church. And is not here, think you, a goodly reason, They were
then Catholic Bishops that did communicate with the Church of Rome; therefore
it is all one now to say the Catholic and to say the Roman Church? The Church
of Rome as the most famous and chief Church was most fit to be named in this
case, but otherwise it may even as well be said, They were Catholic Bishops
that communicated with the Church of Millan where Ambrose was Bishop; therefore
to say the Church of Millan, is all one as to say the Catholic Church. As
little discretion is there in his next allegation out of Hierome, who
mentioning the words of Ruffinus, concerning some works of Origin by him
translated, The Latin Reader shall find nothing in them different from our
faith, demands thus, Hieron. Apolog. aduers. Ruffin. lib. 1. Fide suam quam
vocat? Eamne qua Romana pollet Ecclesia, an illam qu^ Origenis voluminibus
contin^tur? si Romanam responde^it, ergo Cathol^ci sumus qui nihil de Origenis
errore transtulimus, etc.
Which calls he his faith? that which the Church of Rome professes, or that
which is contained in the books of Origin? If he answer, the Roman faith,
then are we Catholics, who have translated nothing of the error of Origin.
For what is there here said of the Roman Church, but what might likewise be
sa^d of any other Church professing the true faith? The argument follows,
because the Roman Church did then maintain the true Catholic faith; so should
it follow of the rest, If he profess the faith of the Church of
Constantinople, of Antioch, of Alexandria, yea of the poor Church of Eugubium,
then is he a Catholic, because al these did then profess the Catholic faith.
But what is this to M. Bishops purpose to prove in the Church of Rome a
privilege of continuance and stability in the same true Catholic faith; to
prove that the Roman faith should be always the certain and undoubted
pattern of the true Catholic faith? In which conclusion his other Authors
also do all fail him, who though it be granted him that they did, as he
says, prove themselves then to be Catholics and their Churches Catholic, by
declaring themselves to communicate with the Church of Rome, and their
adversaries to be Heretics because they did not so, for that the Church of
Rome was then famously known to have continued the same from the beginning in
the points of faith then impugned by the Heretics; yet very idly and
childishly are they alleged to prove that which M. Bishop intends, that it
should always thenceforth continue so. But indeed he racketh his Authors
and wrongeth them, neither do they say that which he would have them taken to
say. Tertullian appealeth to other Churches as well as to the Church of Rome,
and refers his Reader to the most famous of them accordingly as they are
nearest at hand; Tertul. de praescript. Percurre Ecclesia^ Apostolicas apud
quas ipse adhuc Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur, etc. Proxima est
tibi Achaiai habes Corinthum. Si non long es a Macedonia, habes Philippos,
habes Thessalonicenses. Si potes in Asiam tender^, habes Ephesum. Si autem
Ital^ae adiaces, habes Romanam.
Run through the Apostolic Churches in which there are Bishops still sitting
in the seats of the Apostles in their places. Is Achaia next unto thee? thou
have Corinthus. If thou be not far from Macedonia, thou have Philippos and
the Thessalonians. If thou can go into Asia, thou have Ephesus. If thou
border upon Italy, thou have the Church of Rome. What is there here for M.
Bishops turn? Epiph. haeres. 27.
Epiphanius sets down a Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome, but says not a
word to that effect as M. Bishop cites him. Optatus approves his part to be
Catholic, not simply by communicating with the Church of Rome; but for that
together with the Church of Rome, Optat. lib. 2. Si^icius hodie noster est
socius; cum quo nobis totus orbis co^mercio formatarum in vna communionis
societate concordant.
they communicated with the church of the whole world. Yea in the same book
he attributes as much in this behalf to the seven Churches of Asia as to the
Church of Rome, and thereby as strongly reproves the Donatists. Ibid. Cum
quibus Ecclesijs nullum communionis probamini habere cons^rti^, etc. Extra
septem Ecclesias quicquid soris est alienum est.
You are proved to have no fellowship of communion with the seven Churches.
Whatsoever is without the seven Churches is stranger to the Church. Austin
sets down the succession of the Bishops of Rome, and vpbraideth the
Donatists, that Aug. Epist. 165. In hoc ordine successionis nullus Donatista
Episcopi^ inuenitur.
no Donatist was found amongst them; but as well does he object to them, that
whereas Ibid. Quile gunt in codicibus sanctis Ecclesias quibus Apostoli
scripseru^t and nullum in eis habe^t Episcopum. Quid autem peruersius and
insanius quam lectoribus easdem Epistolas legentibus dicere, pax tecum, and ab
earum Ecclesiaru^ pace separare quibus ipsa Epistolae scriplae su^t.
they read the Epistles of the Apostles, they divided themselves from the peace
and fellowship of those Churches, to which the Apostles wrote the same
Epistles. So then in all these Authors which he alleges he does but merely
abuse his reader, which is the cause why he thus set down their names without
their words, for that he presumed that only alleging their names, men would
imagine that undoubtedly they said somewhat for him, whereas if he had set
down their words, every man might see that they said nothing. Yea, but it is
greatly to be noted, says M. Bishop, that there is no general Council of
sound authority wherein the Christian truth has been expounded and
determined, but is confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. Well; and it is as greatly
to be noted that the sentence of no Bishop of Rome was anciently holden
sufficient for the deciding of a question of faith, except the same were
confirmed by a general Council. Therefore does Leo Bishop of Rome mention Leo
epist. 61. Apostolicae sedis Epistola universally sancta Synodi assens^ firmata.
Et Epist. 70. Scripta mea adiecta vniuersalis Synodi co^firmatione, etc.
his Epistle against the heresy of Eutyches, confirmed by the universal
assent of the sacred Synod, and his writings having the confirmation of the
general Council added thereto. And what his authority was in the Council it
may be conceived by that he wrote to the Council of Ephesus, Idem Epist. 14.
Misi qui vice mea sancto conue^tui vestrae fraternitatis intersint, and communi
vobiscum sententia qua Domino sint placitura constituant.
I have sent my deputies to be present with you in your assembly, and by
sentence in common to decree those things which may be pleasing to the Lord;
where we see that he challenges no more but a voice in common with the rest
of the Bishops there. And that Councels held it not an^ ^atter of necessity to
have the confirmation of the Bishop of Rome, it is manifest both by the African
Council excluding his authority from amongst them, as has been before
showed, and by the Council of k Chalcedon, which notwithstanding the
opposition of the l Council. Chalced. Act. 16. Contradictio nostra his gestis
inh^reat, etc. J^dices dixerunt, Quod interlocuti sumus, tota Synodu^
approbauit.
Legates of the Bishop of Rome and Leo Epist. 51. 52.
his own reclayming thereto, yet decreed to the Church of Constantinople
equality of privileges with the Church of Rome, save only that the Bishop of
Rome had precedence and priority of place, as before also is declared. As for
M. Bishops other note it is a vain and fond presumption, that all heresies
sprung up since the Apostles days have opposed themselves against the Roman
Sea, and have been by it finally overthrown. The Church of Rome has had
nothing singular in this behalf; Yea many heresies there have been that have
more bent themselves against other Churches then against the Church of Rome,
neither has the Church of Rome done so much in the confounding of them as
other Churches have done. But yet he brings Austin, affirming for him that
that chair obtained the top of authority heretics in vain barking round
about it. Where he deals very unhonestly in falsifying the words of Austin
who in that whole book by him cited, never once names the Roman Church or
chair, nor says any thing that may be avouched to have any special reference
or respect thereto. Of the Catholic or universal Church so apparently to be
discerned from all heretical combinations, St. Austin there says; Aug. de
vtilit. credendi. c. 17. Dubitabimus nos eius Ecclesiae condere gremio, quae
vsque ad confession^m generis humani ab Apostolica sede per successio* nes
Episcoporum frustra hareticis circumlairantibus, etc. culm^n authoritatis
obtinuit.
Shall we doubt to repose our selves in the bosom of that Church which even by
the confession of mankind from the Apostles sitting (or time when the Apostles
sat) by successions of Bishops has obtained a height of authority, Heretics
in vain barking round about, etc. In the whole process of that book from the
beginning to this place which is almost the very end, he speaks generally of
the Catholic Church without relation to any particular Church, and therefore
unlikely it is that his words here should bear any special application to
the Church of Rome. M. Bishop will say that I mistranslate the words ab
Apostolica sede, and that Apostolica seeds is there meant the Apostolic Sea,
that is, the Roman Church. But he must give us leave to understand the meaning
of St. Austins words by St. Austin himself, who in this cause so often
signifies by that phrase of speech, the time wherein the Apostles themselves
sat, that is, wherein they lived and occupied the rooms of teaching and
governing the Church. Thus he says in another place, Aug. cont. Faust. Manich.
lib. 11. cap. 2. Vides in hac re quid Ecclesiae Catholicae valeat authoritas
quae ab ipsis fundatissimis sedibus Apostolorum vsque ad hodiernum diem
succedentium sibimet Episcoporum and lot populorum consensione firmatur.
Thou see how much the authority of the Catholic Church herein avails,
which from the most surely founded seats of the Apostles until this day (that
is, from the time that the seats of the Apostles were most surely founded
until this day) by rank of Bishops succeeding one another, and by the consent
of so many peoples is confirmed. And again, Ibid. lib. 28. cap. 2. Vniuersa
Ecclesia ab Apostolicis sedibus vsque ad praesentes Episcopos certa successione
perducta.
The universal Church, says he, which is derived by certain succession from
the seats of the Apostles (that is, from the time that the Apostles sat) unto
the Bishops that now are. And in another place, Ibid. lib. 33. cap. 9. Eam
sequamini que ab ipsius praesentiae Christi tempo^ibus per dispensationes
Apostolorum and (...) ab little ^edibus successiones Episcoporum vsque ad haec
tempora peruenit.
Follow that authority which has come from the time of the presence of Christ
himself, by the ministry of the Apostles, and by other successions of Bishops
from their seats (from the time wherein they sat) until this time. Which
when he will in more proper words express* he speaks thus: Ibid. lib 28.
cap. 4. Ecclesia quae ab ipsius Matthaei temporibus vsque ad hoc tempus certa
successionum scrie declaratur.
The Church which from the very time of Matthew until this time by certain
rank of successions is declared. Ibid. lib. 32. cap. 19. Euangelica authoritas
ab Apostolorum temporibus vsque ad nostra tempora per successiones certissimas
commendata.
The authority of the Gospel commended by most certain successions from the
time of the Apostles until our times. And in another place: Contra Aduers.
leg. and Prophet. lib. 1. cap. 20. Ecclesia quae ab illorum (Apostolorum)
temporibus per Episcoporum successiones certissimas vsque ad nostra and
deinceps tempora perseuerat.
The Church which from the times of the Apostles by most certain successions
of Bishops continues to our times and so forward. Now then since all these
speeches, as by conference appears, serve to express only one and the same
thing, it is plain that St. Austin when he said ab Apostolica sede, meant
nothing else but from the sitting, that is, from the age and time of the
Apostles. Of the Apostles, I say, though he speak in the singular number,
because he names from thence not a succession as speaking of one, but
successions as res^rting himself to those many seats wherein Bishops had
succeeded from the time of the Apostles. And though we do understand it of
one Apostle St. Peter, as elsewhere he says, Cont. Epist. fundam. cap. 4.
Tenet ab ipsa ede Petri vsque ad praesentem Episcop^tum successio Sacerdotum.
The succession of Bishops from the very seat of Peter ( from the very time
when Peter sat) until the Bishopric that now is, holds me in the
Catholic Church; yet does there nothing hereby follow more to the Church of
Rome then to the Church of Antioch, where Peter sat as well as he did at Rome,
and where there had been Bishops succeeding him until that time. In a word
let M. Bishop take those words as he will, yet is there nothing therein to be
seen concerning the Church of Rome, but only that as the principal Church,
and specially (...) these Western parts, it served him most conveniently for
instance of the succession which he pleaded; but as for the height or top of
authority there spoken of, it belongs to the Catholic or Universal Church,
discountenancing all partial and schismatic combinations, and mere
impudency is it by those or any other words of Austin to challenge to the
Church of Rome an authority or superiority of government over other Churches,
when as we see that both Austin and the rest of the Bishops of Africa did with
one consent utterly disclaim the same. Hitherto, therefore we see no cause to
attribute to the Church of Rome any such privileges as M. Bishop pretends,
and the less opinion have we that any such there are for that he brings no
show of proof, but only by wresting and falsifying the Authors whom he
alleges in that behalf.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
HEre comes in Master Abbots second proposition (but the CHVRCH of Rome is a
particular CHVRCH) in which is as great doubling and deceit as in the former:
for albeit the Church of Rome, do in rigor of speech only, comprehend the
Christians dwelling in Rome; yet is it usually taken by men of both parties, to
signify all Churches of whatsoever other Country, that do agree with the
Church of Rome in faith, and confess the Pastor thereof, to be the chief
Pastor under Christ of the whole Church. Like as in times past, the Roman
Empire did signify, not the territory of Rome alone, or Dominion of Italy;
but also any nation that was subject to the Roman Emperor: Even so the whole
Catholic Church, or any true member thereof, may be called the Roman Church, a
part principaliore; because the Bishop of Rome is the supreme head of their
Church. Whereupon, if you demand of a French Catholic of what Church he is,
his answer will be, that he is of the Catholic Roman Church; where he adds
Roman to distinguish himself from all Sectaries, who do call themselves
sometimes Catholics, (though most absurdly) and to specify that he is such a
Catholic, as does wholly join with the Roman Church in faith and religion.
Even as the word Catholic was linked at first with Christian, to distinguish a
true Christian believer from an Heretic, according to that of Pacianus an
ancient Author; Christian is my name, Epistola ad Simphorian.
Catholic is my surname: so now adays the Epitheton Roman is added unto
Catholic, to separate those Catholics that join with the Church of Rome in
faith, from other sectaries; who do sometimes call themselves also Catholics,
though very ridiculously, because they be divided in faith, from the greatest
part of the universal world. Out of the premises may be gathered, that the
Roman Church may well signify any Church, that holds and maintayneth the
same faith which the Roman does: whence it follows, that M. Abbot either
dealt doubly, when he said the Roman Church to be a particular Church; or else
he must confess himself to be one of those Doctors whom the Apostle notes,
For not understanding what 1. Tim. 1. verse. 7.
they speak, nor of what they affirm.

R. ABBOT.
HEre is a newfound distinction, and I confess my self to be one of those
Doctors that know it not, and we see that M. Bishop as great a Doctor as he
is, yet can bring neither Scripture, nor Father, nor Council, nor Story, nor
any ancient writer whatsoever for the warrant of it, but such as it is we must
take it barely upon his own word. The Church of Rome has abused the world
under pretense of the name of the Catholic Church, alleging falsely of it
self that which is truly said of the Catholic Church, that without the Church
there is no salvation. To discover this fraud we instruct men, as truth is,
that the Church of Rome is but a particular Church, and therefore cannot be
called the Catholic, that is, the universal Church; and therefore again that
it is but a mere mockery of Popish impostours, whereby they say that out of
the Church, meaning the Church of Rome, there is no salvation. To this M.
Bishop answers, that in that proposition, The Church of Rome is a particular
Church, there is doubling and deceit. And how I pray? Forsooth, albeit the
Church of Rome in rigor of speech do comprehend only the Christians dwelling
in Rome, yet it is usually taken to signify all Churches of other Countries,
agreeing in faith with the Church of Rome, and confessing the Pope to be chief
Pastor of the whole Church. Where it is to be observed how he sets himself
merely to circumuent and cosen his Reader. For it being admitted that the
Church of Rome is taken to signify all Churches of other Countries, agreeing
in faith with the Church of Rome, and confessing the Popes chiefty over them,
yet this nothing hinders, but that the Church of Rome is still a particular
Church or a part only of the Church, because the whole Church does not agree
nor ever has agreed to give to the Pope and Church of Rome that chiefty which
they require. For how many Churches are there not in Europe only, but also in
Asia and Africa, that deride that claim of theirs, and neither yield nor
acknowledge any such superiority to belong unto them? Yea and his own instance
of the Roman Empire confounds him in this behalf, because as the Roman
Empire was not the Empire of the whole world, but imported only the Countries
subject to the Romans; there being many other Dominions and Kingdoms that were
never subject unto them; even so the Roman Church is not the Church of the
whole world, which is the Catholic Church, but signifies only those Churches
which profess subjection to the Bishop of Rome, there being many other
Churches which profess no such subjection. Now therefore be it so, that the
Church of Rome is so usually taken to signify other Churches, submitting
themselves to the Church of Rome, M. Bishop for all this to his purpose is
never a whit the nearer, unless he can show that the Church of Rome is taken
to signify the whole Catholic Church of Christ. For if it be not the whole
Catholic Church, then it is but a member and part thereof, and therefore only
a particular Church. Tell us then, M. Bishop, is it any where to be found that
the Roman Church is taken to signify the whole Catholic Church? Mark, I pray
thee, gentle Reader, how it sticks betwixt his teeth. Feign he would speak
it, and yet because he knows it to be an absurd lie, his heart fails him,
and only faintly he tells us, The whole Catholic Church may be called the
Roman Church. But M. Bishop do not tell us what in your foolish conceit may
be, tell us what has been done? The Fathers were interested in this cause as
well as we; they have told us of the East Church and the West Church; the
Greek Church and the Latin Church; they have infinite times made mention of
the Roman Church; but show us that ever they meant by the Roman Church, to
signify the whole Church. Here he is blancke and can say nothing; and if he
would say any thing, the testimony of Pighius one of his own fellows should
be sufficient to choke him, Pigh. Eccles. Hierarch. l. 6. cap. 3. Quis per
R^mana^ Ecclesiam vnquam intellexit aut vniuersalem Ecclesiam aut generale
Concilium?
Who did ever by the Roman church understand the universal Church! A general
Council is holden to be by representation the universal or Catholic church,
and who was there ever so far out of his wits as to call a general Council the
Roman Church? The seven Churches of Asia have been taken to betoken the
universal Church, as we have seen before, but who ever said or thought that
they did betoken the Roman church? Now whereas he tells us that it may be so
taken, I answer him, that so some man may take M. Bishop to signify a
ioined-stoole. For if men will take names and words to signify what they list,
why may not some man be as wilful in the one as he sees them witless in the
other? What authority have they to impose significations upon words and
phrases contrary to the first original thereof, and to the always continued
custom and use of the whole Church? The Church of Christ absolutely is but
one, dispersed and scattered over the whole world. Of this one Church there are
notwithstanding diverse parts, which all being in nature alike are by the name
of the whole called by the name of Act. 15. 41. Romans 16. 16.
Churches. For distinction of these Churches they have every of them their
denomination of the places where they are. The church of Antioch is called Act.
13. 1.
the Church which is at Antioch: the Church of Corinth is 1. Cor. 1. 2.
the Church of God which is at Corinth: the Church of Ephesus are Ephesians. 1. 1.
the Saints which are at Ephesus. And thus when the Apostle meant to write to
the Church of Rome he writes Romans 1. 7.
to all that be at Rome beloved of God, etc. For as the Church of Thessalonica
is 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1.
the Church of the Thessaelonians, that is, of them that inhabit Thessalonica,
so the Church of Rome is the Church of the Romans, that is, of them that
inhabit Rome. And thus we see that in the inscriptions of the Epistles of the
ancient Bishops of Rome accordingly as we have them, albeit sometimes they
wrote themselves Bishops of the Catholic Church, yet do show that they meant
it no otherwise then as all Bishops wrote themselves Bishops of the Catholic
Church, as I have before showed, namely with limitation thereof to the City of
Rome whereof they were Bishops, without ever dreaming of M. Bishops universal
Roman Church. Thus we find, Calixt. Epist. 1. Calixtus Archiepiscopus
Ecclesiae Catholicae vrbis Romae.
Calixtus Archbishop of the Catholic Church of the City of Rome; Marcellin.
Epist. 1. Marceilinus Episcopus Sanctae Ecclesiae Catholicae vrbis Romanae.
Marcellinus Bishop of the holy Catholic Church of the City of Rome; Marcell.
Epist. 2. Marcellus Episcopus Sanctae and Apostolicae and Catholicae vrbis
Romae.
Marcellus Bishop of the holy and Apostolic and Catholic City of Rome. And
so Leo onewhere writing himself, Leo. Epist. 13. Leo Catholicae Romanae
Ecclesiae Episcopus.
Leo Bishop of the Catholic Roman Church, does otherwhere plainly express the
meaning thereof, Epist. 1 2. 3. Leo vrbis Romae Epi copios. Et Epist. 12. Leo
Papa Ecclesiae Catholicae vrbis Romae.
Leo Bishop of the City of Rome; Leo Bishop of the Catholic Church of the
City of Rome. To be short, it is not to be found that ever the Church of
Rome was otherwise understood, but only for the Church of the City of Rome,
and shall we hearken to these new vpstart Minters, that thus coin us a Church
of Rome that was never heard of before? And therefore it is nothing to us what
they by abuse of speech teach their followers to say; let their French
Disciples say they are of the Catholic Roman Church; we understand them
thereby to take part with the Church of Rome, but the Church of Rome is that of
Rome only whereto they addict themselves. Albeit by that addition, what do
they but show themselves Sectaries and Schismatikes, dividing themselves
factiously apart from the whole? the Catholic Roman Church absurdly so named
by themselves, from that which is absolutely, and therefore truly called the
Catholic Church. For the Catholic Church is the whole Church as has been
said, but Roman put to it is a term of diminution, and abridgeth the whole to
a part, the universal to a particular, because the whole is not Roman.
Therefore to say Catholic Roman, is to say, Catholic not Catholic; and Roman
Catholics are Catholics which are no Catholics, and of them it may be truly
said which Optatus said of the Donatists; Optat lib. 2. Vultis vos solos esse
totum qui in omni toto non estis.
You would have your selves only to be the whole who are not in all the whole.
Now here we may ask them with what face they can talk of antiquity, who have
brought into the Church so strange a nouelty as this is. The name of Catholics
and of the Catholic Church, which pleased antiquity, is not enough for them.
Pacianus said of old; Pacian. ad Simpron. epist. 1. Christianus mihi nomen est;
Catholicus vero cognomen.
Christian is my name, and Catholic my surname; but that is changed now into
Roman Catholic is my surname, disclaiming thereby the communion and fellowship
of the Catholic Church, and banding themselves in a partial and factious
confederacy with the Roman Church. Thus having departed from the ancient faith
and discipline of the Catholic Church, they do notwithstanding for coloring
of their Apostasy, retain certain names and formalities thereof, but they
do it so as that by their additions and constructions they make no other but
mungrels and bastards of them. And this appears by the reason that M. Bishop
gives of their adding Roman to Catholic, namely to separate them that join
in faith with the Church of Rome from other sectaries; because Catholics were
of old so called, not for joining in faith with this or that Church, but for
being members of the universal Church. And if that reason were sufficient, it
should have waighed of old as well as now, when there were so many Sects and
Heresies in the Church, when Schismatikes and Heretics usurped to themselves
the name of Catholics, and yet the Catholic saw no reason to draw the whole
to the name of any part, or to call themselves otherwise then by the name of
Catholics, as resolving to profess no other communion or fellowship, but
universally with the Church of the whole world. Neither was it otherwise till
Antichrist had exalted himself in the Roman Sea, who challenging to himself
and his only to be the Church of God, took upon him to set his own mark
upon the Church, to call it the Catholic Roman Church, and the members thereof
Roman Catholics, that none should thenceforth be called Catholics, but such
as would be called Roman Catholics. And hereof M. Bishop very rightly says,
that hereby they separate those Catholics that join in faith with the Church
of Rome from other sectaries; as importing them also to be Sectaries that
join in faith with the Church of Rome, and that by this mark they are to be
known from other Sectaries. For certain it is that the name of Roman
Catholic is a name of Sect and Schism, and an open proclaiming of a rent and
division of the Catholic Church of Christ. Now for conclusion of this passage
he tells us, that out of the premises may be gathered, that the Roman
Church may well signify any Church, holding the same faith which the Roman
does. But what premises may we think he means here? Surely if this be his
conclusion, we find here nothing but conclusion; premises to prove it we
find none. He has told us before that it may be so, and here full wisely
he repeateth the same again, but neither before nor here does he say any
thing whereof it should be gathered that it may be so. And though it may be
so, yet it avails him nothing as has been said, because it is but a part of
the Church that joins in faith with the Church of Rome, and therefore the
Roman Church cannot be said to be the whole Catholic Church; so that my
proposition still stands good, the Church of Rome is a particular Church, and
Master Bishop though he be a Doctor that sometimes understands what he
speaks, yet is not so great a Doctor in this point as that he can give us
any reason why he ought otherwise to understand.

W. BISHOP.. 4.
NOw to this his second sophistication, The Roman Church (by our rule) is the
head, and all other Churches are members to it; but the Catholic comprehends
all: ergo, to say the Roman Church is the Catholic, is to say the head is the
whole body. Here is first a mish^pen argument, by which one may prove or
disprove any thing; for example I will prove by the like, that the Church of
England is not Catholic, thus: The Church of England, by their crooked rule,
is a member of the Catholic Church; but the Catholic church comprehends
all: wherefore to say the English Church is the Catholic Church, is to say, a
member is the whole body. Besides the counterfaite fashion of the argument,
there is a great fallacy in it: for to omit, Fellacia accidentis.
that we say not the Church of Rome, but the Bishop of Rome to be the head of
the Church, it is a soul fault in arguing (as all Logitians do understand)
when one thing is said to be another by a metaphore, to attribute all the
properties of the metaphore to the other thing. For example, Christ our Savior
is metaphorically said to be a Lion, Vicit Leo de tribu Judah: now if
therehence Apocal. 5. v. 5.
any man would infer; that a Lion has four legs, and is no reasonable
creature, ergo Christ has as many, or is not endued with reason; he might
himself therefore be well taken for an unreasonable and blasphemous creature:
Even so must M. Abbot be, who shifteth from that propriety of the metaphore,
Head, which was to purpose, unto others that are clean besides the purpose.
For as Christ was called a Lion, for his invincible fortitude; so the Bishop of
Rome is called the head of the Church, for his authority to direct and govern
the same: but to take any other propriety of either Lion or Head, when they be
used metaphorically, and to argue out of that, is plainly to play the
Sophister. Wherefore, to conclude this passage, M. Abbot has greatly
discovered his insufficiency in arguing, by propounding arguments that offend
and be very vicious, both in matter and for me; and that so palpably, that if
young Logitians should stand upon such in the paruies, they would be hissed o^t
of the Schools: it must needs be then an exceeding great shame for a Divine to
use them, to deceive good Christian people in matter of salvation. And if after
so great vaunts, of giving full satisfaction to the Reader, and of stopping his
adversaries mouth, that he should not have a word to reply, he be not ashamed
to put such bables as these into print; he cannot choose but make himself a
mocking-stocke to the world: surely his writings are more meet to stop
mustard-pots, (if I mistake not much) then like to stop any mean Scholars
mouth.

R. ABBOT.
HEre it may well be doubted whether M. Bishop were such a Doctor as to
understand himself, because it should not seem likely, if he had so done
that he would have given such a brainlesse and stupide answer. The first part
thereof serves to show that when he has played the wiseman once, he cannot
be quiet until he have done the like again. Of the shape of the argument I
need say no more then has been said of the former being of the same kind,
and let him propound as he should, that by the like it may be proved that the
Church of England is not the Catholic Church, and we acknowledge so much* and
do take his argument as he has set it down, The Church of England is only a
member of the Catholic church* but the Catholic church comprehends all;
wher^^^re to s^y, the English Church is the Catholic Church, is to say, a
member is the whole body. We confess it to be true, and therefore we are not
so absurd as to say that the Church of England is the Catholic Church; we
affirm it to be only a member and part thereof; and may we not then think
that this man has made a doughty fray? But, beside the counterfeit fashion of
the argument, there is, says he, a great fallacy in it. And how? Marry, first
we say not, says he, that the Church of Rome; but the Bishop of Rome is the
head of the Church. True it is, M. Bishop, that when ye compare together the
Church and the Bishop of Rome, ye say that the Bishop of Rome is the head of
the Church; but is it not true also that when ye compare Church with Church,
ye say the Church of Rome is the head of all Churches? Your Master Bellarm. d^
Romans Pont. lib. 2. cap. 13. c^ Synod. Nicen. 2. Act. 2. Capu^ om^^ium Eccles^
arum De^.
Bellarmine has cited this title as a matter of great moment out of the second
Nicene Council, approving the Epistle of Adrian where it is so called; Ibid.
cap. 14.
out of S^ricius, Innocentius, John the second, Pelagius the second, Gregory
the Great, Bishops of Rome, out of Ibid. cap 16.
Prosper and Victor Vticensis, and do you come now with your slecu^les^c tale
and tell us that you say not so? The truth is that you know not what to say,
because you see it sorteth absurdly whatsoever you say. Well, let us omit this
because M. Bishop is willing so; the vpshot of his answer is, that it is a
fiule fault in arguing when one thing is said to be another by a metaphore, to
attribute all the properties of the metaphore to the other thing. And this he
handles very gravely by example of Christ's being called a Lion, whence
notwithstanding he says, it is not to be argued that he has four legs,
and therefore that M. Abbot must be an unreasonable creature who shifteth from
that propriety of the metaphore, Head, which was to purpose unto others that
are clean besides the purpose. Now here a simple man, who commonly admireth
that most which he understands least, imagines that M. Bishop has showed
himself a learned man, and has told a worthy tale, when as that which he
has said is as much to the matter as if he had told us in great sadness,
that a bird bolt has no brains. Undoubtedly he dreamed very strongly that I
had said that the Church of Rome because it is the head, must have a nose in
the middle of the face, or because it is old, must have wrinckles in the
brows, or must have long ears, because it is become an Asses head. If not,
who can take him for any other but a foure-legged creature, that thus
impertinently comes in with a tale of four legs? What property of a head
do I speak of that he should say, that I shift from that propriety which was
to the purpose, to others that are beside the purpose? My words are these; To
speak by their rule, the Roman Church is the head, and all other Churches are
memb^rs unto it. I name no property of a head at all; let it be what it will
or what they will have it; it shall be all one to me; for in whatsoever
respect they will make the Church of Rome the head of all Churches, in the same
respect they must make all other Churches the members and body to this head.
Let it be that property of a head which he mentions, and which I intended as
meant by them, that all other Churches are to be directed and governed by the
authority of the Church of Rome, as the members of the body by the head;
accordingly my argument shall proceed, that the Church of Rome by their
learning is the head of all other Churches, and all other Churches are as the
members and body to this head; but the Catholic Church comprehends all, even
the whole both head and body. To say then that the Roman Church is the
Catholic Church, is all one as if a man should say that the head is the whole
body. Who can speak hereof more clearly then I have done, and who can answer
more absurdly then he has done? And albeit he have thus egregiously played
the fool, and has bewraied plainly that he was here put to his trumps and
knew not what to say, yet to flourish and face the matter, he admirably
vaunteth and insulteth upon my insufficiency in ^rguing, and tells me of
being hissed o^t of the Schools, and making my self a mocking-stocke, and
that my writings are more meet to stop mustard-pots, then likely to stop
any mean Scholars mouth. You say well, M. Bishop; You shall do well to
stop your mustard-pot with some part thereof that your mustard may be kept
quick and strong to clear your head; for if it be always as dull as you
have showed it here, it may very well be said that such a head has but a
little wit. As for your mouth it may be it will not be stopped, because you
are sick of Pisoes disease, Hieron. ad Ocean. Pisoniano vilio cum l^qui
nesciret, tac^re non potuit.
Who though he knew not what to say, yet could not hold his peace. A man may
well think that your mouth is not easily stopped, who rather then you would
say nothing, would tell such a wise tale as you have here done.

CHAP. II. The comparison betwixt the Donatists and the Papists is justified
and enlarged.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

IT is therefore a mere Usurpation whereby the Papists call the Roman Church
the Catholic, etc. to, There was reason why Austin should, etc.

W. BISHOPS REPROOF. Page 95.. 1.
IN the former passage M. Abbot bestowed an argument or two, raked out of the
rotten rubbish of those walls, ( to use some of his own words) which were
before broken down by men of our side: Now he comes to his own fresh
invention, as I take it; for it is a fardle of such beggarly base stuff, and
so full of falsehood and childish follies, that any other man (I ween) would
not for very shame have let it pass to the print. It consists in a
comparison and great resemblance that is between the old doting Donatists,
and the new presumptuous Papists, if M. Abbot dream not. The Donatists ( says
he) held the Catholic Church to be at Cartenna, and the Papists do hold it to
be at Rome in Italy. False on both sides, because we do not hold it to be so
at Rome, as they did at Cartenna: for we hold it to be so at Rome, as it is
besides also dispersed all the world over; they, that it was wholly included
within the straight bounds of Cartenna in Mauritania, and her confines: so that
whosoever was converted in any other Country, must go thither Epistola. 48.
to be purged from their sins, as S. Augustine testifies in express
terms, in the very place by M. Abbot all^aged. False also in the principal
point, that the Donatists held the Catholic Church to be at Carten^^: for
there dwelt only the Rogatists, who were (as Saint Augustine there speaks,)
Bre^^ssimum frustum, d^ frusto maiore, A most small gobbet or fragment, broken
out of a greater piece; that is to say, a few Schismatic fellows fallen
from the Donatists, as the Puritans are from the Protestants, or the
Anabaptists from the Sacramentaries: so that although men of that sect held the
Catholic Church to be at Cartenna, yet the maine body of the Donatists
maintained it not to be there at all, but held that congregation of Cartenna
to be wholly Schismatic, and no true member of the Catholic Church. This
first part then of the comparison, is most ugly and monstrously false.

R. ABBOT.
IN this comparison betwixt the Donatists and the Papists, I must confess that
I committed some little ouer-sight by understanding that generally of the
Donatists which belonged only to a part of them, and thereby affirming that
wholly of Cartenna in Mauritania, which is to be referred to that which
properly and particularly is called Africa. I observed the error my self long
since, and meant in another edition, if any should be, to correct it; and in
the mean time to have noted it in the Preface of my third part. But now since
it falls out to be first noted by M. Bishop, I will take it here in his due
place, making it to appear that this mistaking in a circumstance alters
nothing of the substance of that comparison which I had there in hand. The
first branch then of the comparison shall be this; The Donatists did set up a
particular Church to be the Catholic Church; all of them first in the south of
Africa, some of them afterward, namely, the Rogatists, at Cartenna in
Mauritania, and so have the Papists done at Rome in Italy. Against this branch
as it was before set down, he gives two exceptions. First, that they do not
hold it so to be at Rome a^ the Rogatists did at Cartenna. And what is the
difference? Marry, they hold it to be so at Rome, as that it is dispersed also
all the world over, but the Rogatists held it to be wholly included in the
bounds of Cartenna and confines thereof. The first part of which answer on
their own behalf is false, and the second part thereof concerning the
Rogatists is vain. For it is false that he says that their Romish Church is
dispersed all the world over, and he knows well that the Churches of Greece
and all the Eastern Churches are holden by them to be Schismatikes, because
they disclaim subjection to the Church of Rome. True it is, they would have it
all the world over, and they make simple fools believe that it is so, but they
themselves know that the skirts of it are too short to reach so far, and that
a huge part of the Church there is that will have nothing to do with them. And
this drew from Bellarmine that caution that I before mentioned in the first
Chapter, that Supra. cap. 1.. 1.
though one only Province did embrace the true faith, yet the same should truly
and properly be called the Catholic Church, so long as it could be plainly
showed that it is one and the same with that which at any time or times was
over the whole world. Now hereof it follows that the other part of his
exception concerning the Rogatists is vain. For although the communion of the
Church of Rome be far larger then that was of the Rogatists at Cartenna, yet
does neither of them contain any more but a part, and their doctrine as
touching their communion sorteth all to one. For whereas M. Bishop says that
the Rogatists included the Church within the bounds of Cartenna and the
Country thereabout, it was not by position of doctrine that they so included
it as if it could not be any where else; but because they pretended that the
Church was only in their communion, and there were none in any other part of
the world that took part with them, it follows of this defect that they so
included it. But though there were now not above Aug. Epist. 48. Tu cum december
Rogatistis qu^ remansistis, etc.
ten or eleven Bishops of them remaining, as Saint Austin obiecteth to them,
yet by that he vpbraideth them with this number remaining, it appears that
they had been of greater number and extent, and we cannot doubt but that they
would as willingly have had the whole world to join with them as the Church of
Rome would. Now inasmuch as they held themselves only to be the Catholic
Church; And there were none of them otherwhere to be* found to Baptize and
reconcile pe^itents, but only within the confines of Cartenna, Saint Austin
rightly obiecteth it as an absurdity ensuing thereof, that Ibid. Quisquis
f^^rit hac praedicatione commotus in qualib^t pa^te orbis ter^arum, nisi
quaesierit and inuenerit latent^m in Mauritania Caesariensi Cartennensem
Vincentium aut aliquem ex cius nou^m aut december con^ortibus, dimitti ei peccata
non pos^int, etc. Nisi Cartennas venerit aut in vi^^iam Cartennensium, mundari
omnin^ ^ delictis suis non pot^rit.
then whosoever there were in any part of the world, that were moved with the
preaching of the Gospel, unless he did seek and find out Vincentius Bishop
of Cartenna lurking in Mauritania Caesariensis, or some one of his nine or ten
consorts, he could not have remission of sins; or as otherwise he expresses
it; except he came to Cartenna or into the Country near adjoining, he could
not be cleansed from his sins. Now although the Roman Church, as M. Bishop
understands it, is of much larger extent, and stretches it self into sundry
Countries and Nations, yet being but of small compass in comparison of the
whole world, the exprobration of the same mad fancy lies upon it, that
whosoever in the further parts of the world shall be moved with* the preaching
of the Gospel and converted thereby, unless he come to Rome or into some
part of the world where he may meet with a Popish Priest, he cannot be
baptized or reconciled to God, he cannot obtain the remission of his sins,
it being by them resolved of themselves, as by the Rogatists of themselves that
out of their particular communion there is no salvation. Therefore, both
Rogatists and Papists let them go together, and the truth is that in this
behalf there is no difference betwixt them. As touching his second exception,
although it be not generally true of the Donatists that they placed the
Catholic Church at Cartenna, yet it is not altogether untrue, because the
Rogatists were Donatists; August. vt supra. Vos qui non solum cum illis
communiter Donatistae a Donato, verumetiam proprie Rogatis^^ a Rogat^
app^ll^nu^*
being in common with the rest called Donatists of Donatus, as Sa^nt Austin
notes, and by a more proper name Rogatists of Rogatus. For although they had
in some spleen and upon some pe^uish quarrel divided themselves from the
rest, yet the substance of their doctrine was still the same as before, as
appears by St. Austin, who disputing against Vincentius the Rogatist,
charge him in effect with nothing else but the common positions of the
Donatists, and therefore they were all at once commonly comprehended under the
name of Donatists. The Donatists then, though not all the Donatists but of them
the Rogatists only, placed the Catholic church at Cartenna; and to the
Rogatists, then being a part of the Donatists, the Papists are like, who do in
the same sort place the Catholic Church at Rome. Yea, and although the
Donatists in general did not seat the Church at Cartenna, yet M. Bishop is
not ignorant that they in general before some quarrelling fell amongst them,
did in effect the same thing by designing the place thereof in Africa properly
so called, so as that none should be called Catholics in any part of the
world, but such as did communicate with that African Church of theirs. For
although they acknowledged that the Church by the preaching of the Apostles had
been dispersed over the world according to the manifold testimonies and
prophecies of holy Scripture in that behalf, which they professed to believe,
^et they said that Aug. de unit. Ecclesiae, c. 12. Ista, inquiunt, credimus and
copleta esse cofitemur, sed postea o^bis terrarum apostatauit and sola rema^sit
Donati communio. (...) postea cap. 15 Postea c^ter^s de^icientibus solam
Christo As^icam remansisse.
the Church afterward fell away by Apostasy, and there remained only the
communion of Donatus; that the rest failing, there remained to Christ Africa
only. Whereupon it was urged upon them as consequent of this opinion, that
either Ibid cap. 16. Ostendat Ecclesiam vel in sola Africa perditis tot
gentibus retinendam, vel ex Africa in omnibus gentibus reparadam atque
adimpl^dam. ^t ibid. Declaretur Africa vel in reliquis sola derel^cta, vel ad
priacip(...) ^^nouandi atque implendi orbis sol^ ^^ruata.
the Church was to be retained thenceforth in Africa only, or else that from
thence as the beginning the Churches of the whole world were to be repaired and
restored again. The former they disauowed, because they had their partakers,
till there fell out distraction amongst them, not only in Africa but also in
Ibid. cap. 3. and Epist. 48.
Mauritania Caesariensis, in Tripolis, Byzacium, amongst the Auzuges, in Idem
cont. lit. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 108.
Spain, yea and at Rome also as follows to be said hereafter. Yea by the
words of the Catholic Bishops to Marcellinus the Lieutenant, Collat. cum
Donatist 1. c. 16. Neque enim desperare debemus multo dignius and sacilius ^os
velle vt part Donati vniuerso ^rbi Christiano reconcilietur, quam vniuersus
orbis Christianu^ a part Donati rebaptizetur.
hoping that the Donatists would think it more meet and more easy that their
part should be reconciled to the whole world, then that the whole world should
be rebaptized by them, it appears plainly that their opinion did not exclude
the having of their communion throughout the whole world. It remained therefore
that Africa was to be as it were the head and foundation of their Catholic
Church, and from thence the Church through the world was to be renewed and
restored again by holding communion and fellowship with that Church. Even in
the same sort stands the matter with the Papists, who tell us that the Church
in all the far parts of the world has failed; that Rhem. Testam. Annotat. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
the Patriarchall and Apostolic Seas are all either extinguished, or by
Schism and Heresy fallen away, and only the Roman Church has remained,
wherein only is the communion of the Catholic faith, and whence the Church
through the whole world is to be reedified and reduced to the obedience of the
Pope. And to that purpose they tell us of strange wonders that they have done,
and make as if they had converted whole worlds of nations to their Roman faith,
when as indeed they do but mock the world with lies and tales, talking
liberally of Countries whither they know it unlikely for us to come to search
out whether they speak truth or not; and the nations which they pretend to
have converted being either colonies of their own people transported thither,
or some Insidels forced to accept baptism without religion, or such as by
wiles they have surprised to make profit of by traffic and merchandise, as in
Iaponia the Jesuits most lewdly and trecherously have done. Thus then M. Bishop
avoiding to be like the Donatists by putting the matter spoken of over to the
Rogatists, is in this point become like both to Rogatists and Donatists, by
tying the seat of the Catholic Church to one only particular place.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
THe second is not unlike: The Donatists would have the Church to be called
Catholic, not by reason of the communion and society thereof through the whole
world, but by reason of the perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, which they
falsely challenged to themselves; the same perfection the Church of Rome now
arrogateth to her self. Here are many faults: the first is a gross lie in the
chief branch; for the Donatists did not call the Church Catholic, for the
perfection of doctrine and Sacraments: see S. Augustine in both places, who
expressly delivers, that it was for the fullness of Sacraments, Ex plenitudine
Sacramentorum, Breui collat. cap. 2. dici 3. Epist. 48.
or for the observation of all Gods Commandments, Ex obseruatione omnium
diuinorum praeceptorum: of perfection of doctrine they said not one word, they
were more sharpe-witted (as S. Augustine observes) then to go about to prove
universality by perfection, which is not universal. But seeing well that they
could not defend their congregation to be Catholic, (that is, universal) but
by some kind of universality; they defended it to be so called, for the
universality and fullness of Sacraments and Commandments, that is: because
their Church retained all the Sacraments that the Catholics did, and professed
to keep all Gods Commandments as fully as they. M. Abbots former fault then
in this second point of resemblance (and that a foul one) is, in that he
belieth the Donatists. And more palpably should he have belyed the Roman
Church, if he had justly brought in the resemblance, to wit: if he had said as
due proportion required, that we hold our Church to be Catholic as the
Donatists did theirs, for the perfection of doctrine and Sacraments: which is
so manifestly untrue, and so clearly against the doctrine of all Catholic
writers, that he (that was wont to blush at nothing) seems yet ashamed to
avouch it openly; and yet does at last traile it in deceitfully. As for
perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, though it be only in the Catholic
Church; yet it is so far wide from the signification and use of the word
Catholic, that none (except such wisemen as M. Abbot is) do think any thing
to be Catholic, because it is perfect.

R. ABBOT.
THe second branch of this comparison betwixt the Papists and the Donatists, I
set down thus; The Donatists would have the Church to be called Catholic, not
by reason of the communion and society thereof through the whole world, but by
reason of the perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, which they falsely
challenged to themselves, and the same perfection the Church of Rome now
arrogateth to it self, and will therefore be called the Catholic Church. M.
Bishop says that there are many faults here, yet he reckons but only two;
belike he would have me think that he does me a favor to let pass the rest.
As touching the first, he very grossly tells me that in the chief branch
there is a gross lie; for the Donatists, says he, did not call the Church
Catholic for perfection of doctrine and Sacraments. For what then? Marry, for
the fullness of Sacraments and for the observation of all Gods Commandments.
Well; it is true indeed that Saint Austin challenges Vincentius Aug Epist.
48. Acutum aliquid videris dicere cum Catholic^e nomen non ex totius orbis
communione interpretaris, sed ex obseruatione omnium praeceptorum diuinorum and
omnium Sacramentorum.
for interpreting the word Catholic, not of the communion of the whole world,
but f^r the observation of all Gods Commandments and all the Sacraments; and
in the other place brings them in, saying, that Breuic. collar. cum Donatist.
di^ 3. cap. 2. Donatist^e responderunt non Catholicum nomen ex vniuersitate
gentium, sed ex p^enitudine Sacramentoru^^ institutum.
the word was instituted not to import universality of nations, but fullness of
Sacraments, but did I amiss for a brief hereof to name perfection of doctrine
and Sacraments? Is not fullness of Sacraments the same with perfection of
Sacraments? and when they professed the observation of all Gods Commandments,
did they not thereby pretend an observation both to teach and practice all that
God had commanded, and is there not perfection of doctrine in teaching all? Or
if M. Bishop be foolishly wilful, and will say still that he sees not
perfection of doctrine in those words, yet he might have seen it in the very
next words to those that I alleged, where St. Austin expresses the Donatists
conceit in other terms thus, that Idem Epist. 48. Si sort hinc sit appellata
Catholica quod totum veraciter teneat.
the Church is called Catholic, for that it holds all wholly (what but the
whole Christian faith?) according to truth; for what is perfection of doctrine,
but the holding of all according to truth? And whereas he says that St. Austin
observes the Donatists to be more sharpe-witted, then to go about to prove
universality by perfection (a very ridiculous jest, because Austin only in
mockery tells Vincentius that he seemed to himself in so expounding the
world Catholic as before, to speak very acutely and wittily, meaning that he
did nothing less,) let Gaudentius himself, a Donatist and a chief man
amongst them, tell him that by Catholic they did mean perfect; Coliat. 3. ^um
Donatist. cap. 102. Hoc est Catholicum nomen quod Sacramentis pl^num est, quod
perfectum, quod immaculatum.
The word Catholic imports that which is full in Sacraments, which is
perfect, which is unspotted. Now then as I have in this point belyed the
Donatists; even so and no otherwise in the application do I belie the Roman
Church. M. Bishop says, that I should have belyed them if I had s^id as due
proportion required, that they hold their Church to be Catholic as the
Donatists did theirs for the perfection of doctrine and Sacraments. But was he
blind, and did he not see that I said so much? Are not my words very express
and clear, The same perfection (of doctrine and Sacraments) the Church of Rome
now arrogateth to it self, and will therefore be called the Catholic Church?
And what? do I therein belie the Roman Church? Ask his own fellow Bristow
the great Motiue-Master, who says to Doctor Fulke, Reply to Fulke, Chap. 10.
Them. 6.
We tell you with the words of St. Austin, that the Church our Mother is
called Catholic of this, because she is universally perfect and halteth in
nothing (though the Donatists and other like Heretics do never so much
triumph in that interpretation) and is spread over all the world. Both
interpretations agree to our Mother, says he, and we claim them accordingly.
And it is true indeed that St. Austin in a work which he wrote in his younger
time, and which he himself for the imperfection thereof August. Retract. l.
1. c. 18. Qu^m neque ^d deram, and abolere decreueram.
had purposed wholly to suppress, does give that double interpretation of the
word Catholic, that the Church is so called, Ide^ de Genesis ad lit. imperf. cap.
1. Quae Catholica di^itur ex eo quod vniuersaliter perfecta est and in nullo
^laudicat, and per totum orbem dissusa est.
not only f^r that it is spread over all the world, but also for that it is
universally perfect and halteth in nothing; but in his further experience and
judgment, having special occasion to discuss and examine that point, he
leaves that interpretation wholly to the Donatists, and never vouchsafes once
to make mention of it. In the mean time notwithstanding seeing Bristow a
Catholic writer of their creation has so affirmatively told us, and claimed
it to the Church of Rome to be Catholic in that sense, let it be considered
with what discretion M. Bishop says, that so to say of them is manifestly
untrue, and clearly against the doctrine of all Catholic writers. And whereas
he concludes that perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, though it be only
found in the Catholic Church, yet is so far wide from the signification and
use of the word Catholic, that none except such wise men as M. Abbot is, do
think any thing to be Catholic because it is perfect, to say nothing that St.
Austin when he g^ue that construction was undoubtedly as wise as M. Bishop, let
the same wise M. Bishop tell us what he thinks of Cyril of Jerusalem, who
amongst diverse reasons of the name of the Catholic Church gives one, that it
is so called, Cyril. Hierosol. Catech. 18. Quia docet Catholice, hoc est,
vniuersal^ter and sine vllo defect^ vel differentia omnia dogmata quae deberent
ve^re in cognitionem.
because it teaches Catholikely, that is, universally and without any defect
or difference, all doctrines that are to be known. Yea let him tell us what he
thinks of Pacianus, whom he named before as his Author for Pacian. ad
Symph^^ian. Catholicus vt docti^es p^tant obedientia omnium nuncupatur;
^^ndatorum scilicet Dei*
Catholic, to be the surname to Christian, who notes it for the opinion of
the learned that Catholic signifies obedience to all the Commandments of
God. Which I say not, as to approve that which either Austin, or Cyril, or
Pac^anus have said in that behalf, but that it may appear what wise men M.
Bishop makes of the Fathers, yea and of his own fellows when he list, not
^lieking to cross both the one and the other, so that he can thereby shift
for the present to save himself. But Bristow is our witness, as we have
seen, that the Church of Rome does call it self Catholic, as the Donatists
did for the perfection of doctrine and Sacraments, and M. Bishop has showed
himself scantly wise in the denial of it, because it being manifest to all
that are not blind, that it is a mere foppery and cogging device of theirs,
to say that the Roman Church is spread over the whole world; either he must
prove the same to be Catholic by perfection of doctrine, or else it must
wholly leave the name of the Catholic Church.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
THe third particle of the resemblance is, That from Cartenna the Donatists
ordained Bishops to other Countries, even to Rome it self. And from Rome by
the Papists order, Bishops be authorized to all other Churches. I am not so
copious, as to afford to every leasing of M. Abbot a new phrase; wherefore, the
Reader (I hope) will bear with my rud^nesse, if I call sometimes a lie by the
name of a lie. It is an untrue tale, that the Donatists ordained Bishops from
Cartenna; for they could not abide that place, but esteemed it to be
Schismatic, as you have heard before. He does misreport S. Augustine, who
says: Quo ex Africa ordinare paucis Lib. 2. cont. C^^scon. c. 37.
vestris soletis Episcopum, You Donatists are wont to order and send a Bishop
thither to your few companions out of Africa, not from Cartenna in Mauritania.
Neither does the Catholic Church appoint, that every Bishop should go to Rome
to take holy Orders, and from thence to be sent to other Catholic Countries;
but in every other region where be three Catholic Bishops, they may be
lawfully consecrated: albeit for unities sake, and to pr^serue due order, they
be confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, the supreme head under Christ of the
Catholic Church.

R. ABBOT.
PVt Africa here in steed of Cartenna, and M. Bishop has no shift to avoid
this point of resemblance betwixt the Romanists and Donatists. The Donatists
designed the fundamental place of the Catholic Church in Africa, as the
Papists do at Rome. The Donatists labored the extent of their communion into
all other Countries, as also the Papists do. Optat. lib. 2. Sed and habere vos
in vrbe Roma partem aliquam dicitis.
In the City of Rome it self, as Optatus witnesses, the Donatists bragged
that they had a part that joined with them. They had there a Bishop of their
own to assemble and govern that part of theirs, insomuch that Optatus in the
same place reckons six Bishops of that faction, Victor, Bonifacius,
Encolpius, Macrobius, Lucianus, Claudianus, who had there succeeded one
another. Of the manner of the appointing of these Bishops St. Austin says in
the place by me cited to M. Bishop: Aug. cont. Crescon. lib. 2. cap. 37.
Romanorum Ecclesia, quo ex Africa paucis vestris ordinare soletis Episcopum.
To Rome for those few followers that you have there, you are wont to order and
direct a Bishop out of Africa. Out of Africa, says M. Bishop, not out of
Cartenna in Mauritania. True it is if Africa be in special understood, but I,
not waighing the matter so strictly, understood Africa more largely as the
third part of the world, and in that signification Mauritania, and therefore
Cartenna in Mauritania is a part of Africa. Well, let Cartenna be put out, and
take Africa, as indeed it was meant, for Theo* l^ret. haeret. fabul. l. 4. de
Donatist. Regio quae olim Lybia, nunc autem Africa appellatur.
that Country which of old was called Lybia, and in which meaning St. Austin
notes that Mauritania Caesariensis, where Cartenna was, Aug. Epist. 48.
Mauritania Caesariensis qua^do nec Africam se vult dici, etc.
refused to be called by the name of Africa; from this Africa the Donatists
ordered and established Bishops over that part which they had at Rome; and so,
said I, from Rome by the Papists order must Bishops now be authorized to all
other Churches. Now M. Bishop, seeing that Africa being thus put in steed of
Cartenna, the resemblance would somewhat touch their Church of Rome, brings a
very poor and silly shift for the auerting of it. The Catholic Church, says
he, he means the Roman Church, does not appoint that every Bishop should go
to Rome to take holy Orders, and from thence to be sent to other Catholic
Countries. No more, say I, did the Catholic Church of the Donatists bind men
to come into Africa to be ordered Bishops there, but it was enough if by
Bishops of their communion he were ordered otherwhere. For whether it were by
sending some to order Bishops where none were, or by sending Bishops already
ordered, it may either way stand, which St. Austin notes as a matter of their
conceit, that August. de unit. Eccles. c. 13. Ostendant esse praedictum solam
Africam remansuram and quocunque Episcopi ex Africa ^^tierer tur.
out of Africa Bishops should be sent into all places. And thus the same St.
Austin although in the place alleged, he mention no more but the ordering of a
Bishop to be sent to Rome out of Africa, yet in another place declares it to
have been indifferent with them, either August. ad Quodvult h^rel. 69. In vrbe
Roma Mont^nses vocantur qu bus (...) ex Africa sol^nt Episco^um mittere, aut
^inc illuc Afri Epicopi little pergere si forte ibi cum ordinare placuisset.
to send a Bishop to Rome out of Africa, or that the African Bishops should go
to Rome if they thought good to order a Bishop there, namely because there were
no other Bishops there of their communion, by whom otherwise he might be
ordered. Whereas therefore M. Bishop says, that Bishops may lawfully be
consecrated in any region where be three Catholic Bishops, he says no more
for their Popish Bishops, then the Donatists acknowledged of theirs, and
therefore in this point of the resemblance, there is no difference at all
betwixt the Donatists and the Papists. Albeit by reason of that which M. Bishop
confesses, that all Bishops must be confumed by the Bishop of Rome, it may be
truly said that Bishops are made at Rome only, because they are not taken to be
fully and absolutely Bishops till they be confirmed there. Which confirmation
is not for unity and order, as M. Bishop pretends, but for extortion and
covetousness, the Pope being wont to make infinite advantage and profit to
himself thereby; neither is it given by the supreme head under Christ, as he
styles the Pope, but by a Nimrod and proud usurper over the Church of Christ.

W. BISHOP.. 4.
THe fourth point of the comparison is most absurd; for the Donatists were so
far from thinking them Catholics, that kept communion with the Church of
Cartenna, that they detested and abhorred their company as Schismatikes.
Neither do we call any men Catholics for keeping communion with the Church of
Rome, if it be taken for that particular Church which is contained within the
walls of Rome; but because that communicating with that Church in faith and
religion, they do communicate with all other of the same faith, which are
spread all the world over.

R. ABBOT.
I Said, the Donatists; I should have said, the Rogatists (who were but one
part of the Donatisls, as I have before observed) the Rogatists, I say, would
be taken to be Catholics for keeping communion with the Church of Cartenna,
and even so will the Papists be accounted Catholics for keeping communion with
the Church of Rome. For the Rogatists expounding the word Catholic of
integrity and perfection of faith, as before we have seen, and affirming Aug.
Epist. 48. Persuadere conaris solos remansisse Rogatistas qui Catholici recte
appellandi sant, etc. Et vos esse solos in quibus fidem inu^niat filius hominis
cum venerat,
themselves only to be Catholics, and that with them only Christ at his
coming should find faith, left it as consequent that none could be called
Catholics, but by communicating and joining with them. Now they did but apply
to their Schism at Cartenna those things which the Donatists in common held
concerning their Church in Africa, who said of themselves that Collat. Carthag.
3. cap. 22. Apud nos est vera Catholica.
with them only was the true Catholic Church; August. de unit. ^ccles. c. 13.
Velut pro se commemorant quod ait Dominus, Filius hominis veniens putas
inueniet fidem in terra?
that with them only Christ should find faith, whence it should remain that
in their communion only men were to bear the name of Catholics. Now whether
we look to the Rogatists for Cartenna, or to the Donatists for Africa, the
Papists are like them both, who plead the same for their Roman Church that
they did for the other two, that men are Catholics for keeping unity of faith
and agreement therewith. But M. Bishop tells us that they do not call men
Catholics for keeping communion with the Church of Rome if it be taken for
that particular Church, which is contained within the walls of Rome. Where we
see how true it is which Optatus says; that Optat. lib. 2. Memoriam custodem
oportet habere mendacem.
a liar needs to have a good holding memory; for he himself a little before
speaking of that particular Roman Church, to which he attributes the
privileges of stability in faith and superiority in government above all
other Churches, has told us that St. Hierome Part. 1. 2.
affirms men to become Catholics by holding the Roman faith; and that
Tertullian, Epiphanius, Optatus, and Austin do prove their Churches to be
Catholic, and themselves to be Catholics, by declaring that they do
communicate with the Church of Rome, and did condemn their adversaries to be
Schismatikes and Heretics, because they did not communicate with that Church.
If it be true which he has told us thus before, that men become Catholics
by communicating with that particular Roman Church, why does he here tell us
the contrary, that they do not call men Catholics for that cause? The reason
is, because he speaks no otherwise then as Optatus obiecteth to Parmenian the
Donatist, Optat. lib. 1. Omnis pro tempore, nihil pro veritate.
All for the time and present shift, and nothing for the truth. Well, let us
hear what it is for which men with them are called Catholics. Because that
communicating with that Church, the particular Roman Church, in faith and
religion, they do communicate with all other of the same faith, which are
spread all the world over. So then men are not Aug. Breuic. Collat. cum Donat l.
3. c. 2. Quia communicant Ecclesiae toto orb di(...) Cathol^ci merito and sunt
and vocantur.
Catholics now as of old, because they communicate with the Church dispersed
over the whole world, but because in the communion of the Church of Rome they
communicate with the Church of the whole world. But what if the Church of the
whole world do not hold communion with the Church of Rome, as when the East
and West Churches have been divided, and when Arianisme had ouerflowed in a
manner the whole world; whence was the name of Catholics to be taken then? Yea
to speak of later times before the Portugals and Spaniards had gotten the
Indies, or discovered the new world, and before Ignatius Lo^ola had hatched his
cockatrices brood, which braggeth of so great conuersions there attained unto,
when neither the Greek Churches in Europe received the Roman faith, and out of
Europe scant any Church at all, how could it then be said that men were called
Catholics, for that in communicating with the Church of Rome they communicated
with the Church spread over all the world? And since they say that all other
Churches may err, and only the Church of Rome has the privilege of
perpetual truth; put case that all other Churches do err, how shall the name
of Catholics be continued, but only for holding correspondence with the
particular Church of Rome? Yea how is it that he sees not that he merely
circumuenteth and overthrows himself? For if a man be a Catholic for
communicating with the Church of the whole world, and it be by communicating
with the particular Church of Rome that he communicate with the Church of the
whole world, then it is by communicating with the particular Church of Rome,
that the name of a Catholic does belong unto him. To be short, M. Bishops
former acknowledgement justifies the resemblance as I have set it down, and
yet the Donatists if they could have had their way would never have doubted to
say of their Church as M. Bishop does here of his, that men should be called
Catholics, not for communicating with their African Church, as it was
contained only within the bounds of Africa, but for that in communicating with
that Church, they communicated with all other of the same faith spread
wheresoever in the world. Neither could the one nor can the other assume to
themselves, that they were or are spread over the whole world, and therefore
neither could the one nor can the other take upon them to be Catholics, but
only each for communion with their own Church.

W. BISHOP.. 5.
FInally, the fifth is as false as the fourth, and in the same sort to be
confuted. True it is, that the Donatists thought that none could be saved out
of their congregation, which is almost a common position of every sect and
heresy; but most sure it is, that there is no salvation out of the true Church
of Christ, no more then was out of the Ark of Noah in the general deluge:
wherefore, whosoever does not communicate with the Church of Rome, (which is
the chief member thereof) in society of Faith and Sacraments, is out of the
state of grace and salvation; according to that of S. Hierome to Pope Damasus:
I following no chief but Christ, join my self to Epistola 7. tit. 2.
the communion of Peter's chair, upon that Rock I know the Church to be built,
whosoever does eat the Paschal Lamb out of this house, he is profane; he
that is not found within the Ark of Noah shall perish, etc. where there is much
more to this purpose.

R. ABBOT.
THe Rogatists as touching their Church of Cartenna, and the Donatists as
touching their Church of Africa, were of mind that howsoever a man believed he
could not be saved, unless he did communicate with their Church. This M.
Bishop acknowledges to be true, and if this be true, what hinders but that
the resemblance stands good, The Papists likewise hold that there is no
salvation but in communicating with the Church of Rome. Forsooth we must
understand that the Rogatists and Donatists spoke falsely concerning their
Church; but most sure it is, says he, that there is no salvation out of the
true Church of Christ. It is sure indeed, and will not both Rogatists and
Donatists, and all manner Heretics say the some as well as he? They all
confess that out of the true Church of Christ there is no salvation, and
therefore do every sort of them take upon them to be the true Church of
Christ, that so they may persuade men that there is no salvation but with them.
But M. Bishop infers; Wherefore whosoever does not communicate with the
Church of Rome, which is the chief member thereof, is out of the state of
grace and salvation. And would not a Donatist as well infer, Wherefore
whosoever does not communicate with the Church of Africa, which is the chief
member thereof, is out of the state of grace and salvation. Indeed he should
have said somewhat to the purpose if he had made it good, that out of the
communion of the Church of Rome, there is no communion of the Church of Christ;
but if he cannot make this good, then full simply does he conclude, There is no
salvation out of the true Church of Christ, therefore there is no salvation out
of the Church of Rome. But he tells us that the Church of Rome is the chief
member of Christ's Church. Be it so, and so was the Church of Jerusalem the
chief member of the Church of the Jews, and yet the Church of Jerusalem put
to death the Prophets and Christ himself, and in that communion there could be
no salvation. Is not a chief member of the same substance as is the rest of
the body? and what hinders then but as the other members, so the chief
member may be wounded and corrupted, and cause annoyance to other members that
adioyne unto it? Albeit we desire him to prove to us that the Church of Rome is
the chief member of the Church of Christ. I regard not what humane estimation
has attributed unto it for the renown and eminency of the place, but I
require some divine institution whereby it has been founded the chief member
of the Church. We say that with God there is no more respect of the Church of
Rome then of any other Church; if they will have us to believe more, we put
them to that for their Roman Church which St. Austin required of the Donatists,
for proof of that which they said for their African Church; August. de unit.
Eccles. c. 6 Legite nobis hoc de Lege, de Prophetis, de Psalmis, de Euangelio*
de Apostolicis literis; legite and credimus.
Read us this out of the law, out of the Prophets, out of the Psalms, out of
the Gospel or Writings of the Apostles; read it to us, and we believe it,
namely that Christ abides no where heir upon the earth, but where he can have
the Pope to be Ibid. Quare superordinatis dicendo in nullis terris haeredem
permanere Christum vbi non p^tuerit coh^redem habere Donatli?
his fellow heir, as the Donatists said of their Pope Donatus; or that the
Roman Church is such a chief member of the Church, as that no man can live but
by the breath that he draws from thence, or obtain forgiveness of sins
but in the society and fellowship thereof. I know I trouble M. Bishop now; he
loves not to be called upon for Scripture for the proof of this matter; for
he knows well that the Scripture has nothing at all to give testimony
thereof. Well though he bring nothing out of Scripture, yet he has that out
of Hierome that will serve his turn: Hieron. ad Damas. Ego nullum primum nisi
Christum sequens beatitudini tuae, id est, Cathedr^ Petri communione consocior
super illam petram aedificatam Ecclesiam scio; quicunque extra hanc domum agnum
comedcrit, prophanus est: siquis in Arca Noe non fuerit, peribit regnante
dilu^i^.
I following no chief but Christ, says he to Damasus Bishop of Rome, join my
self to your blessedness, that is, to the communion of Peter's chair; upon
that Rock I know the Church to be built; whosoever eats the Paschall Lamb
out of this house, he is profane; whosoever is not in the Ark of Noah, shall
perish by the floode. By these words M. Bishop would bear us in hand that
Hierome believed a perpetual necessity of having communion of faith with the
Bishop and Church of Rome. But tell us, M. Bishop, in good sooth do you think
that Hierome not long before would have said the same to Liberius, that here he
says to Damasus? He says of Liberius, that Idem in Catalog. Liberium Romanae
vrbis Episcopum pro fide ad exilium pergentem primus solicitauit and fregit and
ad subscriptionem haereseos compulit.
by the persuasion of Fortunatianus he was overcome and brought to subscribe
the heresy of Arius, and would he then have joined in communion with him? If
he would in this case have disclaimed Liberius, then certainly he could not
mean to Damasus that it stands for a perpetual rule in the Church, that who
so will be saved must join in communion with the Bishop of Rome. But Hierome
dealt advisedly by expounding himself in his first words though M. Bishop
list not to take knowledge of it. He professes to give primacy to none but to
Christ himself; to make none the Author or Lord of his faith but only Christ.
Notwithstanding in communion and fellowship of faith he professes to join
with Damasus. But how far or in what sort? I join in communion with your
blessedness, that is, with Peter's chair. Not simply then with Damasus Bishop
of Rome, but with Damasus sitting in Peter's chair. Now as Mat. 23. 2.
the sitting in Moses chair, imports the teaching of the doctrine of Moses,
so the sitting in Peter's chair, imports the teaching of the doctrine of
Peter. Damasus at that time did so, and maintained against the Arians the
confession of Peter, Mat. 16. 16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. This Hierome well knew, and
therefore what he would not have yielded to Liberius though Bishop of Rome
because he sat not in Peter's chair, that he yields to Damasus because he
did so; and desires by him to be instructed, whether the use of the word
hypostasis might stand with the truth of the confession of Peter. It is
therefore communion with Peter's chair which Hierome commends, that is, with
the faith and doctrine which therein Peter taught, but he does not tell us that
the Bishop of Rome does always and infallibly sit in Peter's chair. For of
Peter's chair at Rome we deem the same as of Peter's chair at Antioch, and
Alexandria, both which Gregory Bishop of Rome makes Gregor. lib. 6. Epist. 37.
Seeds Apostolorum Principis in tribus locis vnius est, vnius atque vna est
seeds, cui tres nunc Episcopi praesident. Idem lib. 4. Epist. 37. Apostolicam
sede regis. Idem. lib. 6. vt supra. Petri Cathedram tenet.
one with Peter's chair at Rome, and says of the Patriarchs there to the one,
that he governed the Sea Apostolic, and to the other that he possessed Peter's
chair. But Hierome in the place alleged disclaimeth Paulinus the Patriarch of
Antioch, that he might join himself to Peter's chair, signifying that Paulinus
though succeeding Peter at Antioch, yet sat not in Peter's chair, because he
taught not the faith of Peter. Now if to be Bishop of Rome where is the place
of Peter's chair, be infallibly to sit in Peter's chair, then to be Bishop of
Antioch should be so also, because there also is the place of Peter's chair.
Which appearing by Hierome to be untrue, it follows that to be Bishop of Rome
likewise is not necessarily to sit in Peter's chair; because a man may be
Bishop as of Antioch, so of Rome, and not teach the same as Peter did. Of
Peter's faith and confession then it is that he says; Upon that Rock I know
the Church to be built. Erasmus very well notes thereat, Erasm. in Schol.
Epist. ad Damas. Non super Romam, vt arbitror; nam fieri potest vt Roma quoque
degeneret, sed super came fidem quam Petrus professus est.
Not upon Rome, as I suppose; for it may be that Rome also may degenerate, but
upon that faith which Peter professed, even as Gregory himself Bishop of Rome
expounds, Greg. lib. 3. Epist. 33. In petra Ecclesiae, hoc est, in
consessione beati Petri.
The Rock of the Church to be the confession of St. Peter. The communion of
this faith is the house wherein Christ our Paschall Lamb must be eaten; the
Arc of Noc wherein who so is not, shall be drowned. If the Bishop of Rome
shall thus sit in the seat of Peter, we are ready to accord with him, and so
far as he does so, we still hold communion with him; but that he shall
always sit there, we have no warrant; and we are sure that now he does not
sit where Peter sat. Now since M. Bishop can give us no warrant that the Pope
and Church of Rome shall always continue in the faith of Peter, his conclusion
is but a fond and vain presumption, that out of the communion of the Church of
Rome there is no salvation, and no otherwise challenged to the Church of Rome
then by the Donatists to their Church. Now albeit I see that I much offend M.
Bishop in making this comparison betwixt the Papists and the Donatists, yet
that it may more fully appear that there was some cause why I did so, I will
to those resemblances that I have already set down add some few more, whereby
it may be discerned how directly they walk in the same steps. And first of
Donatus the Pope of the Donatists, Op tatus records that Optat. lib. 3. ^um
super Imperatorem non sit nisi solus D^ qui fecit Imperatorem, dum se D^natus
super Imperatorem extollit, iam quasi b^minum excesserat metas vt se vt Deum,
non vt hominem ^stimaret, etc. Quamuis non sit vsus hac voce (Ego sum Deus)
tamen aut fecit aut pas^ si^ est quod defectum huitu vocis impleret, etc.
tantum sibi ipsu^ exegit vt eum no^ minori metu omnes venerarentur quam Deu^,
etc. Primus Episcoporum quasi plus esset ipse quam caeteri, exaltauit cor suum,
etc. vt nullum hominem sibi comparandu^ arbitraretur.
he exalted himself about the Emperor, and thereby made himself more then
man, and even as it were a God, because above the Emperor there is none but
God that made the Emperor; and although he used not those words, I am God,
yet he either did or suffered to be done to him, that which might supply the
want of those words, requiring so much to himself as that all stood in no
less awe of him then they did of God himself, being the first Bishop that
advanced himself as if he were more then the rest, and did think no man
comparable to himself. Now is there not in this Pope of Africa a very just and
lively description of the Roman Pope? He has made himself more then all
other Bishops, and no man comparable to himself. He has lifted up himself
above the Emperor, and thereby as Optatus concludes, made a God of himself.
He has not only done and suffered to be said and done to him such things as
whereby in effect he has taken upon him to be God, as namely in dispensing
against the law of God, and disannulling the institution of Christ, but in very
words has yielded to be so called, and in the Gloss of his Canon law where
he professes to have corrected such things as were amiss, yet he has
suffered this title given to him to stand still, Extrauag. Joan, 22. Cum
interim. in Glossa. Credere Dominum Deum nostrum Papam non potuisse, etc.
haereticum censeretur, Paris. anno 1601. cum priuileg. Gregor. 13. etc.
Our Lord God the Pope. He bath made men to stand in no less awe of him, yea
more then of God himself, whilst he has made show to have Gods anger at his
command to inflict it where he will. Secondly, the Donatists took upon them
that Collat. Carthag. 3. c. 165. Cum pacis and Ecclesia Dei possessores semper
fuerimus ac simus.
they had always been possessors and owners of unity and of the Church of
God, in so much that they reckoned Aug. c^t. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 92. In
vestri^ exemplis aduer(...) Imperat^^es qua^ plures ac Iudices. vestros
persecutione^ nobis facie^do perijsse, vt relinquam N(...), Domitian^,
Traianu^, Vari^. etc.
Nero, Domitian, Traian, Varius, Decius, Dioclesian, and the rest, to have
been persecutors of their Church, whereas their beginning whereby they were
Donatists, was after the time of those persecutions, and had they been then,
Ibid. August. Isti omnes vniuersaliter Christianum nomen pro suis idolis
persecuti sunt, etc. Vnitatem ipsam vel vnde nos sicut, vos putatis, vel vnde
vos sicut Christus docet, exijstis, totam persequebantur.
had not suffered any thing for being partakers with Donatus, but for
professing the name of Christ. No otherwise do the Papists take upon them to
have been always the Church of God, and that it was their Church that was
persecuted, that they were their Martyrs that were slain by the same Tyrants;
whereas their beginning whereby they are Papists (which properly they are for
worshipping their Lord God the Pope) yea and that whole form of doctrine
almost which is properly theirs, is of far latter time, and though they had
been then, yet had been persecuted only for that profession of Christ which
is common both to us and them. The Donatists alleged that Aug. cont. Epist.
Gaude^t. l. 2. c. 30. Per iustitiam non vera^ sed vestram ad Imperatorum curam
pertinere cause huiusmodi non deberent.
Emperors and Princes had nothing to do in Church matters. And Idem Epist.
48. Vos quibus crimen videtur de inimicis communionis nostra Christiono
Imperatori aliquid conq^eri.
held it for a great fault in the Catholic Bishops to complain to the
Emperor of them. Optat. lib. 3. Quid est Imperatori cum Ecclesia?
What has the Emperor to do with the Church? says their Pope Donatus: and
so his followers, Aug. in psalm. 57. Quid nobis and Regibus, inquiunt? Quid
nobis and Imperateribus?
What have we to do with Kings? what have Emperors to do with us? for the
teaching of the people of Israel, Idem cont. Gaudent. Epist l. 2. c. 26. Ad
docendu^ populum Israel omnipotens Deus Prophetis pr(...)ium dedit, non Regibus
imperauit. Saluator ammarum Dominus Christus ^d insi(...)dam fidem piscatores,
non milites misit.
says Gaudentius, God gave charge to Prophets and not to Kings, and our Lord
Christ the Savior of souls sent Fishermen, not Soldiers for the planting of
the faith; thus vpbraiding the Emperors for condemning their Schism, and for
using power and force of arms for repressing the infinite rage of their
madde-brained Circumcellions. Thus they say to Marcellinus the Tribune, whom
the Emperor had appointed to be Judge in the conference at Carthage; Capit.
gest. collat. Ca^^hag. 3. c. 295. Si Christus non es, cur de Sacerd^tibus
iudicas? Hoc iudicium Christo seruandum est.
If thou be not Christ why do thou judge of Priests? this judgment must be
reserved for Christ: And another of them, that Aug. Epist. 162. Non debuit
Episcopus Proconsulari iudicio purgari.
a Bishop should not have his purgation at a Lieutenants judgment, and
therefore Donatus their Patriarch writes contemptuously to Gregory, one of the
Emperors Officers, Optat. lib. 3. Adquem sic scribere minime dubitauit;
Gregori macula Senatus and dedecus Praefectorum and caetera talia.
Gregory the blot of the Senate, the disgrace of Lieutenants, with other terms
of the same kind, as Optatus has reported. Of the same humor are the
Papists, who make the Prince Did. 96 Si Imperator. Filius est non Praesul
Ecclesia; quod adreligionem co^petit, discere ei conuenit, non docere, etc. Ad
Sacerdotes Deus voluit quae Ecclesiae disponenda sunt pertinere, non ad seouli
Potestates, etc. Imperatores Christiani subdere deb^nt executiones sua^
Ecclesiasticis Praesulibus, non praeferre.
a son only and not a Governor of the Church, who must learn and not teach
what appertains to religion, because God would have Church matters to belong
to Priests, not to the secular powers; and Christian Emperors are to submit
their executions to the rulers of the Church. Therefore they hold the
Commissioners and Officers of Princes to be incompetent Judges in their
causes; they carry themselves contemptuously and despightfully toward them;
they think it lawful by equivocations and mental reseruations to abuse them,
because they will not acknowledge any subjection to them. The Donatists Aug.
Epist 48. Multis aditu^ intrandi obsereba^t rumores maledicoru^ qui nescio quid
aliud nos in Altar Deiponere iactiraba^t.
by false rumors discouraged and terrified men from coming to Church, and
amongst other things gave out of the Catholic Bishops, that some of them
Optat. l. 3. and 7. Dicebatur venturos P^ulum and Macarium qui interessent
Sacrificio, vt cum Altaria soleniter aptarentur profe^rent illic imaginem quam
primo in Altar ponerent, and sic Sacrificium offerretur. Hoc cum acciperent
aures percussi sunt and animi, etc. vt omnis qui hoc audierat diceret, Qui
degustat, de sacro gustat.
at the time of the celebration of the Sacrament did set an Image upon the
Altar or Communion table; whereat the minds of men were greatly moved, and
every one said, He that tastes thereof, tastes of a profane thing; so
contrary was it holden to religion then, which Of Images* sect. 9.
M. Bishop approves now to set Images upon the Altar. But in this also the
Papists are their followers, who in the like sort devise rumors and tales of
our divine Service, and put strange conceits thereof into the minds of men,
that without cause they may abhor to have any communion with us. The
Donatists alleged their August. Epist. 162. Prolata sunt a partibus vestris
gesta quaedam quibu^ recitatum est, etc. Temerarium Concilium quamlibet
numerosissimum.
own Councels assembled by their own authority, and managed wholly by
themselves for defense of their cause, both against the Ide^ in psalm. 57.
Lectum est Concilium Bagaitanum vbi damnati sunt Maximianistae, Et co^t. lit.
Petil. l 2. c. 43. Plenarij Co^cilij vest^i ore damnas^is.
Maximinianists their own Schismatikes, and against the Bishops and Pastors of
the Catholic Church. Even so do the Papists allege against us their own
partial conuenticles wherein they themselves have been both accusers,
witnesses, and judges, and wherein none has been suffered to sit, but only
such as have first been sworn solemnly to the Pope. The Donatists Aug. Epist.
137. Non habendo in causa sua diu^sionis quod defendant, non nisi hominu^
crimina colligere affectant and ^aipsa plura falsissime iactant, vt quia ipsam
diui^a Scripturae veritatem, etc. criminari and obscurare non possunt, homines
per quos pradicatur adduca^t in od^u^.
not knowing how sufficiently to make good their cause, and rent from the
Church by argument and reason, sought to make themselves the more plausible, by
devising and publishing crimes and slanders against them, who in the behalf of
the Church were adversaries to them, that men disliking the persons of men
might consequently think the worse of the truth of God, that was maintained
and defended by them. In the same steps the Papists walk, with whom nothing is
more common in all their books, then to labor by strange and odious
imputations, to blemish the names of Luther, Calvin, Beza, and all other by
whom the gospel of Christ has been specially defended, yea generally of the
Bishops and Ministers of our Church, that bringing men into hatred and
detestation of the men, they may cause them to like the worse of the faith and
religion which they did or do teach. Collat. Cartag. 3. c. 30. D^natist^^ nos
appella^dos esse credunt, cum si nominum paternorum ratio vertitur and ego ^os
dicere possum imo palam apert^que design^ Mensuris^as and Cecili^nistas esse.
Petilian the Donatist being offended that they were called Donatists, as
justly they were, for tying themselves to Donatus as their Patriarch and Ibid.
cap. 32. Nec ^lic abnu^ esse mi^i Principe^ ac fuisse Donatum.
Prince, retorted upon the godly Bishops, the names of Mensurists of Mensurius,
and Cecilianists of Cecilianus, as if they in like sort depended upon them. So
the Papists being vexed at that name of Papists given to them for being wholly
at the devotion of the Pope, seek to disgrace us with the names of Lutherans,
and Zwinglians, and Caluinists, of Luther, Calvin, and Zwinglius, as if we were
in like sort affected and devoted unto them. The Donatists complained that Aug.
co^t. lit. Petil. l. ^. c. 43. Derebus vel locis Ecclesiasticis quos tenebatis
and no^ tenetis querimi^i. Et co^t. Gaude^t. l. 2. c. 28. Obijcitis nobis quod
res vestras possidere cupiamus.
the goods and reuennues of their Churches bestowed upon them by their
ancestors were taken from them, and given into the hands of the Catholic
Pastors and teachers of the Church, upon whom they cried out Cont. Gaudent.
lib. 2. cap. 2^. Alienarum rerum incubaetores.
as robbers and spoilers of them. The same complaint Epist. to the King, sect.
31.
M. Bishop and his fellows use, that Bishoprics and Deanries and Benefices
founded by men of their religion, and to the use thereof, are now as they
pretend by wrong and usurpation bestowed upon us. The Rogatists being one part
of the Donatists Aug. Epist. 48. Solos vos Christianos esse perhibetis.
affirmed themselves only to be Christians, even as the Donatists generally did
challenge Ibid. Vniuersi Donatist^ se pro Ecclesia Christi supponentes. Optat.
lib. 2. Nitimini suadere hominibus apud vos solos esse Ecclesiam.
to themselves only to be the Church of Christ, and so now the Papists in their
faction esteem themselves only to be Christians, in so much that Bellarmines
Ghost doubts not to say, that Tort. ad Apolog. resp. Jacobus cum Catholicus
non sit, neque Christianu^ est.
our King James because he is no Catholic (of their coin) therefore is no
Christian. The Donatists Aug. Epist. 50. 68. 122. and cont. Crescon. Grammat.
lib. 3. cap. 42. etc.
provoking Emperors and Kings by their intolerable outrages and villainies, to
make laws for the punishing of them, when the same were executed, complained
of Aug. cont. Gaudent lib. 2. c. 12. Propter filium hominis ac fidem, etc. vos
persecutionem sustinere iactatis.
persecution, and termed themselves Collat. Carthag. 3. c. 22. Apud nos est
vera Catholica quae persecutionem patitur, non quae facit.
the Church persecuted which persecuteth not: and such of them as were justly
executed for murders and other unlawful acts they called Aug. cont. lit.
Petil. l. 2. c. 83. Cum viuatis vt latrones, mori vos iactatis vt Martyrs. Et
Epist. 166. Dementia vt latronum facta fac(...) and cum iure punimin^, marlyrum
gloriam requiratis.
Martyrs, yea such as threw themselves down from sleep places to kill
themselves, that it might be thought that others killed them, yea such as
forced others to kill them, threatening to kill them if they did not so, these
all I say they blazed Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 71. Petil. Vos beati non
estis, sed beatos martyrs facitis quorum scilicet animabus c^li repleti sunt,
corporumque memoria terr^ storuerunt. Vos ^on colitis^ed facitis quos colamus.
Aug. Si dictum esset, Beati qui seipsos praecipitant, implerent coeum martyrs
vestri. Et l. 1. c. 24. Praeci^^tatorum vltro ^adauerum cultus sacrilegos mitto.
for Martyrs, and to their Relikes and dead bodies they did great devotion, and
canonized them otherwise for ^^ints in heaven. Even the same course do the
Papists take with us, who by their traitorous attempts and practices and most
devilish conspiracies, giving cause of making laws for their punishment and
restraint, do upon execution thereof cry out Concertat. Eccl. Cathol in Angl.
Epist. De persecution^ Anglicana.
of persecution, Epistle to the King, sect. 33.
terrible persecutions, says M. Bishop, in the late Queens days, and do
call them Martyrs that are notoriously put to death for such horrible treasons.
Under which name they have registered Apolog. pro Henr. Garneto page 169.
Garnet, that wretched caitife, a principal abettour of the gunne-powder
practice, then which there was never a more impious designement amongst men.
Yea and these thus justly put to death, they honor with great devotion, they
devise miracles of them, they dippe handkerchiefes in their blood, they joy to
get pieces of their bodies, they make of them Saints, and Concertat. Eccl.
Cathol. in Angl. verse. de Campian. Sis mihi quaeso tuo facilis patronus alumno;
Nec cesses pro me saepe rogare De^^.
pray unto them. The Donatists, though of their detestable and enormous acts
Emperors took occasion to make laws against them, yet would not have it
thought that the Emperors did it as of their own mind, but moved and drawn
thereto by the godly Bishops and Pastors, that were adversaries to them. Aug.
co^t. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 9^. Calumniamini nobis dicentes, a nobis in vos ad
iracundiam Reges seculi concitari, dum cos no^ docemus diuinam Scripturam, sed
malitiam nost^a^ suggerimus.
Ye calumniate us, says St. Austin, saying that by us Kings are incited to
anger toward you, for that we teach them not the Scripture of God, but suggest
to them our own malice. Even so our Papists, and namely Reproof, page 85.
M. Bishop, although they know that of their own ungodly misdemeanors the
State has taken occasion to make laws against them, and that our Princes have
had very just cause to deal severely with them, as Watson their own proctor
has largely confessed; yet that their own blame may be the better hidden, do
impute these proceedings to the instigations and exasperations of our Bishops
and Ministers, as if otherwise no cause were conceived but that they should be
mo^^ gently entreated then now they are.* The Donatists albeit they knew well
that it was a very small part of the world that joined with them, yet ioyed to
use words as if they had had a Church throughout the world, saying in their
Council of three hundred and ten Bishops, that Aug. cont. Cresco^. Gra^m. lib.
3. cap. 56. Cum Ecclesiae Catholicae Sanctitatem vir memory vtnerabilis ab
errore persidia Donatus assereret, in ^ius nomen and cultum mundi pene totius
obseruantia ^^trita c^aluit.
when Donat(...) ^reed the Catholic Church from the error of perfidiousnesse,
the observance or obedience almost of the whole world joined to his name and
honor; in which manner ^armenian also, though he held the Church Optat. lib.
2. Eam tu apud ^os solos esse dixisti.
to be with them only, yet pretended Ibid. post. Offerre vos dicitis pro vna
Ecclesia quae sit in tot^ terrarum orb dissusa.
to offer or pray for one Church which is dispersed over the whole world. Even
so the Papists also, albeit they know that it is but a small part of the world,
wherein the communion of the Bishop and Church of Rome is accepted or
acknowledged, yet take pleasure to babble and prate as if the Popes triple
crown were so wide as to compass the whole earth, and his scepter so long as
to reach to the worlds end. Thus much then M. Bishop has gained by being angry
at my comparing the Papists to the Donatists, that whereas I mentioned but five
resemblances before, I have now added twelve more, and so like are they in all
these, that I doubt not but by observation they may be found like in many more.
As for the retortion of this comparison which he has used in his answer to my
Epistle Dedicatory, as it is wholly forced and violent in it self, so it
argues only malice and folly in him. I will set down the branches of the
Donatists heresy as he has noted them, and add the application that he has
made of every of them. First he Reproof, page 42.
says they held that the true Church of Christ was perished all the world
over, saving in some coasts of Africa, where their doctrine was current. Well,
and what is that to us? The Protestants, says he, teach even as they did, that
Christ's visible Church was perished for nine hundred years at the least all
the world over, and is now wholly decayed in all other parts of the world,
saving where their doctrine is embraced; and this, he says, was the maine
point of the Donatists heresy. To show why he names the visible Church, he
puts in a parenthesis, thus; for the invisible Church the Donatists held
could not perish, as St. Austin witnesses in Psalm. 101. Which is a very lie*
neither is there any thing to be found in St. Austin to that effect. But as
touching the visible Church, where do the Protestants hold or affirm that it
was or is perished in that sort as he says? Why does he not cite us some
author of this assertion? Well, whether we say so or not, it skilleth not;
Bellarm. de notis Eccles. c. 9. Ecclesiam visibilem a multis seculis perijsse,
and nunc solum esse in septentrionalibus partibus vbi ipsi sunt, doce^t omnes.
Bellarmine has told him that we all say so, and that is enough for him. Yet
that we do not all say so, M. Bishop may sufficiently understand by that that
has been before handled at large, as touching this point in the answer Sect.
17.
to the Preface to his second part, whither I refer the Reader for further
satisfaction hereof. Here I briefly answer him, that we hold in all that time
whereof he speaks one only Catholic church, whereof the Church of England was
a part, and the Church of Rome another part, and the Greek Church another
part, and so the rest throughout the whole world. The Church in these parts was
in that time blemished with many corruptions and errors, whilst first the
Teachers in steed of 1. Cor. 3. 18.
silver and gold and pearl, built hay and straw and stubble upon the
foundation; and secondly the Pastors more and more Ierem. 10. 21.
became beasts, as the Prophet says, and sought not the Lord, nor had any
understanding to teach Gods law, by means whereof ignorance increased, and of
ignorance grew superstition, and one idolatry begat another, till the whole
face of the Church was berayed with the filth thereof, Mat. 24. 15.
the abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, and the man of
sin tyra^nizing over the Church, and giving strength to all abuse and
corruption for his own gain. So gross were the enormities and superstitions
which in this time had grown into the Church, as that the great Rabbines of
the Church of Rome could not for shame but in some part acknowledge the same,
and took upon them to correct sundry things Trident. Council. sess. 22. de
Missa celebr. Quae sieve temporum vitio, sieve hominum incuria and improbitate
irrepserunt in Missam ipsam.
which either by the corruption of times or by the carelessness and
naughtiness of men were crept into the very Mass. And thus the Pope himself
confessed concerning their Offices and Primers, that Offic. Beatae Mariae per
Pium V. in Summar. constitut. and indulgent, etc. Vanis superstitionum
erroribus alia fere omnia huiusmodi officia, etiam Latino sermon referta esse
deprehensum fuit, etc. Credant ijsde^ alijs ^fficijs multas sub falsis and
confictis sanctorum nominius confict^^ orationes fuisse insertas.
they were found to be stuffed with vain errors of superstitions, and that
many counterfaite prayers were inserted into them under false and counterfaite
names of Saints. Of these errors and superstitions they reformed what they
list, and purged their books and Service of many things that were amiss: and
what? will any man say hereupon that they became another Church? We proceeded
further and voided the Church of the rest of those abominations, which
ignorance and error had brought in, which they were not willing to have meddled
with, because the same were gainful to them; and shall we be said hereupon to
deny that there was any visible Church before, and to begin a new Church? No,
we say that the Church has continued still from the time that it was first
planted; we affirm it to have been the house of God, the garden and vineyard
of the Lord, but we say that the husbandmen had long dealt wickedly and
unfaithfully in the usage of it; they dressed not the Lords vine but suffered it
to grow wild; they let this garden be ouergrowen with briars and weeds, and
Foxes and Swine had liberty to tread it down and to destroy it. All that we
have done has been but to loppe and prune the vine, to dress and water the
garden that lay wast, to pluck up the weeds and thorns, to drive out the
noisome beasts, and to repair the fence that they may be kept out. Therefore,
we do not take upon us to be another Church, but the same Church reformed,
neither have we gone about to bring in a new religion, but only to reform that
which they call the old, retaining still the same Scriptures which they
acknowledged, the same articles of faith, the same Sacraments of Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord, the same form of divine Service, save only that we
have cut off what their superstition had brought in contrary to the word of
God, and practice of the first Church. Many goodly stones and pillars of
Christian doctrine there were remaining amongst them, which we continue and
acknowledge according to the word of Christ, and whereby we cannot doubt but
that in those times of darkness many found means to see the light of God,
and were thereby directed unto eternal life. Far therefore are we from
Donatisme, who neither affirm the perishing of the Church in any part of the
world, no not in Rome it self, nor tie it to any one place as the Papists do
to Rome, nor hang it upon the neck of any one man as they do upon the Popes
neck; but acknowledge all nations and all men indifferently accepted with God,
accordingly as in spirit and truth they faithfully worship him. The second
point of the Donatists heresy he names this, that they rebaptized Catholics
that fell into their sect. His application is, Though all the Protestants do
not rebaptize, yet one part of them, to wit, the Anabaptists do use it. But
his foolery in that deserves no answer, it being known to himself that the
Anabaptists are exploded and detested universally of all Protestant Churches.
The Anabaptists shall be rather theirs then ours. And whereas he divides the
Protestants into Lutherans, Sacramentaries and Anabaptists, as answerable to
the Donatists, Rogatists and Maximianists, he should rather have made the like
division of Papists into Anabaptists, Secularists, and Iesuitists; the
Anabaptists answering the Rogatists in challenging the Church from the rest of
the body of their Schism only to themselves; the Secularists and Iesuitists
fully resembling the Donatists and Maximianists, each divided for a time by
mortal quarrel amongst themselves, but content after a while as men of one
Church and religion to be reconciled again. The third point that he
mentions is this, They held not the faith of the blessed Trinity entire and
whole, but some of them taught like Arians, the son to be less then the
father, though as St. Austin notes this was not marked of their followers.
This he applies to us in this sort, Thirdly, diverse of their principal
teachers, as Melanchton, Calvin, and many others do corrupt the sound doctrine
of the most sacred Trinity, as I have showed, says he, in the Preface of the
Reformation of a deformed Catholic, though the common sort of them do not
greatly observe it. In which third point he very wilfully belyeth both St.
Austin and the Donatists and us. For St. Austin does not say of the Donatists,
but only of a second Donatus, who was a follower of the former, that August. ad
Quodvult. haeres. 69. Apparet cum etiam non Catholicam de Trinitate babuisse
sententiam, etc. Verum in hunc quem de Trinitate habuit ^ius errorem
Donatistarum multitudo intenta no^ fuit, nec facile in eis quisquam qui hoc
ill^ sensisse nouerit inuenitur.
he had an vncatholike opinion of the Trinity, which the Donatists were so
far from approving as that he says, there was scant any one found amongst
them that knew that he thought so; so that to him only it is referred which
St. Austin says in his Epistle; Idem Epist. 50. Si aliqui ipsorum ^^^orem
filium dixerunt esse quam pater est, ^iusdem tamen substanti^ non negarunt.
If any of them have said that the son is less then the Father, yet they
have not denied him to be of the same substance. And indeed St. Austin though
living amongst them and having perfect knowledge of them, yet never vpbraideth
them with this heresy, and therefore M. Bishop does wrong both to them in
laying this heresy to them, and to St. Austin in making him the witness
thereof. Neither shall it help him that Theodoret charge them therewith, who
as it plainly appears by his relation never knew what their heresy was, and
being deceived perhaps by the writings of that Donatus, reports that as
common to them all, which St. Austin of his knowledge notes to have been
proper to him only. As for that he charge Melancthon, Calvin, and other our
principal teachers with corrupting the doctrine of the holy Trinity, how
lewdly and falsely he deals therein, Answer to the Preface of the second part
of Doct. Bishops Reformation, sect. 6. 7.
I have fully declared in answer of the Preface, where he says he has showed
the same. The fourth matter of the Donatists by him noted, is their being soon
divided into three sects, whereof he says nothing but what is before touched.
Only he adds; There were also amongst them many frantike furious fellows
called Circumcellions, who rouing up and down committed many outrages, etc:
But what is this to the Protestants? Forsooth, for plucking down of Churches,
abusing the most blessed Sacrament, holy Oiles, and all holy ornaments that
belonged to Catholics Churches, the Protestants are not behind, but go far
beyond the Donatists. But this I let pass as another part of his idle babbling,
only telling him that to fit the example of the Circumcellions, he should
rather have looked to those memorable acts that have been done by the Leaguers
and Jesuits, and other madde-braines of their employment in France, Germany,
Poland, and in all places almost of Christendom, where they have gotten any
strength, whereof goodly stories might be here set down if it were pertine^t
to the maine point that we have now in hand. In the last thing which he notes
of the Donatists, he specially shows his great abundance of little wit, the
matter whereto he alludeth being such as whence I might most justly have taken
yet a further resemblance betwixt the Donatists and them. Finally, says he,
the Donatists devised a new kind of Psalms to be sung before their divine
Service and Sermons. And what the Protestants? Forsooth, they have also
compounded and framed a new kind of Psalms, says he, called Geneua Psalms,
to be sung before their Sermons. A new kind of Psalms, say you, M. Bishop?
What? do not you know that those Geneua psalms, as you call them, are only
the Psalms of David and other Prophets and holy Men, translated into English
Meter, and do they seem to you a new kind of Psalms? They were turned into
Meter and Verse, and fitted with plain and easy notes and tunes, to serve for
popular and common use of Christian exercise and edification, both in our
Churches and private houses, that we may answer the exhortation of the
Apostle, Col. 3. 16.
Let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in you, in all wisdom teaching and
admonishing your selves, or one another, in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
Songs, singing with a grace in your hearts unto the Lord. Now mark, I pray
thee, gentle Reader, what St. Austin faith hereof in the place whence M. Bishop
would fetch a resemblance betwixt the Donatists and us. Of Aug. Epist. 119.
cap. 18. De Hymnis and Psalmis canendis and ipsius Domini and Apostolorum
habemus documenta and praecepta and exe^pla. De hac re tam vtili ad mouendum
pie animu^ and accendendum diuinae lectionis affectum varia consuetudo est,
etc. Donatista nos reprehendu^t quod sobrie psallamus in Eccl^sia diuina
cantica Prophetaru^, cum ipsi ebrietates suas ad canticum Psalmoru^ humano
ingenio compositorum quasi tubas exhortation is insla^ment. Quando autem non
est tempus cum in Ecclesia fratres congregantur Sancta cantandi nisi cum
legitur aut disputatur, aut anti^^ites clara voce deprecantur, aut communis
oration voce Diaconi indicitur.
singing Hymns and Psalms we have lessons and examples, and precepts of the
Lord himself and his Apostles. It is a thing profitable to stir up the mind
to piety, and to kindle devotion and affection toward the lessons that are
read from God. Of the Donatists contrariwise he says; The Donatists reprehend
us for that we soberly sing in the Church the holy songs of the Prophets,
whereas they by singing of songs devised by men as it were by trumpets of
encouragement, do inflame and provoke themselves to drinking until they be
drunk. Against this he says: When is it out of time when the brethren are
gathered together in the Church to sing Psalms, but when there is reading or
preaching, of when the Ministers do pray with loud voice, or when by the voice
of the Deacon warning is given of common prayer? That the Donatists used those
songs in the Church or before their Service and Sermons St. Austin says not;
that is M. Bishops lie; his words import that as their August. co^t. lit.
Petil. l. 1. c. 24. Mitto prophanas bacchation^s ^bri^t^tu^.
drunken meetings and feastings which elsewhere he obiecteth to them, they used
such songs, as the manner is of carnal profane men at their meetings and
merry-makings, by vain and wanton and lewd songs, to cheer and sport
themselves. But out of St. Austins words it is easy to be gathered whether of
us in this behalf are more like the Donatists, either we that retain the same
religious custom of singing Psalms which St. Austin commends, and not he
only, but also Leo Bishop of Rome witnesses, that Leo de collect. ser. 4.
Psalmi Dauidici per vniuersalem Ecclesiam cum omni pietate cantantur.
the whole Catholic Church with all devotion then used; or the Papists who
reprove us for the same, and have wholly abandoned it, both out of their
Churches and houses, and can better brook to solace themselves with secular
and profane rimes and sonnets, yea with filthy and unclean ribawdries,
insomuch that some of their own as touching their Service have complained,
that Cornel. Agrip. de vanit. scient. cap. 18. Hodie cum Missa ipsius Canone
obsc^n^ cantiunculae pares vices habent.
obscene and filthy songs had their course and turn therein, as well as the
Canon of the Mass. Very unfortunately therefore has M. Bishop entered into the
retorting of this comparison; nothing fitteth, nothing serves his turn; his
ball reboundeth upon himself, but neither in doctrine nor in manners can he
truly allege any thing reproueable in the Donatists that can be fastened upon
us.

W. BISHOP.. 6.
TO conclude this passage, seeing that M. Abbot went about to prove the Church
of Rome to be like that of the Donatists, by no one sound argument but by mere
fabling and lying; he must look (unless he repent) to have his part with all
liars in the poole burning with Apocal. 21. v. 8.
fire and brimstone. And if it please the Reader, to hear at what great square
the Donatists were with the Church of Rome, to which M. Abbot does so often
resemble them, I will briefly show it out of the best records of that time. S.
Augustine speaks thus to the Donatist Petilian: What has the Church or Sea
of Rome Lib. 2. cont. Pe^il. cap. 51.
done to thee, in which Peter did sit, and now sits Anastasius? why do
thou call the Apostolical chair the chair of pestilence? See how friendly the
Donatists saluted the Church of Rome, stiling it the chair of pestilence.
Optatus Bishop of Mileuitan says thus: Whence Lib. 2. cont. Parmeni.
is it that you Donatists contend to usurp unto you the keys of the Kingdom?
and that you wage battle against the chair of Peter, presumptuously and with
sacrilegious audacity? If they waged battle against the Church of Rome so
cruelly, surely there was no agreement between them. Wherefore, as the
Catholics of Africa then, so they that were taken into the communion of the
Church of Rome, cared little for the Donatists, as witnesses S. Augustine,
saying of Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage: He need not to care for the multitude
August. Epistola 162.
of his conspiring enemies the Donatists, when he saw himself by communicatory
letters joined with the Roman Church, in which always the principality of the
Apostolical chair flourished, etc. So we at this time, need as little to
care for the bitter reproaches and deceitful arguments of the Protestants, so
we stand stable and firm, in the like society of faith and religion with the
same Church of Rome.

R. ABBOT.
I Wish M. Bishop to take heed lest the doom which he pronounces upon me be
returned upon himself by the sentence of the Gospel, Luke 19. 22.
Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee thou evil servant. Mistake I did in
a circumstance, but lie I did not, because Mentiri est contra mentem ire.
to lie is to go against a man's own mind and knowledge, which it is plain I
did not, for that my error was disadvantage to my self, in that I alleged
the Papists to be like the Donatists only, whereas by more perfect relation
they are found to be like both Rogatists and Donatists. But now to make the
matter the more goodly for himself, he for conclusion notably plays the
Skoggin, and most grossly deludeth the simple Reader that has not discretion to
epsy his fraud. Forsooth, he will show at what great square the Donatists
were with the Church of Rome. But trouble not your self M. Bishop about that
matter: we know it, and will acknowledge it always as far as you; only we
desire to know what that makes to the matter here in hand? What? because the
Donatists in the time of Optatus and Austin, were at great square with the
Church of Rome, does it follow that there can be no cause now to compare the
Papists to the Donatists? When M. Bishop was clapped up in prison at Rome, there
was great enmity betwixt the Seculars and Jesuits, and does it therefore follow
that they are not friends now? What is it, M. Bishop, but your legerdemaine, to
pretend a comparison made by me, betwixt the Donatists and the Church of Rome
that was of old, when as my comparison concerns only Romanists and Papists
that now are, who are far departed from that way wherein that Church of old
did walk? Why do you in this case allege to us Optatus and Austin, to
disprove this resemblance, as if they were able so long before hand to tell us
that the Papists now in the points alleged are not like the Donatists? The
Donatists of old were at square with the Church of Rome, for resisting their
claim of the propriety of the Church: neither do we doubt but that if they
were now in being, the Church of Rome would be at square with them, for
challenging that to Africa which they hold properly to belong to Rome, but this
squaring on the one side or the other, hinders not but that Papists now in
their kind are like to Donatists in their kind, each tying the Catholic
Church respectively to their own place and faction; wherein the condemning of
the Donatists of old by the Church of Rome for so tying it to Africa, is an
instruction to us to condemn the Papists now for doing the like to Rome. But
M. Bishops purpose of cosenage does more lively appear in the first citation
which he here brings out of Austin, where purposely he omitteth a part of the
sentence, whereby the Reader should perceive that it makes nothing for his
purpose. To P^tilian the Donatist condemning all Churches save their own, he
says; Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. ^. c. 51. Cathedra tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae
Romana in qua Petrus sedit and in qua ^odi^ Anastasius sedet; vel Ecclesiae
Hier^s^lymitana in qua Iacobus sedit, and in qua body Joannes sidet, quibus
nos in Catholica vnitate connectimur and a quibus v^s nefari^ fur^re
separastis? Quare appellas Cathedram pestilentia Cathedram Apostolicam?
What has the chair of the Church of Rome done to thee wherein Peter sat,
and wherein at this day Anastasius sits; or the chair of the Church of
Jerusalem wherein James sat, and in which John at this day sits, to which
we are joined in Catholic unity, and from which you have severed your selves
by wicked fury? Why do you call the Apostolic chair the chair of
pestilence? Now what do these words make more for the Church of Rome then for
the Church of Jerusalem? The Donatists were then at square with the Church of
Jerusalem, and yet that hinders not, M. Bishop will confess, but that the
Church of Jerusalem may be now Schismatic: and the Donatists were then at
square with the Church of Rome; what is there here to hinder but that the
Church of Rome may be now Schismatic as the Donatists were then? The Church
of Jerusalem is by St. Austin termed an Apostolic chair or Sea, as all the
Churches planted by the Apostles are by him styled Aug. Epist. 162. Possent
Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum iudici^ causam suam integra^ reseruare.
Apostolic Churches, as well as the Church of Rome* The Church of Jerusalem M.
Bishop will not deny, both might be and has been since St. Austins time a
chair of pestilence. And does St. Austin say any thing there to let, but that
the Church of Rome also may be since become the chair of pestilence, though it
were then the chair of unity and peace? Yea what he says here concerning the
Churches of Rome and Jerusalem, the same he says elsewhere of other Churches
also. Ibid. Quid tibi fecit, 6 pars Donati, quid tibi fecit Ecclesia
Corinthiorum? Quod autem de ista dic^, de omnibus ^a^^bus and tam long positi^
intelligi v^l^; quid vobis fecerunt? etc.
O ye Donatists, what, what, I say, has the Church of the Corinthians done to
you? What I say of it, I would have to be understood of all such and as far
distant Churches; what have they done unto you? etc. with all which the
Donatists were at as great square as they were with the Church of Rome, and yet
M. Bishop will not yield to any of them any prorogatiue thereby. But all
mention of the Church of Jerusalem and the rest, he thought it behouefull for
him to suppress, because if he had set it down he knew well that the Reader
would easily see that in all this great show he had said nothing. And by the
premises it appears that he has said as little in producing the words of
Optatus; for be it that the Donatists did then cruelly wage battle against the
Church of Rome, and there were no agreement betwixt them, what is that to that
that I say concerning the Church of Rome now? what hinders that, I say still,
but that there may be now a just resemblance betwixt the Papists and the
Donatists? His conclusion therefore is ridiculous, that because Austin says
that Cecilianus needed not to care for the Donatists, so long as he saw
himself joined with the church of Rome, therefore they need not to care so
long as they stand in the like society of faith and religion with the same
Church of Rome. For seeing the Church of Rome is not the same now that it was
then, as in the process of this book, God willing, shall plainly appear,
there may be just cause in many things now to forsake the communion of the
church of Rome, though it were piety and religion to hold it then. But it is
not to be omitted how falsely he deals here again, in alleging the words of
Austin, as if he spoke of being joined with the Church of Rome only, whereas he
names other Churches as well as the Church of Rome. Aug. Epist. 162. Qui
posset non curare conspirantem multitudinem inimicorum, cum se ^ideret and
Roman^ Ecclesiae in qua semper Apostolic^ Cathed^^ viguit principatus, and
c^teris terris vnde Euangelium ad ipsam Africam venit per communicate^^ as
literas esse coniunctum.
He needed not care, says he, for the conspiring multitude of his enemies,
when he saw himself joined by communicatory letters, both to the Church of
Rome, where the principality or chiefty of the Apostolic chair has always
flourished, and to other nations whence the Gospel came into Africa. What is
here more for the communion of the Church of Rome, then for the communion of
other Churches? Why does M. Bishop thus deceiptfully appropriate to one that
which St. Austin makes to concern many? Do we find it in St. Austins words,
which he pretends, that it shall be always an infallible rule of safety to
hold communion with the Church of Rome? He will say that there is there
attributed a principality to the Church of Rome. Be it so, a principality of
honor, not of power, as I have Chap. 1.. 2.
before made plain by Austin himself: but does it follow that because the
principality of the Apostolic chair had flourished there till that time,
therefore it should be necessary or safe to communicate with that church for
ever until the worlds end? These are loose and vain collections, mere
mockeries of simple and credulous persons, very unfit to stablish and resolve
the conscience of any sober or advised man.

CHAP. III. That the name of Catholics is abused by the Papists, and is in
their abuse a Donatisticall and hateful name of faction and schism.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

THere was reason why Austin should be moved with the name of Catholic, etc.
to, Now as of this Catholic Church, etc.

W. BISHOP.. 1.
SAint Augustine indeed was so much moved with the name of Catholic, that he
alleges Cont. Epist. Fund. c. 4. De vera Relig. c. 7.
it to have been one principal cause, which kept him in the lap of the
Church. And elsewhere very often exhorts all Christians, To hold the
communion of that Church, which both is Catholic, and known also by that very
name; not only to her own followers, but also to others. And the self same
reason alleged by M. Abbot himself, which caused that most holy wise, and
learned Father to esteem so highly of that title Catholic, is now of great
force to persuade all reasonable men, to make themselves members of the Roman
Church: for by joining in society of faith with the Church of Rome, they shall
communicate with the Church spread over the whole world; because the faith and
religion of the Church of Rome, has been generally received all the world
over, as our adversaries themselves do confess. The name Catholic, is by the
Protestants Donatistically applied to their schismatic congregation, that
neither are nor ever were scattered all the world over* but be enclosed and
confined within certain Countries of Europe, is the Donatists were within the
bounds of Afrike. Most sottishly then (to use his own words) does M. Abbot
affirm, the name Catholic to be applied by us of the Roman religion, unto the
particular Church of Rome; when as we call all other Churches of what Country
soever (that with the Church of Rome keep entirely the same faith) Catholic.
And men of all other nations do we call Catholics, as well as those who are
Romans borne, because they all believe and confess the same one Catholic
faith, that is extended over all the world.

R. ABBOT.
THe name of the Catholic Church might justly move St. Austin to continue in
the society thereof, when under that name August co^t. Epist Fundam. cap. 4.
Tenet ipsum Catholica nomen quod non sine causa inter tam multas h^rescs ista
Ecclesia sola obtinu^t.
Catholic he saw the communion of a Church successively continued from the
time of the Apostles throughout the world, and that only communion every where
termed by that name. There was reason for him to exhort men. Idem de vera
relig. cap. 7. Tenenda est eius Ecclesiae communicatio quae Catholica est and
Catholica nominatur non solum a suis verumetiam ab omnibus inimicis.
to hold communion with that Church which was thus Catholic or Universal, and
so called both of the friends and of all the enemies thereof; and thereby to be
fortified against all heretical distractions and separations, as knowing that
to draw them away from this communion, should be to draw them away from the
Church of Christ. The appellation of Catholics according to the original of
it, as I have Chap. 2. 4.
before noted, imports an interest holden by them that are so called in this
universal communion, without renting themselves by heresy or schism from the
common society and fellowship of the Church. In this only meaning is it rightly
used, and they are mere usurpers of it who take it to themselves without this
or in any other sense. Now whereas M. Bishop according to that sense, as he
pretends, tells us that that name is of great force to persuade all
reasonable men to make themselves members of the Roman Church, he is greatly
deceived himself, and does but seek to deceive others therein, because they
wholly fail in the ground of it, the Church of Rome being neither Catholic
indeed, as St. Austin requires, nor so called by any other, but only by it
self. Who is there in the world so mad as to call the Roman Church the
Catholic Church, but only they that are drunk by drinking of the same cup? He
says that we confess that the faith and religion of the Church of Rome has
been received all the world over; but that is both ways a lie, because
neither do we confess so much, neither was it ever so. And therefore whereas
he says, that by joining in society of faith with the Church of Rome, we shall
communicate with the Church spread over the whole world, he again abuses his
Reader, there being at this day no Church in Asia or Africa that holds
communion with the Church of Rome, to say nothing of the Greek Church, and
sundry other in Europe, that do detest the fellowship thereof. I am not
ignorant how they seek to gull the world in this behalf, and what goodgeons
they give men by telling and writing tales from Rome of Gentill^t. in Exam.
Council. Trident.
Patriarchs and Metropolitans of the Egyptians, the Assyrians, the Armenians,
the Aethiopians, and such other like, coming to Rome to submit themselves, and
to be reconciled to the Pope; these jests are now grown stale; these suborned
and counterfeit Patriarchs have been discryed, and were they not men absurdly
impudent they would never practice the like cosenage again. And yet my friend
And. Eudoem. adu. R. Abbat. Respon. lib. 3. sect. 6. Aegyptius C^phtorum
Patriarcha a qu^ Aethiopia petit pracepta fidei, ad communionem Catholicam
nuper Clemente octau^ Pontifice redijt.
Cac^daemon tells us in sadness of the Egyptian Patriarch, upon whom all
the Churches of Aethiopia depend (his name is neither known to him nor me)
that now very lately in the time of Clement the eight, he returned to the
communion of their Catholic Church; the wise man not considering that thereby
he does intimate unto us contrary to other fables and tales which they have
given out before, that therefore before that time he was a stranger to them.
Thus by reason that these submissions and reconciliations are still to seek,
and the world sees no appearance nor effect of them, they are every while put
to their shifts to devise new rumors hereof, and to stuff the old coat of
some Gibeonite with straw, setting him up upon a poles end under the name of
the Patriarch of some far Country, so to feed the humors and fancies of
them, that do yield themselves content to be gulled and deluded by them. But
against this foolery the Catholic Bishops truly noted against the Donatists,
that Collat. Carthag 1. cap. 55. Non in vnum aliquem terra locum ex alijs locis
ad Deum gentes venturas esse praedictum est, sed in ocis suis ^um adoraturas
it was not foretold by the Prophets, that the nations should from other places
come to God into any one place of the earth, but that in their own places they
should worship him. This they held to be enough, and knew no need^ of hunting
or seeking to this place or that place, either to Rome or to Africa, as under
the ouerture whereof they might have readier access to God, because all places
were alike to him. Where if M. Bishop will say that they do not require that
every one shall come to Rome to worship God there, I answer him, that when the
Donatists did require August. co^t. Crescon. Gra^. mat. lib. 3 c. 34. Tot
populi quid fecerunt, quicum ista nescirent, tamen a v^bis rebaptizandi
censentur?
all nations to be rebaptized by them, they were not so mad as to think that
it should concern all men personally to come into Africa, but would have
thought it sufficient that though not immediately by themselves, yet mediately
by their rebaptizers, though not in person, yet in devotion and affection they
had been there; that in the mean time they did respect it as the rock from
whence in their conuerters they were dug; as the root of their
Christianity, the oracle of their doubts, the place of their appeals, the
sanctuary of piety, from whence by communicating with it, all their Services
and Sacrifices should ascend to be acceptable unto God. Such as would have
yielded them this regard, they would never have doubted, though they had never
come into Africa, to adiudge them true members of their Church: and therefore
the Fathers in denying any one place to which the nations should need to come,
that they might come to God, either spoke idly against the Donatists, or else
must be understood to deny any such one place as I have said. But the Papists
not content to attribute that to their Rome which the Donatists did to Africa,
have further made it a matter of so great merit and moment with God, to come to
Rome to do devotion there, as that to them that do so or do by money redeem
the necessity of going thither, thereby to be esteemed as if they did go, they
have proclaimed the full pardon and remission of all their sins. Since then
the Catholic Church imports the universal communion of 1. Cor. 1. 2.
all that call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place through
the world, and the communion of the Roman Church is extremely short of being
extended over the whole world, being limited to one place, and being particular
and private only to one sect and sort of men, out of the number and company
whereof are innumerable Christians and Christian Churches, which as the case
stands neither have nor desire to have any portion therein, yea undoubtedly a
number that never have heard either of the Pope or of the Roman Church, it must
needs follow that as they deal absurdly who call the Roman Church the
Catholic Church, so they deal as absurdly who appropriate the name of
Catholics to the communion of the Roman Church, which cannot arise but from
the communion and fellowship indifferently of the universal Church. And hereby
it appears that though some of them had dispersed themselves into all
nations, yet they could no more take upon them thereby to be Catholics, then
the Donatists in the like case could have done. For as the Donatists though
they had set foot into all other Countries, as they did into Italy and
Spain, and out of Africa particularly so called into many parts and Provinces
of Africa at large, yet could not for that have been called Catholics,
because through the whole world they should have been but a part of the whole
Church, Aug. Epist. 161. Pars vestra quae Donati dicitur, etc.
Pars Donati, Donatus his part, depending upon one man, and divided under his
name from the common society of the Church; even so the Papists also though
they should spread themselves in the same sort, yet should not thereby obtain
the right of the name of Catholics, because they should be but a part of the
whole, the Popes part, depending upon him and under his name divided from an
innumerable multitude of all nations, who though they disclaim the Pope, yet
doubt not to have interest in the Church as well as they, and therefore where
they are, are no other but a faction and schism, renting the union and
communion of the Church of Christ. Surely if anciently there had been any such
dependence of the Church upon the Bishop of Rome, as the Papists pretend now,
the Donatists being offended as St. Austin witnesses, August. co^t. lit.
Petil. l. 2. c. 39. Quia vos de part Donati essedicimus, qu^ritis hominem de
cuius part (...) esse dicatis.
that they were called Donatists or Donatus his part, and seeking to entitle
their adversaries under the name of another part* would never have been to
seek herein, but being at so great square with the Church of Rome as M. Bishop
has alleged, would have given them a name from the Bishop of Rome, to whom as
their Prince and chief they were as fast tied as they themselves were to
Collat. Carthag. 3. cap. 32. Petil. N^c nunc abnuo esse mihi principem ac
f^isse beatiss^m^ santaeque memoris Donatum.
their Prince Donatus. But because there w^nted ground and occasion of so
doing, the Church then standing in the liberty whereunto Christ had called it,
and neither addicting it self to any one place, nor yielding it self servant
to any mo^^all man, therefore they divised otherwise as occasion and stomach
led them, sundry names which they applied unto them, Aug. Epist. 164. Nos
Macarianos appellatis.
Macarians, Collat. Carthag. ^ cap. 30. Petil. Palam aperteque designo
Mensuris(...) cos and Ceci(...)istas esse.
Mensurists, Cecilianists, of Macarius, Mensurius, Ceciltanus, even in the like
manner as the Papists, being offended that we call them Papists, for tying
their deuo^^on wholly to the Pope, seek to return the same objection of
partiality upon us, by calling us Zwinglians, Lutherans, Caluinists; whereas we
yield no more either to Zwinglius, or Luther, or Calum, then we do to all
other learned men, so far only to regard them as their proofs go: yea and
do determine that whosoever in adhering to any one place or any one man, do
affirm themselves only in that communion to be the Church of Christ, they are
no other but Donatists, they are no other but Schismatikes, mere breakers and
disturbers of Christian peace. Whence it follows as I have said that the
Papists are no other, who limit the name of Catholics, and of the Catholic
Church, only to the communion of the Pope and of the Roman Church. Which M.
Bishop here does, who though he say that all other Churches of what Country
so(...)r may be called Catholic, makes restr^int of his ^ll in this sort,
that with the Church of Rome keep^ entirely the same faith. In which sort the
Donatists also would not have denied all other Churches to be called Catholic,
that with their Church of Africa kept entirely the same faith: and therefore I
said rightly before, that the name is now by the Papists Donatistically applied
not only to one particular Church of Rome, as M. Bishop falsely repeateth, to
put the sot if he could from himself to me, but also as I added to men bearing
the name of Catholics only for communicating with that Church. As for us, we
apply the name Catholic no more to the congregations of the Protestants, then
we do to all that profess in truth the communion of one universal Church.
The name of Protestants being casual, and arising by occasion in these
Northern parts, may happily be enclosed and confined within the bounds of
Europe, but the Church of Christ cannot be so enclosed, and Aug. Epist. 48.
Erit Anathema quisquis annunciauerit Ecclesiam praeter communionem omnium
gentium.
cursed is he, says St. Austin, that preaches the Church otherwise then in
the communion of all nations. No otherwise do we preach the Church; we limit
it not to our selves; we say the Papists ought not to limit it to themselves.
There are questions betwixt them and us, but how many Christian Churches are
there in the world which neither know them nor us, nor have ever heard any
thing of the quarrels that are betwixt us? How many Churches are there in the
East which have heard of the Pope and his proceedings, and will by no means
endure to hold communion with him? He will say that those Churches do not
accord with us in judgment of all points of faith. Be it so; no more did
Cyprian and Aug. cont. Gaudent. lib. 3 art. 10. Quando rebaptizabat Cyprianus
ab h^reticis venientes, Ecclesia Carthagine^sis Episcopus, tunc Ecclesi^
Romanae Stephanus Episcopus in ^odem baptism^ quem foris accep^ra^t suscipiebat
^aereticos and ambo haec diuersa facien^es in vnitate Catholica permanebant.
Stephanus Bishop of Rome agree in all points, and yet they were both members
of one Catholic Church. How many differences of opinions are there found
amongst the Fathers, and yet we do not therefore divide them into many
Churches. They may err, and we may ^rre, but we believe that wheresoever the
Gospel of Christ is read and published, there Christ has a people to whom he
reuealeth all truth that shall be necessary unto eternal life. In a word they
profess the same Christ, they read the same Gospel and Scriptures that we
do, and therein our faith both has been from the beginning, and does now
continue dispersed and spread over the whole world.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
SEcondly, M. Abbot is much mistaken in his comparison of the name of Jew, with
the name Catholic: for ^o omit first that such examples prove nothing, but do
only serve for show or explication; and moreover, that it can hardly be showed
that the name of Jew was a name of such honor at any time: for that peoples
honorable name was Israelites, and were not called Jews, till toward the
declination and wane of their estate. Neither was it ever any peculiar and
proper title of the people of God: for God had many good servants, that were
never called Jews, as may be gathered by Job the Husit^, Naaman the Syrian,
the widow of Sarepta a Sydonian, and by a great number Luc. 4. verse. 16.
of Prosilites, and finally by that which the Apostle teaches: Many Gentiles
were saved without the law. Romans ^. verse. 14.
Lastly, most uncertain it is, of what name the Prophet Isay speaks when he
says: It shall be left for a name cap. 65. verse. 13.
of curse. All these impertinencies of his example being too too many, I do
remit him, but cannot pardon his gross fault in the maine point of the
comparison: for the name Jew (according to the usual signification of the
word) being the name of a certain people of one race and kindred, and having a
law given them by Moses, which should continue only for a prescript time, and
end at the coming of Christ, is not like the name of Catholic; which is no
special name of the people of any one Countr^y, but is attributed and does
agree to all sorts of men, of what Country or nation soever, that do embrace
the true Christian faith: And is inseparably linked, and so fast joined and
riueted with the Christian profession and religion, that it shall never fail,
fall, or be separated from it, so long as Christ's faith stands; nor ever be
contemned of the faithful, whiles Christ's true religion flourishes: which is
proved inuincibly out of the very Etymology of the name Catholic, and that
according to M. Abbots own interpretation in the same place, who does expound
it to signify that Church, which is through the whole world, and shall be to
the worlds end. If the name Catholic shall continue to the worlds end the true
title of the Church, who then but miscreants and Heretics, can take it for a
name of curse, reproach, and shame? Is it not until this day set down in the
Apostles Creed, as the honorable title and epithet of the true Church? I
believe the holy Catholic Church Must he then not be rather an Apostata then a
Scholar of the Apostles, that blusheth not to anouch the very name Catholic,
to be the proper badge of Apostataes and Heretics, which the Apostles ascribe
and appropriate unto true Christianity? If any proud and false fellows do
usurp that name, and challenge it to themselves wrongfully, as many did even
in S. Augustines time, when M. Abbot confesses it to have been in greatest
estimation, let such usurping companions be rebuked sharply, and convicted of
their insolent and audatious folly: but the name Catholic, which the Apostles
thought worthy and fit to be placed in the articles of our Creed, and
principles of our religion, must always remain and be among true Christians,
a name very glorious and desirable. We therefore say with S. Augustine: We
receive Tract. 32. ^^ Iohannem. Lib. 1. co^t. Gaudent. c. 33.
the holy Ghost, if we love the Church, if we be joined together by charity, if
we rejoice in the Catholic name and faith. And they that do not joy in that
name, but mock at it, doc blaspheme, as the same most holy Author intimates.
The name Jew being taken in the Apostles sense, for one (of what nation soever)
that fulfilleth the justice of the law, never was, nor never shall be a name of
reproach: so that M. Abbot is driven to hop from one sense of that name to
another, to make it applyable to his purpose.

R. ABBOT.
SVch examples, says he, prove nothing, but serve only for explication. And
what of that? As though it were unlawful for me to use explication, and I were
bound to proof only. His first exception then is wholly idle and of no effect
at all. Whereas secondly he says, that it can hardly be showed that the name
of Jew was a name of honor, he says untruly, because the Scripture in sundry
places mentions it with honor, as the name of them with whom God did dwell;
Zachar. 8. 23.
Men of all languages of the nations shall take hold of the skirt of him that
is a Jew, and say; we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with
you: as the name of them from whom salvation was to be derived to other
nations, John 4. 22.
Salvation is of the Jews: as the name of them that had received preferment at
Gods hands; Romans 3. 1.
What is the preferment of the Jew? much every manner of way: the same giving
them a preeminence above others; Galat. 2. 15.
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles: as a name gloried
and rejoiced in; Romans 2. 17.
Behold thou art called a Jew; in respect whereof the Apostle teaches the
truth of the name, that they might not vainly rejoice in it; Verse. 28.
He is not a Jew which is one outward; but he is a Jew which is one within; for
which cause the holy Ghost challenges it from them who literally assumed to
themselves the name for carnal propagation only without regard of inward
truth: Ap^c. 2. 9.
They say they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Satan. He
again denies it to have been a proper title of the people of God; but his
instances to that purpose are vain; for albeit to speak of particular men God
had many good servants of other nations, Job the Husite, Naaman the Syrian, the
Sydonian widow, and many Proselites and conuerts as he alleges, yet there
was no other nation vouchsafed the honor to be called the people of God, but
only the nation of the Jews, according to that of the Psalm, Psalm. 147. 19.
He has given his laws unto Jacob, hi^ Statutes and Ordinances unto Israel;
he has not dealt so with any other nation. As for the words which he adds;
Many Gentiles were saved without the law, they are his own; the Apostle has
no such; and therefore he deals falsely to cite them under the name of the
Apostle. Well, I say then that the name of Jews was of old a name of honor,
and the proper title of the people of God, and yet afterward by their
Apostasy who were so called, it was left for a name of curse and reproach. I
quoted for this the words of the Prophet Esaias: Esaias. 65. 15.
Ye shall leave your name as a curse unto my chosen. M. Bishop hereto says;
Most uncertain it is of what name the Prophet Esaias speaks, when he says, It
shall be left for a name of curse. But the reason of his uncertainty is,
because he will be certain of nothing, which he sees in any sort to make
against him. Certain we are that the prophecy has had his effect, and we see
the effect thereof in the name of Jew, and in no other name, and therefore how
should we but be certain that the prophecy has reference to that name? It is
true that the place with some undergoes another translation, and is thereby
drawn to another construction; but being translated as by M. Bishop it is set
down, which is according to the most proper signification of the words, no
man understands the name there mentioned of any other, but of the name of Jew
only. Thus Hierome according to that translation expounds it; Hieron in Esa.
l. 8. c. 65. Nomen vestrum erit in iuramentum Electis meis vt pro malorum
exemple vos habeant and detestentur talia suslinere and iurent sic; Non hac
pati^r qua poss^^ est popul^^ Iud^^rum.
Your name shall be for an oath to mine Elect, so as that they shall take you
for an example of evils, and shall abhor to suffer such things, and shall
say: Let me not suffer those things which the Jews suffered. The ordinary
Gloss yields the meaning thus; Gloss. Ordinar. in Esai. 65. Vt aliqui
affirmantes dicant: si aliter fecero, conti^gat mihi sicut Judaeis Romanorum
gladio occisis.
So as that men by way of affirmation shall say; If I do otherwise (then I
say) let it befall to me as to the Jews, that were slain with the sword of
the Romans. Lyra thus: Lyra. ibid. Christiani sic iurant aliquando; si feci
istud quod mihi imponitur, suspendar ego per pedes sicut Iudaeus.
Christians sometimes swear thus; If I have done that wherewith I am charged,
let me be hanged by the feet like a Jew. Osorius their own Paraphrast
understands it in the same sort; Osor. Paraphras. in Esai. l. 5. o. 65. Nomen
relinquetis electis infaustum and abhominandum, quod in dirarum imprecationibus
vsurpetur; ita vt quise voluerit execratione deuincire, exitum sibi Iudaoru^
imprecetur si quicquam in se contra quam fas and officium requirit admiserit,
etc. seruos suo^ non tudaeos appellabit Dommus, etc.
Ye shall leave your name to mine Elect as unfortunate, and to be had in
abomination, so as that it shall be used in imprecations and curses, and he
that will bind himself with a curse, shall wish to himself the destruction
of the Jews, if he have done any otherwise then right and just. The Lord shall
not call his servants Jews, but shall give them a new more excellent name. The
name of Jews then it is which is meant in the words of the Prophet, and
therefore hither to there are no impertinences in mine example, but his
exceptions are altogether impertinent. Yet being taken for such, he is content
like a kind Gentleman to remit them, but tells me that there is a gross
fault in the maine point of the comparison which he cannot pardon. Doubtless
it is some reserved case: his holy Father the Pope must pardon it, and none but
he. And what is it I pray you? Forsooth, the name Jew being the name of a
certain people of one race and kindred, and having a law given them by Moses,
which should continue only for a prescript time, and end at the coming of
Christ, is not like the name Catholic. It may be, M. Bishop, that in all
things it is not like, and I suppose you are not so ignorant, but that you know
that it is needless that things compared should every way and in every respect
answer each the other. It is a common saying, that Omnis similitudo v^^ pede
claudicat.
every similitude halte thou one foot at the least: and concerning the
similitudes and parables used by our Savior Christ in the Gospel, Origin
notes, that Origin. in Mat. cap. 13. Quemadmodum in imaginibus and statuis
similitudines non omni ex part respondentijs adqu^ conferuntur, etc. simititer
mihi cogita and de similitudinib^s quae s^^^t in Euangelio:
as images and pictures do not on all parts and in all respects fit to those
things which they represent, so neither do those similitudes that are used in
the Gospel. It is sufficient always in this case that the resemblance stand
good in that, in respect whereof the similitude is taken. Now therefore albeit
the name of Jew do import a people of one race and kindred, and the name of
Catholic do not so, yet the name of Jew implies withal a certain
profession of religion and devotion toward God, according to the oracles of
God, delivered unto that people, and therein it agrees with the name of
Catholic, which amongst Christians has done the like. The name of Jew
importing of old a prerogative of being the people of God, and of having the
knowledge of God and of true religion, was a name of honorable respect, as I
have showed, and therein the name of Catholic is answerable to it, having
been wont to signify the true professors of Christian faith, living in the
unity and fellowship of one Catholic Church, being thereby partakers of the
honor that belongs to the same Church. The name of Jew though in it self a
gracious and lovely name, yet by the infidelity and apostasy of them who for
carnal propagation only continued it to themselves, without regard of the
spiritual duty thereto annexed, became a name of curse and reproach. What
hinders but that I might also say, the thing being so, that the name of
Catholics also, though honorable and desirable in it self, and in that use
whereto it was of old applied, yet being abused by unjust usurpers of it, is in
them and in their abuse a name of curse and infamy, so as that when we hear
such a man call himself a Catholic, we take him thereby to be a man of shame,
and to carry the mark of an Apostata and an Heretic. Yea but the law of the
Jews, says he, was to continue but for a time, and to end at the coming of
Christ, whereas the name of Catholic shall never fail* It is true that the
law of the Jews as touching the outward ceremonies was to end at the coming
of Christ, but in the spiritual use and doctrine thereof accomplished in
Christ, it was to remain for ever. Wherein if the Jews had continued by
faith, their name and they themselves had continued in honor, but Romans 11. 20.
by unbelief they were broken off, and thereby their name grew to that
detestation spoken of. Even so the faith for which men at first were called
Catholics, shall remain without end, wherein if they had continued that
assume to themselves that name, it should have been to them still as of old it
was a name of honor; but having seized upon the name only by external and
carnal succession, and having banished that faith which they professed, who of
old were called Catholics, the name according to their understanding of it is
odious and hateful, neither does any faithful man joy to be called a
Catholic, lest he should seem to be partaker with them in their perfidious
apostasy from the faith of Christ. For the better clearing whereof and better
discovery of M. Bishops fraud, who to deceive the simple hudleth and
confounds all, it is to be obse^ued that the word Catholic in our common
speech is taken sometimes adiectiuely and sometimes substantiuely. Adiectiuely
as when we say the Catholic Church, the Catholic Faith, the Catholic Doctors
and Fathers; and thus we forbear not to use the name, but it is common in our
mouths and in all our writings, neither will we make it any doubt or question
with M. Bishop, but that the Church has been from the beginning, and shall be
to the end called the Catholic Church. But it is otherwise taken
substantiuely, and put absolutely to design the persons that are styled by the
name of Catholics, as when a Papist says that he is a Catholic, and that
they generally are Catholics, in which sort it was not used from the
beginning, and therefore there is no necessity of the continuance of it to the
end. For the space of three hundred years after Christ until the time of
Constantine, and the arising of the heresy of the Donatists, I do not think
it can be showed that Christians of true belief were accustomed any where to
be called by the name of Catholics. I would entreat M. Bishop for my learning
to bring me Tertullian, or Origin, or Athanasius, or Clemens Alexandrinus, or
Cyprian, or Euscbius, or any other of those times, by whom it may appear that
there was any such use thereof. Nay Athanasius certainly knew it not, who to
express the true professors of the faith, uses no other names but to call
them, Athanas. Apolog. 2. Epist. Sardic Council. Omnes vbique Orthodoxae fidei
homines.
Men of the orthodoxe or right faith, or more briefly to the same effect, Ibid.
Ab Eusebianis contra Orthodoxos acta. and Epist. proxima. Toti in hoc sunt vt
Orthodoxos eijciant.
The Orthodoxe, or elsewhere, Ibid. Epist. Iulij. Fere omnes Clericos and
Populos Ecclesiae Catholicae insidij^ appeti.
The Clergy and People of the Catholic Church, or such like, and found no
general or usual name to that purpose but only Christians. Which appoareth
very plainly where arguing against the Arians from their very name of Arians,
he says thus: Athanas. co^t. Arian. Orat. 2. Nunquam populus ab Epi^copis suis
sed a Domino in quem credidit, nomen accepit. Certe a beatis Apostolis
preceptoribus nostris ministrisque Euangelij Saluatoris nostri app^llationes
adepti non sumus, sed a Christo Christiani and sumus and nuncupamur. Illi vero
qui al^unde originem suae fidei deducunt, merito authorum suorum cognomenta, vt
ad quos pertineant, praeseserunt. Quapropter cum omnes a Christo Christiani and
essemus and diceremur, explosus est Morcion inuentor haereseos: reliqui autem
qui cum Marcionis explosore remansere. Christiani titulum retinuerunt: qui vero
secuti sunt Marcionem, non iam inde Christiani sed Marcionistae appellati sunt.
Ita quoque Va^entinus, Basilides, Manichaeus, and Simon Magus sectatoribus sua
vocabula impertierunt, ind^que factum vt alij Valentiniani, alij Basilidiani,
etc vocitati sint, Ita Melctius eiectus a Petro, etc. suos qui ipsum
sequebantur non Christianos postea, sed Meletianos denominauit. Eadem it erum
ratione Alexandro Arium eijciente, ij qui Alexandro adhaeserunt remanserunt
Christiani, illi vero qui vna cum Ario recesserunt, nomen Saluatoris nostri
Alexandro cum suis relinquentes, Ariani deinceps appellati sunt. Quinimo ecce
^tiam nunc post mortem Alexandri qui eiusdem communionis sunt cum Athanasio
Alexandri successo^e and quibus ipse Athanasius communione coniunctus est omnes
eundem pariter characterem habent neque ille suis nomen indit aut a suis
recipit, sed omnes, vt antea, consuet^ more Christiani nominantur.
Never any people took name of their Bishops, but of the Lord in whom they
believed. We have not taken names from the holy Apostles our Masters and
Ministers of the Gospel of our Savior, but of Christ we both are and are
called Christians, but they who derive the original of their faith from any
other, do worthily bear the names of their authors as to whom they do
belong. When as therefore we all were and were called Christians of Christ,
Marcion the inuentor of heresy was worthily exploded. The other which remained
with him by whom Marcion was exploded, retained the name of Christians, but
they who followed Marcion were no longer called Christians, but Marcionites.
And thus Valentinus, Basilides, Manicheus and Simon Magus gave names to their
followers, and thence it came that some were called Valentinians, other
Basilidians, other Manichees, other Simonians, other Cataphrygians of their
Country Phrygia, other Nouatians of Nouatus* Thus Meletius being eiected by
Peter a Bishop and Martyr, named them that followed him not any more Christians
but Meletians. In the same sort when Alexander eiected Arius, they who cleaued
to Alexander remained Christians, but they who went away with Arius leaving the
name of Christians to Alexander and his, were thenceforth called Arians.
Moreover even now after the death of Alexander, they who are of the same
communion with Athanasius the successor of Alexander, and with whom Athanasius
himself is joined in communion, they all still keep the same mark; he
neither gives any name to them nor they to him, but all as before according to
the accustomed manner are called Christians. This place I have set down at
large, that the Reader may see that Athanasius here could not have omitted the
name of Catholics, there being such occasion to draw it from him, if it had
been then in use, and that the common names of opposition were then, not
Catholics and Heretics, but Christians and Heretics: even as Cyprian also
uses it, saying of Stephanus; Cyprian. ad Pompeium. Qui haeret^coru^ caus^m
contra Christianos and contra Ecclesiam Dei esscrere conatur.
He goes about to maintain the cause of Heretics against Christians and
against the Church of God, the word Catholic being never found in either of
them, personally taken or substantiuely as before was said, but only that
Athanasius mentions one surnamed Athanas. Epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Faustinus Catholicus homo and genere Bithy^us and opinionibus haereticus.
Catholicus, an Arian Heretic, and a persecutor of the faith. We may therefore
well think that there was little discretion riueted to M. Bishops head, that
would tell us that the name so taken is so fast joined and riueted with
Christian profession and religion, as that it cannot be separated from it; for
if it were not so riueted then, how comes it to pass that it is so now? The
original thereof was as we may well conjecture, by occasion of the heresy of
the Donatists, who challenged the name of the Church to a part in Africa or
elsewhere, which were followers of Donatus, against whom they that defended the
Church Catholic, were thereof in process of time termed by the name of
Catholics. The first use then of the name of Catholics, stood in opposition
betwixt Catholics and Donatists, albeit custom soon transported it to make a
general opposition betwixt Catholics and Heretics. Now the name thus arising
accidentally and only by occasion, who doubts but that without prejudice of
Christian profession it may by occasion be let fall again? And what greater
occasion can there be then the Popish abuse thereof, who make a Catholic to
import the same in effect now, that a Donatist did then? For with them a
Catholic is no otherwise taken but for a Roman Catholic; and because the
whole Church is not Roman but a part only, what is this Roman Catholic, but
one who under the false name of a Catholic divides himself from the whole
Church, as the Donatists did, to cleave to a part thereof? What is the name of
a Catholic then with them but a Donatisticall name, schismatic and
factious, and therefore wicked and hateful, and in their sense wholly to be
abandoned out of the Church of God? Hereby it may appear how idly M. Bishop
says, that the Apostles did ascribe and appropriate the name Catholic to true
Christianity; for although they taught us to believe the Church to be
Catholic, that is, universally extended through the world; yet did they never
teach, neither was it for a long time after them accustomed, that true
Christians were called by the name of Catholics, and therefore without wrong
to any thing which the Apostles taught, we may rightly say that the name
according to the Popish abuse thereof, is become the proper badge and mark of
Apostataes and Heretics. And therefore although if we had been in the time of
Austin, we would with him August. in Joan. tract. 32. Catholico nomine and fide
gaudemus.
have rejoiced in the Catholic name and faith, yet now we cannot with the
Papists rejoice in the name of Catholics, and without any blasphemy we reject
it; because under that name they have divided themselves from the Catholic
Church, and have destroyed the true Catholic faith. Who though they be no
other but proud and false fellows, as M. Bishop speaks, and mere usurping
companions, and their insolent and audacious folly have been both rebuked and
convicted, yet do still impudently and infinitely persist in their absurd
claim, and do leave us no way but only to desist from the communion of the
name, which we cannot free from that abuse. Now whereas I say further, that
Romans 2. 28.
the Apostle denies the name of Jews to them, who yet according to the letter
were so called, because of the circumcision of the flesh, and applies the
truth of the name to them, who were so according to the spirit, albeit
according to the letter they were not so named; M. Bishop very discreetly
answers, that the name Jew being taken in the Apostles sense for one of what
nation soever that fulfilleth the justice of the law, never was nor shall be a
name of reproach. But what is this, I pray to that, that I say? Do my words
import that the name of a Jew in that sense is or has been a name of reproach?
When I say, that the Apostle applies the truth of the name to the faithful,
would he conceive me that the Apostle applies to them a name of reproach? My
words plainly signify that the name in vulgar and literal construction
applied to them, who by propagation of nature are the seed of Abraham, is
become a name of reproach and shame; but that as it has implication of
spiritual circumcision and conformity with Abraham, it is a name of honor,
though they to whom it appertains be not according to the letter, and in
common speech called by that name. Let him then understand proportionably that
the truth of the name of Catholics, belongs not to the Romish faction, who
challenge to themselves as the Jews did, to have gotten by succession the
possession of the name, and will be commonly so called; but it belongs to us,
who though we use not the word being grown to ill meaning by their abuse, yet
do maintain one and the same truth with them, who first were called by that
name. In a word as there is a double sense in the one, so is there also in the
other, and I do not so hoppe from one sense to another in the one, but that I
show a just ^orrespondence betwixt them both.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
But ( and it please you) the Protestants have the kernel of the name
Catholic, and we but the shell. Why do they then so bitterly inueigh against
it? why are they not more willing to extol and magnify that renowned title,
being of such ancient Nobility? Twenty pound to a penny, that what face soever
he set on it, yet in his heart he meruailously fears the contrary himself.
If that faith and religion only be Catholic and Universal (as he
acknowledges) that has ever been, and is also spread over all the world, and
shall continue to the worlds end; then surely their religion cannot be
Catholic, even by the uniform confession of themselves: who generally
acknowledge, that for nine hundred years together, the Papacy did so domineer
all the world over, that not a man of their religion was to be found in any
corner of the world, that durst peep out his head to contradict it. Could
there be any Church of theirs then, when there was not one Pastor and flock of
their religion (though never so small) in any one Country? And even now when
their Gospel is at the hottest, has it spread it self all the world over? is
it received in Italy, Spain, Greece, Afrike, or Asia, or carried into the
Indians? nothing less. They cannot then call themselves Catholics, after the
sincere and ancient acceptance of that name, which is as himself has often
repeated out of S. Augustine: Quia communicant Ecclesiae to to or be diffusae,
Because they communicate in fellowship of faith with the Church spread over all
the world. They must therefore (notwithstanding M. Abbots vain bragges) be
content with the shell, and leave the kernel to us, who do embrace the same
faith that is dilated all Countries over: yea, they must be contented to walk
in the foote-steps of their forefathers the Donatists, even according to M.
Abbots explication, and fly from the universality of faith and communion of
the Church spread all the world over, unto the perfection of their doctrine;
which is nevertheless more absurd, and further from the true signification of
the word Catholic, then the Donatists shift was of fullness of Sacraments, and
observation of all Gods Commandments, as has been already declared. But let
us hear how clearly and substantially, he will at length prove their Church
to be Catholic.

R. ABBOT.
IT pleases us very well, M. Bishop, that we have the kernel of the name of
Catholics, and in the mean time because your importunity so requires, we are
content to leave the shell to you. The kernel serves us to feed upon, and it
is very tastfull to us; but you have berayed the shell, and therefore we have
no care to meddle with it. Our inueighing against it is no otherwise but in
respect of your abuse; let it be restored to his true use, and we shall be
ready to extol it, and where it is so, we do so. As for your wager, M.
Bishop, of twenty pound to a penny, you have lost it, and you know that you have
lost it, because you see that I have set no other face upon the matter then by
sufficient proofs I have made good. But here he takes in hand to bereave us of
the kernel, because our faith and religion was never Catholic, that is, was
never spread over the whole world. Whereas I on the other side do tell him,
that it is only our religion which appears to have been absolutely spread
over all the word* and none but ours. For our religion is no more nor other
then is contained in the Gospels and Epistles of the Apostles, and because we
know that the religion there set down was spread over all the world, therefore
we cannot doubt but that our religion is that, that was spread over all the
world, and though Apostasy has ouershadowed it, yet has ever since continued
in the world. As for that which he alleges to the contrary, it is no uniform
confession of ours, but a deformed lie of his own. We do not acknowledge that
for nine hundred years together there was not a man of our religion to be
found in the world. The Papacy indeed did mightily domineer accordingly as it
was foretold, but yet it could never so prevail to the extirpation of our
religion, but that even in the midst of the Papacy it has continued still;
yea thousands and hundred thousands, as by their own stories appears, have
been murdered and slain for the profession thereof. Yea in the very religion
of Popery our religion has continued; for what is Popery, but a doctrine
compounded of our religion, and their own device? Our religion has served
them for a foundation, whereupon to build, not only their wood, and hay, and
stubble, but also the wildfire and poison of their idolatries and damnable
heresies, which without the pretense and color of our religion, Christian
ears would have detested and abhorred, but therefore dreaded them not, because
they saw them cloaked with show of still retaining that which we profess. They
durst not deny those Canonical books of the old and new Testament, which our
religion receives, but to serve their turn they added other books not
inspired of God, to be notwithstanding of like authority with those. They
acknowledged the Lords prayer, the articles of the Creed, the ten
Commandments, which we receive as principles of our religion, but they
frustrated them by a superstitious custom brought in of reciting them like a
charm in an unknown tongue. They have never denied the two Sacraments which
we teach, which were fast rooted in Christian profession; but they have added
to them other five, and made them up seven. They used no other substantial
form of Baptism then we do; only they profaned it with sundry polluted and
corrupt ceremonies of humane device. In their Mass and Sacrament of the Altar,
the ground of all is that that we do according to the institution of Christ,
and example of the primitive Church. They bring bread and wine to the Lords
table, they sanctify or consecrate the same with the words of Christ; when and
where they list they administer the same to the people, and all this they take
upon them to do in remembrance of the Passion, Death, and Resurrection of our
Lord Jesus. This is our religion, and herein their example justifies us; but
their doctrines of transubstantiation, and real presence, and concomitancy,
and sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead, with the rest of that kind,
are additions of theirs, whereof the institution of Christ which together with
us they recite, makes no show at all. If they should have disclaimed
redemption and remission of sins, by the bloodshed and death of Christ,
Christian people would have defied them; therefore they left the name thereof
in the Church, which is our religion, but they defeated the power of it by
bri^ging in a thousand other devices, whereby men should redeem themselves, and
purchase the remission of their own sins. It is our religion to acknowledge
Christ to be the Mediator betwixt God and Man, and this they would never
disauow; but to Christ they have joined the Saints also to be our Mediators. It
is our religion to teach that God is to be worshipped, and all spiritual
devotion is to be done unto him, and this they cannot deny: but they have added
hereto the worshipping of Saints and Saints Images, and thereby have defiled
the worship of the immortal God. They deny not grace which our religion
teaches, but they put to it the power of nature and free will. They dare not
but confess Christ to be the head of the Church, which our religion teaches;
but they have added the Pope to be another head, and so have made the Church a
Monster with two heads. Thus in every point of doctrine take away those
patcheries and additions of theirs, which are things not taught us by the word
of God, and even in their religion that which remains is our religion, the
very truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. For these and such other
propositions of true faith the Devil could never abolish out of the Church;
only by Antichrist he suppressed the knowledge and use of them, and to this
wholesome wine put such abundance of his corrupt and poisoned waters, as might
frustrate the power and effect thereof. Wherein notwithstanding he could not so
far prevail, but that the light here and there brake forth by such chinks
and lattises as were remaining, which many of our forefathers in the time of
that Egyptian darkness, did discern and see to their everlasting comfort
and souls health. Yea M. Bishop knows well that there were in those times
both Pastors and Flocks, not in one only Country, but in many, who detested
those blendings and mixtures of theirs, and kept themselves either wholly or
for the most part to the entire truth of our religion, the light whereof even
then shined unto them out of the very darkness of the Church. Which
notwithstanding we wonder not that he pretends not to know, who will seem
not to know that our religion has spread it self into Italy and Spain, when
as all the world knows that the Inquisition has shed the blood of many
thousands there only for the profession of our religion. Yea the principles of
our religion are so residing, will they, nill they, in the very bowels of
Popery, as that they are forced to use many sinister courses to drown and
stifle them, and to keep the people from taking knowledge thereof, because
they see that if there be but wind to blow away the ashes, our fire will
straightwaies burn amongst them, and the flame presently ascend to the
consuming of their roof; they see that if men be but stirred a(...) awaked out
of their sleep, they will be forthwith ready out of the very common instinct
of Christianity to beeleeue as we do. In Greece, in Africa, in Asia,
wheresoever the Gospel is, there is no other but our Gospel, because there is
no Gospel but that which the Evangelists and Apostles have recorded in the
writings of the Gospel, neither is Christ any where known, but where he is
known by that Gospel. Therein has our Gospel been spread over the whole
world; therein we communicate with the Church of the whole world; wheresoever
this Gospel is free, there our religion is not bound; but thereby even amidst
error and apostasy, b wisdom is justified of her children, and God Mat. 11.
19.
according to the purpose of his grace gives light unto everlasting life. As
for the Indians, lamentable experience have they had of the Popish Gospel.
Never any Apostle or Evangelist carried their religion abroad as the Papists
have done thither: and they have cause to wish that the Roman Church had never
been so Catholic as to extend to them. Upon some few of the remainder of them
they have forced baptism and some of their ceremonies, but they have taught
them nothing of religion, nothing of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. How otherwise
their religion has been spread over the whole world, enough has been said
already: in brief I say here that they can allege no age nor time wherein
they can make good that it has so been. We know they can talk at will, but
far are they from proof that their doctrines of the Popes Supremacy, his
Pardons and Jubilees, of Purgatory, of Transubstantiation, of their private
Mass and half Communion, with a number of such other, were ever or at any
time received throughout the whole world.

CHAP. IIII. That the Church before Christ even from the beginning was a part
of the Catholic Church; and that the faith and religion of the new Testament
differs not in substance from the old.
A BRIEF DEFENSE OF THE KINGS SVPREMACY ECCLESIASTICAL.

ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

NOw as of this Catholic Church from the beginning to the end there is, etc.
to, Now whereas he alleges, etc.

W. BISHOP.. 1.
WE agree in this, that there is but one faith, one baptism, one spiritual
food, and one religion in the Catholic Church: but M. Abbot is foully
ouer-seen about the time, when the true Church began first to be called
Catholic; which was not before Christ's time but afterward, according to that
alleged out of Pacianus an ancient Author, who writes of the name Catholic,
saying: Pacian. Epist. ad Simphor. de nomine Catholico.
Christian is my name, Catholic is my surname. For when among Christians some
began to teach false doctrine, and to draw others after them into sects, they
that remained sound, and did cleave fast unto the whole body of the Church were
entitled Catholics, to distinguish them from Heretics, that did not join
with the universal corpse of Christians, in faith and religion; which M. Abbot
before did in plain words confess: see his text before, where he begins to
argue of the word Catholic. And the reason is most perspicuous, why the Jews
and their religion could not be called Catholic, though it were right and
according to the will of God for that time, because Catholic signifies that
which is spread all the world over, and received of all nations; so was not the
law of Moses, and the manner of serving God therein prescribed, but was
peculiar unto the children of Israel, and as it were confined within the limits
of one land and country: wherefore it could not be called Catholic and
Universal.

R. ABBOT.
MAster Bishop is foully ouerseene, to make it a question here, what time it was
that the Church began to be called Catholic, it being sufficient to my
purpose that the Church before the time of Christ, albeit it were not then
called Catholic, yet was a part of that Church which has been so called
since the time of Christ, even as the arm which coming first out of the
womb, bears not the name of the child, and yet is a part of the child, which
is afterward called by that name. Therefore, St. Austin dividing mankind into
Aug. in psalm. 61. Vna ciuitas and vna ciuitas. Babylonia vna; Jerusalem vna.
Illa rege Diabolo; ista rege Christo, etc. Illa incepit a Cain, haec ab Abel.
two Cities, the one under the Devil as King thereof, the other under Christ;
the one Babylon, the other Jerusalem ( Heb. 12. 22.
the heavenly Jerusalem, Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem which is above, which is the Mother of us all) begins Jerusalem
at Abel, as he does Babylon at Cain, and makes Aug. in psalm. 86. Ciuis inde
Propheta, ciuis inde Apostolus.
the Prophets as well as the Apostles citizens thereof, and by another
similitude calls the Christian Church Idem in psalm. 79. Quid est expectandii
secundae vincae, in mo eidem vineae? ipsa est enim; non enim altera est.
one and the same vineyard with the Church of the Jews. And if M. Bishop will
not learn this of Austin, let him learn it of Gregory Bishop of Rome, saying
that God Gregor. in Euang. hom. 19. Habet vineam, vniuersalem scilicet
Ecclesiam, quae ab Abel ^usto vsque ad vltimum electum qui in fine mundi
nasciturus est quot sanctos pretulit, quasi tot palmit^s misit.
has his vineyard, even the universal Church, which yields so many branches
as it brings forth Saints from righteous Abel unto the last Elect that shall
be borne in the end of the world: and again, that Idem in Ezech. hom. 15. Vna
est Ecclesia electorum praecedentium atque sequentium.
there is but one Church of the Elect, both before and since the time of
Christ. Or if he be loath to turn so great a volume as Gregory's works, let
him look into their own Roman Catechism, where he shall find that it is one
cause why the Church is called Catechism. Roman. part 1. cap. 10. sect. 16.
Praeterea omnes fideles qui ab Adam in hunc vsque diem suerant qui^e futuri
sunt quamdiu mundus durabit, veram fi^em profitentes ad eandem Eccl^siam
pertinent.
Catholic, because all the faithful who have been from Adam till this day,
and shall be to the worlds end professing the true faith do belong unto it.
What? has M. Bishop been so long a Doctor of Divinity, and yet does he not
know that the Catholic Church though it were not called Catholic, till after
the coming of Christ, yet now is understood to contain all the faithful,
from the beginning to the end? Undoubtedly he knew it well enough, but my
collection galled him, and he saw there was no way but by cauilling to make
show to shift it of. But if he did not, let him have wit to learn it now, and
let him take my words accordingly, that as of the Catholic Church from the
beginning to the end, there is but one body even as one Lord, one God and
Father of all, so there is also but one spirit, which quickneth that one body,
and Ephesians. 4. 4.
one faith, whereby we are all partakers of that spirit, both which the Apostle
joins together when of the faithful both of the old and new Testament, he
says, that they have 2. Cor. 4. 13.
the same spirit of faith. Of this one spirit Gregory says, that Greg. in
psalm. 5. Poenitent. Sicut est vna anima quae diuersa corporis membra viuisicat;
ita totam simul Ecclesia^ vnus spiritus sanctus vegetat and illustrat.
as it is but one soul which quickneth the diverse members of the body, so one
holy spirit gives life and light to the whole Church. Whether we respect them
that were before the incarnation of Christ, or them that come after, they both
make but one body, and therefore the holy Ghost as the soul is but one and the
same to both. So of faith Gregory tells us, that Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 16
^ade sides ^pes, charitas, in antiquis patribus quae in nouis Doctoribus fuit.
in the old Fathers was the same faith, hope, and charity, as in the new
teachers, namely the Apostles and the rest. So likewise Leo Bishop of Rome
says, that Leo in Natluit. Dom. ser. 3. Fides qua viuimus nulla fuit aetate
diuersa.
the faith whereby we live was never different in any age, but Ide^ de Pass.
Dom. sermon. 14. Vna fides iustificat vniuersoru^ temporu^ sanctos.
one faith, says he, justifies the Saints of all times. Aug in Joan. tract.
45. Tempora variata sut, non fides, etc. In diuersis signis eadem fides.
There is difference of the times, says Austin, but not of the faith; in
diversity of signs there is the same faith. Idem Epist. 89. Sacramenta variata
sunt vt alia essent in veteri Testamento, alia in nouo, cum fides varia non sit
sed vna sit.
The Sacraments are altered, one sort in the old Testament, other in the new,
whereas faith is not diverse but one still. Now though the signs and Sacraments
were diverse, yet because there was the same faith and the same spirit,
therefore the effects of faith and of the spirit were the same, so that what we
receive spiritually in Baptism and the Lords Supper, they also though in other
Sacraments received the same, so that they were spiritually baptized, they did
eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood as well as we, as was before
intimated in my answer, and M. Bishop gives occasion to declare further in
the next section. Of the original of the name Catholic and Catholics, I have
spoken before that that may suffice, and though M. Bishop have drawn it in, it
is impertinent here to stand upon it.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
ANd M. Abbot was greatly deceived, or else goes about to deceive others, when
for proof of communicating with the Catholic Church, he recoileth back unto
the beginning of the world. Why did he not rather show, that their new Gospel
flourished in all Countries as soon as the Christian faith was planted, and
that it has continued in all ages since the Apostles days, until our time?
that had been to have spoken directly to the purpose, which he seldom uses.
But he saw that to be a work too hard for Hercules, and therefore to delude
his Reader, and to lead him from the matter, he flies up to the old
farne-daies of Abel, Noe, Abraham, etc. as though they had revealed unto them,
all those particular points of faith which Christ taught his Apostles, and the
same religion and manner of worshipping God that we Christians have; which is
flatly opposite to the doctrine of S. Paul, who testifies; That the mystery of
Christ unto Ephesians. 3. verse. 4.
other generations, was not known unto the sons of men, as now it is
revealed unto his holy Apostles and Prophets in the spirit. Those ancient
Patriarchs (as men looking a far off, at the days of Hebr. 11. v. 13.
Christ the light of the world) did not discover so distinctly the mysteries of
the Christian faith as the Apostles, who were Ioh. 6. v. 45.
taught by his own mouth, and made to know Ioh 15. v. 15.
all his Fathers secrets, and had Romans 8. v 23.
the first fruits of the spirit, in best sort to understand them and carry them
away. To be short, our Savior has decided this question, and says in
express words: Many Prophets and just men have Math. 13. v. 17.
desired to see the things that you see, and have not seen them, and to hear
the things that you hear, and have not heard them. Observe then how absurdly
M. Abbot behaueth himself in this matter. First, he uses tergiuersation, in
leaping so far back from the point of the question, seeking communion with
the Catholic Church, some thousands of years before there was any Church
Catholic. Secondly, in auouching the ancient founders of the first world, to
have believed clearly and particularly, all the articles of faith that we
believe; or else why does he conclude, that the Roman faith is not Catholic,
because in that old and hoare-headed world, some branches of their faith were
not sprung up and of full growth? They did not ( says he) worship Idols and
Images, they did not pray to Saints, etc. But (good Sir) did they believe that
all their children were to be baptized? and that all persons of riper years
among them, were to receive the holy Sacrament of Christ's body? yea, can M.
Abbot demonstrate, that they had perfect faith of the most holy and blessed
Trinity, believing distinctly in three Persons and one God? or that the
Redeemer of the world Christ Jesus, was to be perfect God and perfect Man, the
nature of man in him subsisting without the proper person of man, in the second
person of the Trinity; which are the most high mysteries of our Christian
faith? I am not ignorant, that albeit those ancient Patriarchs and Prophets,
had not clear and distinct knowledge of many articles which we are bound to
believe; yet they believed some few of them in particular, and had a certain
confuse and dark conceit by figures and tipes, of most of the rest.

R. ABBOT.
I Was neither deceived my self, M. Bishop, neither did I go about to deceive
others, the case being so plain as that a man of understanding cannot easily
be deceived therein. If the Catholic Church be but one from the beginning to
the end, and of this Church from the beginning to the end there be but one
faith, as has been showed, who is so blind as that he sees not that the
Catholic faith now must be the same with the faith of all the Patriarchs and
Fathers since the world began? It was not Catholic then, because it was
peculiar only to some few whom God enlightened, or to one only nation which he
specially selected, but it was the very same which afterward became Catholic
by being preached and spread over the whole world. Now then most clear it is
that if our faith be the same with the faith of Abel, of Enoch, of Abraham, and
the rest of those times, then our faith is the Catholic faith, even the faith
which the Apostles preached through the world; and if the faith of Popery be
not the same, then is Popery falsely termed the Catholic faith. M. Bishop
blames me for recoiling to the beginning of the world, and tells me what it
is that I should have proved, when by recoiling, if I must so call it, to the
beginning of the world, I prove that which he requires, howsoever he under
pretense of calling for proof would make his Reader believe that he sees no
proof. But he well enough sees the work too hard for Hercules, as he calls
it, by this proof very readily dispatched; for if there be but one faith of
the Church from the beginning to the end, and our faith be that which was in
the beginning, then is our faith that which was spread over the world, and shall
continue to the end. As though, says he, they had revealed unto them all those
particular points of faith which Christ taught his Apostles, and the same
religion and manner of worshipping God that we Christians have. I answer him,
that all particular points of faith were revealed unto them, but not all
circumstances of all particular points, nor so clearly as to us; and the same
religion and manner of worshipping God in substance was delivered unto them,
though in outward rites and ceremonies we differ from them. Christ was Apoc.
13. 8.
the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. Aug. Epist. ^. Christu^ Deu^
in carne venturum, morituru^, resurrecturum, in coelum ascensuru^ etc. inque
illo remissionem peccatorum, salutemque aeternam credentibus futuram esse,
omnia gentis illius promissa, omnes prophetiae, Sacerdotia, Sacrisicia, templ^
and cunc^a omnino Sacramenta sonuerunt.
All the promises of that time, says St. Austin, all the Prophecies, the
Priesthood, the Sacrifices, the Temple, and all the Sacraments did tell them
that Christ should come God in the flesh, that he should die, that he should
rise again, and ascend into heaven, and that all that believe should have
remission of sins in him. These are particular points of faith, and these
they believed, albeit the manner and circumstances of the Birth, the Life,
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, were not reueiled unto them as
they are in the Gospel lively described, and set forth to us. For as in the
first draught of the painter there is to be discerned the whole feature,
proportion, and parts of the body which he has in hand to paint, which remain
afterward by filling and garnishing to be brought to full and perfect form;
so the whole frame of Christian faith was in the beginning made known to the
Patriarchs and Fathers of the first world, though the same remained more and
more clearly to be reueiled until by the coming of Christ it should receive
full and perfect light. It skilleth not therefore which he says, that those
ancient Patriarchs did not so distinctly discover the mysteries of Christian
faith as the Apostles did; they did discover them, though not so distinctly;
they saw them, though it were as it were Hebr. 11. 13.
a far off. Even as we see those things that are taught us concerning the end
of the world, the resurrection of the dead, the day of judgment, and the life
to come, which yet distinctly we do not see, so did they see those things,
which since by the effecting of them in Christ are become distinct and plain
to us. Therefore St. Austin says; August. de not. and great. c. 44. Ea sides
iustos sanauit antiquos quae sanat and nos, id est, mediatoris Dei and ^emi^um
hominis Jes^ Christi, fides sanguinis eius, sides crucis eius, sides mortis and
resurrectionis (...).
The same faith saved the just of old, that saves us, the faith of the
Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the man Jesus Christ, the faith of his
blood, the faith of his cross, the faith of his death and resurrection; hereby
signifying that they believed all these points of faith as well as we, though
being things to come they were not as yet so clear and manifest unto them. As
for the Scriptures which he alleges, because they make nothing against this,
therefore they make nothing against us. He brings the Apostle, saying, that
Ephesians. 3. 5.
the mystery of Christ in other generations was not known unto the sons of
men, as now it is reueiled unto his holy Apostles and Prophets. Be it so; it
was known then, but it was not so known, as it was reueiled and made known
to his Apostles. Let him take this from Thomas Aquinas, so expounding the
words: Tho. Aquin. in Ephesians. cap. 3. lect. 1. ^^et mysteria Christi Prophetis
and Patriarchis fuerint. reuelata, non tamen it a clare sicut Apostolis. Nam
Prophetis and Apostolis fuerunt reuelata in quadam generalitate, sed Apostolis
manifestata sunt quantum ad singulares and determinatas circumstantias.
Though the mysteries of Christ were reueiled to the Patriarchs and Prophets,
yet not so clearly as to the Apostles; for to the Prophets and Patriarchs they
were reueiled in a kind of generality, but tot he Apostles they were
manifested, as touching particular and definite circumstances. And hereby the
answer is ready to the words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 13. 17.
Many Prophets and just men have desired to see the things which ye see and
have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear and have not
heard them. For Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 37. Omnes superiorum temporum
iusti and Prophetae cupicbant videre copl^tum quod reuelante spiritu futurum
esse cernebant, vnde and ipse Dominus ait, Quoniam multi iusti, etc.
they desired clearly and perfectly to see those things which they believed,
and with their eyes to behold the promised Savior, in whom all their hope and
joy was fixed, and to hear the gracious words that should issue from his
mouth, which notwithstanding they obtained not. John 8. 56.
Your father Abraham says our Savior elsewhere, desired to see my day, and he
saw it and rejoiced. He saw it, and yet still desired to see it, because as yet
he saw it not as he did desire to see. He desired to see with his eyes Christ
come in the flesh, but so he saw him not; yet by faith he so foresaw his
coming, as that it was great joy and gladness to him. Three other Texts he
quoteth, not to prove his purpose, but only to let us see that he is able for a
need to cite the Scripture. Two of those he appropriateth to the Apostles,
which appertain to all the faithful. To show that the Apostles were taught by
Christ's own mouth, he alleges the words of Christ, citing a sentence of
Esaias the Prophet; John 6. 45.
It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God, whereas it
is plain that the words are spoken not of being outwardly taught by the mouth
of Christ, but of being inwardly taught by Mat. 16. 17.
the revelation of the Father; nor contain any thing peculiar to the Apostles,
but common to all the Elect, as both by the course of Christ's speech appears,
and by the words themselves, as they are set down by the Prophet, Esa. 54. 13.
All thy children shall be taught of the Lord. So to the Apostles also he
refers the words of St. Paul, of Romans 8. 23.
having received the first fruits of the spirit, whereas to be partaker of the
first fruits of the spirit, is the condition of every regenerate man, in which
manner St. Austin generally applies it; August. de Peccat. Merit. and Remiss.
l. 2. c. 7. Nunc ei similes esse iam coep^mus primitias habentes spiritus.
We have now begun to be like him by having the first fruits of the spirit,
and not only in the new but in the old Testament also, because of us both the
Apostle witnesses, as we have heard before, that 2. Cor. 4. 13. * John 15. 15.
we have the same spirit of faith. In the third place Christ says to his
Apostles, ^ I have called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my
Father, have I made known to you. But what will M. Bishop conclude hereof?
Will he argue that because Christ taught his Apostles all points of faith more
plainly and clearly, therefore the ancient Patriarchs knew not all points of
faith? Nay, we will argue to the contrary, that since Christ makes known to
his friends all his fathers secrets, as M. Bishop speaks, therefore God made
known all those secrets to Abraham, because Abraham was Esa 41. 8. James 2. 23.
called the friend of God, and such a friend as that he says of him: Genes.
18, 17.
Shall I hide from Abraham the thing that I will do? And seeing Abraham is
called Romans 4 11. 12.
the Father of all that believe, as in the steps of whose faith we are to
walk, how can we doubt but that God reueiled unto him all that faith which
concerns us unto eternal life? In a word, St. Austin says again of all
those fathers and of us, Aug. cont. 2. Epist. Pelag. l. 3. c. 4. Eadem sides
and in illis qui nondum nomine sed reipsa fucrunt Christiani, and in illis qui
non solum sunt sed and ^^cantur, and in vtrisque eadem gratia per Sp. San^um.
There is the same faith both in them who before-time not yet in name, but
indeed were Christians, and in them who not only are, but also are called so,
and in both the same grace by the holy Ghost. From which words it may be
observed, what will become of those two absurdities which M. Bishop has taken
upon him to observe in me. For first, if those old Fathers were indeed
Christians, and therefore members of the Catholic Church, as well as we, what
tergiuersation do I use, or how do I leap back from the point in question,
when by affirming our communion with them, I affirm consequently our communion
with the Catholic Church? Forsooth, the Church was not then Catholic. Be it
so, but it was then the same Church which was afterward to become Catholic, a
part of the Catholic Church, and in com(...)nicating with a part of the
Catholic Church, we communicate with the whole, because of the whole there is
but one and the same says. Secondly, if they were Christians by the same
faith, whereby we are so, what absurdity do I commit in saying, that they
believed all the articles of faith that we believe; so clearly I do not say,
because they believed them not in those particular circumstances, which by the
story of the Gospel are known to us, but yet all the same, and as clearly as
we believe those points of faith, which are of those things that are yet to
come? And if they did so, what hinders but that we rightly conclude, that
those branches of the Roman faith which were not then sprung up, are only
Romish additions, and not any parts of the true Catholic faith? Against this
M. Bishop excepteth: But good Sir, did they believe that all their children
were to be baptized? and that all persons of riper years among them were to
receive the holy Sacrament of Christ's body? I have answered him before, that as
touching outward signs and Sacraments, there is difference betwixt them and
us, and I now answer him further, that as touching the power and effect of
Sacraments, they were in their Sacraments spiritually baptized as well as we,
and spiritually partakers of Christ's body and blood as well as we. For Leo in
Natiu Christi. ser. 3. Verbi inca^natio haec contulit facienda quae facta, etc.
Hoc magna pietatis Sacramentum quo totus iam mundus impletus est tam potens
etiam in suis significationibus fuit vt non minus adepti sine qui in illud
credidere promissum quam qui suscepere donatum.
the incarnation of Christ being yet to come, says Leo, yielded the same that
it does now being done, and the great mystery of godliness whereof now the
whole world is full, was so powerful in the significations of it, as that they
attamed no less, who believed therein being promised, then they did who have
received it, now given and performed. And again, Ide^ de Pass. Dom. ser. 13.
Sanguis vnius ius^^ quem nobis pater donauitqui ^um pro reconciliatione mundi
credimus fusum, hoc contulit patribus qui similiter credidere fund^^dum.
The blood of one just one which the father has given unto us, who believe the
same to have been shed for the reconciliation of the world, yielded the same
benefit to the Fathers, who did believe that it should be shed. Therefore, we
see that the Apostle as on the one side he says of us, that we are Col. 2. 11.
circumcised, because the effect of circumcision is with us, so says of them
also that they were 1. Cor. 10. ^.
baptized, because the grace and effect of baptism was with them. And thus
Gregory says, that Greg. Mor. l 4. c. 3. Quod apud nos valet aqua bapt^matis,
hoc e^^t apud veteres vel pro paruulis sola fides, vel pro maioribus virtus
sacrificij, vel pro his q^i ex Abrahae sti^pe prodierant mysterium
circumcisionis.
what the water of baptism avails with us, the same with (...) old Fathers
did either faith only for infants, or for them of el^^^ years the power of
Sacrifice, or for them that came of the stock of Abraham the Sacrament of
circumcision. And thus of their Sacraments, whereto now answers our Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, the Apostle says, that therein 1 Cor. 10. 4.
they did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual
drink. For their Sacraments and ours August. in Joan. tract. 26. Sacramenta
illa fu^runt; in signis diuersa sunt, sed in re quae significatur pari^ sunt.
in signs are diverse, faith St. Austin, but in the thing signified they are
both alike. They that did eat Manna aright, Idem de vtil. po^^it. cap. 1.
Quicunque in Manna Christu^ intellexerunt, ^undem quem nos cibum spirituilem
manducauerunt.
did understand Christ therein, and thereby did eat the same spiritual meat
that we do, even the flesh of Christ, and they that did drink of the Rock
aright, did therein also drink of Christ, even the blood of Christ, for the
Rock was Christ, that is, Ide^ de Te^p. sor. 108. Petra illa typum habuit
corporis Christi etc. Quod vtique non ad d^uin^tatem (...) sed ad cara^m
relatum est quae siticntium corda populorum perenni riu^ sang^^nis sui
inundauit.
was the type or figure of the body of Christ, says Austin: again, the same
not being referred to his Deity, but to the flesh which watered the hearts of
the thirsty people by the euer-flowing river of his blood. Idem de vtilit.
Poenit. cap. 1. Eundem ^rgo cibum, eundem p^tum, sed intelligentibus and
credentibus. Non intelligentibus autem illud solum Manna, illa sola aqua; ille
cibus esurienti; potus iste sitienti: nec ille net iste credenti; credenti
autem ^dem qui ^^^c.
There was, says he, the same meat and the same drink to them that had
understanding and faith; but to them that understood not, the one was only
Manna, the other was only Water; the one food for the hungry, the other drink
for the thirsty, neither the one nor the other meat or drink for the
believer, but he that believed had the same that we have now. And if they had
so; if by Manna they did eat the body of Christ, and by the Water of the Rock
they did drink the blood of Christ, what hinders then but that we may say
that though not by outward sign, yet as touching inward grace and effect, they
were partakers of the Lords Supper? Whereas he further asks, Can M. Abbot
demonstrate that they had perfect faith of the Trinity, believing distinctly in
three persons and one God? I answer him that it may be to him in ^ade of a
demonstration that they did so, because sundry Heathen Philosophers, as Cyril.
cont. lulian. lib. 1. Ex Hermete, Orp^^^, Porphyrio, etc. Vide Phil. Morn.
Plessi de verit. Christ. relig. cap. 6.
Cyril at large shows, were not ignorant of this secret of the divine nature,
who had no otherwise knowledge thereof but by some kind of Tradition from the
Fathers, who had been so instructed from God himself. For can we think that
it could be known to Philosophers and Pagans, and that it was unknown to the
Patriarchs and godly Fathers? Nay, it is a certain demonstration that they had
this knowledge of the Godhead, because out of those Scriptures wherein their
knowledge and faith is set forth unto us, we have testimony and proof
thereof; though not so formal and clear as in some few places of the new
Testament is expressed, yet such as from whence this point of faith is most
certainly and undoubtedly to be conceived. For when we find on the one side,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4.
The Lord our God is one Lord, and on the other side do read, Psalm. 2. 7.
The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee;
and again, Psalm. 110. 1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, etc. and again, Esa
48. 16.
The Lord and his spirit has sent me; Esa. 61. 1.
The spirit of the Lord God is upon me, with infinite other places to like
effect, how can we doubt but that in unity of the Godhead they saw distinctly
three persons* the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost? And thus Gregory
resolves, that Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 16. Si^e hi qui elects in testame^to
veteri fuerunt, sieve hi qui in nouo testamento secuti sunt, ^imirum constat
quia omnes ex amore Trinitatis accensi sunt, etc. Ad veram speciem ex
Trinitatis sunt cognitione decorats.
whether the elect in the old Testament, or they that followed in the new they
were all enkindled with the love, and adorned to true beauty with the knowledge
of the holy Trinity. As touching the last point which he mentions of Christ
in unity of person being both God and Man, I answer him by St. Austin, that
they did so believe; for Aug. Epist. 157. Cuius hominis eiusdemque Dei
saluberrima fide ^tiam illi iusti salui facti sunt qui priusquam in carne
vemret crediderunt ill^m in carne centurum.
by the most wholesome belief, says he, of Christ both God and Man, even those
just were saved who believed that he should come in the flesh before that he
did come. And in another place he says yet more expressly concerning Abraham,
Idem cont. Pelag. and Celest lib. 2. c. 27. Nunquid and il lud quod iubet
Abraham ponere mark seruum suum sub semore suo and iurare per Deum coeli,
aliter quisquam recte intellecturus est nisi Abraham scisse in qua v^ntu^us
esset Deus coeli, carnem de illo semore propagari?
When Abraham bid his servant put his hand under his thigh, and swear by the
God of heaven, can any man otherwise understand it aright, but that Abraham
knew that from that thigh should be derived that flesh, wherein the God of
heaven should come. If Abrah(...) knew that the God of heaven should come in
flesh, taken of his flesh, he could not be ignorant, I trow, that when he
should be come, he should be in the flesh both God and Man. To be short, the
same St. Austin presently after says, Ibid. cap. 28. Nondum factum sed adhuc
futurum eadem tamen ipsa and patrum quae nostra est sides vna ca^tabal, Tues
Sacerdos in aternum, etc.
The faith of the Fathers all one with our faith did sing that which then was
not done, but was as yet to come, Thou art a Priest f^r ever after the order of
Melchisedec. Where we cannot doubt but their faith observed as ours does, from
the beginning of the Psalm, that it was David's Lord to whom this was said, and
therefore that he was very God; and because he could not be a Priest after the
order of Melchisedec, except he were man, therefore that he was truly man, and
because God notwithstanding speaks unto him as only one, therefore that in
unity of person he should be both God and man. For conclusion M. Bishop
grants that they believed some few points of faith in particular, and had a
certain confuse and dark conceit by figures and types of most of the rest;
but inasmuch as he instanceth against me the most high mysteries of our
Christian faith, and yet it appears that they had the belief and knowledge
thereof, we do not doubt but that they had likewise knowledge, though not so
easily as we, but with more labor attained unto, yet they had knowledge not
only of the most, but also of all the rest.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
TOuching these very points, whereof M. Abbot would have them wholly ignorant
(if his bare word without any manner of proof were so powerful) I affirm,
that they held the most of them; which I will not stand here to prove at large,
for that were Protestant-like to run from one question to another without
order: but I will only give a touch to every one of his instances, refer^ing
the Reader for more full satisfaction, to the proper place of those head
controversies. First, no Catholic ever taught any man to worship Idols, let
that then pass as a Protestant slander: but that Images are to be placed in
Churches, the examples recorded in the old Testament, of having them both in
their Tabernacle, and in the Exodus 25. v. 18.
Temple of Solomon, and this sentence of the Psalmist; 3. Reg 6. v. 23.
Adore his foote-stole, and many such like places and Psalm. 98. v. 5.
resemblances, do argue very strongly, that Images are to be worshipped.
Secondly, invocation of Angels is most plainly practiced, by the holy Patriarch
Jacob, the Father of all Israelites: God, etc. and the Angel that has Genes
48. v. 16.
delivered me from all evil, bless these children. The example of so
religious a person is our sufficient warrant, to pray to Angels and Saints: for
Saints in heaven are equal Luc. 22.
to Angels, as our Savior himself assures us; and Job was counseled to pray
and call for aid unto some of the Saints: Ad aliquem Sanctorum convert.
Thirdly, Job 5. verse. 1.
they of the old Testament knew good works to merit life everlasting, and had
by Gods grace free will to do them; which I add, because by the same
sentences I will prove both together. God said unto Cain: If thou do Genes. 4.
v. 7.
well shall thou not receive; if evil, thy sin will be at the door, but the
appetite or pange of it shall be under thee, and thou shall have dominion over
it: see both power given to the wicked to do well, if they will, and
recompense promised therefore. Again, in the law Moses having propounded to
the Israelites Gods Commandments, exhorting them thereunto, says: Consider
Deuteronomy. 30. v. 15.
that I set before you life and good, and contrariwise death and evil; if you
love God, and will walk in his Commandemens, life; or else, death, etc. choose
therefore life, etc. Must they not be very dull, Verse. 19.
that hence cannot gather the keeping of Gods Commandments, to deserve and
merit life everlasting, and that man has by the aid of Gods grace free will
to perform them? Fourthly, they that were skillful in the law of Moses, could
not be ignorant of works of supererogation, that is: that there were many good
works which men were not bound to do, yet if they did them, they might
thereby advance themselves in Gods favor; because there is special Numer. 6.
order taken, for the sanctification of any man or woman, that would be a
Nazarite, that is: any one that of devotion would withdraw himself from
secular affairs, and for some certain time serve God more religiously, yet no
man was bound thereunto. Further, they were allowed and encouraged to make
vows, which is also a work of supererogation, against M. Abbots fifth
instance. For not only David says: Vow and render it Psalm. 75. v. 12.
to our Lord; but in the law it is written: When thou Deuteronomy. 23. v. 21.
do vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, slack not to perform it, because the
Lord thy God does require it, etc. but if thou will not promise thou shall be
without sin. And to leave the word Monkery, as fitter for a Monkey then for
an Abbot, Josephus a grave author among the Jews, witnesses: That there
lived Antiquitat. Iudaic. lib. 18. c. 2.
in the time of the law many thousands called Esseni, who were contemners of
riches, lived in common, having neither wives nor servants. What other thing
do Monks profess then such poverty and chastity? saving obedience, which
must needs also in some degree be among the others, who lived no doubt in
orderly society. Sixthly, neither they nor we either buy or sell pardons, yet
had great mercy and pardon showed them for their forefathers sake, as God
testifies in the first Commandment. And that they were on the other side, to
endure temporal punishment for sin, after the guilt of the sin, and the
eternal pain was forgiven them, is most clearly recorded both of all the
people of Israel, Whose murmuration against Numer. 14.
God, was at the earnest intercession of Moses pardoned; and yet were they
therefore deprived of entering into the land of promise. Yea Moses and Numer.
20. v. 24
Aaron themselves, were in like manner both pardoned for their diffidence, that
they did not glorify God at the waters of contradiction; and yet nevertheless
debarred from entering into the land of promise, for the Deuteronomy. 32. v. 51.
same offense: so that after the mortal guilt of sin is remitted, there
remains either some temporal satisfaction to be made on our parties, or else
to be forgiven and pardoned us by God and his Ministers. Seventhly, that they
made prayers and offered Sacrifice for the souls in Purgatory, is manifest by
the fact of Judas Machabeus, 2. Match. 12.
who was a most noble, virtuous, and faithful Israelite, as all Christians do
confess. Neither is there any need for this purpose to auerre and prove the
books of the Machabees to be Canonical Scripture, when it serves this turn,
that they be taken for a grave History, and that the Protestants allow them to
be of sufficient authority for instruction of manners. Further, all the Jews
even to this day, do pray for the souls in Purgatory: see the Catholic
Apology out of Protestant Authors. Eighthly, the Titul. 1. Sect. 4.
Jews of the male-kinde, by their law were bound to go as it were in
pilgrimage, at three solemn feasts in the year, unto one special place, that
God should choose for his service: And King Solomon encouraged all strangers to
go on pilgrimage, to the Temple builded by him, when he prayed that what
stranger soever, should Deuteronomy. 16. v. 16.
come thither to pray, he might obtain his suit. And the bones of the Prophet
Elizeus, giving life by 3. Reg. 8. v. 21. 4. Reg. 13. v. 21.
their touch unto a dead man, does sufficiently instruct all true believers,
that it is very profitable to go on pilgrimage, unto the sacred bones and holy
relikes of Gods faithful servants departed. Lastly, they were not wholly
unacquainted with a kind of shrift and absolution: for they Numer. 5. Leuit. 5.
were charged to confess the sins they had committed, and to bring with them
unto the Priest a prescribed Sacrifice, to be offered by them for their pardon
and absolution. And as the lepers by that law were bound to present themselves
to the Priests, and were by them declared such, or purged from that imputation:
so in the law of grace, men infected with the souls leprosy (that is, mortal
sin) are either to be bound, and declared obstinate by the Priests, if they
will not repent; or repenting and confessing the same, are to be cleansed
therefrom by the Priests absolution, as both S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. lib. 3.
de Saceraot. Hieron. in cap. 16. Math.
and S. Hierome do argue. This in brief will suffice I hope, for answer unto
M. Abbots particulars.

R. ABBOT.
I Gave instance in mine answer of sundry points of faith and religion, which
I affirmed to be unknown to the first Fathers; which notwithstanding are such
as they could not have been ignorant of, if they were matters of so great
moment in religion, as they are pretended now. I named the worshipping of Idols
and Images, Invocation of Saints and Angels, Merits and supererogations,
Monkish vows, Popish pardons, and prayers for souls in Purgatory, Pilgrimages
to Relikes and dead men's bones, auricular Confession and shrift, in which and
sundry other such like devices, the very substance of Catholic religion is now
with the Papists imagined to consist. Now M. Bishop affirms to the contrary,
that they held the most of these; the most, he says, not all; thereby
importing concerning some of them, at least that they were unknown to them.
And yet as though he wist not what he had said, he takes in hand to touch
every one of my instances, and to give some proof of every one of them,
referring the Reader for more full satisfaction, to the proper places of the
head controversies, whereas he knows well that in the answer to those
controversies is already taken away almost all that he has here said. As
first, his exception against the name of Idol, Of Images, sect. 5.
I have showed to be wholly vain, and have made it plain out of Tertullian
and others, that every Image consecrated to be worshipped, is properly an
Idol. Again, his allegations of Images in the Tabernacle, and in the Temple
of Solomon, and of the words which he brings out of the Psalm, Ibid. Sect.
8. 16.
Adore ye his foote-stoole, have been also declared to be to his purpose
false, impertinent, and vain. But yet to give a touch for a touch, note here
also briefly the folly of them. I say that the old Fathers worshipped no
Images; and he to prove the contrary alleges that in the Tabernacle and
Temple they had Images. What is the one of these to the other? Be it that they
had them, but does it thereof follow that they worshipped them? Does he not
know that some of our men do defend the having of Images in Churches, and yet
do hold it gross idolatry to worship Images? It is written in the Psalm,
Adore ye his foote-stoole, but what is that to Images? Does it any where
appear that Images are Gods foote-stoole; or that there were in the Tabernacle
or Temple any Images that went under that name? He cites two places for Images
there, which both mention the Cherubins, Joseph. Antiquit. l. 8. c. 2. Hae
Cherubicae ^ffigies quanam specie fuerint n^mo ^el conijcere potest vel cloqui.
the shape and fashion whereof, Josephus says, no man can conjecture or tell;
but can he show us that they had the Images of Abel, of Enoch, of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and such other holy men? Did they set up any such in the Temple
or Tabernacle, and fall down to worship them? If they did, let him make it
appear to us. If they did not, why does he trisle and dally in this sort? why
does he abuse the unwariness of simple and ignorant men, thus having one thing
in hand to prove, to bring testimony of another? As for Invocation of Angels,
how far the Patriarchs and Fathers were from it, may appear by Origin, who
when Celsus the Pagan objected to the Jews that they did worship Angels,
says, that Origin. co^t. Cells. lib. 1. Vbinam inuenit in Mosaicis literis a
legislatore tradi cultum Angelorum?
it is no where found in the writings of Moses, that the Lawgiver did deliver
the worshipping of them; and says again, that Ibid. lib. 5. Coelestes Angelos
nemo adorat qui se legi Mosis subdidit.
no man worshippeth Angels that yields himself subject to Moses law. M.
Bishop notwithstanding out of the law of Moses brings proof, as he would
make us believe, of the practice thereof by the Patriarch Jacob, who says
concerning the two sons of Joseph, as M. Bishop sets down his words, God,
etc. and the Angel that has delivered me from all evil, bless these
children. Where it is to be observed how for the serving of his turn he does
by putting in, and, very wickedly corrupt and forge the text. For it is not
said as he cites, God and the Angel bless them, as if there were a dividing
of the Angel from God, but thus the words are, Genes. 48. 15.
The God before whom my Fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which has
fed me all my life long until this day, the Angel which has delivered me
from all evil, bless these children, so as that the God, the God, the Angel,
are by apposition to be applied all to one, as if he had said; The God who has
fed me who is the Angel; or even the Angel which has delivered me from all
evil. For M. Bishop should not be ignorant of that which Hierome says, that
Hieron. in Agg. cap. 1. In multis locis Dominus noster atque Saluator Angelus
Dei dicitur.
in many places our Lord and Savior is called the Angel of God. Which
Tertullian declaring at large, and defining it as a thing Tertul. de Trinit.
Personae Christi conuenit vt and Deus sit quia Dei filius est and Angelus sit,
quoniam paternae dispositionis adnunciator est.
agreeing properly to the person of Christ, both to be God, because he is the
son of God, and to be an Angel, because he is the messenger for declaring
his Fathers will: and giving sundry examples hereof, comes at length to the
words which M. Bishop cites, saying, Ibid. Etiam post haec aeque no^ cessat
eade Scriptura diuina Angelum Deum dicere, Deum Angelum pronunciare. Nam cum
Manassem atque Ephram filios Joseph benedicturus esset hic ipse Jacob
transuersis super capita pueroru^ manibus collocatis, Deus, inquit, qu^ pascit
me, etc. Angelus qui liberauit me, etc.
And yet further the holy Scripture cease not to call God an Angel, and to
pronounce the Angel to be God; for when Jacob was to bless Manasses and
Ephraim the two sons of Joseph, laying his hands a-crosse upon their heads,
he says; God who siedeth me from my youth up to this day, the Angel who has
delivered me from all evil, he bless these children. Now then it is no
created Angel that is here spoken of, but it is God that is called the Angel,
even the second person in Trinity the Son of God. And that it is no otherwise
to be understood, Tertullian euicteth out of the very words; Ibid. Vsquead^o
eunde Angelum ponit quem Deum dixerat vt singulariter in exitu sermonis sui
posuerit personam de qua loquebatur, dic^ndo, benedicat pueros hos. Si enim
alterum Angelum voluisset intell^gi, plurali numero duas personas complexus
fuisset, etc.
So certain is it that he calls him the Angel whom he had called God, as
that in the issue of his speech he sets down in the singular number, the
person of whom he speaks, saying, Benedicat, he bless these children; for
if he would have had the Angel to be understood another then God, he would in
the plural number have comprised two persons (benedicant; they bless these
children.) And thus Chrysostom recites the words as all of one; Chrysostom. in
Genes. hom. 66. Ille, inquit, cui patres mei been placuerunt, qui me a
inuentute mea vsque in praesentem di^m educauit, qui me ab initio ab omnibus
malis liberauit, qui tantam erga me declarauit prouidentiam, ipse benedicat hos
pueros.
He whom my Fathers served, who has brought me up from my youth until this
present day, who from the beginning has delivered* me from all evil, who has
declared toward me so great providence, even he bless these children. M.
Bishop therefore is yet to seek for invocation of Angels amongst the Fathers,
because the Angel here spoken of, is no other but the same God whom Jacob does
there innocate and call upon. And if invocation of Angels fail, then fails
his argument, whereby from them he would prove invocation of Saints, because
Saints forsooth are said in the Gospel Luke 20. 36.
to be equal to Angels. How vnhandsomly he uses that text, I stand not here
to declare, because it is nothing pertinent to the point in hand. But to prove
it better then only by such collection, he tells us of Job that he was
counseled Job 5. 1.
to pray and call for aid to some of the Saints; Turn thee to any or some of
the Saints. They are the words of Eliphaz to Job, depending upon a discourse in
the former Chapter, wherein Eliphaz had intimated it to him, that it appeared by
this calamity of his, that there had been hypocrisy and iniquity in his
former life, without which God is not wont to lay his hand so heavily upon any.
Job 4. 7.
Remember I pray thee, says he, who ever perished being an innocent, or where
were the upright destroyed? This he amplifieth and prosecuteth unto the end of
that Chapter, and then says to the same effect again, Call now if any will
answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn? thereby willing him
to ask and enquire whether there were any that could tell that ever any of the
Saints, any just and upright man had tasted of that misery, that was now lying
upon him? To the same purpose Bildad also afterward says: Cap. 8. 8.
Enquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thy self to search of
their Fathers; shall not they teach thee and tell thee, and utter the words of
their heart? etc. Behold God will not cast away an upright man. This being
manifestly the drift and purpose of these words, and nothing appearing whereby
to draw them to invocation of Saints, we must think M. Bishop to be very
destitute of proof, that would apply them to that end, neither can they serve
thereto, because of all the Saints departed, we must conceive the same then,
that expressly we read of some; Esa. 63. 16.
Abraham is ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not. The words are somewhat
otherwise expounded by Gregory Bishop of Rome, but yet so as that for
invocation of Saints he finds nothing in them. He refers the first part to
God, the other part to living Saints, such as David speaks of; Psalm. 16. 3.
My delight is upon the Saints that are in the earth: as if Eliphaz had told
Job that he neglected their company in his prosperity, and therefore that now
in his affliction they yielded no help or comfort to him. Greg. Moral. l. 5.
cap 31. Ac si aperte dicat, Qua^ tumlibet afflictus clames, Deum tibi
respondentem non habes quia vox cum in tribulatione non inuenit quem men's in
tranquillitate contempsit. Vbi adhuc deriden^o subiungit, Et ad aliquem
Sanctorum conuertere; acsi despiciens dicat, Sanctos quoque inuenire in
afflictione adiutores no^ vales, quos habere socios in ^ilarita^e roluisti.
He says, Call if there be any to answer thee, as if he plainly said,
Howsoever in thy affliction thou cry, yet thou find not God to answer
thee, because the prayer finds not him in trouble, whom the mind in
tranquillity has despised. Where yet further in derision he adds, says he;
And turn thee to any of the Saints; as if by way of despite he said, Thou
can not find the Saints thy helpers in affliction, whom thou would not
have for thy companions in thy mirth and welfare. In a word, we find not in
the words that Job was counseled to pray to Saints, neither do we find it
any where else that Job followed any such counsel, neither is there any
example of any other of those Fathers that they did so, and therefore neither
in this can M. Bishop find their religion in the Fathers. The next matter is
concerning Merit and Free Will, for which he brings two texts which are
already wrested from him, being by himself Of Free Will Sect. 10. 11.
before alleged, and by me fully answered. But yet observe briesly how well
they make for that for which he alleges them. If thou do well, says God to
Cain, shall thou not receive? His argument hence must be this: He that does
well, shall receive; therefore he meriteth that which he shall receive. It
follows not, because that which he receives is of the bountifulness of the
giver, not of the merit or desert of works, as through the whole question of
merits I have declared at large. Such is his other argument from those words
of Moses; Deuteronomy. 30. 19.
I have set before you life and death; choose life that thou may live, by
loving the Lord thy God, etc. For God thus setting life before us, does not
tell us what we by right deserve, but what it is his pleasure to give to those
that love and obey him. We choose life by loving the Lord our God, and obeying
him, and cleaving unto him; but in all this we do but our duty, and cannot
presume to merit any thing thereby. No better success has he for Free Will,
albeit in that manner as he propounds it, we deny it not, for we grant that
man has by Gods grace free will to do good works; we deny only that free will
which they hold as a power of nature, and not the effect of the grace of God,
whereby man himself does something for himself beside that which God does. We
do well; who denies it? but it is only of the grace of God that we do well.
We choose life, it is true; but it is of the gift of God that we choose life;
August. de Praedest. sanct. cap. 10. Ipse sacit vt illi saciant quae praecepit.
Who makes us to do those things, says St. Austin, which he has commanded
to be done. As for that which M. Bishop says, that power is given to the
wicked to do well if they will, it is an absurd speech, because they cannot
will till God work in them to will, neither can they have any power to do
well, until they have the will. For the forbearing of outward heinous acts, we
deny not but that God has left in man, even in the wicked, some power of
free will, else in vain were all laws and admonitions, neither could there
continue any society amongst men. Be it that the words cited by M. Bishop do
yield so much to Cain; but to the converting of the heart, to the inward
renewing of the soul, to the embracing of the love of righteousness, to true
repentance, faith, obedience, the will of man has nothing at all but what is
wrought in it by the grace of God. But of all these things I have spoken so
fully before, that it is not fit here to stand upon them any more. For works
of supererogation he is feign to betake himself to the ceremonial law of
Moses; thereby leaving us to take it as of his own confession, that before
that time, which was the space of two thousand and almost five hundred years,
the Church of God knew no such; and hereuppon to conclude, that because they
stood only in ceremonies which were not merely for themselves to be reckoned
in the number of good works, therefore the ceremonial law being abolished in
Christ, those works of supererogation must therein have an end. But the works
of supererogation which they maintain, and whereof I spoke, are works of the
moral law, the precepts and righteousness whereof has concerned the whole
Church from the beginning, and before the written law; and therefore which must
needs have been found in the Church from the beginning, if there were in them
that righteousness and perfection, which is now presumed of them. Of these M.
Bishop is silent; he can say nothing, he can show nothing; there is no example,
no intimation of any such, believed or practiced in the Church, I will not say
for two thousand, as before, but for the space of four thousand years, as by
his own confession interpretatiue we argue, because he alleges none. His
instance of works of supererogation is only in legal vows, which albeit in
the ceremony they were in some sort arbitrary, yet carried always an
implication of spiritual necessary duties which to make their vows acceptable
unto God were then to be performed by them, and are now still remaining to be
performed by us. The vow of the Nazarite did by certain observations shadow
forth, what ought spiritually to be the holiness and purity of them, who
either then were or now are by the calling of the grace of God separated unto
God. And so it stood with all other vows, which were of things appointed by
the law to be offered and sacrificed, which served to advertise both them and
us of that Leo in Anniuersar. suo. ser. 3. Vniuersi spirituales and rationales
Christiani Sacerdotalis officij consortes, etc. Quid tam sacerdotale qua^
vouere Domino conscientiam puram and immaculatas pietatis hostias de Altari
cordis offerre?
Priestly duty, as Leo calls it, common to all Christians, to vow unto God a
pure conscience, and upon the Altar of the heart to offer up unspotted
sacrifices of piety unto him. What is there here then for Popish vows, and why
does he go about to build his works of supererogation upon a foundation so
unfit for the bearing of them? But of these matters I have Of Vows. sect. 1.
5. confut. of the Answ. to M. Perk. Aduert. sect. 16.
spoken also sufficiently before, and have handled those texts, which as there,
so here again he cites to no end. Very ill does it sort, that when I allege
that they vowed no vows of Monkery, he answers me by texts that concern
vows of sacrifices and ceremonies belonging only to that time. But being
offended at my term of Monkery, fearing it belike to be a charm, to turn
their Monks into Monkeis, he sets himself to be revenged on me, by
bringing a proof inevitable for the antiquity of them amongst the Patriarchs
and Fathers of the old Church. Forsooth, Josephus a grave author amongst the
Jews witnesses that there lived in the time of the law many thousands called
Esseni, who were contemners of riches, lived in common, having neither wives
nor servants. Similes habent labra lactucas. Like matter, like proof.
Ridiculous man, who for the justifying of their Monkish vows would bring us
the example of lewish professed Heretics, so recorded to have been by
Philast. de haeres. cap. 6.
Philastrius and Epiphan. haeres 19.
Epiphanius, and by his own author Josephus set down for such another sect,
as were the other two of Joseph. Antiquit. ludaic. l. 18. c 2. Iudai in tr^s
sectas diuisi, Essenorum, Saducaeorum and Pharis^orum.
the Pharisees and Saducees. Why did he not as well allege the Pharisees and
Saducees (but specially the Pharisees, amongst whom he might have found some
show for their Epiphan haeres 16. Quidam ipsorum ^^m se exer^^bant,
praescribebat dec^nnium aut octennium ^ut quadrien^^um virginitatis sieve
continentiae.
vow of continency and chastity) but that their names being known out of the
Gospel, he knew it would easily be discerned what kind of weapon he had
brought to fight against me. These Essees Philast. vt supra. Christ^m Dominum
Dei silium non expectantes, etc. Sed Prophetam aut iustum hominem s^lum
cred^ntes expectant.
believed not that Christ the Messiah should be the son of God, but only some
Prophet or just man, as Philastrius writes of them. Josephus says of them
Joseph. de bell. Iudaic. l. 2. ^. 7. Opinio apud illos sirmata est
corruptibilia esse corpora, ma teriamque (...)um non ess^ perpetuam. anim is
autem immortales semper manner, and quasi careeribus ita corporibus implicari,
etc. q^um vero fuerint a carnalibus releuate vinculis quasi de seruitute
longissi^a liber ^as, ^^a (...) ^eta^i, etc. Bonas pronunciant vltra Oceanum
degere, etc. illic q^ippe esse reg^onem que neque imbribus neque niuibus neque
aestibus aggrauetur, etc. malis autem animabus procellosa loca and hyberna
delegant.
that they believed the immortality of the soul, but the resurrection of the
body they believed not, into which they said according to Origens opinion, that
the soul was brought as into a prison, and shall greatly rejoice when it is
freed therefrom. They dreamed that the souls of the just have a place of rest
beyond the Ocean, where there is no rain, nor snow, nor heat, and on the
other side, that some stormy and winter quarters were designed for the evil.
In the place cited by M. Bishop he shows further, that Idem Antiq. l. 18.
cap. 2. Ad templum donaria mutentes sacraibinon faciunt, quod sanctioribus
vtantur ceremonijs; quapropter exclusi ^ communi sano seorsum sacrificant.
they sent gifts to the Temple, but did no sacrifice or devotion there, for
that they used more sacred and holy ceremonies, namely then were appointed by
God himself, for which cause being from thence excluded, they sacrificed
apart, which was a thing contrary to the commandment of God. Now whereas M.
Bishop says, that they had neither wives nor servants, though it were true in
some of them, yet it was not so in all. For Josephus notes that there was one
sort of them which though Idem de bello Iudaico, l. 2. c. 7. Est autem aliud
etiam Ess^norum collegium, cibos qu^d^ and mores legesque fimiles cum prioribus
habens, distans vero opinione de con^^gio. Maximam siquidemvitae hominum
partem, successionem scilicet, amputare qui abstineant nuptijs arbitrantur, etc.
they agreed with the rest as touching diet and orders, yet differed from them
in the opinion of marriage, thinking that they that did forbear marriage, did
cut off a great part of the life of men, by taking away succession, and
therefore they did marry. But it is not to be omitted how M. Bishop graceth
these Essees, with living in the time of the law, making show to the ignorant
Reader, as if they had had some great continuance of good and approved times,
whereas Funcc. Chronolog. Anno mundi 3833.
the beginning of them as of the Pharisees and Saducees, was in the very
declination of true piety and religion amongst the Jews, some two hundred
years before the time of Josephus, about a hundred and forty years before the
birth of Christ. Neither in the law of Moses nor in any of the Prophets is
there mention of any such, neither were they in being whilst any of
Prophetical spirit was remaining amongst that people. But when men left to be
guided by the law and word of God, and betook themselves to humane inventions
and traditions, diverse wits drew diverse ways, and they became divided into
sundry sects, in such sort as has been said. Since then those Es^ees were no
other in the Church of the Jews but Schismatikes and Heretics, divided in
opinion amongst themselves, never known till there grew a general and final
corruption of that slate, and yet no mention of any vows wont to be made by
them, do we not think that M. Bishop has stoutly carried himself in
bringing them for an example of vowing their Monkish vows? As ridiculously
does he behave himself in the next point, where I alleged of those old
Fathers, that they neither sold nor bought Pardons. He answers, neither they
nor we either buy or sell pardons; (yet that the Pope does so and usually has
so done, all the world knows) but if he would have spoken to the purpose, he
should have showed us that though they neither bought nor sold Pardons, yet
they had Pardons accustomably, as they have been amongst us. He should have
made it appear to us, if he would have dealt plainly, that there was then from
time to time some Pope or Quasi-Pope, that could give bills of release from
Purgatory pains, for the comfort of the souls, which he says lie broiling
there; or since he could not so do, should have confessed ingenuously that
there was no such matter in those times, neither Pope, nor Purgatory, nor
Pardons, and so have left us to think as already we do, that we may be as
well without belief of them now, as they were then. As for that which he
alleges of mercy showed to the children for the fathers sake, and of
punishment reserved after the remission of the sin, what mad man would have
brought the same in the behalf of the Popes Pardons, but that belike his
Reader perforce must take it, that he has given me an answer, because he
says somewhat? But of these two points, Of Merits, sect 7. Consut. of the
Answer to M. Perkins Aduert. sect. 23
how God shows mercy to the children for the fathers sake, and how untruly
they affirm Of Satisfaction, sect 9. 10. etc.
the retaining of punishment after forgiveness, I have before declared, and
have answered those texts and examples of the Israelites, and of Moses and
Aaron, which here he brings for proof of the latter point. Well though he
can say nothing for Pardons, yet for Purgatory whatsoever I say to the
contrary, he will surely speed. He leaves Moses and the Prophets, of whom
it was said, Luke 16. 29.
Let them hear them, and comes down to the latter times of the Jews, to
Judas Maccabeus, or rather to that which an uncertain story reports,
concerning Judas Maccabeus, which yet reports not that which he takes upon
him to report from it. By the fact of Judas it is manifest, says he, that the
Jews did make prayers, and offered sacrifice for the souls in Purgatory. But
where do you find that, M. Bishop, which you say; for the souls in
Purgatory? What, will you belie your Author, and say of him that which he
says not? The story does not say that any thing was done for the souls in
Purgatory; yea it gives plain demonstration that nothing was meant to be done
in that respect. For having set down that which Maccabeus did, it goes on
thus; 2. Macca. 1^. verse. 43.
Doing well and honestly that he thought of the resurrection; for if he had not
hoped that they which were slain should rise again, it had been superfluous
and vain to pray for the dead. That then which Judas did, is said to have
been done in respect of the resurrection from the dead, that the sin of them
which were slain, might not be imputed unto them when they should rise
again. Yea, it is said that that which was done were superfluous and vain,
but only in hope of the resurrection. But though there were no resurrection,
yet prayer for the dead should not be superfluous and vain if thereby souls
were delivered from Purgatory pains. Therefore, there was no respect of
Purgatory in that which Judas did. Yea what if that which Judas did were not
done for the dead at all, but only for the living? Surely for my part I am so
persuaded, and I think any man that well waigheth the story, will be of the
same mind. Peruse it, gentle Reader, and thou shall see that there is great
cause to think that all that is spoken there as touching prayer and offering
for the dead, is the historians Commentary, and interpretation of the fact of
Judas, without any occasion of such construction given by Judas himself. In a
battle some few of the Jews were slain, under whose coats when they came
to bury them, they found jewels consecrated to Idols, which they were forbidden
by the law to meddle with. Then every man saw, says he, that this was the
cause wherefore they were slain, and they gave thanks to the Lord the
righteous Judge, which had opened the things which were hid. This yet was not
all, but because they knew what had befallen* to the whole Host of Israel for
the like sin of Achan, only they feared least the like now should befall to
them. He goes on therefore and says; And they gave themselves to prayer, and
besought the Lord that they* should not utterly be destroyed for the fault
committed. This being set down generally concerning the people, it follows
particularly concerning Judas thus; Besides, that noble Judas exhorted the
people to keep themselves from sin, for so much as they saw before their eyes
the things which came to pass by the sin of these that were slain, and
having made a gathering through the company, sent to Jerusalem about two
thousand drachmes of silver, to offer a sin offering. Which words containing
the narration of the fact of Judas, who would otherwise understand but
according to that that is gone before, that Judas* having the like care as the
people had, that the wrath of God might not remain against them all for the
sin of these few, not only exhorted the people to beware by their example of
committing the like trespass, but also took care that of common charge a
sin offering in common should be offered, that God might be appeased
toward the whole army. That Judas had this regard we cannot doubt, neither
can we doubt but that he would be careful to show it according to L^uit 4.
13. compared with Ios. 7. 1. 11. and 22. 20.
the law, and as was wont Deuteronomy. 21. 1. 2. etc.
to be done upon the like occasion. How then shall we interpret that which he
did otherwise then of that which by order was to be done, when as we see
nothing else done that should be answerable to that order? To offer a sin
offering for the multitude, it was agreeable to the law, and therefore we may
well presume that he did so, and cannot but take that which he did to be
intended so, rather then of that whereof the law commanded nothing, nor example
is there found of any that did the like. But the historian not content to set
down the narration of this matter simply, as it seems he found it in the
former story which he followed, takes upon him to give his judgment of it,
and makes thereof construction according to his own conceit, as if Judas had
offered for the dead in respect that he believed that they should rise again,
when as indeed nothing appeared to that effect. And thus he afterward gives
his censure of the deed of 2. Macca. 14. 37. etc.
Razis in killing himself, giving approofe and commendation thereof; so that
by his authority we may as well argue that it is lawful for a man to kill
himself, as that it is lawful to make prayers and offerings for the dead. Now
M. Bishop knowing well our exception against the books of Maccabees, that they
are not Canonical Scripture, and therefore are insufficient to give us warrant
of any point of faith, preoccupateth this objection, and tells us that it is
needless to prove the books of the Maccabees to be Canonical Scripture, and
that it serves this turn that they be taken for a grave history. Very
unlearnedly and childishly; as though every grave history were sufficient to
give us information in points of faith; and as though by the commendation of
the fact of Razis, it did not appear that he did not greatly deserve with us
the commendation of a grave historian, who know not so much as a grave Heathen
Philosopher did know, Pythagoras by name, from whom Tully learned it, that Tull
de Senect. Vetat Pythagora^ iniussu imperatoris, id est, Dei, de praesidio and
statione vitae decedere. Et Tuscul. quaest. l. 1. Vetat dominans ille in nobis
Deus iniussu hinc nos suo demigrare.
it is forbidden us of God, but only at his call and bidding to go out of this
life, and therefore that it is not lawful for a man at his own will to make
away himself. As for our allowing of those Apocryphal books, to be read for
instruction of manners, what is it to the warranting of matters of faith?
neither do we by that allowance give them such authority, as if every thing
which they say in that behalf were to be approved, but only acknowledge them
as containing for the most part very not able instructions, and very profitable
to that end, which yet must all have authority from those books, which by due
testimony we have received to be the certain and undoubted word of God. What
the Jews do at this day it skilleth not, so long as from their law they have
no rule for that they do. We know they have now many superstitions amongst
them, whereof their example can be no warrant to us, that we should thereupon
presume to do the same. To the eighth point by me alleged; They made no
pilgrimages to Relics or dead men's bones, he answers, that the Jews were
bound to go as it were in pilgrimage at three solemn feasts yearly to one
special place, which God should choose for his service. Where mark, I pray
thee, how when I speak of going in pilgrimage, he answers me of going as it
were in pilgrimage; and where I speak of going to relics and dead men's
bones, he tells me of going to the Temple of God. What accord have these one
with the other? who would trouble himself to give answer to an absurd man,
that fooleth and trifleth in this sort? As much is it to the purpose which he
alleges, that 2. Kings 13. verse. 21.
a dead man buried in the grave of Elizeus upon the touching of his bones
revived and lived again. Be it so, but does he read that hereupon there was
ever any pilgrimage used to the bones of Elizeus? or does he find that they
who carried the body to be buried, did purposely go on pilgrimage to the
sepulcher of Elizeus, as thinking to receive any benefit thereby? Surely, they
did casually what they did; they saw enemies approaching, and for have they cast
the dead man into Elizeus grave. It pleased God to show that miracle once only
for that time, to confirm that which had been taught by his servant Elizeus;
but neither any before, by any other example, nor any after by this example,
learned to hunt after dead men's bones, to receive any health or comfort by
them. We can find no pilgrimage, M. Bishop, in this story, because here was
no pilgrimage, nor any was hence learned to the bones of Elizeus. As barely and
coldly deals he in the last point, where I say, They knew no shrift nor
absolution. They were not wholly unacquainted, says he, with some kind of
shrift and absolution. Mark how faintly the man speaks; some kind of
shrift, he says; and again, they were not wholly unacquainted with it. They
were not acquainted with shrift, but yet they were not wholly unacquainted with
some kind of sh^ift. But it is Popish shrift and absolution that we require,
whereby the penitent is taught to tell in the ear of the Priest all his sins
particularly, and thereupon to receive absolution, and iniunction of penance to
be performed afterward. Which if it be of so great use and necessity as they
pretend now, we must think it was likewise behouefull and necessary then; or
if they could then be well without it, there is no cause to think it so
religious and necessary now. Speak out, M. Bishop, deal plainly with us; are
ye able to tell us any tidings of it? No more forsooth but this, they were not
wholly unacquainted with some kind of shrift and absolution. But what was that
kind? They were charged, says he, to confess their sins which they had
committed. And is that all? We acknowledge the same charge to belong to us; we
confess our sins to God, both publicly and privately: in public trespasses
we require confession to be made to the Church of God; in private griefs of
conscience we persuade and commend the disclosing of the wound, for advice and
comfort to the Minister of God; but what is all this to Popish shrift? Again,
he says, they were to bring to the Priest a prescribed sacrifice to be offered
for their pardon and absolution. Of the sacrifice we find somewhat, and we
find Gods promise that Leuit. 4. 20.
the sin should be forgiven, and we find the Priest directed to Number. 6. 23.
pray for them; but that the Priest gave absolution upon auricular confession,
or enjoined penance to any party absolved, we can find nothing. Yea, but the
leapers by the law were bound to present themselves to the Priests, and were by
them declared such, or purged from that imputation. Well, and what of that?
Marry, Chrysostom and Hierome do argue, says he, that even so in the law of
grace men infected with the souls leprosy, are either to be bound and
declared obstinate by the Priest, if they will not repent, or repenting and
confessing the same, are to be cleansed therefrom by the Priests absolution.
First, Chrysostom in the place by him alleged says nothing either of
confession or absolution, but noting by occasion what grace is administered by
Priests in baptism, that Chrysostom. de Sacerdot. lib. 3. Authors nobis sunt
natiuitatis eius quam a Deo habemus, etc. atque adeo adoptionis eius qua nos
per gratiam silij Dei sumus effecti. Corpori^ lepram purgare seu verius dicam
haud purgare quidem sed purgatos proba^e Iudaeorum Sacerdotibus solis licebat,
etc. At vero nostris Sacerdotibus non corporis lepram, verum animae sordes, non
dico purgatas probare, sed purgare prorsus concessum est.
they are, as he speaks, authors of our new birth, and of that adoption
whereby we are made the sons of God, he adds further thereof thus, Only the
Priests of the Jews might purge the leprosy of the body, or so speak more
truly, not purge it, but give warrant of them that were purged; but to our
Priests it is granted, I will not say, to approve such as are purged, but to
purge not the leprosy of the body, but the uncleanness of the soul. This the
Priest does sacramentally and ministerially in baptism, when he Acts 2. 38.
baptizeth in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ to the remission of sins; and
what is this to M. Bishops turn? As little is there in the words of Hierome,
who says that Hieron. in Mat. c. 16. Quomodo ibi Sacerdo^ facit leprosum mund^
vel immundum (non quo Sacerdotes leprosos faciant and immundos sed quo habeant
notitiam leprosi vel non leprosi and possint discernere qui mundus quiue
immundus fit) sic and hic alligat vel soluit Episcopus and Presbyter, no^ ^os
qui insontes sunt vel n^xij, sed pro ^fficio suo cum peccatorum audierit
varietates scit qui ligandus sit, qui soluendus.
as the Priest in Moses law did make the leaper clean or unclean, not for
that he did so (indeed) but only took notice who was a leaper and who was
not, and did discern betwixt the clean^ and the unclean, so here the Bishop
or Priest does bind or loose, not bind them which are innocent, or loose the
guilty, but when according to his office he hears the variety of sins, he
knows who is to be bound and who to be loosed. We see here the office and
duty of the Priest to discern betwixt man and man, to acquit the innocent, to
bind the guilty by the public censure of the Church, to decide who is to be
holden for loosed with God and who for bound, all which belong to the outward
and public discipline and government of the Church: but as for auricular
confession or private absolution and p^nance thereto appertayning, there is not
so much as one word spoken thereof. It is plainly here to be seen why M.
Bishop quoted the authors only, but did not set down their words, because
the Reader would have discerned his folly, that would set down such
impertinent stuff, nothing at all concerning the point in hand. Yet he hops
that he has said that that may suffice for answer to my particulars, whereas
he has brought no tolerable proof or probability for any one particular, and
therefore leaves us to resolve, that none of those points of religion by me
mentioned, were ever known to the old Fathers.

W. BISHOP.. 4.
I Might easily add, how the Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, under
the forms of bread and wine, were both prefigured by Melchisedechs Host in
bread and Genes. 14.
wine, and foretold by the Prophet Malachy: and what a Malach. 1.
lively type Manna ( that Angelical and delicate food) was of Christ's body in
the Sacrament. And how the supreme authority of one headouer all the whole
Church, and that to belong to a Bishop, and not to the lay Magistrate, was not
obscurely shadowed but lively represented, by the Sovereign power that the
high Priest of the old Testament had over all the rest, To determine and end
all doubts Deuter. 17.
and controversies, arising about any hard point of the law. As for
consecrating of Priests, and hallowing of Churches and Altars, with all
Vestiments and Ornaments thereunto appertaining; and for the several feasts
and fasts, there is so great resemblance between them and us, that Protestants
commonly cry out against us, for the over great affinity that is betwixt the
old law and our religion. But as they are to be reproved of indiscreet zeal
against the rites of Moses law, which were of God, and good for the time, and
most of them figures and types of the law of grace, according to that of the
Apostle; All 1. Cor. 10.
things chanced to them in figure, and were written for our correction and
instruction: so on the other side, some strange defluxion, and d^stillation of
corrupt humors, maruailously darkened M. Abbots sore eyes, that he could not
discern nor find in the whole law of Moises, any one shadow of that which we
now practice. May not these worthy words which S. Paul pronounced of the
blinded Jews in his time, be verified of him? Their senses 2. Cor. 3.
were dulled until this day: when Moses is read, a veil is put upon their
heart; that is, they reading and hearing the law of Moses, do no more
understand it, then does a man hoodded, or that has a veil before his eyes,
see what is before him; or else M. Abbot reading the old Testament, could not
choose but have seen much of our religion, and many articles of our faith
there recorded. And albeit we teach, most mysteries of our faith to have been
in the law of Moses prefigured and foretold: yet is it very absurd to say, as
M. Abbot does, that we believe no more articles of faith then they did; for we
were by the Son of God our blessed Savior, given to understand many high
points of belief, which were not reueiled unto them, as has been before
declared.

R. ABBOT.
ANd I might as easily answer that the Popish Sacrifice of the body and blood
of Christ, as they call it, under the forms of bread and wine, is an absurd
nouelty, neither prefigured by Melchizedecke, nor foretold by Malachy the
Prophet, nor ever known to any ancient Father of the Christian Church. Strange
it is that a real propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, under the
forms of bread and wine, should be derived from Melchizedecke, with whom we
see no token or semblance thereof, of whom it is not said, that he offered
bread and wine, but only that Genes. 14. 18.
he brought forth bread and wine, and that as Ambrose and Hierome say out of
the Hebrew writers, Ambros. ad Hebr. cap. 7. and Hieron. ad Euagr. Nec mirum si
Melch^zedec victori Abraham obuiam processerit and in rese^^ion em tam ipsius
quam pugnatorum eius panes^ ^mumque protulerit.
For the refreshing of him and his soldiers: in which meaning Joseph. An^iq
Iudaic. l. 1. ^. 11. Milites
Josephus namely Abrahami hospitaliter habuit nihil ^is ad victum decsse
passus. does understand it. And if M. Bishop will needs have it translated by
the word of offering, as his fellows are wont greatly to wrangle to that
intent, yet Ambrose so also applies it, that Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4. c. 3.
Occurrit illi Mel^lnsedec Sac^rdos and ^btulit ei pa^^e and vinii.
he offered to Abraham bread and wine, thereby excluding all necessity of
construction of sacrifice to God. But if yet we shall perforce take it of
offering to God, we conceive of it according to that which Cyprian says, that^
Cyprian l. 2. Ep. 3. Domi^u^ noster Jesus Christus Sacrificium D^o Patri
obtulit, and obtulit hoc id^m quod Melchisedec obtul^rat, id est, panem and
vinii, su^^ scilicet corpus and sanguine^.
our Lord Jesus Christ offering a sacrifice to God the Father, offered the very
same that Melchisedec had offered, that is, bread and wine, even his own body
and blood. If the sacrifice of Christ and Melchisedecke be the very same, and
Melchisedecke also offered the body and blood of Christ, as these words import,
then cannot our sacrifice be a true and real sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood, because Melchisedecks was not so, Christ as yet not having taken his
body and blood; and therefore must both that and this be understood to be only
the mystery and signification thereof. And this interpretation of the
sacrifice on both sides, Hierome confirms when of our Savior Christ's
institution of the Sacrament he says; Hieron. in Mat. 26. Assumit panem and ad
verum Paschae tra^sgreditur Sacramentum, v^ quomodo in praefiguratione eius
Melchisedec su^mi Dei Sacerdos panem and vinii offerens fecerat, ipse quoque
veritatem sui corp^ris and sanguini^ repraesentaret.
Christ takes bread and goes to the true Sacrament of the Passover, that as
Melchisedec the Priest of the high God in prefiguring of him, offering bread
and wine had done, so he himself also might represent the truth of his body
and blood. There is therefore both in the one and in the other, not the very
truth of the body and blood of Christ, but only a representation of the truth
thereof: even as Chrysostom on the one side expresses, when he says, that
Chrysostom. Op. imperfec. hom. 11, Haec vasa sactificata inquibus non ^st verii
co^pus Christi sed mysterium corporis eius continetur.
in the holy vessels is contained, not the true body of Christ, but the
mystery of his body. And unless it be thus, it cannot stand which Ambrose,
concerning this offering of Melchisedec, says, that Ambros. de Sacram. l. 4.
c. 3. Intellige Sacramenta qu^ accipis anteri^ra esse quam sint Moysi
Sacramenta, etc.
the Sacraments which we receive, are more ancient then the Sacraments of
Moses; for how can that be, if our Sacraments be truly and really the body and
blood of Christ, which Melchisedecks were not? Again, where God by Malachy
says; Mat. 1. 11.
In every place incense shall be offered unto me, and a pure offering, whose
eyes are so sharp as that in those words he can discern the Popish sacrifice
of the Mass? We read here of incense and a pure offering, but this room is
too little for the building of so large a house: their Mass cannot stand
within the compass of this ground. And when we consider how the Fathers
expound the same, Tertullian one where generally of Tertul. adu. ludaeos.
Desacrisicijs spiritualibus addit, dicens. In omni loco sacrificia munda
offer^tur.
spiritual sacrifices; another where of Idem cont. Marc. l. 4. Sacrificium
mundum scilicet, simplex oration de conscientia pura.
sincere prayer out of a pure censcience; Hierome of Hieron. in Zacha. c 8.
Sacrificium mundum nequaquam in victimis veteris Testamenti, sed in sanctuate
Euangelica puritatis.
the sanctity and holiness of Evangelical purity; Eusebius of Eusebius. de
demonstrat. Euang. lib. 1. c 6. Sacrificium quod appellaturpurum facimus per
puras actiones.
pure and godly doings; Austin of Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 86. Viuum
Sacrificium de quo dictum est, Immola Deo sacrificium laudis.
the lively sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving; Theodoret of Theodoret. in
Mal. c. 1. Debitum honorem praestabu^t and accomodatum cultum adhibebunt.
the due honor and convenient worship of God, exemplifying the same by the
words of Christ, John 4. 23.
The true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: and by the
words of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Let men pray every where lifting up pure hands without wrath or doubting: and
Hierome by the words of the Psalm, Psalm. 141. 2.
Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the incense, and the lifting up of
my hands as an evening sacrifice: these things, I say, considered, may we not
be thought to be out of our wits, if we shall believe them that the place must
needs be understood of their monstrous sacrifice? That Manna was a type of the
body of Christ, no Christian man doubts, but that it was a type of Christ's
body, as really in the Sacrament, no wise man believes, and the reason whereby
Answer to M. Perkins Advertisement, sect. 56. See the Confutation.
elsewhere he goes about to prove it, is there declared to be vain. So have I
also Of Traditions, sect. 21.
formerly showed that the example of the high Priest amongst the Jews gives
no manner warrant to the supreme authority of one head over the whole Christian
Church; that the high Priest amongst the Jews had no such supremacy as they
claim to the Pope; that reason teaches such a supremacy to be the manifest
and certain danger of the Church, and experience has found it to be the very
ruin and desolation thereof. As for their according with the Jewish ceremonies
in consecrating of Priests, and hallowing of Churches and Altars, and
Vestments, etc. it is a slender proof for the finding of their religion
amongst the Jews, because they have borrowed many ceremonies from the Pagans
also, and yet they will not say that their religion was amongst the Pagans.
Their emu^a^^on of those ceremonies we justly cry out against as preposterous
and absurd, because they being, as M. Bishop says, types and figures of the
law of grace, the substance and truth being reueiled, they ought to cease, This
was the very reason why the Apostles taught the Church Col. 2. 17. 20.
to be disburdened of those rites, because they were shadows of things to
come, the body whereof is in Christ. But M. Bishop tells us by another
spirit, that therefore the Church of Rome reteineth them, because they were
shadows of things to come; because they were types and figures of the law of
grace, and reproves them of indiscreet zeal that are minded otherwise. Since
then he can observe indiscreet zeal in the Apostles, I may not marvel that he
deemeth my sore eyes, darkened with strange defluxion and distillation of
corrupt humors; but such indeed is the case of mine eyes, that in the law of
Moses, and in the Prophets I cannot see that religion which we call Popery,
which stands in those points of faith whereof the question is betwixt them
and us. The rest of his words I pass over as idle talk. What he has
declared, we see, and we see so much folly in it, and so little weight, as
that we cannot but advise him to take longer time, and go over the same again.

W. BISHOP.. 5.
ANd much more repr^chfull is it, to hold as he does, That we worship God after
the same manner as they did: for then should we sacrifice to him, Beefs,
Muttons, Calves, and Lambs, and our sacrificers should be of Aarons issue and
order, and we all circumcised. I omit all their ceremonies, because M. Abbot
excepteth them. And if the Protestants do altogether pray as they did, and in
the same terms as M. Abbot affirms them to do; they sometimes then do pray
unto God to remember Exodus 32. v. 13.
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes to make mercy on them: for to
that effect and in those terms prayed the Prophet Moses, and that according
unto those Patriarchs express order and commandment. Genes. 48. v. 16.
Whereunto if it please the Protestants to join that other prayer of the
Psalmist: Remember (O Lord) David, Psalm. 131.
and all his mildness; let them tell me, whether this small prayer, with
which they find so great fault, (Tu per Thomae sanguinem, etc. Thou (O Lord)
for that bloods sake, which thy servant shed in defense of thy holy Church,
take compassion upon us) be not warranted for good, by example of the like
recorded in the old Testament. For if they then did desire God to remember the
excellent virtues of his servants, and for their sakes to show mercy to others,
why may not we do the same now? why may we not as well beseech God to remember
the constant fortitude of S. Thomas, as they did the mildness of David? I will
not dwell upon these impertinent and loose follies, which all that be not
babes, may of themselves easily discry; but do out of the premises infer:
first, that no religion was to be called Catholic, before the Gospel of
Christ was preached, or to be preached to all nations; and therefore the law of
Moses being peculiar to one people and country, could not be called
Catholic: secondly, that the Roman faith and religion, is very conformable to
that of the Patriarks and Prophets, as the verity is to the figure; whence it
follows, that the Protestants new devices, hold no due correspondence with
them. I have already confuted this his assertion, That Christ at his coming,
confirmed the faith and religion of the Jews, without any additions of his
own, and commended it simply and nakedly (only stripping it of types and
shadows) to be preached to all nations: And here I add, that then Christians
may yet have many wives together, as the Jews had, or give their wives upon
any displeasure, a libell of divorce; for these were no shadows nor
ceremonies. And briefly, it should follow thereof, that all that part of their
law that does belong to justice and judgment, stands still in full force and
virtue among us Christians: which is most opposite to the determination of the
Apostles in the first Council holden at Jerusalem, where it was plainly
decided, that we Christians Act. 15. verse. 28.
were not bound to keep the old law. Again, if the Apostles were simply and
nakedly, to preach unto the Gentiles the law of Moses, stripped of types and
shadows, why were they commanded to preach unto them the Sacrament of
baptism, or of our Lords Supper, which are no where commanded in the law of
Moses? Well, let this then pass, as a most notorious and gross oversight.
But the Apostles ( says he) added nothing of their own, which is very false;
for many things were left by our Savior to their disposition: whereupon Saint
Paul says, Caetera cum venero disponam, I will dispose 1. Cor. 11. v. 3^.
of the rest when I come; and was further bold to say, Haec dico ego non
Dominus, For the rest I say, 1. Cor. 7. v. 12.
not our Lord. M. Abbot goes on belying the Apostle and saying, And they
preached only the Gospel, Romans 1.
promised before by the Prophets: where he corrupts the Text, by adding the
word only; and weaueth into that Text to the Romans, these words out of the
Acts of the Apostles, saying none other things, then those Act. 26. v. 22.
which the Prophets and Moses did say should come: where he both mangleth the
Text, and also breaks off in the midst of a sentence, that it might seem
applyable to all points of the Apostles preachings, which the Apostle applies
only to Christ's death and resurrection, and the preaching and carrying of light
unto the Gentiles. It is a piece of strange alchymie, to distill out of these
words of the Apostle, that they preached nothing but the same faith and
religion which the Jews embraced. S. Paul says, that he had preached nothing
of Christ's death and resurrection, and that he was the light of the Gentiles,
but that which the Prophets did speak should come to pass: M. Abbot of his
own head enlarges this his speech to all other points of our faith. Again,
all is besides the purpose: for the Apostle says not, that he taught any one
article, which the common sort of the Jews did believe, but such things as the
Prophets said should come to pass. Who knows not, that they foresaw and
foretold many things, that were no articles of faith in their days? and
touching these very particulars, how many of the Jews did believe that their
Messiah should die so shameful a death? or that Moses law should be abrogated
by their Messiah? and that the Gospel of Christ should be preached unto all
nations? all these were great nouels, and exceeding scandalous to the body of
the Jews: wherefore, though some better learned among them, and more
religiously affected, might understand the Prophets speaking of those points;
yet were they far from the common reach, and persuasion of that people of the
Jews from these points, that the Jews believed all that Christ taught, and
all that he commanded his Apostles to deliver to all nations.

R. ABBOT.
THe words of mine answer are, As they worshipped God, so, saving ceremonial
observations, we also worship him. Consider now I pray thee, gentle Reader,
from what brain M. Bishops illation proceeds, Then should we sacrifice to
him Beefs, Muttons, Calves, Lambs, and our sacrificers should be of Aarons
issue and order, and we all circumcised. Why, M. Bishop, are not all these in
the number of ceremonial observations? Forsooth no; I omit all their
ceremonies, says he, because M. Abbot excepteth them. But did not M. Abbot in
excepting all their ceremonies, except circumcision and sacrifices, and the
whole Priesthood of the law? What, is M. Bishop ignorant, that circumcision
and sacrifices, and the whole rites and rules of the Leuiticall Priesthood,
do all belong to the ceremonial law? and that our Savior Christ in
abrogating the ceremonial law, is understood to have abolished all these? Is
he to be set to school again, to learn what is meant by the name of
ceremonies? It were a shame to send a Doctor of Divinity to his Catechism; for
his credits sake I will refer him to a greater book of Thomas Aquinas, where
he says, that Tho. Aquin. sum. 12. q. 101. art. 4. Per tot. In veteri lege
singula praedicta (Sacrificia, Sacramenta, sacra and obseruantiae) ceremoniae
vocantur.
in the old law Sacrifices, Sacraments, sacred vtensils and implements, and
obseruances of singular or special conversation, are all called ceremonies,
and this I would have him learn against the next time. His next exception is
against that I say, As they prayed, so and in the same words we also pray.
Then, says he, they do sometimes pray unto God to remember Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes to take mercy on them, as Moses did.
Which in part we acknowledge and profess to do; to pray God in like manner as
Moses did, to remember Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes to
take mercy upon the seed of Abraham, but not to take mercy upon us. God bound
himself to the seed of Abraham Genes. 17. 7.
by an everlasting covenant to be their God; by reason whereof we believe that
in this forlorn estate wherein they now be, God still stands entirely
respective to the preservation of that nation: and though Romans 11. 28.
as touching the Gospel, they be enemies for our sakes, yet as touching the
election, as the Apostle faith, namely whereby God of old elected them to be
his people, they are beloved for their Fathers sakes. Their present infidelity
then is an interruption only, not any final reiection of them, and the time
will come when the effect of that love will appear* by restoring that nation
again to the society and fellowship of the Church of Christ. What hinders
then, but as they are beloved for their Fathers sakes, so we may pray God to
remember their Fathers Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and for their sakes to
show his love, and to return unto them in mercy and compassion, 2. Cor. 3. 15
16.
To take away the veil that is laid before their hearts, that they may be
turned to the Lord? Which notwithstanding we say not for our selves, because
God has made no promise to us properly and personally in Abraham, but only
Genes. 22. 18. (...)ls 3. 25.
in the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. 16.
which is Jesus Christ, by whom and in whom it is, and not by Abraham himself,
that we are become the children of Abraham. As for the text which he alleges,
to prove that it was the express order and commandment of the Patriarchs,
that their posterity should so pray, he shows his ignorance in the abusing
of it, because no otherwise did Jacob say, Genes. 48. 16. Vulg. Innocetur super
cos nomen meam.
Let my name be named upon them, and the name of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac,
then as seven women in a time of desolation are brought in by the Prophet,
saying to one man, Esa. 4 1. Vulg. Innocetur nomen tuum super nos.
Let thy name be named upon us; these women hereby craving that they might be
called the wines of such a man, and the Patriarch desiring that Ephraim and
Manasses should be severally reckoned for Tribes of the seed of Abraham and
Israel, as if they had been immediately descended from him, even as Jacob
himself a little before expresses his own meaning, saying; Genes. 48. 5.
Thy two sons Manasses and Ephraim, which are borne unto thee in the land of
Egypt, before I came to thee into the land of Egypt, shall be mine, as Ruben
and Simeon are mine. But now upon this that has been said, that they prayed
God for those Fathers sakes, to be merciful to them. M. Bishop being
resolutely impudent to make all good that is stark naught, groundeth a defense
of a devilish and horrible blasphemy, which the Church of Rome had brought of
old into the service of the Church. Concerning Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the time of King Henry the second slain then, without due and
lawful proceeding, but yet dying no other but an insolent rebel and traitor
to his Prince, they have been wont to pray thus:

Breuiar. in tra^slat. S. Thomae Cantuar. Jesu Christ per Thomae vulnera, Quae
nos ligant relaxa scelera. Tu per Thomae sanguinem quem pro te impendit, Fac
nos Christ scandere, quo Thomas ascedit.
O Jesus Christ by Thomas his wound,
Release the sins wherewith we are bound.
By the blood of Thomas which for thee he did spend,
Make us O Christ to climb whither Thomas did ascend.
In which prayers we see how by the wounds and blood of this holy Saint of
theirs, they ask at Gods hands remission of sins and everlasting life, which
Christian faith abhors to ask by any other, but only the blood of Jesus
Christ. Yea so harshly it sounds in Christian ears, and so contrary is it to
the common sense of Christian profession, as that the Rabbines of the Roman
Synagogue were content even for very shame to blot it out of their Portesse,
thereby acknowledging that it was by apostasy and error that it came first
in. But M. Bishop a man more wise and learned, or rather a man of harder
forehead then they were, takes upon him to assure us that there was nothing
amiss in that prayer, and that it might very conveniently and lawfully have
been retained still. And why? Marry, because of old time they prayed thus,
Remember Abraham, and Isaac; and Jacob: and again, Lord remember David and all
his mildness. For* says he, if they did then desire God to remember the
excellent virtues of his servants, and for their sakes to show mercy upon
others, why may not we do the same now? why may we not as well beseech God to
remember the constant fortitude of St. Thomas, as they did the mildness of
David? But against that if of his I oppose the exposition that Thomas Aquinas
makes of the Apostles words concerning the Jews, that they were beloved for
their Fathers sakes, understanding the same of the elect of that nation. Tho.
Aquin. in Romans c. 11. Lect. 4. Quod non est sic intelligendum quasi merita
praestita patribus fuerint causa aternae electionis (...) sed qu^a Deus ab
aterno elegit gratis and patres and filios, hoc tamen ordine vt filij propter
patres consequerentur salutem, no^ quasi merita patrum suffi^ creat ad siliorum
salutem, sed per quandam abundantiam divine gratiae and (...) hoc dicit quae in
tintum patribus est ex^^bita vt prop ter promissiones eis factas etiam fily
saluarentur.
Which, says he, is not to be so taken as if the merits bestowed upon the
Fathers, were the cause of the eternal election of the children, but for that
God from everlasting chose freely both the Fathers and the children, in such
order notwithstanding as that the children for the Fathers sakes should obtain
salvation, not as if the merits of the Fathers should suffice for the salvation
of the children, but he speaks it according to an abundance of Gods grace and
mercy, which was so far yielded to the Fathers, as that the children should
be saved by virtue of the promises, or for the promises sake made unto their
Fathers. Here is then the true reason why they alleged unto God for themselves
the names of the Fathers, not for the merits of the Fathers, but because of the
promises that God had made unto them. Whereof we have this for a certain
demonstration, that we no where find any of the Fathers mentioned in that
sort, but only such to whom the promises of God have in special manner been
made, neither Abel, nor Enoch, nor Noe, nor Job, nor Moses, nor Esaias, nor any
of the rest, but only Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, to whom God vouchsafed to
do that honor by special covenants and promises, to tie himself both to
them and to their seed. Yea, and it is further to be observed, that this was
no ordinary manner of praying amongst them, as whereby to beg of God remission
of sins and eternal life, as we see that Popish prayer does; but when God in
anger and displeasure seemed ready Deuteronomy. 9. 25. 26.
to destroy their nation, and so to forget the promise made unto their Fathers,
or when they would seek any favor at Gods hands for the justification of that
promise, then would they allege to God the names of their Fathers, as it were
to put him in mind of those things which he had promised. Thus does Moses
himself declare the meaning of that prayer, in another place when he says;
Exodus 32. 13.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thine
own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed, etc. In which
sort the three children in the fiery furnace are brought in, praying unto God
in the Apocryphal additions to Daniel: Song of the three children, Verse. 35.
36.
Take not away thy mercy from us for thy beloved Abraham's sake, and for thy
servant Isaacs sake, and for thine holy Isreal's sake, to whom thou have spoken
and promised that thou would multiply their seed, etc. And thus it is said,
that 1. Chro. 13. 23
the Lord had mercy on them, and pittyed them, and had respect unto them,
because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So concerning David
also we read, that 2. Chro. 21. 7.
the Lord (though he were much provoked) yet would not destroy the house of
David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and because he had
promised to give a light to him and to his sons for ever. This covenant and
promise Solomon pleads in his prayer unto God, 2. Chro. 6. 16.
Lord God of Israel keep with thy servant David my father, that which thou
have promised him; and again, Verse. 17.
Let thy word be verified which thou spakest unto thy servant David. And thus
the Church of the Jews in time of affliction, remembers God concerning David,
Psalm. 89. 49.
Lord where are thy old loving kindnesses which thou swarest unto David in thy
truth? By all which we see that it was not upon the persons or virtues of
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, that those ancient faithful rested themselves in
their prayers, but upon the word, the covenant, the promise of God, which he in
mercy had vouchsafed to make unto them. And hereby we learn what to conceive
of those latter words which M. Bishop alleges out of the Psalm, Psalm. 132.
11.
Lord remember David and all his mildness. Where to make the words seem
somewhat the more effectual to his purpose, we see how he groundeth himself
upon an error of translation. For the words of the Psalm truly translated
are not, Remember David and all his mildness, but remember David and all his
affliction or trouble, as not only Hieron. translat Psalm. iuxta Hebr. Memento
David and omnis afflictionis cius.
Hierome in his translation opposed to the Septuagint in Greek, but also their
own interpreters, Pagn. and Ar. Mont. Vniuersa afflictionis eius.
Pagnine and Arias Montanus have translated it. Where under the name of
affliction we understand that fervent burning zeal, and careful travel of
mind, wherewith David was possessed, and even perplexed and anguished through
desire that he had for the building of the Temple of God, and for the settling
of the Kingdom and state, accordingly as God had promised unto him. With which
desire he was so vehemently affected as here it is expressed, as that he swear
and vowed to the Lord, not to enter into his house, nor to climb up to his
bed; not to suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eye lids to slumber, till he
found the place for building the Temple of God, the house of God wherein he
would rest and dwell amongst them. Solomon the son of David whom I doubt not
to have been the author of this Psalm, for that Psalm. 132. ^. etc.
a part hereof was used by him in 2. Chro. 6. 41.
the dedication of the Temple, recommendeth herein to God the remembrance of
this care, and craves success thereto, and that God would verify in him all
that he had thereupon said and promised to David in that behalf. I have before
showed how Chrysostom gives the effect of this prayer in Salomons name;
Chrysostom, in Psalm. 131. Quoniam genus ab co duxi and quoniam cum tibi acceptum
suiss^t cius stud^um and diligentia, dixisti te cius genus and regnam
erecturum, propterea nunc haec pa^la conuenta a te exig mus. Idem habet Basil.
in Psalm. cund.
Because I am borne of him, and for that when his study and diligence was
acceptable to thee, thou saiedst thou would raise up his stock and Kingdom,
therefore we now desire of thee the things which thou have couenanted and
promised. Albeit if we grant M. Bishop his own translation, and that here
Solomon mentions the mildness and goodness of his father David, yet shall
it avail him nothing; because God being styled 1. King^ 8. 23.
the God that keeps covenant and mercy with his servants that walk before
him with all their heart, the commemoration of David's virtues shall be but a
describing of him, to be one of those servants to whom God keeps covenant and
mercy, not any allegation of his merit whereby he should stand as a Mediator
for them. Therefore the Greek Fathers who follow the translation of the
Septuagint, and do read the mildness of David, do notwithstanding make the
promise of God the maine ground of all this prayer and request. Thus Theodoret,
though misapplying the Psalm to the people of the captivity of Babylon, gives
the brief thereof thus, that Theodoret. in Psalm. 131. Captiui qui Babyloni
crant vniuersorum Deum obsecrant, promissiones magno Dauidi ab ipso factas pro
precibus ass^rentes vt veniam consequantur precantes.
they besought God bringing the promises made by him to David, in steed of
prayers that they might obtain pardon. And so Basil and Chrysostom coming to
those words of the Psalm; The Lord has sworn unto David, etc. do note
therein the principal point whereupon Solomon relied: Basil. in psa^. cund.
Quonia^a Dauidis, virtutisque ac studij illius circa Templum meminit and
priscarum narracion^m mentionem secit, hoc quod maximum crat huius reicaput,
testame^tum scilicet Dei relegens praetexit. Idem habet Chrysostom. ibid.
Having made mention, say they, of David and his virtue and care concerning the
Temple, and of other ancient narrations, he now alleges that which was the
chiefest ground of this matter, rehearsing the testament and covenant of God.
In all this, let M. Bishop take it how he will, we see no blood alleged for
remission of sins, no merit for obtaining the Kingdom of heaven, but all is
for stablishing a stock and Kingdom, which God had promised upon the earth.
If he can show us any promise made to Thomas Becket, concerning forgiveness of
sins and eternal life, to be obtained by his blood, he shall say somewhat
to the purpose; but since he cannot do so, little reason had he and less
conscience to allege the example of that prayer of Solomon, for defense of
such a prayer, or rather such a blasphemy, as theirs is, whereof he himself is
so ashamed as that even here where he defends it, he seems loath to utter
it, repeating in Latin only the words, Tu per Thomae sanguinem, and whereas
the prayer is by the blood of Thomas to be brought to heaven, setting down in
steed thereof, take compassion upon us. Now although he have thus showed
himself a monstrous man, in defending this horrible impiety of mingling the
polluted blood of a vile traitor, with the sacred and innocent blood of the
unspotted Lamb of God, yet to make the matter very goodly for himself, he
passes from it with a Rhetorical extenuation, thus; I will not dwell upon
these impertinent and loose follies, which all that be not babes may of
themselves easily descry. Indeed he may well call them on his own part
impertinent and loose follies, which are no otherwise tied together but with
such slender knots; which are so palpably impious, as that there is no babe so
simple that has any common understanding of Christian faith, but sees the
grossness and absurdity thereof. But herein he follows the steps of his
companions, whose manner it is where they are most wounded to make show to
laugh most, and namely of M. Harding, who being pressed with this sacrilegious
prayer, answered that it was an objection meet for a Cobbler, so very a trifle
is it with them to abase the merit of the Son of God, by matching with it the
demerit of a wicked and wilful man. Upon this transition he infers out of
the premises two cruel conclusions. First, that no religion was to be called
Catholic before the Gospel was preached unto all nations. True, but yet the
same faith and religion was before though it were not as yet called Catholic
til it were preached unto all nations. Aug. cont. Faust. l. 16. cap. 28. Non
diuersa doctrina est, sed diuersum tempus.
There was no difference of the doctrine, says St. Austin, though there were
difference of the time. Secondly, says he, that the Roman faith and religion
is very conformable to that of the Patriarchs and Prophets, as the verity is to
the figure. But we see not the premises whence this conclusion should follow,
having hitherto heard of nothing pertaining to that purpose, but only a
ridiculous imitation of old shadows and figures, which we rather hold for a
deformity of the Church that is, then any conformity with the Church that was.
Our conformity with them must not be in shadows and figures, which were no
longer to continue but Heb. 9. 10.
until the time of reformation should come; but in the substance and truth
which those pictures and shadows for the time helped them to understand that
they might believe, and which Christ has taught us now to believe without any
of their helps. To cleave to the shadow still when the body is in place, what
is it but to play with a shadow, and to neglect the body? The figure whereof M.
Bishop speaks is outward and corporal; the verity and truth is inward and
spiritual. The resembling then of those outward figures in Popish outward
ceremonies, is not a conformity betwixt the verity and the figure, but rather
that that is betwixt figure and figure, betwixt one picture and another. As for
us, we hold that due correspondence with that old church which God requires,
who wholly without those figures hold that spiritual truth which they believed
therein. He goes on and says, that he has already confuted my assertion,
that Christ at his coming confirmed the faith and religion of the Jews
without any additions of his own, and commended it simply and nakedly, only
stripping it of types and shadows, to be preached to the nations. Where note,
I pray thee, gentle Reader, that whereas I say that Christ confirmed the same
faith and religion and no other, he sets down of his own device, the same
faith and religion without any additions of his own; which although it be true
as touching substance of faith and religion, for therein Christ added nothing,
yet it shows his lewd mind for that he has done it to evil purpose, that
he might give way to himself with some color to cavil against me, as
presently after he does, that Christ added other signs and Sacraments, which
the Jewish Church before received not. But let him report my words as he
finds them, and then they shall stand good, that Christ taught no other but
the same faith and religion that was delivered by Moses and the Prophets to the
former Church, which is not hindered by that he instituted new Sacraments,
because I have already showed that in diversity of Sacraments there is still
the same faith. Which how handsomely he has confuted has before appeared, and
I suppose by that time he has further considered of the matter, he will find
cause to seek for a better confutation. But yet taking it upon him that he
has confuted me, he goes on, saying: And here I add that then Christians may
have many wives together as the Jews had, and may give their wives upon any
displeasure a lib^ll of divorce. Where we may well think that he was scant in
the right that took the lawfulness of many wives, and the giving of a bill of
divorce to a wife, to have been matters of the Jews faith and religion
toward God. I have cited Leo Bishop of Rome, saying, that. 2. of this Chapter.
the faith whereby we live has never differed in any age: and will M. Bishop
infer against him, as he does against me, that Christians then may have many
wives, and husbands may upon every displeasure give their wives a bill of
diuorcement, to put them away as it was amongst the Jews? Did not his
discretion serve him to put difference betwixt matters of faith and of manners;
betwixt articles of religion and offices of conversation? Faith and religion
import that devotion and service which is immediately performed to God, and
what lets but that in their lawfulness of many wives they might yield to
God the same devotion that we do, and we in single marriage the same that
they? But happily somewhat it was that he aimed at, which his troubled head
served him not to express. I said in my answer as touching those Fathers of
the old Testament; According to the approved example of their life, we also
teach men to live. Now I imagine hereof it is that he meant to say, that then
Christians may have many wives, and at their pleasure give their wives libels
of divorce. If this were his meaning, he should have bethought himself where
their example in these things is found any where to have been approved,
because I made mention only of approved example. For our parts we hold
plurality of wives in those times to have been permitted, but not approved;
tolerated by dispensation, as Gregor. exposit. in 1. Reg. c. 2 l. 2. Quaedam in
sacra Scriptura inuen^untur praecepta, quae dispensat^o^^ q^id^m D^^ praecepta
s^nt sed non amore De^.
Gregory says, some things were of old, but not warranted by institution. And
of that dispensation the same Gregory takes an example of the Jews, giving a
bill of divorce, concerning which we see how the Pharisees allege in the
Gospel not that God ordained it, but only that Moses so commanded or rather
suffered, and the reason thereof given, Mat. 19 78.
because of the hardness of their hearts: and therefore we hope M. Bishop upon
better advice will not of unity of faith conclude any more, that it should now
be lawful for us to do the same. As for the judicial law of the Jews, it is
wholly without the occasion and compass of my speech, and briefly I answer
him, that though there be the same faith and the same rules of duty and
conversation, yet it does not therefore follow that censures and punishments,
or trials and legal proceedings must be the same. In a word, whatsoever the
Apostles decreed in their Council at Jerusalem for the abrogating of the law,
we acknowledge and obey, and that more faithfully then the Papists do, who, as
M. Bishop confesses, do hold it their grace still to hold a conformity with
the ceremonies of the law. Yet again, if the Apostles, says he, were simply
and nakedly to preach to the Gentiles the law of Moses (he should say without
ambiguity, the faith and religion of the Patriarchs and Prophets) stripped of
types and shadows, why then were they commanded to preach unto them the
sacraments of Baptism and of the Supper of the Lord? An idle question, and it
is already answered, that in delivering other Sacraments they taught no other
but the same doctrine and faith. The Sacraments are water in Baptism, bread
and wine in the Lords Supper, different from those of old. The doctrine of
faith is the death of Christ, and shedding of his blood for the cleansing of
our souls and remission of our sins, which was the same in all the
Sacrifices and Sacraments of the Church since the world began. And this one
doctrine I said the Apostles by the commandment of Christ so taught, as that
they added nothing of their own. This, says M. Bishop, is very false; for
many things were left by our Savior to their disposition. Now thou must
understand, gentle Reader, that I used not those words as mine own, but did
set them down in a distinct letter, quoting Tertullian in the margent as the
author of them. The whole passage of those words shall give some light to the
matter here in hand. Tertul. de Praescript. Nobis nihil ex nostro arbitrio
indulgere licet, sed ne eligere quod aliquis de arbitrio suo induxerit.
Apostolos Domini habemu^ authors qui nec ipsi quicquam ex suo arbitrio quod
inducerent clegerunt, sed acceptam a Christo disciplinam fideliter nationibus
adsignauerunt.
We may not, says he, give our selves liberty of any thing at our own
discretion, nor make choice of any thing which any other man has brought in of
his own mind. We have the Apostles of the Lord for our leaders, who did not
of their own will or discretion make choice of any thing to bring in, but the
doctrine which they received of Christ, they faithfully delivered to the
nations. Here then M. Bishop gives Tertullian the lie, and tells him that it
is false which he says, dissembling in the mean time the sight of Tertullians
name, and making show as if he spoke it to me only. Thou art now at thy choice,
gentle Reader, whither thou will rather believe Tertullian or M. Bishop. If
thou will rather believe Tertullian in a work generally approved, then thou
must say as we say, that the Apostles added nothing of their own, but taught
only what they received of Christ, according to the commission given unto them;
Mat. 28 20.
Teaching them to observe whatsoever things I have commanded you. But to show
that our Savior left many things to the disposition of the Apostles, he
alleges those words of St. Paul; 1. Cor. 11. 34.
Other things I will dispose or set in order when I come. Where I would pray
him to tell us in good sadness whether the meaning of those words be, I will
teach you when I come some new doctrine and points of faith which Christ has
not taught or commanded me to teach, but I have added of mine own. If he
think so, let him tell us that we may wonder at him. If he do not think so,
to what end is it that he alleges those words? Surely he who a little before
so religiously tells them, that Vos. 23.
he received of the Lord that which he delivered to them, should not seem
likely presently after to say that he would hereafter teach them other matters
of his own, which he had not received of the Lord. M. Bishop therefore should
have used his discretion to put a difference betwixt matter of order and matter
of faith, so to understand that though the Apostles might, as the Church
always may, prescribe orders for decency and conueniency in the public
assemblies and government of the Church, yet that in doctrine and faith,
neither they then, nor the Church now, may add any thing to that which Christ
our Lord commanded and delivered both to them and us. Of the same kind is his
other proof out of that which the Apostle faith for advice to the unmarried so
still to abide, concerning which he professes to have received 1. Cor. 7. 12.
25.
no commandment from the Lord; for what is this to show that the Apostle
hereby added a new point of faith, when as whether the married or the
unmarried, whether they that follow his advise, or they that follow it not, all
are saved by the same faith? Advise is of things arbitrary to be done; faith is
of things necessary to be believed. The Apostle therefore might give wholesome
advise without commandment of the Lord, and yet cannot hereupon be said to
teach a new article of faith. I said further in my answer, that the Apostles
preached only Romans 1. 2.
the Gospel, promised before by the Prophets in the holy Scriptures. M. Bishop
tells me that I belie the Apostle, and corrupt the text by adding the word,
only. But I set down the word only in a letter distinct from the words of the
text, as appears in my book, though he would not observe it, but hudleth all
together, and therefore there was no cause for him to charge me with corrupting
the text. And what? will he say notwithstanding that it was not meant that they
preached only the Gospel promised in the Scriptures? Surely the Apostle notes
his calling and service to have bin to preach the Gospel of God. This Gospel
of God, he says, God had promised before by his Prophets in the holy
Scriptures. Now if M. Bishop will say that though the Gospel were there
promised, yet the whole Gospel was not promised; he wrongeth the Apostle by
making his words partly true and partly false; true in one part of the
Gospel, because one part was promised; false in another part, because that
other part was not promised. Which to avoid, he must confess that the whole
Gospel was promised in the Scriptures of the Prophets, and because the
Apostles preached only the Gospel of God, therefore they preached only the
Gospel promised in the Scriptures. And thus in the end of the same Epistle the
Apostle speaks again to the same effect, that Romans 16. 26.
the myslerie of the Gospel was published amongst all nations by the
Scriptures of the Prophets. We do not think he dallied in so saying as to
mean, the Gospel is published, that is to say, a part thereof but not the
whole, but the Gospel entirely and perfectly is preached by the Scriptures of
the Prophets. Therefore elsewhere he professes that in preaching the Gospel f
he said no other things but what the Prophets and Moses did Acts 26. 22.
say should come. But here M. Bishop says, I mangle the text and break off in
the midst of a sentence, that it might seem appliable to all points of the
Apostles preachings which the Apostle applies only to Christ's death and
resurrection, and the preaching and carrying of light to the Gentiles. But he
himself rather does wrong in so abridging the words of the Apostle contrary
to the practice of the Apostle, who though here he name only a brief of some
principal points as accuslomably is done, yet under these as the chief
comprehends the whole doctrine which he taught. He used the words to take
away the offense which was generally conceived against his preaching, and
seeing he did not preach these only particulars which are here set down,
neither were they offended only at these, therefore he must be so understood as
that the words must be applied to all the rest, and that taken as put in
steed of all, whereat they were offended most of all. And if we do not so
take them, we make him subject to calumniation, because he could not affirm
that he said no other things then the Prophets and Moses did say should come,
if in any other points he taught any thing that had not the testimony of Moses
and the Prophets. Yea when the same Apostle says generally of Romans 3. 21. 22
the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, that it has the
witness of the law and the Prophets, how can M. Bishop persuade us that in the
preaching of the righteousness of God by the faith of Jesus Christ, he should
teach any thing but whereof he had witness and warrant of the law and
Prophets? especially when we see him as in other of his Epistles, so specially
in the Epistle to the Romans, instifying all points of faith accordingly. And
that this is a truth not to be contradicted, we will take witness of Gregory
Bishop of Rome, who says, that Gregor. in Cant c. 5. Apo(...) a Pro(...) ^ru^n
d^ctis vt (...) persisterent fidem integram (...).
the Aposiles received the whole faith from those things that were spoken by
the Prophets. And again, Idem in Ezech. hom. 6. Qued praedicat l^x, hoc ^iani
Prophet; quod d^nuilciant Prophatae, ^o^ (...)b^t (...); quod ex^^ourt
Euangelium, hoc praedi^a^erunt Aposto^^ per mundum.
Look what the law preaches, the same also do the Prophets; and what the
Prophets teach, the same the Gospel has exhibited; and what the Gospel
exhibited, the Apostles preached through the world. Thus the law and the
Prophets and the Gospel, and the preaching of the Apostles, have all delivered
only one and the same thing. Therefore he says, that Ibid. V^raque Testamenta
in nullo a se d^screpant, etc. In^st testamento veteri, testamentum no^um, etc.
Prophetia testamenti no^i, testamentum vetus est, and expositio testamenti
veteris, testamentum nouum.
the two Testaments differ not in any thing one from the other; that the new
Testament is contained in the old; that the old Testament is a prophecio of the
now, and the new Testament the exposition of the old. The same had St. Austin
said before, that Aug. cont. Faust. Manich. l. 15. c. 2. Vetus testamentum
recte intell^gentibus prophe^a est noui testamenti.
the old Testament to them that rightly understand it is a prophecy of the
new; that Idem de Catechiz. rudib. c. 4. In veteri testamento est occultatio
noui. in neuo testamento est manifestatio veteris.
in the old Testament is the hiding of the new, and in the new the manifesting
of the old. To be short Leo faith. Leo in Natiuitat. Dom. sermon 3. Quod
praedicauerunt Apostoli, hoc annunciauerunt Proph^tae, etc. quod semper est
credit^m.
What the Apostles preached, the same the Prophets have declared, and the same
has always been believed. Now if the Apostles received the whole faith of
the Prophets, and the same have always been believed, if the preaching of the
Prophets and Apostles be the same; if the two Testaments differ in nothing one
from the other, and the new be contained and hidden in the old, then have I
rightly affirmed that the words of St. Paul are generally true, that in
preaching the Gospel he said no other things but those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come. In the rest of this division we may think that M.
Bishop was scant sober when he wrote it, or else wrote in a dream when he
neither knew what was said to him, nor what he was to say. The Apostle says
not that he taught any one article which the common sort of the Jews did
believe. And what then? To what end, M. Bishop, do you here tell us a tale of
the common sort of the Jews? Who spoke of them or gave you occasion to make
any mention of them? The matter is what the Prophets taught, and the elect of
God believed, not what the common sort of the Jews believed who commonly
believed not the Prophets but killed and stoned them when they were sent unto
them. How many, says he, believed that their Messiah should die so shameful a
death? or that Moses law should be abrogated by the same Messiah? or that the
Gospel of Christ should be preached unto all nations? All, say I, that
understood and believed the Scriptures of Moses and the Prophets, in which they
were forewarned of these things. The unbelief or ignorance of the rest, I
trow, hinders not but that these things were then contained in the faith of
the Church, and in the doctrine of that time, unless M. Bishop will say, that
in Popery those are no articles of faith which the common sort of their
Christians do not conceive, who have only the Colliars faith to believe just
as the Church believes, when they neither know what the Church believes, nor
what they themselves ought to believe. In a word the Prophets then foretold
nothing for matter of faith which was not matter of faith then as well as now.

W. BISHOP.. 6.
MAster Abbot runs like a wandering Planet to a third; that all which the
Apostles taught, they committed to writing, which is notwithstanding as false
as any of the former: for many of them who never ceased to preach, left not
one sentence in writing behind them; and he that wrote most, did not write the
hundredth part of that which he taughtly word of mouth. We know well, that they
left the Gospel in writing, and many other most divine and rare instructions
in their Epistles; wherefore he needed not cite Ireneus to witness that, which
no man is ignorant of: but that they wrote all which they preached, or all
things necessary to salvation, Ireneus says not a word, but plainly signifies
the contrary; where he most sagely counsaileth all men, when any controversy
in religion arises, to make their recourse to Eusebius. (...). Eccles. lib. 5. c.
19.
the most ancient Churches, where the Apostles had conuersed, ( amongst which
he commends the Roman for principal of all the rest) and from them to take
their resolution: he then was of opinion, that the decision of all
controversies were not to be searched out of the written word, but rather to be
taken from the resolution of the Church. Oh, but Tertullian says, That
believing De Praescriptionibus.
this we desire to believe no more, because we first believe that there is
nothing else for us to believe. Believing this? believing what? the written
word only? nothing less; for in that very Treatise, his principal drift is,
to prove that Heretics cannot be confuted out of the written word, but by
ancient customs and traditions, which he calls Praescriptions: but ( says
he) when we believe the whole doctrine of Christ, both written and delivered by
Apostolical tradition, then we desire to believe no more of any vpstart
Heretics new devices. To S. Augustine I answer first, that those be not his
formal words which he cites. Secondly, admitting the sense (if it be rightly
taken) I say, that these words; If Galat. 1.
any man or Angel shall preach any thing besides that which is written ( where
he alludeth to the Apostles like words) are to be understood, as S. Augustine
himself expounds those of the Apostle, that is: If any man shall preach
contrary to that which is written. For this is his own interpretation: The
Apostle says not Aug. lib. 17. cont. Faust. cap. 3.
more then you have received, but otherwise then you have received; for if he
had so said, he had prejudiced himself, who desired to come to the
Thessalonians, to supply what was wanting to their faith. He that supplies
adds that wanted, but does not take away any thing that was before: so that
you see, when he says that nothing is to be preached besides that which is
written, his meaning is, nothing which is contrary to it; allowing withal,
that much more conformable to it, may be added for a supply to make it full and
perfect.

R. ABBOT.
THe Planets though in respect of other Stars they seem to wander, because
in their orb they change their place, yet in their wandering and change do
always observe a certain and constant course. I seem to M. Bishop to wander
by going from a Prosyllogisme to a Syllogism, and from a mayor to a minor; but
yet he sees to his grief that I infer a direct and certain conclusion, as
I have before briefly declared in the first Chapter. I came by process of
speech to show that our faith and not Popery is the Apostolic faith, To prove
this I alleged that what faith and Gospel the Apostles taught, they committed
the same to writing, and because ours accords fully with that which they
wrote, therefore ours is the Apostolic faith. It offends M. Bishop that it
should be said that all which the Apostles taught, they committed to writing.
Well, what is his instance to prove the contrary? Forsooth, many of them who
never ceased to preach left not one sentence in writing behind them, and he
that wrote most, wrote not the hundredth part of that which he taught. Where we
see the true picture of a very wilful and absurd wra^gler, who seeks by
vain cauillation to obscure that which by reason and truth he cannot disprove.
What though all the Apostles did not write, when as the writings of some might
sufficiently set forth the preaching of all, because they all preached the same
thing? And what though none of them wrote particularly all the words which he
uttered, when as it suffices us that amongst them they wrote all the points of
faith which they uttered in those words? If M. Bishop were asked whether they
have not in Scripture and Tradition all which the Apostles taught, would he not
say, yea? And can he then tell us particularly all the speeches and discourses
and sermons that they made from day to day, Peter amongst the Jews, and Paul
amongst the Gentiles, at Rome, at Corinth, at Ephesus, in Galatia, and the rest;
John in ^ sia, Thomas in India, Matthias and Andrew in Aethiopia, and the other
Apostles otherwhere? If he would think him a fool that should ask him this
question, and does hold it sufficient that they have all the points of doctrine
though they have not all the words, he must give us leave to think him scant
wise that when we say, what the Apostles taught, they committed all to
writing, would understand us otherwise. And this meaning he himself, that it
may appear that he does but famble and palter, presently declares, when
yielding of his courtesy that the Apostles left the Gospel in writing and
many other most divine and rare instructions in their Epistles (a rare
commendation of them as if he spoke of Granatensis his Dux peccatorum or
Parsons Resolution) and therefore that I needed not cite Irenaeus to witness
that, he adds his exception, but that they wrote all which they preached or
all things necessary to salvation Irenaeus says not a word. So then he knows
well enough that when we say that all which the Apostles taught they committed
to writing, we mean thereby all things necessary to salvation, all points of
faith and doctrine by them preached, and which it concerns us to know and
believe unto eternal life. But of this, says he, Ireneus says not a word.
The words of Ireneus which I cited are these: Iren. adu. haer. lib. 3. c. 1.
^on enim per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae cognouimus, quam per eos per
quos I uang^lium peruenit ad nos; quod quidem tunc praeconiauerunt, postea vero
per Dei voluntatem in scriptaris nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and columnam
sidei nostrae futurum.
By no other have we known the order or way of our salvation but by them, by
whom the Gospel came to us, which verily they then preached, and afterward by
the will of God they delivered the same to us in the Scriptures to be the
foundation and pillar of our faith. Now I hope M. Bishop will not deny but that
the gospel which the Apostles preached, contained all points of faith
necessary to salvation. If therefore they have delivered unto us in writing the
gospel which they preached, surely they have delivered to us in writing all
points of faith necessary to salvation. He plays upon a distinction betwixt
the Epistles and the Gospel, as if the Epistles were no part of the Gospel
which the Apostles preached, but if they be not so, he should tell us what they
be, and how the Apostle professes Phil. 3. 1.
to write in his Epistle the same things which he had before preached; and how
Christ preached Mat. 4. 23.
the Gospel of the Kingdom, and taught men Mar. 1. 15.
to believe the Gospel before there was any written Gospel, and before the
greatest part of the history was in act; and how St. Paul challenges the
Galathians for being Gal. 1. 6.
removed to another Gospel, when yet they received no other story concerning
Christ, but doctrine contrary to that which is contained in the Epistles? Aug.
de Ciu. Dei. l. 17. c. 17. Fatentur ex Sion missam suisse legem Christi, quod
Euangelium nos vocamus.
The Gospel, as St. Austin tells us, is the law of Christ, and are the
Epistles of the Apostles no part of the law of Christ? The Gospel is called by
St. Paul 2. Cor. 5. 19.
the word of reconciliation, and is expounded by St. Ambrose to be Ambros. in
Romans c. 1. Euangelium Dei est bonum nuncium Dei quo peccatores ad indulgentia^
conu^cantur.
the glad tidings sent from God whereby sinners are called to pardon and
forgiveness, and do not the Apostles in their Epistles teach this word of
reconciliation and glad tidings from God? If then the Apostles left the Gospel
in writing, and the Gospel contain all points of faith necessary to
salvation, then that which the Apostles left in writing contains all points
of faith necessary to salvation. Albeit to follow M. Bishop in his own
distinction, if we take the Gospel as he does for the writings of the four
Evangelists, St. Austin says thereof, that August. in Joan. tract. 49. Ipse
sanctus Euangelista testatur multa Dominum Christum and di^isse and socisse qu^
scripta non sunt. Electa sunt autem quae scriberentur quae saluti credentium
sufficere videbantur.
of those things which our Lord Jesus said and did, choice was made of so much
to be written as seemed sufficient for the salvation of them that believe. And
to the same purpose Cyril also says; Cyril. in Joan. lib. 12. c. 68. Non
igit^r omnia quae Dominus fecit conscripta sunt, sed qu^ scri^^^tes sufficere
putarunt tam ad mores, q^am ^d dogma^a, vt recta fide and operibus and vir(...)
rutil^ntes ad regnum coelorum perueniamus.
All things which Christ did are not written, but what the writers thought
sufficient both for manners and doctrine, that shining with true faith and
virtuous works, we may attain to the heavenly Kingdom. The Gospels then
contain that doctrine and faith that is sufficient to salvation, albeit God
would provide for us not only sufficiently but abundantly, and has in the
Epistles of the Apostles given us large and clear declaration of the doctrine
of Christ that is contained in the Gospels. As for that which M. Bishop
alleges under the name of Ireneus to prove the contrary, it is a most wilful
and impudent falsification. He most sagely counsaileth all men, says he, when
any controversy in religion arises to make their recourse to the most ancient
Churches where the Apostles had conuersed, and from them to take their
resolution. He cites for this Eusebius. hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 19. But that
which is of Ireneus is by my Book Cap. 18. and no matter at all tending to
that effect as he alleges. Ireneus is there brought in mentioning Eusebius.
hist. l. 5. cap. 18. Cum puer adhuc in Asia inferiore apud Polycarpum essem,
etc. Commemorarequeam quomodo se cum Joanne ac reliquis qui Dominu^ viderunt
conuersatum esse dixerit and sermones eorum memorauerit, and quae ex illis de
Domino audierit and de virtutibus eius and doctrina tanquam ex ijs qui ipsi
verbum vite viderant percepta and cuncta sanctis Scripturis consona rec^nsuerit.
that he had been in his childhood with Polycarpus, and that he had heard him
tell how he had been conversant with John and the rest that had seen the Lord,
and remembered their speeches, and what he had heard of them concerning the Lord
and his miracles and doctrine, as received from them who themselves had seen
the word of life, and reported all things agreeable to the holy Scriptures.
Here is a commendation of the Scripture, and an intimation given that tradition
ought to be no other but consonant and agreeable to the holy Scripture, but of
referring to the Churches in cases of controversy not so much as one word. But
though his head here failed hi^, yet I know well what the place is that he
meant to cite, which follows in the book whence I alleged the sentence to
which he answers. And yet there is nothing in that place fitting to his
purpose, Ireneus having there to do with Heretics, who being reproved by the
Scriptures, rejected the trial of the Scriptures upon the like pretenses as
the Papists now do, and therefore being forced to use against them the
testimony of the Churches from the time of the Apostles, for proof of those
things which were clear by the writings of the Apostles, as we now do against
the Papists, but saying nothing at all as to deliver a rule, that when cases of
controversy do arise, we should always have recourse to such testimony of
the Church. Of that place of Ireneus I have spoken sufficiently Answer to
Doctor Bishops Epistle to the King, sect. 11.
before, and therefore I will not here again trouble the Reader any further
therewith. In what sort also he attributes principality to the Roman Church, I
have already declared in the. 2.
first Chapter of this book. Now as he is impudent in answering Ireneus, so in
his answer to Tertullian he is much more impudent. The sentences of those two
Fathers I cited as depending one upon another. Ireneus says, that the Gospel
which the Apostles preached, they afterward delivered to us in the Scriptures.
Tertullian says; Tertul. de Praescript. Nobis non est opus curiositate post
Christum nec inquisitione post Euangelium. Cum h^c credimus, nihil desideramus
vltra credere; hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod vltra credere debemus.
We need no curiosity after Christ, nor further enquiry after the Gospel;
when we believe this, we desire to believe nothing further, for this we first
believe that there is nothing further for us to believe. Mark well, gentle
Reader, the coherence of these words. The Apostles committed the Gospel to
writing; we need no further inquiry after the Gospel; we desire to believe
nothing further; we believe that there is nothing else for us to believe. To
this what does M. Bishop say? Believing this? believing what? the written word
only? nothing less. The Gospel, M. Bishop, it is the Gospel, you see, of the
belief whereof he speaks, and beside which or after which he desires to
believe nothing, yea believes that there is nothing further to be believed.
Seeing then the Gospel is written as Ireneus says, it follows by Tertullian
that beside the written word there is nothing else to be believed. Nothing
less, says M. Bishop. And why? For in that whole Treatise, says he, his
principal drift is to prove that Heretics cannot be confuted out of the
written word, but by ancient customs and traditions which he calls
Prescriptions. Where he most shamefully abuses that work of Tertullian,
expounding Prescriptions to be meant of old customs and traditions, whereas
Tertullian has nothing to that purpose, but by Prescriptions means grounds
of reasons and arguments whereby to proceed and deal against Heretics for
the reproving and conuincing of them. Neither does he go about to prove that
Heretics cannot be confuted by the written word, but only shows that it was
to no purpose to deal with them by the Scriptures or written word, because
they received and rejected Scriptures as they list, did put in and blot out,
alter and chop and change, so that whatsoever made against them should go for
no Scripture. Yea the matters of their heresies were touching those articles of
our faith, which are clearly and manifestly testified by the Scriptures, and
therefore M. Bishop deals very lewdly with Tertullian, to make him to say
that they could not be confuted thereby. I need not stand hereupon, having Of
Traditions, sect. 10.
before at large discovered M. Bishops dishonesty herein, and showed out of the
matter of the book how falsely he fathereth that drift upon Tertullian. Only it
is here to be noted what a pretty meaning he makes of those words which I
cited thence, namely this, When we believe the whole doctrine of Christ both
written and delivered by Apostolical tradition, then we desire to believe no
more of any vpstart Heretics new devises. Where I pray thee to note how his
two answers agree together. He told us before to Ireneus that the Apostles
left the Gospel in writing. Here to Tertullian speaking of the Gospel, he
answers, that the Gospel signifies the whole doctrine of Christ both
written and unwritten. So when he list the Gospel is written, and when he list
the Gospel is unwritten, and he cannot tell certainly what it is. If the
Gospel were left in writing, then the Gospel is no doctrine unwritten; or if
the Gospel do signify also unwritten doctrine, then the Apostles did not
leave the Gospel in writing, but only a part and parcel thereof. But we
believe that the Apostles left us a perfect written Gospel, and therefore we
say to M Bishop and his fellows, as Athanasius said to the Arian Heretics;
Athanas. de Incar. Christi. Si Discipuli estis Euangelioru^ ne loquamini contra
Deum iniquitate^ sed per scripturas cedite. Quod si diuersa a scripturis
fabulari vultis, cur nobiscum concertatis qui neque ^oqui neque audire
sustinemus quod extraneum sit ab istis, dicente Domino, etc.
If ye be Scholars of the Gospel, speak not iniquity against God but go by
the Scriptures; but if you will babble things diverse from the Scriptures, why
do you meddle with us who endure neither to speak nor hear any thing which
is strange from the Scriptures, our Lord Christ telling us, If ye abide in my
word, then shall ye be free indeed. Now to show that beside the written
Gospel and word of God there is nothing else to be received, I alleged a
peremptory sentence of St. Austin; Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 3. c. 6. Sieve de
Christo sieve de eius Ecclesia, sieve de quacunque alia re qu^ pertinet ad fidem
vitamque nostram, non dicam Nos, neq^aquam co^parandi ^i qui dixit, Licetsinos,
sed quod secutus adiecit, si Angelus de coelo vobis annunciauerit praeterquam
quod in Scripturis legalibus and Euangelicis accepistis, anathema sit.
If any man, nay if an Angel from heaven shall preach unto us concerning
Christ or concerning his Church or concerning any thing pertaining to our faith
and life, but what we have received in the Scriptures of the law and gospel,
accursed be he. Here M. Bishop comes forth and tells us; To St. Austin I
answer first, that those are not his formal words which he cites, and that
is all his first answer. Wherein he shows no other but a perfidious and
treacherous purpose, in that he would put a surmise into the Readers mind that
I had cited the words amiss, when he had nothing to allege, why he should
say that I had done amiss. What ailed him that he did not himself set down
the formal words that it might be seen what fault I had committed in the
citing of them? Thou may well be assured, gentle Reader, by the whole course
of his writing, that if he had had any thing to say he would not have omitted
so to do. To let this go, he takes upon him secondly to give us a formal
answer. Admitting the sense, says he, if it be rightly taken, I say that the
words are to be understood, If any shall preach contrary to that that is
written. Of this sense he makes St. Austin himself the Author, quoting one
place in the margent of his book, as he did before with Ireneus, when as the
words which he cites are in another, showing that he took them at all
adventure out of their large volumes, and never looked into the Author whether
he did right or wrong. It is true indeed that in the place quoted, St. Austin
applies the words of the Apostle, If any preach beside what ye have
received, to condemn Faustus the Here^ike Aug. cont. Faust. Mani^h. l. 17. c.
3. Qu^a de Christo contra Christi Discipulos loquitur and contra Euangclium
quod ill^rum authoritate firmatum est.
for that he spoke of Christ contrary to the Disciples of Christ, and contrary
to the Gospel which by their authority was confirmed. Thus he might very
rightly use the words and not beside the meaning of the Apostle, who when he
taught the Galathians to reject whatsoever was beside the gospel which he had
taught them, does much more teach them to condemn whatsoever should be
contrary thereto. But this exposition though it be true yet is not sufficient,
because it was not enough that the Apostle should condemn only things
contrary, but all doctrines beside the Gospel which they had received. For we
cannot doubt but that the Apostle preached unto them the whole doctrine of the
Gospel, even as he did to the Ephesians Act. 20. 27.
all the counsel of God. Now of the whole doctrine of the Gospel it is truly
said that not only nothing contrary, but nothing beside it is to be received.
The Apostle therefore meant so that they were to receive nothing beside the
Gospel which they had received. And this Chrysostom very well observes;
Chrysostom. in Gal. c. 1. N^que dixit, si contraria annuntiauerint, aut totum
Euangelium ^ubuerterint, verum si vel paululum euangelizauerint praeter
Euangelium quod accepistis, etiamsi quidvis labefactarint, anathema sint.
Paul does not say; if they preach contrary things, or if they subvert the
whole Gospel, but if they preach but even a little beside the Gospel which
ye have received, or if they weaken any thing, accursed be they. This Theophy
lact expresses more plainly, thus; Theophy l. in Gal. c. 1. Neque enim fi
contraria solum praedicauerint, intulit, sed si euangelizauerint quid prater
quod ipsi Euangeliz^uimus hoc est, s^ plusculum quippiam ipsi adi^cerint,
execrationi, ^ubdantur.
For he says not only, if they preach contrary things, but if they preach any
thing beside that which we have preached, that is, if they add but any little
thereto, let them be accursed. As for the words of Austin which M. Bishop
cites he knows not whence, they make nothing against this meaning but wholly
for it, save that he somewhat forces them by false translation, and cutteth
off the last part of them. August. in ^^an. tract. 98. Non ^^t, plus quam
accepistis, sed praeter quod accepistis: nam si iltud diceret sibi ipse
praeiudic^ret qui cupiebat venire ad Thessalonicenses vt suppler et quae eorum
fidei de^uerunt, sed qui supplet, quod minus erat addit, non quod inerat
tollit. Qui autem praetergreditur regulam fidei, non accedit in via sed re^^dit
de via.
The Apostle says not, more then ye have received, but beside what ye have
received: for if he had so said, he should have prejudiced himself, who
desired to come to the Thessalonians, to supply what was wanting to their
faith. Now he that supplieth, adds that which is wanting; and takes not away
what was before. But he that goes beside the rule of faith, goes not forward
in the way, but departs from the way. Where St. Austin does not say,
otherwise then you have received, as M. Bishop translateth, but beside what ye^
have received, as the Apostle speaks, calling that which they had received
the rule of faith, and saying, that he that goes beside or beyond that rule,
as it were to make a larger way, departs out of the way, which M. Bishop
thought it safest for him wholly to suppress. But he notes withal that the
Apostle forbids them not to receive more then they had received, that is, to
receive that more perfectly which they had received by growing more and more in
the knowledge and understanding thereof, and proceeding therein as it were from
milk to strong meat, which is the drift of St. Austins discourse there; only
he wills them that beside that which they had received, they should receive
nothing. In a word to speak as the Schools speak, in extension they were to
receive no more by adding to the doctrine which they had been taught; in
intension they were to receive more by increasing and profiting in that which
they had received. But that we may know that it was St. Austins mind as his
words import, that nothing is to be received beside what we receive out of the
Scriptures of the law and the gospel, we are to observe again that which I
before observed, that he says that August. de Doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 9. In ijs
qu^ aperte in Scriptura posit^^ sunt, in^^^iuntur illa omnia qua continent
fidem moresque viuendi.
in those things which are plainly set down in Scripture, are found all those
things which contain faith and conversation of life. Yea he says further,
that Idem de vtilit. cred. cap. 6. Plane ita modificata vt nemo inde baurire
non possit quod sibi satis est si modo ad bauriendum deuote ac pie vt vera
religio poscit accedat.
the doctrine of the Scripture is so tempered as that there is no man but may
draw from thence that that is sufficient for him, if he come to draw with
devotion and piety as true religion requires him to do. Hereto add how he
uses the words of the Apostle, where to he alludeth in the sentence by me
cited in his disputing against the Donatists: Idem de unit. Eccl. c. 11. 12.
Quisquis aliud Euangelizauerit, anathem^ sit: Aliud autem euangelizat qui
perijsse dicit de c^t^ro mudo Ecclesiam and in part Donati in sola Asrica
re^nansisse dicit. Ergo anathema sit. Aut legate mi^i hoc in scripturis sanctis
and no^ sit anathema.
Whosoever preaches any other thing accursed be he; but he preaches another
thing who says that the Church is perished out of the whole world, and is
remaining only in the Donatists; therefore accursed be he; or else let him
read it to me in the holy Scriptures that he may not be accursed. Now then if
by St. Austins judgment there be found in Scripture all things belonging to
faith and manners and there be no godly man but may draw from thence that that
is sufficient for him; if he be to be holden accursed that preaches that which
he cannot read to us out of the holy Scriptures, then it appears that M.
Bishop deals falsely in expounding the words of Austin, and that they serve
very fully to that purpose and meaning, whereto I alleged them, and whereto
without any ambiguity at all they most plainly sound. But because we have here
in hand to inform the Roman Catholic, I will conclude this place with the
censure of a Roman Bishop, Gregory the first who calls Gregor. in 1. Reg. l.
2. c. 3. Quid cor and animam Dei ^^si sacram eius scripturam accipin^.
the holy Scripture the heart and soul of God, and tells us that Idem Moral.
l. 16. c. 16. Per came Deus loquitur omne quod vult.
by it God speaks all his will or all that he requires, and that so as that
Ibid. l. 18. c. 14. Eos ad sacrae authoritatis paginas vocat vt si vere loqui
desiderent, inde sumere debeant quid loquantur. Qui ad verae praedicationis
verba se praeparat, necesse ^st vt causarum origines a sacris paginis sumat vt
omne quod loquitur ad diuinae authoritatis sundamentum reuocet atque in c^
aedificium locutionis suae ^irmet.
he that desires to speak or preach iruly, must take from thence that which
he speaks, and set ^h the grounds of his matters out of the sacred books,
that he may bring all that he speaks to the foundation of divine authority,
and thereupon settle the building of his speech. He says again that Ide^ in
Cant. c. 5. Sancti viri se consilijs Scripturae ex toto addicunt, vt vide^icet
nihil agant nisi quod ex respons^ Scripturarum audiunt, etc. Quia de
quibuscunque scrupuli^ in Scripturis consilium quaeritur, fine min^ratione de
omnibus ad plenum inuenitur.
holy men do wholly addict themselves to the counsels or directions of the
Scripture, namely so as to do nothing but what they hear by answer of the
Scriptures; because of whatsoever doubts, advise is sought for in the
Scriptures (namely concerning matters of faith and godliness) it is there
fully found of all things without exception, and Idem in Ezech. hom. 15.
Vniuersa nostra munitio in sa^ro ^l^qu^o cominetur.
all our munition or armor (to wit, against our ghostly enemies) yea Ibid.
hom. 9. In h^^ volumine cuncta qu^ ^dificant, omni^ qu^ (...)diunt, scripta
conti^entur.
all things that do ^difie, all things that do instruct are contained
therein. In all which speeches if Gregory say truth, then it must stand good
which I have set down, that all our faith and religion is contained in the
Scriptures, and neither may the preacher speak, nor the hearer receive any
thing that has not confirmation and proof out of the book of God.

W. BISHOP.. 7.
MAster Abbot having in few lines run over four large questions, to wit:
first, That the Prophets and Patriarks believed no principal points of the
Roman faith; secondly, that Christ delivered nothing but what the Jews before
hand believed; thirdly, that the Apostles preached the same and no other to the
Gentiles; fourthly, that whatsoever they preached they afterward wrote: he
fifthly add^th, that the Protestants receive and believe all the written word.
Whence he will have it to follow finally, that the Protestants are very good
Jews, and do iumpe just with them in all articles of faith; and consequently
are true Catholics: so that in M. Abbots reckoning, before you can be a true
Protestant Catholic, you must first become a good honest Jew. Behold what a
round this man is driven to walk, and how many brakes of th^rnes he is forced
to break through, ere he can come to make any show of proof that the
Protestants are Catholics, the matter is so improbable. I have already
declared how false every one of his former four propositions be: the fifth is
as untrue, and more (if more may be) then any of the other; and he plays the
sophister in it egregiously, to begg^ that which is principally in question.
How proves he that Protestants receive and believe all the written word? has
he so little wit and judgment, as to think that we would freely grant him
that? for to omit that they receive not, but reject diverse books of the old
Testament (because they were not in the Canon of the Jews, or doubted of by
some in the primitive Church, by which reason they might refuse as many of the
new) do they rightly understand and believe truly, all that is written in that
blessed book of Gods word? nothing less* Do they give credit to our Savior
jesus Christ himself telling them: This is my Mat. 26. 27. 28.
Body that shall be broken for you; this is my Blood that shall be shed for
you. Whose sins ye shall Ioh. 20. v. 23.
forgive on earth shall be forgiven in heaven. Thou Math. 16. v. 18.
art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. and the ga^es of
hell shall not prevail against it. Call the worke-men ( that had labored in
Math. ^0. v. 8.
his vineyard) and pay them their hire. Do you see Jacob 2. v. 24.
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only? Is any man sick
among you, let him bring in Jacob 5. v. 14.
the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over them, anoiling them with
Oil in the name of our Lord, etc. Confess therefore your sins one to Ibidem
16.
another? These and an hundred more plain texts recorded in that fountain of
life, wherein our Catholic Roman doctrine is delivered in express terms, to
wit: Thereall presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament; That Priests have
power to pardon sins; That Christ built his Church upon S. Peter; That good
works do in justice deserve eternal life; That we are justified not by faith
alone, but also by good works; That in extremity of sickness, we must call
for the Priest to anoile us with holy Oil; That we must confess our sins,
not to God alone, but also unto men: these and diverse such like heads of our
Catholic faith, formally set down in holy Scripture, the Protestants will not
believe, though they be written in Gods word never so expressly; but do
ransacke all the corners of their wits, to devise some ^dde shift or other, how
to fly from the evidence of them. Whereupon I conclude, that they do not
receive all the written word, though they profess never so much to allow of
all the books of Can^nicall Scripture. For the written word of God consists
Lib. 2. de Trinitate ad Constable.
not in the reading, but in the understanding ( as S. Hierome testifies:) that
is, it does not consist in the bare letter of it, but in the letter and true
sense and meaning joined together; the letter being as the body of Scripture,
and the right understanding of it, the soul, spirit, and life thereof: he
therefore that takes not the written word in the true sense, but swarueth from
the sincere interpretation of it, cannot be truly said to receive the written
word as a good Christian ought to do. Seeing then that the Protestants and all
other sectaries, do not receive the holy Scriptures, according unto the most
ancient and best learned Doctors exposition, they may most justly be denied, to
receive the sacred written word of God at all, though they seem never so much
to approve all the Books, Verses, and Letters of it; which is plainly proved
by S. Hierome upon the first Chapter to the Galathians.

R. ABBOT.
I Have noted. ^.
before in this Chapter, that St. Austin faith of the Prophets and faithful of
the people of the Jews, that though not in name, yet in deed they were
Christians as we are. As they were Christians then with us, so are we now Jews
with them, not according to M. Bishops understanding of the name of Jews, to
whom I may well say as Austin said to Julian the Pelagian, August. co^^.
Julian. l. 4. c. 3. Cum insana dicis and rides, phrenetico es similis.
When thou speak madly and laughest, thou art like to a frantike Bedlem, but
according to the Apostles construction thereof; Romans 2. 29.
He is a Jew which is one within, and Phil. 3. 3.
we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. We must be Jews by unity of faith
with them, as they were Christians with us, because they with us and we with
them make but one body and one Church, whereof though there be diverse
Sacraments, yet there is but one faith from the beginning to the end, received
first by the Patriarchs, written afterward by the Prophets, written again
more clearly by the Apostles, so that Ephesians. 2. 20.
upon the foundation (not foundations but one foundation, because one even one
written doctrine) of the Apostles and Prophets the household of God are built,
and our faith rests wholly thereupon. I have walked no rounds; I have broken
through no brakes of thorns, but have kept a direct and even way, and have so
strongly builded all this as that I scorn M. Bishops poor paper-shot as much
too weak to throw it down. To him I know these things are rounds and mazes;
he knows not which way to get out of them: they are brakes of thorns; he
lies fast tied in them; God give him grace to yield to that which he sees
himself unable to reprove. He is very angry it seems, as touching the last
point that I should say, that the Protestants receive and believe all the
written word. He says that therein I beg that which is principally in
question, and thinks that I have little wit or judgment to think that they
would freely grant me that. But our usage and debating of questions with them
is sufficient to put that out of question. We use the Scriptures our selves, we
translate them for common use; we read and expound them publicly in our
Churches; we exhort men to read them privately in their houses; we instruct
them to receive no doctrine but what they see there; we make the same written
word the sovereign Judge of all our controversies, we defend the authority
and sufficiency thereof against the impeachments and disgraces which Papists
have cast upon it. What may we do more to make M. Bishop believe that we
receive and believe the written word? Surely if I tell him that the Sun
shines at noone day, he will not believe it, if it seem to him to sound any
thing against the Pope. But he will give instance to prove that we do not so;
first for that we reject diverse books of the old Testament. Wherein he says
untruly; for the books of the old Testament are the books of Moses and the
Prophets and the Psalms; August. co^t. Gaudent. lib 2. cap. 23. Non habent
Judaei sicut legem and Prophetas and Psalmos quibus Dominus testimonium
perhibet tanquam testibus suis.
To which, says Austin, our Lord Jesus gave testimony as his witnesses; of
which we reject none; the other books that are adjoined to these, we do not
reject, but we read them and commend them, yea we say as much of them as M.
Bishop vouchsafes to say of Paul's Epistles and the rest, that they contain
many most divine and rare instructions, but yet we give them no authority for
confirmation of matters of faith, because Christ and his Apostles have given no
testimony or witness of them, and the primitive Church in that respect has
expressly disclaimed them, as I have showed at large Of Traditions, sect. 17.
before, and rests hereafter in this book to be showed again. Secondly, he
brings sundry texts of the new Testament, to prove that we do not rightly
understand and believe all that is written in Gods word, wherein he says their
Catholic Roman doctrine is delivered in express terms. First, to prove the
real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, he cites the words, This is
my body which shall be given for you, etc. But if the Romish doctrine be here
delivered in express terms, how is it that their own Scotus says that
Scotus apud Bellarm. de sacra. Eucharist. lib. 3. cap. 23. Dicit nullum extare
lo^um scripturae tam expressum vt sine Ecclesi^ declaratione euidenter c^gat
transubstantiationem admittere. Atque id non est omnin^ improbabil^ etc. an ita
sit merit^ d^bitar^ potest cum homines doctiss^^^ and acutiss^^^, qualis
inpr^^is Scotus fuit, contrarium s^^tia^t.
there is no place of Scripture so express as that it evidently forces to
admit transubstantiation without their Churches declaration. Yea Bellarmine
himself says, that this is not improbable, and that it may worthily be
doubted whether there be any such, because very learned and acute men, such as
Scotus specially was, do think the contrary. Let him first go and agree with
Scotus and Bellarmine, and those other so learned and acute men, and then tell
us what he has to say and we will answer him, albeit of this matter. I have
Confu^a^. of the a^swere to M. Perkin^ his Aduertiseme^t, sect. 48. 59.
already answered him so much as will suffice for the clearing thereof. For his
second instance he cites the words of Christ thus, whose sins ye shall
forgive on earth, shall be f^rgiuen in heaven, and makes it here delivered in
express terms, that Priests have power to pardon sins. True it is, M.
Bishop, accordingly as you cite, on earth, but not in heaven; in the Court of
the Church, but not in the Court of conscience; for restitution to the outward
society of faithful men, not immediately for reconcilement to God. As for
forgiveness of sins spiritually with God, the Priest has the ministry
only, not the power thereof; by 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19
the word of reconciliation, not by any form of absolution; neither can he say
any further, I forgive thee, then he says, I baptize thee* who baptiseth not
by any inward effect to God (which is only the work of God) but only by
outward Sacrament to the Church of God. Therefore for the Popish challenge of
the power of absolution with God, our Savior Christ says nothing; he speaks
only for that power of absolution which professes only to take away the bar
that stands against reconcilement to God, who in public sins lying under
public censure, admits of no penitency for forgiveness in heaven, that is
not testified and declared for obtaining forgiveness and pardon upon earth. It
needs not that I speak so much hereof, having so largely handled this point
Answer to the Epistle to the King, sect. 28. and to the Preface of his second
part, sect. 3.
before. Thirdly, he alleges the words, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it;
from whence he infers, that Christ has built his Church upon St. Peter. But
it was of Petra, the Rock, that Peter had that name given him to be called
Peter, and therefore it cannot be that Peter himself should be the Rock.
Gregor. in Psalm. 5. Poenitent. Ipse est Petra a qua Petrus nomen accepit, and
super qua^ s^ ad ^icaturum Ecclesiam d^xit.
Christ himself is the Rock, as Gregory says, of which Peter took his name,
and upon which he said he would build his Church. Albeit we deny not but that
the Church was in some sort built upon Peter, but upon Peter as one of many,
not upon Peter alo^e, because of the City of God there are Apoc. 21. 14.
twelve f^undations wherein are the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles, not
only Peter's name. See hereof also that which has been Chap. 1.. 2.
before said. His fourth text is, Call the workmen (that had labored in the
vineyard) and pay them their hire; which he brings to prove that good works
do in justice deserve eternal life. But is this in express terms delivered
in those words? Surely it seems to me a very long conclusion to be drawn
out of so short a speech. I have handled this text Of Merits, sect. 14. 17.
before, and have showed out of the very circumstance of the place, that it is
so far from proving that which he says, as that the contrary is very
manifestly and infallibly euicted thereby. The brief is, that if things had
been there measured by desert, then greater work should have had greater
wages, whereas there all have alike, that it might be understood of all, as
there I have cited out of Prosper, that Prosp. de vocat. Gent. l. 1. c. 5. Vt
intelligant d^num se grati^, non operli accepisse merc^dem.
they received a gift of grace, not a wages for their works. For his fifth
instance he brings the words of St. James; Do you see that a man is
justified by works, and not by faith only? Hence he infers, that we are
justified not by faith alone but also by work^s. And who denies but that by
works also we are justified and must necessarily so be? We say with Saint
James that we are not justified by faith only, but also by works, as Abraham
was, but yet we say with St. Paul also, that Romans 3. 20. Gal. 3 11.
before God or in the sight of God we are justified by faith and not by works,
and Romans 4. 2.
if Abraham were justified by works (he denies him not so to be) he had to
rejoice, but not with God. For the further handling of this point also I
refer the Reader to that that I have said Of Justification, sect. 36.
before. Again, to prove that in extremity of sickness we must call for the
Priest to anoile us with holy oil, he cites St. James, Is any man sick among
you? let him bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over them
anoiling them with oil in the name of our Lord. But if their Sacrament of
Extreme unction be here so expressly delivered, how is it that their own
Cardinal Cai^tan^ could not see it, who says, that Caietan in Iac. cap. 5.
Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu verba haec loq^untur de sacramentali unction
extrem^ vnctionis, sed magis de unction quam instit^^t Dominus in e^angel^^
ex^rcendam in ^g^^t^s.
neither by the words nor by the effect does the Apostle here speak of their
sacramental unction, but rather of that which the Lord instituted in the
Gospel, to be used by his Disciples to them that were sick? He justifies
that which we say, that the anointing whereof St. James speaks, was no other
but a ceremony annexed to 1. Cor. 12. 9.
the gift of healing, of which we read in the Gospel spoken of Christ's
disciples; Mar. 6. 13.
They anointed many that were sick with oil and healed them, which gift and
power of healing being ceased in the Church, the ceremony must be reputed idle,
and the using thereof in that manner and to that end as the Papists do, is no
other but an imitation of the Valentinian Heretics and Heracleonites, as I
have Answer to the Preface of the second part sect 20.
before showed. St. James does not say, Is any man in extremity of sickness,
past hope of life, and now departing out of the world, as M. Bishop in part
speaks, and as they wholly use that new devised Sacrament, but he says
absolutely, Is any man sick? Again, St. James makes the effect of that
anointing to be bodily health, saying that the Lord shall raise him up or give
him ease, which is the saving or preserving, of which he speaks, namely, from
the peril and danger of sickness, as Bellarm. de Extr. vnct. c. 8. Incipit a
sanitate corporali, cum ait, Oration fidei saluabit infir(...).
Bellarmine himself expounds it, whereas the effect of Sacraments is no
corporal benefit, but only inward and spiritual grace. For albeit the water
of Baptism have an effect to cleanse the body, and bread and wine in the Lords
Supper to nourish and feed the same, yet these are no Sacramental, but only
natural effects belonging to these creatures without any Sacrament, whereas
the proper effect of that whereof St. James speaks is bodily recovery, and
therefore by OEcumen. in Iac. 5. Hoc etiam Domino adhuc inter homines
conuersante Apostoli sacrebant vngentes aegrotos ol^o and sanantes.
OEcumenius is made all one with that which the Apostles did, as I have
alleged, whereof health is noted to have ensued. His last text is to prove,
that we must confess our sins not to God only but also to men, because the
same St. James says; Confess your sins one to another. And who denies
this? who gainsayeth it, when as our Savior Christ so plainly instructs him
that has Luke 17. 4.
sinned against his brother to return to him and say, It repents me, that so
there may be reconciliation and peace betwixt them? We make no question of
confessing repentantly and charitably one to another, but we question the
necessity of confessing auricularly to the Priest by particular enumeration of
all our sins: and so far is the text which M. Bishop cites from delivering
expressly this, as that his Masters of Rhemes do plainly tell him, that Rhem.
Testam. Annotat. Iam. 1. 16.
it is not certain that St. James speaks here of sacrament all confession,
who notwithstanding would have bin glad if they could have had any ground
whereupon to affirm that he did so. Now, what did he then mean thus to heap
together such a number of places, as wherein their Roman doctrine is delivered
in express terms, when as there is not one of them that does justify their
Roman doctrine, and his own fellows do confess so much of sundry of them?
What need we to ransacke all the corners of our wits to devise odd shifts to
avoid the ^uidence, as he calls it, of such places, which without any shifts
at all are so easily and plainly cleared as these are? Yet according to his
wonted and wise manner, he concludes that the Protestants do not receive all
the written word, who notwithstanding receive all these places, read them,
cite them, expound them, acquaint the people usually with them, which they by
no means dare to do. Yea but the Scriptures are not in reading but in
understanding, and we do not take them in the right sense. Silly fellow, what
hinders but that we should be thought able to understand the Scriptures as
well as he? Forsooth, we receive not the Scriptures, he says, according to the
most ancient and best learned Doctors exposition. But be thou Judge, gentle
Reader, whether in this whole work, to go no further, I have not brought the
most ancient and best learned Doctors exposition, more frequently and firmly
then he has done. He talks of the Doctors for show to blind simple men, but
the true cause of their grief is, that we receive not the Romish exposition,
nor be content to submit the whole Scriptures to the Popes will. But because
we find no such rule amongst the most ancient and best learned Doctors, that
the Popes mouth should be any oracle of Scripture-sense, we leave his babbling
of the exposition of Scripture as partial and idle, and do wish him to learn
more wit then to take Scriptures in such sort as they that are at Rome are
feign to do.

W. BISHOP.. 8.
NOw to draw toward the end of this clause, not only never a one of M. Abbots
assertions (whereby he went about to prove themselves and their Church to be
Catholic) is true, as has been showed before, but over and besides, his very
conclusion conuinceth himself (even by the verdict of himself) to fall into
the foul fault and error of the Donatists. Our faith ( says he) because it
is that which the Apostles committed to writing, is the Apostolic faith, and
our Church by consanguinity and agreement of doctrine, is proved to be an
Apostolical Church, etc. and is the only true Catholic Church, etc. see you
not how he is come at length to prove their Church to be Catholic, Ex
perfectione Page 16. lin. 5.
doctrinae, By perfectness of their doctrine? which was (as he himself in
this very assertion noted) a plain Donat^sticall trick, reproved by S.
Augustine, whom in that point he then approved. What doting folly is this, in
the same short discourse so to forget himself, as to take that for a sound
proof, which he himself had before confuted as heretical? We like well of
Tertullians observation. That our faith ought to have consanguinity, and
perfect agreement with the Apostles doctrine; but that is not the question at
this time: but whether our doctrine or the Protestant be truly called
Catholic, that is, whether of them has been received and believed in all
nations over the world? that is to be proved in this place. M. Abbot, if he had
meant to deal plainly and soundly, should not have gone so about the bush, and
have fetched such wide and wild windlesses from old father Abraham's days, but
should have demonstrated by good testimony of the Ecclesiastical Histories, or
of ancient Fathers (who were in the pure times of the Church, the most Godly
and approved Pastors thereof) that the Protestants religion had flourished
since the Apostles days, over all Europe, Afrike, and Asia; or at least, had
been visibly extant in some one Country or other, naming some certain
Churches in particular, which had held in all points their faith and religion:
which he seeing impossible for any man to do, fell into that extrauagant and
rouing discourse, which you have heard; concluding without any premises (saving
his own bare word) that in the written word, There is no mention made of the
Pope, or his Supremacy, nor of his Pardons, etc. Belike there is no mention
made of S Peter, nor ought said of his singular prerogatives. It has not
peradventure, That whatsoever he should loose on earth, should be loosed in
heaven. The other points were touched before, and shall be shortly again. But
I would in the mean season be glad to hear, where the written word teaches
us, that Kings and temporal Magistrates, are ordained by Christ, to be under
him supreme Governors of Ecclesiastical affairs; because M. Abbot made
choice of this head-article of theirs for an instance, that the written word
was plain on their side: he should therefore at least have pointed at some one
text or other in the new Testament, where it is registered, that Princes are
supreme Governors of the Church. Nay, are temporal Magistrates any
Ecclesiastical persons at all? or can one that is no member of the
Ecclesiastical body, be head of all the rest of the Ecclesiastical members?
or is the state Secular higher and more worthy then the Ecclesiastical, and
therefore meet to rule over it, though they be not of it? to say so, is to
prefer the body before the soul, nature before grace, earth before heaven:
or is it meet and decent that the less worthy-member should have the supreme
command over the more honorable? where the Christian world is turned
topsie-turuy, that may be thought meet and expedient, but in other places,
that will not be admitted for current, which in it self is so disorderly and
inconvenient; without it had better warrant in the word of God, then that new
position of theirs has.

R. ABBOT.
THe truth of mine assertions has hitherto appeared by my defense of them; but
let them no further be taken for true then he is here found to be false that is
the oppugner of them. He says that my conclusion conuinceth me even by the
verdict of my self, to fall into the foul fault and error of the Donatists.
To prove this he makes me to speak in my answer in this sort: Our faith
because it is that which the Apostles committed to writing is the Apostolic
faith; and our Church by consanguinity and agreement of doctrine is proved to
be an Apostolical Church, etc. and is the only true Catholic Church, etc.
Having set down all these as my words he infers thus; see you not how he is
come at length to prove their Church to be Catholic by perfection of their
doctrine, which was as he himself in this very assertion noted a plain
Donatisticall tricks reproved by St. Austin etc. But I pray thee, gentle
Reader, to look where thou can find those words by me set down, And is
the only true Catholic Church? Ask M. Bishop if thou meet with him, where he
found them, and if he cannot tell thee, ask him in sadness what spirit he
thinks it was wherewith he was led when he set them down for my words? Fie,
M. Bishop, fie for shame, do you talk so against lying, and will you in the
mean time lie so wittingly and willingly, so as that there is no means to
salve it, no color to excuse it? I did not say that ours is the only true
Catholic Church, I made no show of proving it by perfection of doctrine to be
the Catholic Church; I never wrote it, I never thought it, and therefore once
again I wish you to bethink your self of your words whereof I remembered you
before, Reproof. page 283.
The devils cause it is that needs to be bolstered out and underpropped with
lies. Surely, it is beyond doting folly, it is desperate fury that draws men
on to such courses. To let that go, foul and shameful as it is, he tells
us next that he likes well of Tertullians observation, that our faith ought to
have consanguinity and perfect agreement with the Apostles doctrine. But he
curtolleth Tertullians observation by this recital of his, because Tertullian
does not only say what our faith ought to have, but tells us that Tertul. de
Praescript. Quae licet nullum ex Apostolis vel Apostolicis authore^ suum
profera^t vt m^^to posteriores, quae denique quotidie institui^tur, tamen in
eadem fide conspirantes non m^^us Apostolicae dep^tantur pro consanguinitate
doctrinae.
those Churches which cannot bring any of the Apostles or Apostolic men for
their author, as being much later, even the Churches which daily are begun,
yet according in the same faith are for this consanguinity or agreement of
doctrine reputed Apostolic Churches no less then the rest. Hence I concluded
that our Church because it agrees in faith and doctrine with the Apostles, is
therefore to be reckoned an Apostolic Church. But that, says M. Bishop, is
not the question at this time. And what then is the question? Marry, says he,
whether our doctrine or the Protestants be truly called Catholic; that is,
whether of them has been received and believed in all nations over the world.
But did not he see that the one of these directly follows of the other? for
the faith of the Apostles is it that was spread over the whole world. Our faith
is the same with the faith of the Apostles, because it is that which is
recorded in the Scriptures of the Apostles. Therefore our faith it is that was
spread and believed through the world. Abraham's faith was it that was spread over
the whole world, for Abraham is Romans 4. 12. 16
the father and pattern of all that believe both circumcised and
uncircumcised. Our faith is the same with Abraham's faith. Therefore, again it
is our faith that was generally received throughout the world. At this M.
Bishop biteth the lip; it troubles him, that he knows not what to say to it.
He sees this proof to be most certain and impregnable above all other, and
therefore he seeks by all means to divert and turn away his Reader from
listening to it. He tells him that I do not deal plainly and soundly, that
I go about the bush, that I fetch wide and wild windlesses from old father
Abraham's days. But I answer him, that I have so gone about the bush, as that
I have scratched him with it, and my wide and wild windlesses have so enclosed
him as that he cannot find which way to get out again. Well, if my course
like him not, what would he have me do? I should, he says, have demonstrated
by good testimony of the Ecclesiastical histories or ancient Fathers, that the
Protestants religion had flourished since the Apostles days over all Europe,
Afrike, and Asia. I have done already sufficient to demonstrate that. I have
astonished him and choked him with the evidence of Scriptures, Stories,
Councels, Fathers, so as that hitherto he has left all that he has written to
the question of religion without defense. I shall make further demonstration
thereof in this book, even in the Roman Church. What am I the nearer with him
by that that I have done? What shall I be the nearer when I have all done? for
he has resolved himself to a wicked course, and therefore though the light
shine into his eyes, yet he will swear that he sees it not. He blames me for
concluding without any premises, that in the written word there is no mention
made of the Pope, of his Supremacy, of his Pardons, etc. Wisdom, what
premises should I use to prove the negative in this case? It concerns you to
prove that there is mention made of them, and to design us the places where;
for me it is enough to say that there is none. See now what proof he brings
that there is. Belike, says he, there is no mention made of St. Peter, nor
ought said of his singular prerogatives: it has not peradventure that
whatsoever he should loose on earth, should be loosed in heaven. Wisdom, what
is this for answer to me? I say there is no mention made of the Pope, and do
you tell me of St. Peter? And if it were said to St. Peter, Mat. 16. 19.
Whatsoever thou bindest on earth, shall be bound in heaven, was it not also
said to all the Apostles, Mat. 18. 18.
Whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven? What prerogative is
here to St. Peter more then to all the rest of the Apostles? or if there were
any prerogative to St. Peter, what is that to the Pope? He would be glad to
hear where the written word teaches us, that Kings and temporal Magistrates
are ordained by Christ to be under him supreme Governors of Ecclesiastical
affairs. But he says untruly; he would not be glad to hear it: but how glad
would he be if he could out of the written word say so much for the Pope, as we
can for the King? We find the Apostle St. Paul saying, Romans 13. 1.
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, and St. Peter expounding what
is meant by those higher powers; 1. Pet. 2. 13.
whether unto the King, as to the supereminent or chief, or unto Governors as
sent by him, thereby giving absolutely to the King a superiority over every
soul, and requiring every soul; Chrysostom. ad Romans hom. 23. Etiam si Apostolus
sis, si Euangelista, si Propheta, sieve quisquis tandem fueris.
even the Prophet, the Apostle, the Evangelist, as Chrysostom observes, to be
subject to the King. But he will say, it is not here said in Ecclesiastical
affairs. I answer him, Neither is it said here, only in temporal affairs.
The supremacy then being simply given, will M. Bishop dare to set down a
limitation where God himself has set none? The office of a King is declared
by those Apostles, to be Romans 13. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 14.
for the punishment of them that do evil, and for the praise of them that do
well, and if well doing and evil doing do extend as well to Ecclesiastical
as Temporal affairs, what warrant has M. Bishop to restrain the Kings power
from governing in them both? Are temporal Magistrates, says he, any
Ecclesiastical persons at all. Let the Emperor Constantine give him answer
hereof, who told his Bishops thus, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 24. Vos,
inquit, intra Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam Episcopus a Deo constitutus sum.
You are Bishops within the Church, but without the Church God has appointed
me to be a Bishop, signifying thereby that the acting and administering of
divine offices and Sacraments did belong to them, but that otherwise the
government of the Church and the power of commanding all, for the preservation
of religion, and well ordering of Church affairs, did belong to him. Though
temporal Magistrates then be no Ecclesiastical persons in the former sense,
yet a King as a Christian is a member of the Church, and as a King by
Constantines judgment is appointed of God to be externally the Ruler and
Governor thereof. Wherefore to call the state of Kings, as M. Bishop does, a
secular state, as having to meddle only with secular, and temporal things, is
a secular and profane interpretation of the office of Kings, and a mere
begging of the point in question. And of that presumption he infers another,
when he says, Is it meet and decent that the less worthy member should have
the supreme command over the more honorable? I will not here stand upon his
absurd crossing of himself, who having even now made the state Ecclesiastical
and Secular two distinct bodies, does make them here members both of one body.
To let that pass, who will grant him that the King is the less worthy, and
the Priest the more honorable? He will say, that matters of the soul which
are of highest nature, are administered by Priests. Be it so, and matters of the
soul which are of the highest nature, are commanded by Kings, and the
commanding power as we suppose is always more honorable then the administering
office. The very Heathens thought that the devotions to their Gods which were
acted by their Priests, were of greatest respect, and yet they were not so fond
as to conclude hereof, that the person of the Priest was more honorable then
the King. In the policy ordered by God himself, we find 2. Kings 23. 4.
the Priests commanded by the King, but we do not find the King commanded by
the Priest. We find the Prophet stiling himself 1. Kings 1. 24. 26. 27.
the Kings servant, and the King his Lord, but we do not find the King giving
that honor to the Prophet. We know that in the natural body, the heart
ministers life unto the head, and yet the supremacy of honor rests in the
head, even for the government and direction of things belonging to that life,
which is administered by the heart. Even so, albeit the ministering of those
things which concern the salvation and life, both of Prince and people belong
to the Priest, yet that hinders not, but that the highest honor and dignity
rests in the Prince, so far as to command for the due usage and execution
of those things, which concern the salvation both of himself and of his
people. This is, says M. Bishop, to prefer the body before the soul, nature
before grace, earth before heaven. Full wisely spoken; as if a Christian King
were nothing but body, and nature, and earth; but a Priest no other but spirit,
and grace, and heaven. Yet we doubt not, but that many Kings are more
spiritual and graceful, and heavenly, then many Priests; and many Priests,
even Popes themselves, more sauouring of the body and nature and earth, then
many Kings; and how do we then by giving the sovereignty to Kings, prefer
the body before the soul, nature before grace, earth before heaven? Forsooth,
the matters of the soul, and of grace, and of heaven, he will say, are managed
by Priests. Be it so; make comparison then of the things, but make no
comparison thereby of the persons. Say, he that prefers the things that
belong to the Kings affairs, before those things that are ministered by the
Priest, prefers the body before the soul, etc. but we say, we may in
outward state of government give the supreme honor and dignity to the King,
and yet prefer the things that are managed by the Priest, before those things
that are managed by the King. Albeit I always add that to the King as without
the Church, belongs the care and oversight of those things that pertain to
the saving of souls, and to the furthering of his subjects in the grace of
God, and in the way to heaven, so as that in this respect there is no cause why
the Priest should be accounted superior to the King. And this our Princes have
done and still do, and yet the world with us, thanks be to God, is not turned
topsie-turuy, but our state stands upright, and prospers maugre the hearts
of all Romish malignant traitors and enemies, that have sought the ruin and
overthrow thereof.

CHAP. V. That faith and religion cannot be safely grounded on the example of
Fathers and forefathers, and that the Popish factours notwithstanding do in
this behalf abuse the credulity of ignorant men.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

NOw whereas he alleges that all his Majesty's most royal Progenitors, and
to sect. 4. You talk M. Bishop of many urgent, etc.

W. BISHOP.. 1.
PAgans and Heretics do now and then, like Apes counterfeit true Christians:
And no marvel, for their great Master Satan does transfigure himself
sometimes into 2. Cor. 11. v^ ^4.
an Angel of light, and did always, and yet does labor to be like unto the
Highest; but it is easy to epsy their Esaias 14: v. 14.
apish tricks, and to return their fond subtleties upon their own heads.
Simmachus played but the part of a foolish sophister, when he pleaded so with
the Emperor Valentinian, We are to follow our Fathers: for the Emperors
father and nearest Predecessors were no Pagan Idolaters, but professed
Christians, as all men know who are conversant in those ancient histories. To
the point of the proof, I answer in brief, that it is a most found
inducement among us Christians, and to be dearly regarded of all, To follow
the foote-steps of our forefathers in believing, if they before have not
degenerated from their Ancestors. The base and ground of it is this: As God is
more ancient then the Devil, and Christ Jesus then all Heretics; so was the
true service of God, and the right faith of Christ planted, sown, and took
fast root, before Heresy and Idolatry sprung up: which has firm testimony
from our Savior, who teaches; That the good seed was first sown by the
Father Mat. 13. v. 24.
of the household, and the cockle after, and ouersowne by the enemy. Whence it
follows perspiculously, that they who do hold the same doctrine inuiolably,
which was embraced by them of that stock, who were first converted to the
Christian faith, are true and sincere Christians. Those children then, who
follow the holy steps of their Catholic Progenitors, ascending from Son to
Father succ^ssiuely, till they arrive at the first Christians in that Country,
are true Christians: and they that do not succeed their Predecessors in their
faith and religion, but either are fallen themselves, or do follow others who
before fell from the faith of their forefathers, are undoubtedly slipped into
error and infidelity. By which discourse it is evident, that I tendered a most
reasonable request unto his Majesty, that he would embrace and countenance that
religion, which all his Progenitors even to the first Christian among them, had
lived and dyed in; because they were all Catholic, and not one of them can be
named, who changed the religion of his forefathers: yet this notwithstanding,
Simmachus the Pagan using the like argument in show, was not to be heard; the
difference is, because his forefathers* for whose Idolatry he pleaded, had
before forsaken the true and sincere worship of the one living God, and
therefore their children were not to continue in their Idolatry, but to return
unto their former Ancestors true piety. So were the Donatists children (of whom
S. Augustine cited by M. Abbot, speaks) not to follow their Fathers in that
sect and heresy, but to leave their late corrupted parents in their new
doctrine, and to look back unto their grandfathers ancient faith and
religion, from whose integrity their Fathers were degenerated: Even as now
a-daies we exhort men, that had or have parents turned Protestants, not to be
led away with their erring Parents opinions, but happily to receive their
forefathers ancient faith, from which their Fathers revolted unadvisedly. And
so shall they return unto the root and original of our Lords tradition, as
S. Cyprian speaks; because they shall return to that says which was
received from hand to hand, even from the Apostles, our Lords most trusty and
sacred messengers. and cleaving fast to that, shall not need to regard what any
man has thought fit to be done or said against it.

R. ABBOT.
PAgans, Idolaters, and Heretics, and of Heretics, the Papists namely, are in
this pretense of their Fathers and forefathers all alike, and do alike allege
the example of their fathers, for warrant of irreligion and apostasy from God.
M. Bishop to make good their use of it, takes upon him to rectify the rule,
and so to propound it as that it shall serve for a most sound inducement among
us Christians, and to be dearly regarded of all. And how is that? Marry, to
follow the footesteps of our forefathers in believing, if they before have not
degenerated from their Ancestors. Which if of his breaks the force of his
rule, and is so far from giving a careful man any sound inducement, for
settling his conscience in religion, as that it casts him rather into a
further perplexity, whilst he cannot but be in doubt whether those fathers
whom he is wished to follow, have degenerated from their Ancestors, or those
Ancestors from other, or those other from other that were before them. In the
judgment and trial whereof, if men have not some certain rule to be directed
by, they are easily blinded and led into error, whilst all Pagans and
Heretics and Papists pretend each for themselves, that all their forefathers
even from the beginning were such as they are, and have their colors and
shows of antiquities, whereby to persuade that they were so. But yet to
explicate and strengthen his rule, he lays this for the ground of it, that as
God is more ancient then the Devil, and Christ Jesus then all Heretics, so
was the true service of God and faith of Christ before heresy and Idolatry.
Which ground of his we willingly admit, and are most well content to build upon
it. We hold it for certain and infallible which Tertullian prescribes against
Heretics, that Tertul. de Praescript. Ex ipso ordine mani^estatur id esse
Dominicum and verum quod sit prius traditum; id autem extraneum and ^a^sum q^od
sit posterius immissum.
that is of the Lord, and the very truth, which was first delivered; that
strange and false which is afterward brought it; and Idem cont. Marc. lib. 3.
Illic pronuncianda est regulae ^nteruersio vbi posteritas inuenitur.
that where any after-faith is found, there is to be pronounced the perverting
of the rule of faith. Now therefore in question of religion, the trial of
truth shall be to have recourse to that which was first delivered, or as
Cyprian expresses it, Cyp^ian. l. 2. Epist. 3. Ad radicem atque originem
traditionis Dominicae reuertatur.
to return to the root and original of the Lords tradition, and thence to
secure our selves what we are to believe, and what to do that we may be saved.
To the same purpose I alleged other words of Cyprian in the same place, that
Ibid. Si solu^ Christus audi^ndus est, non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante
nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui ante omnes est Christ prior fecerit.
Neque enim ho^^nis consuetudinem sequioportet sed Dei veritat^.
since Christ only is to be heard (according to that which the Father proclaimed
from heaven concerning him, This is my beloved son, etc. hear him) we are
not to regard what any man before us has thought fit to be done, but what
Christ has done who is before all* for we must not follow the custom of man,
but the truth of God. Which words, or the most of them as fitted my occasion,
being by me set down in a distinct letter, that they might be known to be
Cyprians words, M. Bishop in transcribing my text, has changed into his
common letter, that they might be thought to be but mine own words, knowing
well enough that otherwise by the credit of the author, they would give the
Reader a prejudice against all that he has here said. We see that Cyprian
teaches us first of all without respect what men have done, to look to that
which Christ did, and thereby to judge of all the custom of men. But M. Bishop
like the Crabbe that goes backward, teaches a man to look first what his
father did, and then his grandfather, and then his great grandfather, and so
the rest, that out of the custom of men he may learn what is the truth of
Christ. Those children, says he, who follow the holy steps of their Catholic
Progenitors, ascending from son to father successively till they arrive at
the first Christians of that Country, are true Christians. But what if the
first conversion of a Country be not aright, as befell to the Abb. Vrsperg. in
Chronico. Val^ns Ariana persidiae saucius suae partis sautores illuc direxit
praedicatores; qui venientes rudibus and ignaris illi^o perfid^ae suae viru^
insundunt.
Goths, whose conversion was to Arianisme in the time of the Arrian Emperor
Valens, how then shall his rule stand good of ascending from son to father,
till we arrive at the first Christians of that Country? Will he say that such
doubtless believe aright, because they believe as they did, who first were
converted in that Country? If he allege that he speaks of following the holy
steps of Catholic progenitors, he makes himself ridiculous, because it is
the question whether the Progenitors be Catholic, and their steps holy, and
to be followed or not, and he for trial hereof refers us to them that were
in that country first converted, who happily were corrupted at first by them by
whom they were converted. This case we put concerning the conversion of our
nation, whereat he aims, by Austin the Monk, who though he brought hither
the Christian religion, yet brought it somewhat blended and sowred with the
leaven of humane traditions and inventions, so that to receive religion as he
brought it, is to receive the corruption which he also brought; which being
grown since, as in corruptions it falls out, from a little scabbe to a foul
leprosy, yet shall the foul leprosy be colored and defended by the example
of the scabbe. This case being put, M. Bishops rule is out of joint; because we
are come to the first converted of our nation, and we doubt of some default in
their conuerters, which we the more suspect for that we See the Answer to the
Epistle, sect: 31.
find the Britains, who had been formerly and anciently Christians, refusing
at that time to meddle with them. Here then we are new to seek, and are forced
to make further enquiry whether the faith of Christ, as it was taught here
first by that Romish Monk, were in any such sort defiled or not. But that
being granted, that a country is at the first rightly and truly converted to
the faith of Christ, how shall the posterity after so many generations have
infallible assurance, that they hold inuiolably the same doctrine which they
embraced, who were first converted? What rolls, what records have we certainly
and particularly to inform us that our fathers, and fathers fathers, and their
fathers and forefathers, from the beginning, have without adding or detracting,
without change or alteration either of phrase or meaning, believed and
practiced thus and thus? Will he send us to the Chronicles and Stories of our
country to be certified hereof? To say nothing that every one that seeks
assurance of his faith, cannot study Chronicles for the finding of it, suppose
a man has read them all, what is he the nearer, inasmuch as Bellarmine has
taught us to say of them all, that Bellarm. de Effect. Sacram. l. 2. c. 25.
Quod historici quidam meminerint etc. non potest parere fidem nisi humanam cui
potest subesse falsum.
they breed but humane belief, wherein there may be falsehood. Of the greatest
matters many times they say least: they deliver things many times imperfectly,
and often we may rather gather from them the private affection of the author,
then any testimony of public faith. To the devices of their own times, they
apply the phrases of former times, and corrupt the meaning of former times, by
speaking in the language of their own times. We find many times differences
and disagreements amongst them, and that reproved by one which is approved by
another. Sometimes we descry lies and tales, wilfully devised, and falsely
fathered upon the times and persons that have been before, and guilefully
thrust into ancient books for the gracing of superstitions that have grown of
latter times, and other writings and stories suppressed and made away, which
taxed such superstitions as they did arise. Many uncertainties there are, many
difficulties and perplexities in this course, and impossible it is for them
that are the authors of it, to set down out of any records any perfect form
of their own faith, whereof a man can but reasonably satisfy himself that it
has been universally and uniformly received of all our fathers, and
continued wholly the same without alteration from the first converted till our
time. M. Bishop therefore by referring men in question of religion to their
fathers and forefathers, does but send them a long journey in the dark, not
seeing which way to go, and uncertain where they shall arrive. And this he
does to hide from them the true use of that ground and foundation, which he
himself has laid, from whence it properly and naturally arises, that since
that was the certain truth which was first delivered and taught, and is to be
the measure and rule of the faith and doctrine of all succeeding times,
therefore we should first have recourse to the monuments and records of that
that was first taught, thereby to judge of the faith and religion of our
fathers, and to esteem whether their steps were such as that we may securely
follow them. In this behalf Christ has provided for us, who Gregor. in Ezech.
hom. 13 Ipsa quae dixit, etiam Scripturae tradidit vt posteris mand^^etur.
what he spoke, says Gregory, he committed also to writing, that posterity
might know the same. August. de consens. Euangel. lib. 1. c. 35. Quicquid ille
de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc illis scribendum tanquam suis
manibus imperauit.
Whatsoever he would have us to read, says Austin, of his doings and sayings,
he commanded his Disciples as his hands to write the same. And thus Idem in 1.
Epistol. Joan. tract. 2. Contra insidiosos ^rrores Deus voluit ponere
firmamentum in Scripturis contra qu^s nullus audet loqui qui quoquo modo se
vult videri Christianum.
against deceit ^ill errors, says the same St. Austin, God would set us a
fortress or bulwark in the holy Scriptures, against which no man dare speak
that will in any sort be thought a Christian man. Having then certain records
of the truth first delivered, such as no man dare contradict, what way can we
imagine for resolution, either more compendious and short, or more lightsome
and comfortable, then to look to the pattern of faith expressed in those
records, thence to inform our selves, and thereby to rectify whatsoever we
find to have swarned or declined from that rule? This M. Bishop cannot abide;
this they know to be the gall and bane of Popery; and therefore from this they
labor to withdraw men, that what they cannot defend by testimony of truth,
they may notwithstanding color by the example of their fathers. This was the
intent of M. Bishops not humble but presumptuous request to his Majesty, that
he would maintain and set forth that faith wherein all his royal Progenitors
lived and dyed; not that he is able to demonstrate in what religion all his
Majesty's royal Progenitors lived and dyed, but that he may lead him from
that rule whereby he should be able to judge of the faith of his Progenitors,
and whether his fathers have in any sort swarued from that faith, which at the
first was delivered to their forefathers. Albeit if it be true which he says,
that Symmachus the Pagan played the part of a foolish Sophister, when he
pleaded so with the Emperor Valentinian* We are to follow our fathers, because
the Emperors father and nearest Predecessors were no Pagan Idolaters, but
prof^ssed Christians, then does himself also play the part of a foolish
Sophister, in pleading so with King JAMES, that he must follow his fathers,
inasmuch as his nearest Predecessors, his father and grandfather, were no
Popish Idolaters, but professors of the religion of the Protestants, and his
mother so well persuaded thereof, as that she would not go about to dissuade
him from it. But against the plea of Symmachus ^e excepteth further, because
his forefathers for whose idolatry he pleads, had before forsaken the true
worship of one living God. Which though it be true, yet I marvel how M. Bishop
would make him to believe it, inasmuch as he had to allege that for so many
hundred, yea for thousands of years their Ancestors had continued those
devotions, and that it might seem strange that amongst so many wise
Governors, so many learned Philosophers, so many virtuous men, there should
not be one of so many generations that ever could see that they did amiss. We
see how he says not only, Relat. Symmach. apud Ambros. Epist. lib 5. Seruanda
est tot seculis fides, and sequendi sunt nobis parents qui s^cuti sunt
feliciter suos.
Let us follow our Ancestors, but adds; who with great felicity followed
theirs, being fully resolved that both their Ancestors, and the Ancestors of
their Ancestors, had in all times past been the same as they. M. Bishop by
belief of holy Scripture knows the contrary, because he there understands
all nations to have been the posterity of Noah, who was a worshipper of one
true living God, saved by faith in Christ to come, whose religion set forth in
Scripture, being compared to the superstitions of the Pagans, does clearly
convince that they were far departed from that that he was. Now then, M.
Bishop, be content that we return the same to you. You say that all our
Ancestors from the beginning continued in one and the same, even your
religion. Shall we now for trial hereof go to our Ancestors, and ask them
whether it be so or not? No, but we will go to holy Scripture, and there see
what was the faith and religion of them who are our true Ancestors, the first
fathers and founders of the Christian Church; the Apostles and Evangelists; and
there we find a far other manner of faith then Popery does yield, whereby we
certainly understand that they have corrupted the true faith. His exception
against the Donatists pleading of their fathers, is the same as against
Symmachus, that their fathers were degenerated from the integrity of their
grandfathers, and therefore were not to be followed. But yet the Donatists held
that all their forefathers were of their mind, even as stiffly as the Papists
do. They said that they were not fallen from the Catholic Church, but the
Catholic church from them, so as that they affirmed it to have been their
Church, which was persecuted by Nero and the rest of those Roman Tyrants, as I
have before showed in the second Chapter. But St. Austin every where brings
them to the Scriptures, Collat. Carthag. 1. c. 18. In eis literis Ecclesiam
esse quaerendam vbi Christus redemptor eius innotuit. Et Collat. 3. c. 101. Nos
eam Ecclesiam retinemus quam in illis Scripturis inuenim*, in quibus etiam
cognouimus Christum.
there to learn and seek the Church of Christ, where we learn to know Christ
himself, and thereby justifies that they were fallen away from the Church,
and not the Church from them; and therefore that they were to renounce their
fathers that had so done, and return to the Church again. This M. Bishop
cannot plead against us, whose parents have been Protestants, to move us to
refuse the religion of our fathers, and to return to the example of our
forefathers: because by the Scriptures we learn that our forefathers did
amiss, and therefore that it shall be to us a just imputation of apostasy, if
to them we shall retire our selves from the religion of our fathers. And see
here how M. Bishop goes a way quite contrary to St. Austin; for St. Austin
used the Scriptures to draw the Donatists to the example of their former
fathers, and M. Bishop uses the example of our former fathers, to draw us away
from the Scriptures. But against all his vain motives we are settled by the
charge given by God himself, Ezech. 20. 18
Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their
manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols; I am the Lord your God; Walk
in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them. Gods statutes are the
line and rule whereby he has appointed us to go; we respect not therefore
what our fathers have done, but we look to the statutes of God in the word of
God, to the example and teaching of Christ in the word of Christ, there to
learn how far we may approve the doings of our fathers. To do otherwise is,
as the Prophet speaks, Ierem. 2. 13.
to forsake the fountain of living waters, which God has showed, and to dig
to our selves broken pits, that will hold no water, at least no other but
puddle water. For conclusion, strange it is to see how impudently he peruerteth
the words of Cyprian. To return to the original of the Lords tradition, is
with Cyprian to leave the example of our fathers, and to look to the Gospel
what the Lord has there delivered; but with M. Bishop it is to return to our
forefathers, and in steed of the Gospel to learn of them, what it is that
Christ taught. Cyprian says; We are not to regard what any man before us has
thought fit to be done, but what Christ did who was before all. M. Bishop
says, that we are to regard what our fathers before us have thought fit to be
done, that of them we may learn what Christ did, who is before all. Cyprian
says, We are not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God. M. Bishop
says, we are to follow the custom of men, that we may thereby come to the
knowledge of the truth of God. Thus very directly he crosses Cyprian, and yet
will be very angry if we say that he speaks any otherwise then Cyprian does.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
NOw to that point which follows in M. Abbot: There shall be a time, when the
Kings of the Apocal. 17.
earth shall give their power to the beast, and bend themselves to fight
against the Lamb, which I do willingly admit; but when that time shall be, or
what Kings, it is very uncertain: for there shall be also a time, When the
Kings of the earth shall be as nurses to Esaias 60. Psalm. 72.
the true Church, and shall most humbly both obey it, and also enrich and
defend it to the uttermost of their power. Now, by the very insinuation of the
Text, and the uniform consent of ancient writers, the good Kings shall
cherish, exalt, and magnify the Church, before those evil Kings shall arise,
who falling away from their fathers faith, and from the Catholic Church, will
lend their aid to her professed enemies, to work her overthrow: which is a
shrewd presumption, that the Kings of former ages, stood far better affected
to the true Church of God, then some of later times: Well, this I leave to
understanding men's judgment. But I may not slip M. Abbots exceeding gross
ouer-sight, or rather heinous crime, in ranking his Majesty among those Kings
mentioned in the Apocalypse: for albeit they shall hate Cap. 17.
the whore, and make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, etc. yet they
shall be most wicked and impious Kings, and shall adore the monstrous beast
there described, and fight against Christ Jesus. These be the very words of
the Text: And the ten horns, etc. be ten Kings, etc. these have one counsel
and force, and their power they shall deliver to the beast; these shall fight
with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overthrow them, etc. And the ten horns
which Verse. 16.
thou saw in the beast, these shall hate the harlot, and make her desolate
and naked, etc. so that the very same ten Kings signified there by ten horns,
that did give all their power to the beast, did hate the harlot. But how can it
be, says one, that they who hate the wicked harlot, should join with the
beast who was as wicked as she? Yes, that may well be: for it is no news that
wicked men fall out among themselves, so that one ungodly and wicked Prince,
does sometimes with all his might aid another more wicked then himself; and
at the same instant perhaps, or shortly after, fight against a third the most
wicked of all: they do fight against both good and evil, as their own rage,
passions, or occasions carry them. Which I say to stop a starting hole of the
Protestants, who to avoid this inconvenience, say: that first these ten Kings
were bent to all mischief, and then helped the beast against the Lamb, but
afterward repented them of their former iniquity: then lo they hated the
harlot, and persecuted her, which they would not have done, if they had been
badde Princes; this is a pretty shift. Well, say first that this sense could
stand with the words of the text, yet they cannot be applied to his Majesty,
who was not in his former time any ^ider of our religion, and now is fallen of
from that to the Protestants: wherefore this device (if it could stand with the
text) will not serve their turn. But the spirit of God has prevented and
wholly cut off this vain imagination; for it says in the next verse, That the
ten Kings who hated the harlot, even then and after too, gave their Kingdoms
to the beast, till the word of God be consummate, that is, till the end of all.
Wherefore most manifest it is, even by the warrant of Gods sacred word, that
those Kings mentioned in the Apocalypse, were reprobates: such did they live,
and such shall they die. Let then his most excellent Majesty censure, what
reward they are worthy off, who fear not to thrust his Highness into that
list of condemned cast-a-waies; and that too, after they had such fair
warning, as in my answer to M. Perkins I gave them, to beware how they did his
Majesty that shame and despite. If it please his Highness to take notice of
it, I doubt not, but that he will conne them little thank, for this their
commendation of him.

R. ABBOT.
IT has been already very gloriously fulfilled, which God promised unto his
Church; Esaias 49. 23.
Kings shall ^e thy nursing fathers, and Queens shall be thy nourses, etc. The
great states of the world, the Emperors, and Kings, and Princes, Constantine,
Theodosius, Valentinian, Honorius, Lucius of Britain, Theodebert and
Theodelind of France, Reccaredus of Spain, and infinite other of the same, and
other nations held it their greatest honor and felicity to be members of
Christ's Church, and have used all care and endeavor to honor and advance the
same. The time has since been for the fulfilling of the other prophecy, that
Apoc. 17. 13. 17.
the Kings of the earth should give their power and Kingdom to the beast, and
with the whore sitting upon many waters, should bend themselves Verse 14.
to fight against the Lamb. M. Bishop says, that it is uncertain what Kings
these shall be. But it is certain by the confession of all parts, that they
are See of this whole matter, Part. 2. in the defense of M. Perkins Prologue.
Page 42. etc.
the ten Kings, that is, those many Kings that shall arise of the desolations
and ruins of the Roman Empire, and what Kings they are that now possess the
Countries and Kingdoms, that were once the Provinces of the Roman Empire,
Italy, France, Spain, Germany, England, etc. it is not uncertain. The
evidence and certainty thereof teaches us to understand ten Kings, not for ten
only particular men, as M. Bishop most improbably and absurdly does, but for
the Kings successively of so many Kingdoms, the King of England, the King of
France, the King of Spain, etc. under every of which names there is a
succession of many persons. Upon the decay and fall of the Empire, who arose
together with these Kings? to whom have they yielded their Kingdom and power,
but only the Pope, who by little and little thrust out the Emperor, and made
himself Lord of the Roman territory, and has set up himself under a title of
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to usurp a Kingdom above them all? They have
acknowledged his jurisdiction; they have submitted themselves unto him; they
have been content to join with him, and to yield him all assistance to fight
against the Lamb, against the true members of Christ, against all that
professed the true faith and Gospel of Christ. But yet it is foretold that
there shall be a time, when Verse. 16.
these Kings shall hate the wheore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and
eat her flesh and burn her with fire. Where because it might be questioned
how it should be that they should do thus, of whom it is said, that they
should give their power to the beast, the holy Ghost to take away that doubt,
adds; Verse. 17.
For God has put into their hearts to fulfill his will, and to consent
together, and to give their Kingdom to the beast* until the words of God be
fulfilled. Whereby he signifies, that although by the secret hand and counsel
of God, those Kings should give their Kingdom to the beast, yet it should be
so but for a time only, until the word of God be fulfilled, that is, until it
be performed which God has foretold of the abomination of desolation,
standing up in the holy place, in the Temple of God; which being done, they
shall hate the whore, and make her desolate, and burn her with fire, God
opening their eyes that they may see the abuses and usurpations of that wicked
strumpet, that they may reward her accordingly. As for M. Bishops construction
of the beast and the whore, as things diverse, and that those Kings though
giving all their power to the beast, yet should withal hate the harlot, and
fight against her, as wicked men fall out amongst themselves, and aid one
another against as wicked as themselves, I reject it as his own ridiculous and
fond device, the thing being so plain to the contrary, as that his own
fellows the Rhemish Divines, as I have before showed, do confess, that it is
Rhem. Testam. Annot. Apoc. 13. 1.
the beast which is called the whore of Babylon, and by way of exposition do
name the Whore, or Beast, or Antichrist, as appertaining all to one. The
giving therefore of their power to the beast, is the giving thereof to the
harlot; and their hatred toward the harlot, is their hatred toward the beast;
they shall first do the one, and the time of that expired, they shall begin^e
to show the other. This in part is already come to pass, and God has opened
the eyes and turned the hearts of sundry Nations and Princes, that they now
hate the whore of Babylon, the Roman Church, whereof before they stood in awe,
and the rest in Gods good time shall follow and join together, to the
devouring and consuming of it. I noted our gracious King for one of them, whose
eyes God has enlightened, to see the fornications of that wicked harlot, and
to hate the same; but M. Bishop says, that it cannot be applied to his Majesty
in our sense, because he was not in his former time any aider of their
religion, and now fallen off from that to the Protestants. But though King
JAMES have been no aider of their religion, yet the King of England has
been; and the King of England who in other former Kings has been a supporter
of the Kingdom of the beast, is now in King JAMES an impugne^ thereof, the
Kings first supporting, and then (...) not being necessarily in person the
same, but in suc^essio^ only as has been said. Therefore though they (...)
reprobates and cast* a-waies, who gave their Kingdom to (...) beast, as M.
Bishop pronounces of them (as for us we judge the^ not, let them stand or fall
to their own Lord) yet (...) not which he vainly collecteth, that King JAMES
^y b^ing one of them, that shall ^ate and destroy the who (...) (...)^oned
amongst reprobates, but he is rather (...) hereby from the number of them. To
exclude this he alleges, that those Kings shall give their Kingdom to t^^
b^ast, till the word of God be consum^ate, that is, says he, till the and of
(...) But the best is, we are not tied to his Commentary, and because Apoc.
18. 1. 2. etc.
St. John at large declares, that the Beast and hi^ Babylon shall be destroyed
before the end of all, therefore we use our liberty to think it false which he
says, that they shall give their Kingdom to the beast, until the end of all.
They shall so do until it be fulfilled which God has forespoken, concerning
the Kingdom of Antichrist; which being done, they shall arm themselves
against the said Kingdom, and shall help to pull it down. So does King
JAMES, and he will not think it worthy of any hand censure, that we say that
he does so, and as for M. Bishops fair warning, we reject it with scorn, only
telling him that the custom was, that the Tull. Orat. pro Sext. Rosc^ Can^s
aluntur in Capitolio, andC. si luce quoque canes lat^ent, etc. opinor ijs crura
suffringantur.
Capitolian dogs, when they gave warning without cause, should have their
legs broken.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
MAster Abbot having acquitted himself so Clarkelike in the precedent part of
his answer; That we are not to imitate our forefathers, descends to the
subsequent, to wit; That his Majesty's Progenitors, Kings of England and
Scotland, were not of our Roman faith: which he will prove hereafter at more
leisure, that is to say, never. For he does not deny but that the religious and
holy man Augustine, sent into our country by Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome,
to convert our Ancestors the Saxons and English, to the Christian faith, did
then teach the same Roman faith which we now profess: so that above this
thousand years by his own confession, his Majesty's Progenitors have been
of our Catholic Roman faith and religion, and very few Kings now living (I
ween) can derive their pedigree much further. Afterward he does rake out of
the channels of Bale, Jewel, Hollinshead, and such like Page 198.
late partial writers (which any man not past all care of his reputation,
would be ashamed to cite for sufficient witnesses in matters of controversy,
wherein they themselves were parties) that there was great disagreement
between Augustine the Italian Monk, (as he speaks) and the Churches of
England and Scotland: whereas venerable Bede a most approved author, and near
unto those times, who did as most diligently trace out those matters, so record
them most faithfully; he I say (whose authority is sufficient to put down an
hundredth late writers interessed in the cause) affirms, that there was no
variance betwixt them, in any one article of faith, but only in some few points
of ceremony, namely in these two: Upon what day the feast of Easter was to be
kept, Beda lib. 2. histor. cap. 2.
and about the rites of Baptism. For S. Augustine offered them to bear with
all other their different rites, if they would yield unto him in these two
points: Vt Pascha suo tempore celebretis; That ye would keep Easter Day at
the due time appointed by the Council of Nice, and minister the Sacrament of
Baptism after Eusebius. in vita Constable. lib. 3. 17. Epiphan. lib. 3. Haeres. 70.
the manner of the Roman and Apostolic Church. And concerning these two
points, who can think, but that the Sacrament of Baptism, was like to be
administered in those days, in the most renowned City of Rome, after a more
decent and devout manner, then among the Britans, that lived in a corner of the
world? Now for the other of keeping the feast of Easter, the fourteenth day of
the first Moon with the Jews, It was many years before condemned in the
first most famous general Council of Nice: and therefore it cannot be denied,
but that those Britans were either very ignorant in the Canons of the Church,
if they knew not so solemn a decree; or else too too contentious and wilful
in refusing to yield unto it. A third clause was added by S* Augustine, that
the Britans would join with him and his fellows, Beda ibidem.
in preaching the word of God unto the English nation; which also argues yet
more strongly, that they agreed together in all articles of faith, or else they
would not have required their help, in instructing others in matters of faith.
And this is not only registered by S. Bid, that holy Historiographer; but also
reported by their own late writers Hollinshead, and * M. Godwine Volum. 1.
page 103. * Page 6.
in his Catalogue of the Bishops of England. S. Bid also witnesses further in
the place above* said, that the same Britan Christians, even then confessed,
that they did perceive that to be the true way of justice, which Augustine did
preach. Furthermore, the principal Preachers and most godly men, that lived
not long before S. Augustines arrival among the Britans, as namely S.
Dulcitius and S. David, were brought up at Rome, and one of them the Popes
Legate too, as the adversaries John Bale in their lives.
themselves confess. Whereupon it follows clearly, that not only for these
later thousand years, but also in the former hundreths, all his Majesty's
Ancestors both English and Britans, embraced and maintained the same Catholic
Roman faith, which we now do.

R. ABBOT.
MAster Bishop kindly threapeth upon me, that I deny not but that Austin the
Monk sent hither by Gregory Bishop of Rome, did then teach the same Roman
faith, that they now profess; whereas I do not only deny it to be so, but
also do bring Answ. to the Epistle to the King, sect. 31.
diverse instances to prove directly that it is not so. Of those diverse let one
only here suffice. The religion brought in by Austin the Monk, continuing here
till the time of Charles the Great, though it approved the having of Images,
yet condemned the second Nicene Council, for that it approved the worshipping
of them. The thing by Roger Houeden is thus reported, that Roger. Houeden.
Annal. p. 1. Anno 792. Carolus Rex Fra^corum misit Syn^dalem librum ad
Britanniam sibi a Constantinopoli directum, in quo libro (beu pro^ dolor) multa
inconuenientia and ver^ fidei co^traria reperiebantur, maxim quod pene ^mnium
Orientalium Doctorum, non minus quam trecentorum vel ^o amplius Episcoporum
^nanima assertione confir^atum fuerit, Imagines adorari debere, quod omnino
Ecclesia Dei execratur. Contra quod scripsit Albinus Epistola^ ^x authoritate
diuinarum Scripturarum mirabiliter affirmata^ illamque cum ^od^m lib^o ex
person. 1 Episcoporum ac Principli nostro(...) ^rancorum (...)t.
in the year 792. Charles the King of France sent over into Britain a
synodall book, or book of a Council, directed to him from Constantinople, in
which book (alas for woe) many things were found inconvenient and contrary to
true faith, specially for that by agreement of all the Eastern Doctors, no
less then three hundred Bishops and more, it was decreed that Images should be
worshipped, which thing the Church of God wholly accurseth. Against which,
says he, Albinus wrote an Epistle wonderfully strengthened by authority of
holy Scriptures, and brought it together with the book to the King of France,
in the name or behalf of our Bishops and Peers. The Roman faith which Austin
brought condemned that Nicene Council. Tho Roman faith which M. Bishop
brings approves that Council, for so has he done in his Sect. 12.
Epistle to the King. Therefore the Roman faith which M. Bishop brings is not
now the same that Austin brought. He cannot doubt but that Austin being sent
hither by Gregory, did teach the same faith here which Gregory himself taught
at Rome. But the faith which Gregory taught at Rome shall be showed, if God
will, in this book in many particulars, to have been contrary to that faith
that is now taught from Rome. As for our writers Bale, Jewel, Hollinshead, and
such like, I cite them not as sufficient witnesses in matters of controversy,
as he vainly cauilleth, but I name them only as recording matters of history,
which they have taken out of former stories and writers, when mine own Library
does not furnish me with some books which they have followed, in which case I
may as well use their names, as Papists may use the names* of Baronius, Surius,
Genebrard, and other their own authors, as I have Advertisement concerning D.
Bishops Reproof. sect. 6.
before showed more at large. As touching the disagreement betwixt Austin the
Monk and the British Bishops, I referred the Reader to Beda as well as to any
other, and by him it appears that there was variance betwixt them, not only
in some few, but in very many things, Beda hist. l. 2. c. 2. Sed and alia
plurima vnitati Ecclesiae co^traria facieba^^. Qui cum longa disputatione
habita, neque precibus, neque hortamentis, neque increpationibus Augustini ac
s^ciorum eius ossensum praebere voluissent, etc. Dicibat eis, quod in multis
quidem nostrae consuetudini co^traria g^ritis, and tamen si in tribus his mihi
obseperare vultis, etc. caetera aequanimiter ^uncta tolerabimus.
wherein he sought by disputing, by entreating, by exhorting, by reproving, to
draw their assent unto him. Which when he could not obtain, he made offer to
bear with all other differences, so that in three things they would yield to
him; to observe Easter, and to celebrate Baptism after the manner of the
Church of Rome, and to join with them in Preaching to the infidel Saxons. M.
Bishop here will give reason why the Britans should have yielded to the Roman
manner of Baptising, because forsooth it was likely to be administered more
decently and devoutly in the most renowned city of Rome, then amongst the
Britans in a corner of the world. But if it must be presumed that at Rome
because of the renown of the place all things were done more decently and
devoutly then otherwhere, why did Gregory advise Austin, that Ibid. l. r. c.
27. M^bi plac^t vt sieve in Romana, sieve in Gall^aru, sieve in qualibet Ecclesia,
aliquid inuemsti quod plus omnipotenti Deo pos^it placere, so(...)e ^l^ga^.
custodiamus. consuctudines? commendat.
whether in the Church of Rome, or in the Church of France, or in any other
Church, he should find what might better please God, he should make choice of
it? Surely it was an absurdity in Austin, that when things might be better, as
Ambros. de Sacram. l. 3. c. 1. Quod alibi rectius seruat^r, nos recte
Ambrose also says, in other Churches then in the Church of Rome, he should
notwithstanding seek to force other Churches, to the example of that Church.
Yea, and it was a token of his ignorance that he needed to write to Gregory to
be resolved, as touching Beda vt supra. Cum vna sit sides, cur sunt Ecclesiarum
diuersae etc.
the diverse customs and observations of diverse Churches, not knowing that
Eusebius. hist. lib. 5. cap. 23. Dissonantia ieiuny fidei concordiam
difference of ceremonies commends the unity of faith, as Ireneus spoke
particularly of fasting, and therefore that there was no cause for him so to
labor other men to conformity to their rites. Albeit it may be likely that the
Sacrament of Baptism was administered amongst the Britans with greater
simplicity and less ceremony then at Rome, and that for that cause they made
choice, rather to continue their old form, knowing that abundance of
ceremonies, breeds commonly abundance of superstitions, and Aug. Epist. 119.
Quamuis neque hoc inueniri possit, quomod^ contra fidem sint; ipsam tamen
religione^, etc. seruilibus oneribus prem^nt, etc.
though it be not seen how they make against the faith, yet they are, as St.
Austin says, the clogge and burden of religion, oppressing it first, and then
eating out the very heart of it. And this we take to be the chief cause why
they so stiffly refused Austin, for that albeit they acknowledged that he taught
the true Christian faith, yet they saw him join therewith* not in baptism
only, but otherwise also, so many humane traditions and inventions, which they
held to be so many prophanations of the true Christian faith. If some of them
acknowledged so much, as M. Bishop urges out of Beda, we will not stick to
acknowledge the same in such sort as they did, neither will we stand to
question whether Dulcitius (he would say Dubricius, as I take it) or David
principal preachers of the Britans in their times, were brought up at Rome,
though Bale, whom he cites, in his lesser work, which only I have, do not
say so much, or that either of them was Legate to the Bishop of Rome; but be it
so, yet it follows not, that all his Majesty's Ancestors both English and
Britains embraced that Roman faith that now is, because it shall appear as I
have said, that the Roman faith is not the same now that it was then. As
touching the observation of Easter, what reasons might move the Britans to
continue their former custom, we cannot tell. It may be that they were
ignorant of the Nicene decree, and what of that? Surely Hilary a learned and
godly Bishop of France protests, that he Hilar. de Synod. adu. Arian. Fidem
Nicenam nunquam ^^si exulaturus aud^^i.
never heard of the Nicene Council till the time that he went into banishment,
which as appears by Hieromes Chronicle, was about the twentieth year of
Constantius the Arian Emperor, which was thirty years after the time of that
Council. Now if it were so long unknown, or so little known in France, no
marvel if in Britanny it were less known; and where it had not caused a
change within that time, it was not likely afterward to prevail much,
specially with a nation so much afflicted and troubled with wars and
invasions, as the Britans thenceforth were, in which case no alteration might
be likely to take place amongst them. Moreover, they could remember that in the
time of Lucius their King, Eleutherius sent over some preachers hither, for the
converting and instructing of the King and his people, who yet required not to
have Easter observed after the manner of the Roman Church, but left them to
keep it according to the custom that they had used from the time of the
Apostles; whereupon they might resolve that there was no cause why Austin
coming from Rome, should now go about to alter that custom more then they
had done. In a word the Britans were not too contentious in refusing to yield
to a sudden alteration of things so long continued, but Austin rather showed
himself contentious and indiscreet, in that he did so unseasonably and without
cause, so strongly urge the same.

W. BISHOP.. 4.
THe same might as easily be proved of the Churches of Scotland, who
acknowledge Palladius and Patritius, for two of the chief founders of the
Christian faith in that country; who both were brought up at Rome, and sent
into Scotland by Celestinus Bishop of Rome, to instruct the Scots in the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, even as Augustine was from S. Gregory into
England. From which the Scots Church never swarued, until of late years,
Knoxe, Buchanan, and such like giddy* headed and fiery spirited fellows,
seduced them. And M. Abbot most ignorantly or impudently, affirms it to have
been 1200. years after the incarnation of Christ, ere the Popes authority
could get any acknowledgment there: for in the very same hundredth year by him
named, they were so far off from denying the Popes authority over them in
causes Ecclesiastical, that they did acknowledge him to be also their
Protector in temporal affairs. For when King Edward the third, would have
given them John Balial for their King, they answered him; That they would not
accept of him for such, Walsingham in vita Edw. Anno 1292.
without the Popes consent, who had their country in protection, as they then
pleaded. And M. Abbots argument to the contrary, is most friuoulous: Alexander
the King bade the Popes Legate to enter his country at his peril: ergo, he did
not acknowledge the Popes authority. By the like argument one might prove, that
King Philip and Queen Mary did not acknowledge the Popes authority; for they
commanded a Legate of his, to stay at Calis, and to forbear entrance into this
Realm at his peril. The Popes Legates then, when they be sent about affairs
that do seem to the Prince and his Council, preiudicious to the temporal
slate, may be refused, without disparagement to the Popes supreme authority in
causes Ecclesiastical. And the King of Scots had reason to refuse that
Cardinal Legate, whose special arrand was to collect money to maintain the
wars of the holy Land, which was not to be spared in his Country. Besides,
the very entertainment of such a great State so accompanied, was reputed as
needless, so over costly for that poor Country. If M. Abbot have no better
stuff then this to uphold his badde cause, he that best knew his own meaning
and designement, has to the life painted out himself, where he says: They
care not indeed what they say or write, so that it may carry a magnificall and
brave show, to dazell the eyes of them that are not well acquainted with their
lewd and naughty dealing.

R. ABBOT.
Bale. Script. Brita^nic. Cent. 1. oper. minor.
PAlladius and Patritius were sent into Scotland by Celestinus Bishop of Rome,
to instruct the Scots against the doctrine of Pelagius the Heretic, which is a
certain argument of the apostasy of the Church of Rome, inasmuch as the
Church of Rome now patronizeth and defends the doctrine of Pelagius, as I
have Of Free will, sect. 5.
before showed. Little does M. Bishop gain by all this alleagement of teachers
then sent from Rome. We know what was then the religion of the Church of Rome,
and we know that the stream the longer it ran, the more soil it gathered,
but yet it was very pure and tolerable then in comparison of that, that now it
is. There follows now an assertion of mine, that it was twelve hundred years
after the incarnation of Christ, ere the Popes authority could get any
acknowledgement in Scotland, which he says I do most impudently or ignorantly
affirm. But how does it appear that I so do? Forsooth, in the very same
hundredth year by him named, says he, they were so far off from denying the
Popes authority over them in causes Ecclesiastical, that they did acknowledge
him to be their Protector in temporal affairs. Mark well, gentle Reader,
that I name twelve hundred years, and he says, in the very same hundredth
year, and yet for the thing which he reports of the Scots alleging, that
the Pope had their Country in protection, he notes the year 1290. which was
almost a hundred years after the time by me set down. Be it M. Bishop, that
at the end of twelve hundred and ninety years, they had received the Pope to
be the Protector of their Country; that nothing hinders the truth of my
speech, that for twelve hundred years they acknowledged not any authority of
the Pope amongst them in Church affairs. You should have brought us some
records to show that within the compass of those twelve hundred years, the
Pope had without controllement exercised in the Realm of Scotland,
Ecclesiastical and ordinary jurisdiction; which seeing you do not, you
justify my assertion, and the impudency whereof you speak, must be the stain
of your own face, who will take upon you to contradict me with such an
impertinent and sleeuelesse tale. To prove that there was no such jurisdiction
acknowledged, I referred the Reader to the King of Scots own words, who as
Matthew Paris reports, Math. Paris. in Henrico 3. Anno 1237. Volenti autem
Domino Legato intrare regnum Scotiae vt ibi de negotijs Ecclesiasticis
tractaret sicut in Anglia, respondit Rex Scotiae; Non memini Legatum in terra
mea vidisse, nec opus esse iquem esse vocandum, Deo gratias, nec adhuc opus
est, omnia been se habent. Nec ^tiam tempore Patris mei vel alicuius
Antecessoru^ meorum visus est aliquis Legatus int^oitum habuisse, nec ego dum
mei compos suero tolerabo.
when the Lord Legate was desirous to enter into the Kingdom of Scotland,
there to deal in Ecclesiastical matters as he had done in England, answered
him, I do not remember that I have seen any Legate in my Country, nor that
there has been any need, thanks be to God, that any should be called,
neither is there any need; all things are well. No, nor in the time of my
Father, or of any of my Predecessors has any Legate been seen to have had
any entrance there, neither will I suffer any so long as I am in my right wits.
This evidence is clear; none had entered in his time, none had entered in the
time of his Father, or any of his Predecessors, none should enter so long as
he could keep him in his right mind, and though things were amiss, yet none
had authority to enter, but as he should be called and warranted by him. The
same in effect he alleged two years after, when the Legate again was
attempting to go into that Country, and though after much ado, upon
intercession of the Nobles of England and Scotland, he was content for once to
admit him, that he might not have the disgrace of being repulsed, yet it was
with condition as I have See the Advertisement concerning D. Bishops Reproof.
sect. 15.
formerly declared, that the said Legate should put in caution under his hand
and seal, that his entrance should not be drawn to a matter of example,
whereupon to presume the like another time. This matter is more plain then
that M. Bishops paltry shifts can put it off. King Philip and Queen Mary
respited the entrance of a Legate for a time, but wholly to deny him entrance
for ordering matters Ecclesiastical as the King of Scots did, he well knows
they durst not. As for his other tales, that the country was poor and could
not spare money for which the Legate came, and that the charges of
entertainment of such a state would be over great, they are his own skiruy
devices, the story mentions no such thing, and we know the Popes authority
where it is acknowledged, is not wont to be put off with such slender excuses.
He then that considers what I have alleged, and what he has answered, will
easily see that I said truly of them, and that there is no cause to return it
upon me; They care not indeed what they say or write, so that it may carry a
magnificall and brave show, to dazell the eyes of them that are not acquainted
with their lewd and naughty dealing.

THere followed here M. Bishops answer to my sharp taxation of him, for
vpbraiding the Kings Majesty with misfortune in his breeding and bringing up,
which for that it concerns no matter of controversy, I have left to be
touched otherwhere amongst other matters of like nature, and proceed to that
that follows for the sixth Chapter.
CHAP. VI. That the reasons of Popery where there is not a mind preiudicate,
are not urgent or forcible, and that M. Bishop was justly censured, for that in
repeating a rule delivered by the Kings Majesty for judgment of true religion,
he left out some words thereof.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

YOu talk M. Bishop of many urgent and forcible reasons, but you talk as,
etc. to, We hope you will not deny, etc.

W. BISHOP.
TRue, there is no have indeed, for M. Abbot comes fair and soft to the
matter. What a number of idle vaunting words and vain repetitions be here? as
though any iuditious man were to be persuaded by bare words and voluntary
supposals, before he see any proof. Sir I doubt not, but the indifferent
Reader will suspend his judgment, and deem nere the worse of my writing, for
your empty censure, till he see good reason to the contrary. Sure I am, that
some Catholics having read your book, do like much the better of mine, and
esteem yours a very fond piece of work, full of babble, lies, and foul
words, void of sound proofs, and far from common ciuility. Who are more
circumspect then you your selves, to keep your followers from reading our
books? who first imprison any that will help to print them, then set fines on
all their heads that shall keep them, and make very diligent search after them?
so that all these common words, may most truly be returned upon your self:
Mutato nomine, de te narratur fabula. You note that I subtly left out of his
Majesty's speech from Christ her Lord and head, but show no cause why; and no
marvel, for none indeed can be showed: they are needless words, as being
comprehended in the former. For if the Church of Rome departed not from her
self, when she was in her most-flourishing and best estate, she cannot
depart from Christ her Lord and head: wherefore to note this for a subtle
trick, gives the Reader cause to note you for a wrangler, and one that is
very captious where no cause is offered. M. Abbot comes at length to my first
reason, and goes about to disprove it thus.

R. ABBOT.
Howsoever I seem to M. Bishop to come fair and soft to the matter, I make no
doubt but he would have been very well contented that I should have made less
have. His vpbraiding me with idle vaunting words and vain repetitions, with
bare words and voluntary supp^sals, seems to me no strange thing, because he
knows it to be for his behoof, that all that I have written be so accounted.
But every man can conceive that he is no fit man to be judge of my writings. He
has a web in his eye that troubles his sight, so as that nothing seems
straight to him, but that that is crooked. What reason and proof I have
brought for that that I say, and whether my censure of him be right or wrong,
it rests with the judicious and indifferent Reader duly to consider, and
then to pronounce accordingly. But the lest is in that that follows. Sure I
am, says he, that some Catholics having read your book, do like much the
better of mine. And do they so indeed M. Bishop? Happy man are you then, and
need no longer care where you beg your bread. You are certainly in the
right, if some Catholics like better of your book then they do of mine. But
take heed, M. Bishop, that you be not deceived by them. It may be they do but
flatter you, and to please you, are content to say that which they do not
think. It may be they too much favor you, and you may remember what Seneca
says, that Senec. de Tranquil. animi. Semper iudicio favor officit.
favor always hinders a man from judging aright. I told you before of the
Proverb;

Quisquis amat Ranam, Ranam putat esse Dianam.
Who loves the frogge in filthy dike
He thinks the frogge Diana-like.
As in the body, so in the mind there is a corrupt disposition, which makes a
man to like nothing but that that serves for the further corrupting of him.
Yea, and it may be they are like to children, that think the bells sound
whatsoever they fancy, and therefore do esteem mine a very fond piece of
work, full of babble and lies, and I know not what; but yours on the other
side a grave, profound, learned, and super-learned book. But M. Bishop if they
were not forestalled with prejudice, and bewitched thereto with Romish
enchantments, surely they would see that your Epistle to the King is so far
from bringing those urgent and forcible reasons, which you pretend, as that it
consists wholly of mere cauils and calumniations, such and so apparent as
that you have been glad to let it go, because you saw it impossible to defend
it. Gladly would I know of those judicious Readers of yours, how well they like
of your alleging against us the opinion of See the Advertisement concerning D.
Bishops Reproof, sect. 16.
Proclus the Heretic. You have been so hot and so confident in it, as that
having set forth the matter at large, I would willingly hear of them whether
they think you or me more worthy to be thrust into the Asses skin. To let
pass many other matters, you have there tendered to the King diverse
conclusions, drawn from our doctrine, within the compass of a few lines. Of
that that we say, that it is impossible in this state of mortality and
corruption, perfectly to fulfill the law, you infer, Epistle to the King,
sect. 19. 20.
Therefore it is in vain to go about it, therefore it is impossible to have
charity, therefore it is impossible to have faith; therefore it is impossible
for a Protestant cleaving to the grounds of his own religion, to hope for any
salvation. Again, of that that we say that the best work of the righteous
man, is stained with sin, you conclude, Therefore as good to leave all undone
as to do any; therefore all men are bound under pain of damnation, never to
do any good deed. I do but only name those worthy disputes of yours,
referring the Reader to their proper places, to see further the absurd
inconsequence and vanity of them. I might go along your questions of that
part, and put you in mind of a great number of such illations; but I will
content my self to name an argument or two in the last only. To prove the
worshipping of Images Of Images, sect. 16.
you allege out of the Psalm: Cast down your selves before his foote-stoole,
and conclude, that much more Images may be worshipped. Again, to prove that
the Arc was worshipped, you tell us; First, none but the high Priest might
come into the place where it was, and it was carried before the camp with
great solemnity; when they were to fight against the Philistines, they had
great confidence in the presence of the Arc; the Bethshamites were slain for
looking into it; Oza was smitten of God for touching it. You propound first,
that by these things it is evident that the Arc was worshipped, and when you
have set them down, as it were to make your self ridiculous, you demand; Does
not all this convince in what reverence the Arc was had? Anon Sect. 17.
after, for confirmation of the same point, that Images are holy and to be
reverenced, you allege, that the place where Moses stood was holy ground, that
days were called holy and worshipful, that the Priests Vestiments were holy*
from which we wonder how you should dream to derive that conclusion which you
intend. Some man will happily excuse the matter, that being toward the end of
your book, you had spent your wits and knew not well what you said; which we
would easily admit, but that we see that having refreshed your wits again,
your arguments in this book are found to be of the same stamp. I require
example out of the old Testament for the worshipping of Images, and you
answer, that Chap. 4.. 3.
the having of them in the Tabernacle and the Temple (where it was never
thought lawful to set up the Image of a man, but only the Che^ubins, to us
unknown what they were, and the pictures of Lions, and Bulls, and Palm trees,
and Flowers, for garnishing the house) and the sentence of the Psalmist, Adore
ye his foote-stoole, and many such places and resemblances, do very strongly
argue that Images are to be worshipped. To prove the profession of Monkery
amongst the Jews, you tell us out of Josephus of the Essees that were amongst
them, who with the Pharisees and Sadducees, as I have showed, were no other but
Jewish Heretics. For example of Pilgrimages to Relikes and dead men's bones,
you answer us, that all the males amongst the Jews were bound by the law to
go thrice in the year to the Temple of God at Jerusalem. To make good that
you may lawfully pray to have your sins forgiven by the blood of Thomas
Becket, and by the same blood to be brought to heaven, you allege that in the
Psalm it is said, Ibid.. 5.
Lord remember David and all his trouble. To show that St. Paul speaks of the
Mass, you tell us hereafter, that 1. Tim. 2. 1.
he desires that obsecrations, prayers, postulations, thanks-giuings, be made
for all men. What, M. Bishop, do your judicious Catholics of whom you speak,
tell you that they like well of these proofs of yours? And may not we then
think that both you and they have drunk of a spiced or rather an enchanted
cup, that will take such wilful and affected Sophistications, to be very
urgent and forcible reasons? Surely, M. Bishop, with as much wit as you have
told us here, that some Catholics like better of your book then they do of
mine, I might also tell you that many Protestants having seen these your
collections, and our solutions, do pity your Catholics, that suffer
themselves to be gulled and deluded with such reasonlesse reasons, as before I
affirmed them to be. Yea so reasonlesse are they, that when we have showed by
answer, how little reason there is in them, we never doubt to commit them to
the sight of all men. And whereas you ask who are more circumspect then we
are, to keep our followers from the reading of your books, I ask of you,
what cause you your self have to complain in that behalf? Surely, your
books have been very openly and commonly sold; and whereas you say, that we
imprison any that will help to print them, you see your own books printed
for you, and free for all men to buy that are desirous of them. How many other
of your books are there in the same sort common to the view of all men, and by
us made common; our care only being, not to suffer poison to go freely abroad
without a preservative, and therefore having joined answer to them, we leave
every one that list to read at his liberty to judge of both. It would go
amiss with you, M. Bishop, if our books had that free passage amongst you,
that yours have amongst us. Your Kingdom would soon go down, even in Italy
and Spain, if your men had liberty to read our answers, together with your
books. The last part of this passage concerns his delivery of a speech,
uttered by his Majesty at the conference at Hampton Court; That no Church ought
further to separate it self from the Church of Rome in doctrine and ceremony,
then she has departed from her self, when she was in her flourishing and
best estate, and from Christ her Lord and head. In the rehearsal whereof I
note him, that subtly he left out the last words, And from Christ her Lord
and head. He tells me that I show no cause why I do so, and that indeed
none can be showed, because they are needless words, and comprehended in the
former. But we suppose that he needs more understanding, that conceiueth
those words to be needless, which are no otherwise comprehended in the
former, then as the former are expounded by them. For although in right meaning
it be true which he says, that if the Church of Rome be not departed from her
self when she was in her flourishing and best estate, she cannot be
departed from Christ her Lord and head, yet such a meaning he may make of her
flourishing and best estate, as that in that estate she may be found somewhat
to have departed from Christ her Lord and head. His Majesty therefore to
prevent this, with great judgment added, And from Christ her Lord and head, as
to note, that by her departing from Christ her Lord, we are to take knowledge
of her departing from her self, when she was in her flourishing and best
estate, because then was her flourishing and best estate, when she was nearest
to Christ her Lord and head, and most entire in the faith and doctrine, which
she had received from him. Of this flourishing and best estate, we must
consider in the next Chapter, and therefore I cease here to speak any further
thereof.

CHAP. VII. Of the flourishing and best estate of the Church of Rome, and of
the testimony of Theodoret, concerning the fullness of doctrine, contained in
the Epistle to the Romans, and that the Apostle there condemns Popery of
Idolatry, in worshipping of Saints and Images.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

WE hope you will not deny, but the Apostle S. Paul was one principal
pillar, etc. to Chap. 8. Paul says, and we say the same, that, etc.

W. BISHOP.. 1.
WHat a worthy grave Preface he uses, to assure men that we will not deny S.
Paul, nor his Epistle to the Romans, which never were called in doubt by any
man. But good Sir, whiles you muse and busy your head so much upon bables, you
forget or wilfully mistake the very point of the question. Was the Church of
Rome at her most flourishing estate, when S. Paul wrote that Epistle to the
Romans? was her faith then most renowned over all the world, as you write?
nothing less: for not the ten thousand part of that most populous City, was
then converted to the faith; and they that had received the Christian faith,
were very nouices in it, and stood in great need of the Apostles divine
instructions. Any reasonable man would rather judge, that the Church of Rome
then came first to her most flourishing estate, when Idolatry and all kind of
superstition was put to silence, and banished out of her; when the Christian
religion was publicly preached and conntenanced by the Emperors authority,
which was not before the reign of Constantine the Great, our most glorious
countryman: wherefore M. Abbots first fault is, that he shoots far wide
from the mark which he should have aimed at principally. The second is more
nice, yet in one that would seem so acute, not to be excused: It is, that he
takes an Epistle written to the Romans for their instruction and correction,
as if it were a declaration and profession of their faith; when as all men
know, such a letter might contain many things which they had not heard off
before. Further yet, that you may see how nothing can pass his fingers without
some legerdemaine, mark how he englisheth Theodorets words: Dogmatum
pertractationem, The handling of opinions, is by him translated, all points of
doctrine; whereas it rather signifies some, then all opinions or lessons. But
I will let these ouer-sights pass as flea-bitings, and follow him whither he
pleases to wander, that every man may see, when he is permitted to say what he
likes best, that in truth he can allege out of S. Paul, nothing of moment
against the Catholic faith.

R. ABBOT.
We see here what great cause there was that his Majesty should add the
words now spoken off, And from Christ her Lord and head, because it might be
doubted what construction they or any other might make of the flourishing and
best estate of the Church of Rome. I say that St. Paul wrote his Epistle to
that Church, when the faith thereof was most renowned through the world. This
M. Bishop denies, and will not have that to be taken for the flourishing and
best estate of the Roman Church. And why? First, not the ten thousand part of
that most populous City, was then converted to the faith; and secondly, they
who had then received the Christian faith, were very nouices in it, and stood
in great need of the Apostles divine instructions. So then he will have us to
understand, that then was the flourishing and best estate* of the Church of
Rome, when there were in it the greatest number of Christians, and they were so
perfect in the faith as that they needed not the Apostles divine instructions.
But when was that? Not before the reign of Constantine the Great, says he.
Well; and was it then? Nay, he says not so, and we may well think that he
knows not well when, or what to say. Certain it is that Paganism abounded
in Rome after the time of Constantine, who indeed for his time by laws
restrained the public exercise thereof, but yet Relat. Symmach. apud Ambros.
lib. 5. Epist. 30 Diui Consta^tij factum diu non sletit.
that act of his, says Symmachus, did not long stand good; the people
returning to their old superstitions and sacrifices, until that by Theodosius
and Gratian the Emperors of Rome, they were repressed again. Which laws of
theirs Symmachus the Lieutenant of the city, moved the next Emperor
Valentinian in his own name, and in the name of the City and Senate of Rome,
to have again repealed; who Symmach. vt supra. Senatus me querelaru^ suarum
iussit esse I egatum, etc. Vt Praefectus v^ster gesta publica prosequor, and vt
Legatus ciuium mandata commendo.
though he pretended a far greater number of Senators to join with him then
did, as Ambrose shows, yet cannot be doubted to have had a great number also
partakers with him, beside the common multitude of the City, whose affection
how it stood we may gather by that that Hierome says, not much distant from
that time, that Hieron. in Esai lib. 16. c. 57. ^psaque Roma orbi^ Domina in
singulis insulis domibusque Tutela simulachrum cereis venerans ac lucernis,
quam ad tuitionem aedium isto appellant nomine.
Rome in every house did with tapers and candles worship the image of Tutela,
whom they so called for the tuition and defense of their houses, though
elsewhere he testify, that Ide^ ad Marcel. vt commigret Bethlehem. Est ibi
sancta Ecclesia, etc. and gentilitate calcata in sublime se quotidie erigens
vocabulum Christianum.
Paganism was decaying, and the name of Christians arising, and growing higher
and higher from day to day. But if it were yet growing, then it was not at full
growth, and therefore when will M. Bishop say was the most flourishing and best
time of the Church there? Again, we desire to know of him when the time was
that the Church of Rome stood in no need of the Apostles divine instructions?
May we think, M. Bishop, that ever there was any such time? Surely we know now
what the cause is, why the Apostles divine instructions are so little set by at
Rome. They served the Romans forsooth at first, when they were but nouices in
the faith, but now they are grown ripe, and have no need to be taught by him.
May we not think him a wise man, that thus tells us that the Romans then
stood in need of the Apostles divine instructions, as if there were any time
since that they had not the like need? But I would ask him how it appears
to him, that the Romans were then but nouices in the faith? The reason which
his words imply is, because the Apostle wrote that Epistle to them. But so did
he write two Epistles to the Corinthians, of whom notwithstanding he says,
that 1. Cor. 1. 5.
in all things they were made rich in Christ, in all kind of speech, and in
all knowledge. So did he to the Ephesians, Acts 20. 27.
from whom he kept nothing back* but had showed them all the counsel of God.
Yea and of the Romans, the Apostle in that Epistle says, Romans 15. 14.
I am persuaded of you that ye are filled with all knowledge, and are able to
admonish one another; Nevertheless I have somewhat boldly after a sort written
unto you, as one that puts you in remembrance. It should seem then that
they were not nouices in the faith, but fully instructed in all points, and
that the end of the Apostles Epistle was only to keep the remembrance of those
things, which they had been before taught. Of that time Tertullian says, that
Tertul. de Praescript. Foelix Ecclesia cui totam doctrinam Apostoli cum suo
sanguine prosuderunt.
the Apostles Peter and Paul together with their blood poured forth their whole
doctrine, all that they taught, to that Church; and shall we think that when
the Apostles delivered all their doctrine to that Church, that Church did not
receive and learn the same? Of that time we have a more sure and undoubted
testimony, then we can have of times following, that Romans 1. 8.
their faith was renowned throughout the whole world. That therefore do we
hold to be the best state of the Roman Church, and the most flourishing,
because we measure not the flourishing of it by number of professors, or by
glory of outward state, but by integrity of doctrine and truth of faith.
Nevertheless, because flourishing may seem to import a reference to that
outward liberty and exaltation, which that Church as the rest received, by the
reign of Constantine, and enjoyed under other Christian Emperors after him,
therefore his Majesty with great caution and aduisednesse added the other
words spoken of before, to signify that we are so to respect her in that
flourishing estate, as that always for more assurance we have respect to that
that she was at the first, immediately from the Apostles, and from Christ her
Lord and head, the lively picture and description whereof is set forth unto us
in the Epistle to the Romans. Here M. Bishop though he have not yet proved any
first fault, yet takes upon him to note a second, that I take an Epistle
written to the Romans for their instruction and correction, as if it were a
declaration and profession of their faith. Where the Reader sees, that save
only I say the Apostle in that Epistle wrote at large, I say nothing thereof my
self, but report only what Theodoret says, who if he had affirmed that the
Apostle in that Epistle did set down a declaration of the faith, which the
Romans then professed, had said nothing amiss; the care of the Apostle therein
being both to confirm them in the faith which they had received, and to
testify to posterity what that faith was. All men know, says M. Bishop, that
such a letter might contain many things, which they had not heard off before.
But we question not what such a letter might contain, that is an idle and
dreaming supposall of his; but the point is, what we are to think that Epistle
does contain? This I declared by the words of Theodoret, who giving a reason
why the Epistle to the Romans, though written after diverse other; yet was put
in the first place, alleges this to be it, Theodoret. Praefat. Epist. Pauli.
Epistolam ad Romanos praeposuerunt vt quae in se omnis generis doctrinam and
accuratam copiosamque dogmatum pertractationem.
for that it contains doctrine of all sorts, or all kind of doctrine, and
very exact and plentiful handling of the points of faith. This place dazeled
his eyes; he stood astonished at it, and knew not which way to shift. He grew
therefore to a desperate resolution*

^lectere si nequeam superos, Acheronta mouebo: Since God and truth do us forgo
I will try the devil what he can do.
My words in my answer speaking of St. Paul, writing to the Church of Rome,
stand thus; He wrote at large comprehending therein, as Theodoret says, Omnis
generis doctrinam and accuratam copiosamque dogmatum pertractationem; Doctrine
of all sorts, or all kind of doctrine, and very exact and plentiful handling
of the points thereof. He in transcribing my text, sets it down thus,
comprehending therein, as Theodoret says, doctrine of all sorts, or all kind
of doctrine, E^ accuratam copiosamque dogmatum pertractationem, An exact and
plentiful handling of all points thereof. Where note how he purposely leaves
out the Latin words, Omnis generis doctrinam, and whereas in Englishing,
Dogmatum pertractationem, I say, the points thereof, he in steed of, the
points, says, all points thereof. From this latter he frames his miserable
answer, which is only an accusation of me, for legerdemaine in the Englishing
of Theodorets words. And why? Dogmatum pertractationem, The handling of
opinions, says he, is by him translated; all points of doctrine, whereas it
rather signifies some then all opinions or lessons. Thus he ouerslippeth the
words that carry weight and force to the point in question, and to color this
that the Reader may not espy it, he busieth him the while with an opinion of
my false translation; whereas the false translation is none of mine, but by
himself very lewdly foisted in. But the Bear though thus broken loose, must
be brought to the stake again. Remember, M. Bishop, what I told you, and
answer us directly to it. Theodoret says, that the Epistle to the Romans
contains, Omnis generis doctrinam, All kind of doctrine, and does not say it
once only, but says it again, that Idem Praefat. Epist. ad Romans Variam quidem
and omnis generis doctrinam per haec scripta exhibet Apostolus.
the Apostle therein delivers manifold, and not only manifold, but all kind
of doctrine. Now if all kind of doctrine that concerns the Christian faith,
be contained in the Epistle to the Romans, then Popery is not the true
Christian faith, which teaches so many points of doctrine, whereof nothing is
contained in the Epistle to the Romans. Nay, it does not only say nothing for
Popery, but it also says against it, and instructs us to call that apostasy
and heresy, which they falsely call the Catholic faith. Whether any thing be
there to be found of moment to that purpose, we shall see in that that
follows.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
SAint Paul ( says he) is wholy against you, and for us. Quickly said, but
will not be so soon proved. First, he condemns the worshipping of Saints,
and Saints Images, in that he reproves the Heathens, for changing the glory of
the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the Image of a corruptible man. O
noble disputer, and well worthy the whippe! because we may not make false Gods,
or give the glory of God unto Idols, may we not therefore yield unto Saints
their due worship? might not S. Paul whiles he lived, as all other most godly
men, be reverenced and worshipped for their most excellent, spiritual, and
religious virtues, with a kind of holy and religious respect; even as Knights
and Lords, and other worldly men, are worshipped and honored for their
temporal callings, and endowments with temporal worship, without robbing God
of his honor? Is the Lord or Master dishonored and spoiled of his due
reverence and respect, if his servants for his sake be much made off and
respected; yet with such due regard only, as is meet for their degree? This is
so childish and palpable, that if the Protestants were not resolved to stick
obstinately to their errors, how gross soever they be, they would for very
shame not once more name it.

R. ABBOT.
O Noble disputer, says he, and worthy the whippe. Whereby he puts me in
mind, that he has before returned it upon me to be one of the Kings horses,
and indeed Solomon says, that Prou. 26. 3.
to a horse belongs a whippe, but he adds further, that to an Ass
belongs a bridle, and a rod to the fools back. I say in my answer, that
the Apostle to the Romans, condemns Romans 1. 23.
the changing of the glory of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of the
image of a corruptible man, and Verse. 25.
the worshipping of the creature insteede of the Creator. I noted that the
Apostle herein condemns the Church of Rome, which by her schoole-tricks
teaches men to worship God in the image of a man, and by religious devotions
of prayers and offerings, to worship Saints and Saints images in steed of God.
Where thou may see, gentle Reader, that as I cite the Apostles words
double, so I make a double application thereof. Where he condemns the
Heathens for changing the glory of God into the similitude of the image of a
corruptible man, I say, it makes against the Papists, doing the like, in
teaching men to represent and worship God in the similitude and likeness of a
man. Where he notes it for sin in the Heathens, that they worshipped the
creature in steed of the Creator, I say, it condemns the Papists, who
worship Saints and Saints Images, in steed of God. But M. Bishop playing the
part of Danus to set all out of order, takes the former part of the Apostles
words, and puts them to the latter part of my application, making me to say
thus; First, he condemns the worshipping of Saints and Saints images, in that
he reproves the Heathens for changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into
the similitude of the image of a corruptible man. Thus he slippeth by a maine
point of idolatry condemned in the Pagans, and yet defended and practiced by
the Papists, as if his heart failed him, and he saw no way to salve their abuse
against the words of the Apostle. The Apostle gives to understand, that by the
ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome, it was accounted an abominable
wickedness, and an abusing of the Majesty of God, to transform him into the
image of man. The Church of Rome therefore now transforming God in that sort,
and setting him forth to be worshipped in the image of an old man, does that
which was holden abominable in the ancient Church of Rome. What has M. Bishop
here to answer, or what will he say? Will he tell us that the Heathens were to
blame, for that they were false Gods, whom they represented in this sort? But
that the Apostle excludes, in that he notes this as a dishonor done Romans 1.
19. 20. 21. 23.
to the incorruptible God, whom they knew by the creation of the world, whom
they should have glorified: and were punished for that, knowing God they did
not glorify him as God, but turned the glory of the incorruptible God, into
the similitude of the image of a corruptible man; Hieron. in Romans 1. Dicentes
se esse sapientes quasi qui inuenissent quomodo inuisibilis Deus per
simulachrum visibile coleretur.
calling themselves wise, as Hierome says, for that they had devised how the
invisible God might be worshipped by a visible image; even as M. Bishops
wisdom has done, who though he hold Of Images, sect. 7.
that no image is to be made as to represent God to the quick, and as in
himself he is, yet resolves that we may picture God, and resemble him in such
image as he has appeared, or in some similitude represent him by some actions
or properties, whereby to lead our understanding to the better knowledge of
him; whereas the ancient true religion does teach us, that God Origin co^t.
Cells. l. 3. Communis sensus cogitare nos iubet non delectari Deum hoc honor
imaginum quae ^ffigiem eius aut significatione repraesentent aliquam.
is not pleased with the honor of images, which represent either shape or any
signification of him, or Ibid. lib. 7. Quis sanae ment^ no^ rideat cum qui.
etc. Per statuarum contemplationem tanquam signi alicuius conspicui conatur
animu ^rigere ad imaginationem intelligibilis numinis.
whereby to lift up our minds to the cogitation of him. Will he say that the
error of the Gentiles was in this, that they took the very images to be Gods?
But against this we must observe, that the Apostle there speaks of them, who
took themselves to be wise, even the Philosophers and learned men, who scorned
to be taken for such idiots, as to imagine a dead block to be a God. Origin.
co^t. Cells. l. 7. Quis alius nisi sit tot^s fat^us haec deos credit, non dijs
dicatas stat^as.
Who but very fools, says Celsus, take these to be Gods, and not images
dedicated to the Gods? August. in Psalm. 113. Dicunt, Nec simulacbrum nec
d^monium colo sed per corporale effigi^m eius rei signum intueor qua^ colere
deb^o.
I neither worship the image nor the devil, says another, but by the bodily
shape I behold the sign or token of that which I ought to worship. They hold
them to be as it were Athanas. co^t. Idola. Simulachra pro elem^ntis literarum
humano generi esse, quae dum legunt, Dei notitian^ condiscere possiat.
Alphabeticall letters, which men might read, thereby to learn the knowledge
of God, and that Arnob. cont. Gentes lib. 5. Dicere qui conuenit ad incutienda^
for^idmes vulgo deorum (...) a simulac^ra?
they were appointed to terrify the vulgar sort. M. Bishop has no thing to
except against it, but that Pagans and Papists are both alike, and both
condemned by the ancient Roman Church, for changing the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of the image of a corruptible man. But
now for worshipping of Saints and Saints images, he will find somewhat to say,
though it be stark naught. Because we may not make false Gods, says he, or
give the glory of God unto Idols, may we not therefore yield unto Saints their
due worship? Their due worship, says he, when as the thing affirmed against
him is, that no worship is due unto them; and because there is no worship due,
therefore to give them worship, is of Saints in themselves to make them Idols
to us, and to do that which in the other part of the words by me alleged, is
forbidden by the Apostle. For the Apostle speaking Cyril. de rect. side ad
Regin. De his qui adorant creaturam pr^ter creator em^dicit, etc.
of them, as Cyril says, who beside the Creator do worship also the
creature; August. co^t. Faust. l. 14. c. 18 Creaturae culturam damnat Apostolus
dice^s, Et coluerunt and seruierunt creaturae, etc.
Condemns, says Austin, the worshipping of the creature, and Ibid. cap. 11.
Creaturam Dei laudat, and tamen ci cultum religionis exhiberi vetat.
for bids worship of religion to be yielded unto it. Neither is M. Bishop
helped with that which he says of the most excellent, spiritual, and
religious virtues of the Saints, for worship cannot thereby be due to them, who
have the same only by grace and gift, but belongs to him who is the giver
thereof. We cannot doubt but that the Origenists and Arians, when they made
Christ a oreated God, did hold him by endowments and gifts, to be far above
the condition of all other creatures, and yet being supposed to be a creature,
Epiphanius by these words of the Apostle, resolves against Origin that he
ought not to be worshipped. Epiphan. hae^ cs. 64. Quomodoadhuc adorandus erit
si factit^us est? Anser enim indignationem quae est apud sanctum Apostolum
propter cos qui creatura^ velut Deum tractant, and tribue mihi Deum qui
adoratur creat^^, quae non amplius creaturam adorat sed creatore, etc. Omne
enim quod creatu^ est, no^ est adorandu^.
How shall he be worshipped, says he, if he be created; for take away the
wrath which is uttered by the Apostle, as touching such as do use the creature
like God, and show me a created God worshipped according to true faith, which
no longer worshippeth the creature, but the Creator; for nothing that is
created is to be worshipped. So does Athanasius conclude of the Arians, that
Athanas. cont. Arian. Orat. 1. Creaturam asserunt esse Dei verbum, and vt
Ethnici solent cul^um exhibent creaturae, omisso creatore. Cyril de recta fide
ad Regin. Oportebit semper and omnino consiteri quod adhuc pristmi ^rroris
laqueis irretiamur, communi homini sidem exhibentes.
affirming the Word to be a creature, they did after the manner of the Heathens
worship the creature in steed of the Creator. In like sort does Cyril
determine against Nestorius the Heretic, who though he held the manhood of
Christ to be endued with all singular perfections and graces, yet dividing it
from the Godhead, and affirming it notwithstanding to be worshipped and
believed in, is therefore accused of the same Heathenish error. s We must then
conf^sse, says he, that we are yet entangled in the cords of old error,
yielding faith to a common or mere man. Yea the second Nicene Council
charge the same Nestorius expressly with Council. Nicen. ^. act. 7. Epist. ad
Constant. and Iren. Audemus anathematizare etc. Nestorij idololatriam in homine.
idolatry, thus committed in worshipping a man. Now if it be idolatry, and the
same heathenish sacrilege, which the Apostle condemns. to worship Christ
either as a supposed created God, or as a mere man, though of excellent virtue
and grace, then surely it is idolatry, and contrary to the Apostles doctrine,
to worship the Saints, notwithstanding their most excellent, spiritual, and
religious virtues. Of which most excellent, spiritual, and religious virtues,
because he gives us example in Saint Paul, whiles he lived as all other most
godly men, we put him to his choice, either to fall down before such godly men
yet living, and to worship them; to pray and offer to them, as they do to the
Saints, or else to acknowledge his own absurd folly, in alleging to us the
virtues of living men, for warrant of such worship to be done to them, when
they are dead. With us it shall stand good which St. Austin advises; August.
de vera relig. cap. 55. Non sit no^is religio cultus hominum mortu, orum, etc.
Honorandi sunt propter imitationem, non ador^ndi propter religione.
Let it be no religion with us to worship dead men; they are to be honored by
way of imitation, not to be worshipped by way of religion. For albeit men for
their temporal callings be honored, as M. Bishop says, with temporal
worship, without robbing God of his honor, yet to religion this is nothing,
because Ibid ^i vni religantes animas nostras vnde religio dicta creditur.
religion tyeth our souls to God only, as Austin says; Lactant. institut.
lib. 1. c. 20. Religio and veneratio nulla alia nisi vnius Dei tenenda est.
neither are we to hold or maintain any other religion or worship, but to God
only, says Lactantius; Origin co^t. Cols. l. 1. Caetera honor tantum digna,
non etiam cultu and adoratione que nulli creaturae concedi potest sine
diuinitatis ^iuria.
neither can worship (in this sense) be yielded to any creature, says Origin,
without wrong or injury unto God. But here M. Bishop demands of us; Is the
Lord or Master dishonored and spoiled of his due reverence and respect, if his
servants for his sake be much made of and respected, yet with such due regard
only as is meet for their degree? Where we see, that like will to like, and
that a Papist cannot plead for worshipping of Saints, but even as the Pagans
did for their petite Gods. They pleaded for themselves, as Osorius shows,
that Oros. hist. l. 6. cap. 1. Non se plures sequi, sed sub vno Deo magno
plures ministros venerari f^^entur.
they did not follow many, but under one great God did worship many, as his
officers or servants. Now Origin. co^t. Cells. l. 8. ^it ^um qui plures deos
veneretur, hoc ipsorem gratam summo D^o facere, quod nemini honor contingat
nisi quem ille honorari vult. Quapropter qui veneratur eius subditos, non
offendere illum cuius omnes sunt.
he that thus worshippeth many Gods, says Celsus, he does a thing pleasing to
the highest God, for that there is hereby honor given to none, but whom he will
have to be honored, and therefore he that worshippeth his subjects, offends
not him whose they all are. But M. Bishop by Christian learning should
understand, as hitherto has been showed, that God admits no servants of
his to any such communion or fellowship with him, nor can endure that any
servant accept from his fellow servant any part of religious service, which he
requires to be proper to himself alone. Peter notwithstanding all his
religious virtues, takes it not of Cornelius; Acts 10. 26.
Stand up, says he, fir even I my self also am a man. The Angel though more
then a man, admits it not to be yielded to him by St. John; Apoc. 19. 10.
See thou do it not; I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren; worship
God. Cyril cont. Julian. lib. 4. Hi docent honores and adorationem non sibi sed
potius soli summo Deo debere offerri.
They teach us, says Cyril, that honors and adoration or worship, are not to
be offered to them, but only to the highest God. As for M. Bishops addition, as
is meet for their degree, it is but a verbal cover of the idolaters cup. See
of Images sect. 11. and the answer to the Preface of D. Bishops second part,
sect. 12.
They kneel to Saints to worship them, they pray to them, they offer to them,
they give them the honor of Temples and Altars, they keep fasting days and
holy days to them, they swear by them, and what do they not, and then tell
us that they do worship them, but as is meet for their degree. I may say here
as Ambrose says; Ambros. in Romans c. 1. Quasi sit aliquid plus quod reseruetur
Deo.
As though there were any thing more to be reserved to God. Surely those
Christians of whom Leo Bishop of Rome speaks, who retained the superstitious
custom of their Paganism, Leo in Natiuit Dom. ser. 7. No^^ulli Christiani,
etc. superatis gradibus quibus ad suggestum arae superioris ascenditur,
conuerso corpore ad nascentem se solemn reflectunt, and curuatis ceruicibus in
honorem se splendidi orbis inclinant.
to worship the Sun rising, turning themselves back to it, as they went up
the steps to the high Altar, and bowing their heads, and inclining themselves
to the honor of that glorious light, might well have learned of M. Bishop to
excuse and defend this heathenish superstion, for that they put a great
difference, as no doubt they did, betwixt the light and the Creator of the
light, and in honor of the Creator, did worship the Sun, no otherwise then
as was meet for his degree, being such a glorious and goodly creature. But
Ibid. Etsi quidam forte creatorem potius pulchri luminis q^a^ ipsum lume^ quod
est creatura venerantur, abslinendum tame^ est ab ipsa buiusmodi specie
officij, etc. Abijciatur a consuetudine fidelium da^nanda peruersitas nec bonor
vni D^^ debitus cor^ ritibus qui creaturis descruiunt misceatur. D^cit enim
Scriptura diuina: Dominu^ Deum tuum adorabis, etc.
though some of them, says Leo, do perhaps worship the creator of the light,
rather then the light it self which is a creature; yet the very show of this
devotion is to be forborne; let this damnable peruersity be cast away from the
custom of the faithful, and let not the honor due to God only, be blended
with their rites who do service unto creatures; for the holy Scripture says,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve. He
professes such honor in case of religion, to be due unto God alone, and
therefore holds it unlawful, to give so much as the show thereof unto any
creature, and never was acquainted with M. Bishops distinction of worshipping
creatures, as is meet for their degree. Neither was Hierome acquainted with
it; for if he were, he spoke fondly when he said; Hieron. ad Ripar. Ne solemn
quidem and luna^, non Angelos, non Archangelos, non Cherubim, non Seraphim, and
omne nome^ quod nominatur and in praesenti seculo and in futuro colimus and
adoramus, ne seruiamus creaturae potius quam creatori qui est Deus benedictus
in secula.
We neither worship Sun nor Moon, neither Angels nor Archangels, neither
Cherubim nor Seraphim, nor any name that is named in this world, or in the
world to come, least we serve the creature rather then the Creator, who is God
blessed for ever. Yes, says M. Bishop, we worship them as is meet for their
degree, though not in the highest degree. But either Hierome disclaimeth this,
or else he speaks very idly when he thus wholly denies to worship them,
and yet means to worship them in some degree. For conclusion, I would gladly
know how M. Bishop fitteth that last part of his speech to the Images of
Saints, because we have here to do with them also. What, must we think that
as the Saints are servants to God, and therefore to be worshipped for Gods
sake, so the Images of Saints are servants to them, and to be worshipped for
their sakes? Let us then say also, that the Sexton is servant to the Image,
because he brusheth off the dust and keeps it clean, and therefore the
Sexton is to be worshipped for the Images sake. And I. S. is servant to the
Sexton and helps him so to do, and therefore I. S. is to be worshipped for
the Sextons sake. I have derided this dotage of his Of Images, sect. 11.
before, and thither I refer the Reader: I only note here how truly the holy
Ghost having spoken of Idols, said; Psalm. 115. 8.
They that make them are like unto them, and so are all they that put their
trust in them.

CHAP. VIII. That justification before God consists not in proceeding from
faith to works, but in the continuation of faith to faith, and that this faith
notwithstanding cannot be separated from charity and good works.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

PAul says, and we say the same, that the righteousness of God is from faith
to faith, etc. to Chap. 9. The Apostle in express terms affirms, etc.

W. BISHOP.
THe sentence of S. Paul is mangled, his words are: for the justice or
righteousness of God is revealed therein, ( in the Gospel) by faith into
faith; which are obscure and subject to diverse expositions. The most common is,
that Christ (the justice of God) is revealed in the Gospel, by conferring the
faith of them that lived before the Gospel, with their faith that lived under
it; the faith of them who live in the Gospel, giving great light for the
clearer understanding of such things, as were taught of Christ more darkely in
the law and Prophets. This being the literal sense of this place, what is here
for man's justification by only faith? where only mention is made of Gods
justice, and not one word of the imputation of it to man, but of the revelation
of it in the Gospel. What a foul mistaking is this? alas, his poverty of
spirit, and want of good armor, compels him to lay hand on any weapons, how
simple and weak soever. In the next verse, it is plainly showed, that God did
grievously punish all them who lived wickedly, notwithstanding they held the
right faith, for (says S. Paul) the Romans 1. verse. 18.
wrath of God from heaven is revealed upon all impiety and unrighteousness, of
those men that retain or hold the truth of God in injustice. Whence it
follows first, that men may have a true faith without good works, for they
held the truth of God being themselves wicked. Secondly, that the same faith
would not avail them ought, nor save them from the just wrath of God, if it
were not quickened by good works.

R. ABBOT.
I Am not ignorant that there are many expositions made of those words of the
Apostle, which all or the most part are to be found in the collections of
Oecumen. in Romans 3.
Oecumenius, and in Tho. Aquin. in Romans 1. Lect. 6.
Thomas Aquinas, his Commentary upon that place; who notwithstanding ( Aquinas
I mean) either omitteth that which is most likely and warrantable above all
the rest, or else expresses it not in such sort as were convenient. M. Bishop
tells us, that the exposition which he has brought, is the most common,
whereas I am persuaded, that as he has set it down, he can bring no author
of it but himself only. For although it be true that some construe it to be
meant, from the faith of the old Testament, to the faith of the new, yet they
apply the same to far other purpose then he does. Some will have it that the
Apostle would signify that it is faith, that justifies and saves both in the
old and new Testament, so that the change from the old to the new, is but from
faith to faith, that is, in effect no change. This Thomas Aquinas expresses
thus; Tho. Aquin. vt supra. Ex side in fidem, id est, ex fide veteris
testamenti procedendo in fidem noui testamenti, quia ab vtroque homines
iustifica^tur and saluantur per fidem Christi, quia cadem side crediderunt
ventur^ qua nos venisse credimus.
From faith to faith, that is, from faith of the old Testament, proceeding to
faith of the new, because on both sides men are justified, and saved by the
faith of Christ, for that by the same faith they believed that Christ should
come, whereby we believe that he is come. Some other understand it of
proceeding from faith, whereby we believe the Scriptures of the Prophets and
old Testament, to faith, whereby to believe the Gospel. For Theodoret. and
Oecumen. in Romans 3. Ex side in fidem; Oportet enim credere Prophetis and per
illos deduci ad fidem Euangelij.
we must believe the Prophets, says Theodoret, and after him Oecumenius, and
by them be brought to the faith of the Gospel. This I gh^sse it was that M.
Bishop aimed at, but he peruersly applies it to light given by the new
Testament to the old, which was meant by his authors of confirmation given by
the old Testament to the new. This literal sense therefore of his being
neither literal nor sense, but a blind conceit of his own skonce, let us
consider what we may most truly take to be the meaning of that place. The
Apostle propounding, that Romans 1. 16.
the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes,
adds for declaration and proof thereof, that in it or by it the
righteousness of God is reueiled (...), from faith to faith. M. Bishop to
obscure and darken the place, translateth as his Masters of Rhemes have given
him example, by faith into faith; to which we may wonder, how he can devise to
fit the exposition which he himself has set down. But it appears by that
which I cited out of Thomas Aquinas, that the phrase which the Apostle uses,
imports a proceeding, and therefore that by the one preposition must be
understood terminus a quo, the term of beginning, and the other must determine
the progression and the end, to sound even as we translate, from faith to
faith. And this is very expressly and clearly justified by Oecumenius, out of
the Greek expositours, setting down the effect of St. Paul's words thus;
Oecumen. in Romans 3. Ex fide in fidem, quia and in side incipit and in fidem
terminari debet.
It is to begin in or with faith, and in faith to be determined. Hereto
accord almost all the expositions that are made of that place; which cannot
fitly be expressed but by that form of speech; from the faith of God
promising, to the faith of man believing; from the faith of the old Testament,
to the faith of the new; from the faith of the Preacher, to the faith of the
hearer; from the faith of one article, to the faith of another; from faith
present, to faith to come; to all which M. Bishop can as ill fit Clem. Alexand.
strom. l. 5. sub initio. Videtur Apost^lus duplicem fidem annunciare; potius
vero vnam annunciat quae augmentum susc^pit and perfectionem.
by faith into faith, as he can to his own sense. For further manifestation
hereof, we are to note the like phrase in other places of holy Scripture, as
where the Prophet David says; Psalm. 84. 7.
They shall go (...), as the Septuagint translate, that is, from strength to
strength. So the Apostle speaks, though by the preposition (...) in steed of
(...), yet to the same effect, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
We are changed into the same image, (...), from glory to glory: where the
Rhemists translating from glory unto glory, might have learned to translate
here, from faith unto faith, but that they were peruersly bent for their own
advantage, to make the Apostles words less sensible then in themselves they
are. Now therefore as in these places the holy Ghost notes by that form of
speech, a continuation and increase of strength and glory, so in the other he
imports a continuation of faith, and a proceeding and growing therein, to
greater and stronger faith. Thus does Ciemens Alexandrinus construe it, saying;
The Apostle seems to speak of a double faith, but he speaks rather of one,
receiving increase and perfection. Theophyl. in Romans 1. Neque enim sat est
priores fidem hanc excepisse, sed erit etiam fidei huius ductu ad persectiorem
credulit^tem progre^i^^dum, ad im^^otu^ (...) and (...) firmament^^, qu^nta
(...) and (...) Dom (...).
For it is not enough, says Theophylact, to receive this faith at first, but
by the guiding of this faith we are to go forward to more perf^ct belief,
even to immovable and firm assurance, to which purpose the Apostles used
these words to the Lord, Increase our faith. And to this agrees that which
Oecumenius says, Oecumen. in Romans 3. Hoc D^^ (...) est (...) n^m (...)tate
excedentis, ex sola videlicet fide nos peccatis ianc mortuos viuisicar^a^
s^scitare, etc. Verum ad quid viuisicatur, inquit, qui credidit? Ad
perfect^ssimam fide and immutabi^e habitus fortitudinem. Nam ex side in fidem
est viuificatio.
This is the property of the justice of God, exceeding the kindness of man,
even by faith only to quicken and raise us up that are dead in sins. And
whereto is he quickened that has believed? To most perfict faith and
unchangeable strength of the habit thereof. For our quickening is from faith to
faith. Here is then the justice of God, that is, the justification of man
before God, described by the Apostle, that it begins with faith, and goes
forward by faith, and is more and more to be apprehended by increase and growth
of faith. It is begun by faith only, and because the proceeding and
perfecting thereof is according to the beginning, from faith to faith,
therefore it is consummate and perfect in faith only. And this phrase of speech
the holy Ghost seems to have directed purposely against the error of the
Papists; who though they acknowledge the beginning of justification to be by
faith, yet determine the process and perfection thereof to consist in works,
so that our justification with them is not according to the words of the
Apostle, from faith to faith, but contrary to the doctrine of the Apostle, from
faith to works. Bellarm. Recognit. lib. de Iustificat. Charitas vere and
absolute formalis iustitia est, etc. fides proprie and simpliciter iustificat
per modum dispositionis; for^ maliter autem simpliciter and absolute non iusti^
ficat.
Charity, says Bellarmine, is truly and absolutely formal righteousness;
faith properly and simply justifies in manner of a disposition, but simply and
absolutely it does not justify formally. And again, Ide^ Recog. lib. de Great.
and lib. Arbit. Qua^uis fides and spes necessario requirantur ad
iustificationem, tame^ id quod verissime proprijssimeque iustificat tanquam
vnica formalis causa charitas est.
Although faith and hope be necessarily required to justification, yet charity
is it which most truly and properly justifies as the only formal cause. So
then where the Apostle says, that Romans 3. 22.
the righteousness of God is by the faith of Jesus Christ, and that Verse. 30.
God justifies by faith, we must think that he speaks improperly, he
speaks not formally, neither does he name that wherein the justification of
man most truly consists. Thus do they take upon them as the old Heretics
did, to be Iren. lib. 3. cap. 1. Audent dicere gloriantes emendatores se esse
Apostolorum.
correctours of the Apostles, to reform their ouersights, and to better their
terms and phrases, even where they speak most uniformly and constantly, to
deliver the doctrine of true faith. But we will not hearken to them, nor be led
by them, but rather take that which the Apostle teaches us, that the
justification before God which is taught us by the Gospel, is from faith to
faith, that it begins in faith, and continues in faith, and from the
beginning to the end, consists in faith only. And hereto agrees that which
the Apostle says elsewhere; Gal 2. 16.
We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles, knowing that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, even we have believed in Christ that we might (or may) be justified by
the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, because by the works of
the law no flesh shall be justified. Where we see the process of
justification, plainly described as we have said, from faith to faith, the
Apostle professing to have believed in Christ, not thenceforth to be justified
by works as Popery teaches, but to be justified by faith, because being now
believers they knew that by the works of the law no flesh should be justified.
And this meaning is further confirmed by the proof which the Apostle brings
of the words, whereof we speak; Habac. 2 4.
as it is written, says he, The just shall live by faith. For although those
words of the Prophet do seem to attribute justification and life to faith,
yet no otherwise do they infer it to be from faith to faith, but in that
sort as I have said. Certain it is that but by faith no man can attain to be
called a just man, and therefore in the very name of the just, is an
implication of faith. The Prophet then teaches, that a man being by faith
become a just man, is not thenceforth to expect life by his justice, but to go
on from faith to faith; the just, says he, shall live, not by his justice, but
by his faith. For this cause does he express it, not by the present, The just
does live, as the vulgar corruptly reads, but by the future tense, The just
shall live by faith, as to note that the justice of God, that is, the justice
for which God accepts and justifies us, as it began, so proceeds even to
the attainement of everlasting life, not by works, but by faith only. And of
all this we have a notable example in our father Abraham, who is set before us
as the pattern and example of all the faithful, of whom after that Genesis 12.
1. 2, etc. Heb. 11. 8.
by faith he had obeyed God, to go out of his own Country, and had wrought
many works of justice and righteousness, yet to show this continuation of the
righteousness of God, from faith to faith, it is said; Genesis 15. 6.
Abraham believed the Lord, and he counted that to him for righteousness. He
was not first justified by faith, to be afterward justified by works, but
still his faith was it for which he was reputed righteous in the sight of God.
By all this then we see a direct opposition betwixt the doctrine of the ancient
Roman Church, and the doctrine of the Papists. The Papists say that the
righteousness of God begins with faith, but the perfection thereof is in
works, and that it consists most properly and truly in the righteousness of
works, and that the just man though he become just by faith, yet must
afterward with God be justified, and attain to life by works. But the old
Church of Rome was far otherwise minded, that justification before God
begins in faith, and is determined in faith, and that the just man, be he
never so just, must live, not by his justice, but by his faith; it being true
of just men, as Hierome tells us, which is said, Hieron. adu. Pelag. l 2. Pro
nihilo, inquit, saluos faciet illos: haud dubiu^ qum iustos, qui no^ proprio
merito sed Dei saluantur clementia.
He will save them for nothing, as who are saved, not by their own merit,
says he, but by the mercy of God. For Gregor. Moral. l. 8. c 9. Iusti
perituros se absque ambiguitate praesciunt si remota pietate iudice^tur, quia
hoc ipsum quoque quod just videmur viu^re culpa est si vita^ nostram cum
iudicat, hanc apud se diuina miserecordia non excusat.
just men, says Gregory, know beforehand that they shall perish without doubt,
if God set mercy aside in the judging of them, because even that which seems
our just life is but sin, if Gods mercy, when he judges it, do not excuse
the same. Hitherto then it appears that I want no armor or weapons to fight
against him; yea who sees not him rather to be a beggarly companion, who
takes upon him to contradict me upon no other but only his own word? As for
poverty of spirit, he shows his profaneness in jesting at it* because
Christ has pronounced a blessing to it; Mat. 5. ^.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. But now
before he give over that text, he will find a weapon there to fight against
me. In the next verse, says he, it is plainly showed that God did grievously
punish all them who lived wickedly, notwithstanding they held the right faith.
The words of that verse are these; Verse. 18:
The wrath of God is reueiled from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withold the truth in unrighteousness. Where
it being manifest that the Apostles words have reference to Gentiles and
Heathens, who had no knowledge of God, but only by natures light, the Apostle
accusing them for suppressing and drowning even that which they understood, or
might understand, by the creation of the world, I might question with what
discretion it is that M. Bishop attributes unto them, the holding of the right
faith. But not to trouble my self or the Reader further then is needful, I
let that pass, and look to his inferences that he makes out of those words.
Whence it follows first, says he, that men may have a true faith without
good works. Which though it have no manner of sequel from the Apostles
words, there being nothing, as I have said, which imports the having or
holding of true faith, yet with great opportunity he mentions, because he
gives me occasion to show that though the righteousness of God be only from
faith to faith, yet that faith wherein this righteousness consists, never
is, nor can be without due correspondence of good works and godly life. And to
this belongs that which the Apostle says, that Romans 3. 31.
by faith we establish the law; because we do not by faith establish the law,
if we preach such a faith as may stand with the contempt of the law, and
wilful neglect of the commandments of God. Surely if faith may be without
charity, and it be by an after-supply of charity, that we have the will to
keep Gods commandments, then should not the Apostle say that by faith, but
rather by charity we establish the law. But because without says there is no
charity, and charity is the necessary sequel of the regeneration of faith,
therefore the Apostle rightly says, that by faith we establish the law, as
whereby we Gal. 3. ^4. Ezech. 36. 26. 27
receive the promise of the spirit of God, the effect and Gal. 5. 22.
fruit whereof is charity, whereby Romans 7. 22.
we delight in the law of God, as touching the inward man, and are grieved at
the remainder of carnal concupiscence, whereby we are hindered, that Gal. 5.
17.
we cannot do the things that we would. The faith which the Gospel teaches
is that and no other, whereof we read, that Acts 15. 9.
by faith God purifieth our hearts, which is called, Gal. 5. 6.
faith working by love, of which St. John says; 1. John 3. 3.
Every one that has this hope, purges himself even as he is pure; Ephesians. 3.
17.
by which Saint Paul again says, that Christ dwells in our hearts; and Romans
8. 10.
if Christ be in you, says he, the body is dead as touching sin, but the
spirit is life for righteousness sake. As for that faith which is without
works, it is by equivocation only called faith, as the picture of a man is
called a man; this being yielded to custom of speech, and to the conceit of
men, who give names oftentimes for semblance and show, where there wants the
substance and truth of them. To which purpose the words of Leo Bishop of Rome,
are very remarkable; Leode Quadrages. sermon. 7. Charitas robur fidei, fides
fortitudo est charitatis, and tunc verum nomen, and verus est fructus ambarum
cum insolubilis man^t vtriusque co^nexio. Vbi enim non simul fuerint, simu
desunt, quia in^icem sibi and inuam^n and lumen sunt donec desiderium
credulitatis impleat remuneratio visionis, and incommutabiliter videatur and
ametur quod nunc and sine side non dilig^tur, and sine dilectione non creditur.
Charity is the strength of faith, and faith is the strength of charity, and
then is there the true name and the true fruit of both, when there abides an
ins^parable conjunction of them: for where they are not both together, they are
both wanting, because they are the help and light each of other; until reward
of seeing fulfill the desire of believing, and that be unchangeably beholden
and loved, which now is neither loved without faith, nor believed without love.
Where we see a difference signified by Leo, betwixt the true name of faith, and
that which is vulgarly termed faith; so that though sometimes we speak of
faith without works, applying the name of faith to the outward profession of
faith, as he himself also does, yet Idem de Collect. and eleemos. sermon. 4.
Multis quibus auserre non potuit fidem, sustulit charitatem, and agro cordis
ipsorum auaritiae r^dicibus occupato, spoliauit fructu operum quos non priuauit
cons^ssione labiorum.
the true name of faith is not appliable, where there is not charity joined
with it, neither can there be true belief where there is no love. Hereto
accords Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 22. Fidem, Spem, Charitatem, ^tque operatione^
quamdiu in hac vita viuimus aequales sibi esse apud nosmetipsos inuenimus, etc.
Nam nunc and quantum credimus, tantum amamus, and qua^tum amamus, tantum de spe
praesumimus. De fide quoque and operatione Ioannes Apostolus fa^etur dicens,
Qui se dicit nosse Deum, etc. Notitia quippe Dei ad fide pertinet, mandatorum
custodia ad operationem. Cum ergo vi^tus, and tempus, and locus operandi
suppetit, tanto quis operatur, qua^to Deum nouerat, and tantu^ se nosse Deum
indicat, quantum pro Deo bona operatur, etc. Vnusquisque qui in hoc vitae
exercitio versatur tantum credit, quantum sperat and amat: and tantum operatur.
quantum credit, amat and sperat.
also Gregory Bishop of Rome; We find, says he, that faith, hope, charity,
and good works, so long as here we live are equal in us. For look how much
we believe, so much also we love; and how much we love, so much we presume of
hope. Of faith and works also St. John confisseth, saying, He that says, he
knows God and keeps not his Commandments is a liar. For the knowledge of
God appertains to faith; the keeping of the Commandments to works. When
therefore power and time and place of working serves, so much does a man work
as he knows God, and so much does he show himself to know God, as he works
good things for Gods sake. To be short, every one, says he, that is conversant
in this exercise of life, believes so much as he hops and loves; and look
how much he believes, hops, loves, so much he works. These words are
plain enough, and yet the words of Sixtus the third, if that be his which
they have lately published under his name, are somewhat more plain. Sixth. 3.
Epist. de malis Doctor. and oper. fidei. etc. Biblioth. sanct. Patrum tom. 5.
Intelligere no^ norunt vbicunque fidei fructus non sit, ill^^ quoque nec ipsam
fidem esse credendam. Caeterum quis prudens addubitet, vbi fides sit, ill^^
esse and ^^morem? and vbi timor sit, illic esse and obedientiam, and vbi
obedientia sit, illi^ esse and i^stitiam* sicut ^ cont^ario vbi iustitia non
sit, illic nec obedientiam, nec timorem esse nec fidem? Ita enim haec sibi
inuic^m sociata atque connexa sunt, vt diuisa penitus esse non possint.
Wheresoever is not the fruit of faith, says he, it is not to be believed that
there is faith. What wise man doubts, but that where faith is, there is also
fear? and where fear is, there is obedience; and where obedience is, there is
righteousness? as on the contrary, where righteousness is not, there is
neither obedience, nor fear, nor faith? For so are these coupled and joined
together, as that they cannot in any wise be divided. The collection from these
testimonies is very manifest, neither need I to declare it, but very plainly
we see the ancient doctrine of the Church of Rome according with ours, and
condemning as we do the Popish separation that now is made betwixt faith and
works. Thus then M. Bishops first conclusion is fallen to the ground, and as
for the second it deserves not to be stood upon, because it is no wonder that
faith auailed them naught, nor saved them from the wrath of God, in whom it
appears by that that has been said, that there was no faith.

CHAP. IX. That the justification of man before God, is the imputation of
righteousness without works.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

THe Apostle in express terms affirms imputation of righteousness without
works, etc. to, Paul teaches that eternal life, etc.

W. BISHOP.
WE hold with the Apostle, that works be not the cause of the first
justification, whereof he there treats, nor to deserve it; though inspired
with Gods grace, they do prepare us and make us fit to receive the gift of
justification: neither do the Protestants wholly exclude works from this
justification, when they do require true repentance, which consists of many
good works, as necessary thereto. We hold that justice is increased by good
works, which we call the second justification; against which the Apostle
speaks not a word, but does confirm it when he says in the same Epistle:
Not the hearers of Romans 2. verse. 13.
the law are just with God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Mark
how by doing of the law (which is by doing good works) men are justified with
God, and not only declared just before men, as the Protestants gloss the
matter. Now, touching imputation of See the place, Romans 4. verse. 6.
righteousness, the Apostle speaks not like a Protestant, of the outward
imputation of Christ's justice to us, but of inherent justice, to wit; of faith
which works by charity, which are qualities powered into our hearts Romans 6.
by the holy Ghost: so that there is only a bare sound of words for the
Protestants, the true substance of the Text making wholly for the Catholics.

R. ABBOT.
CVrsed is the gloss, they say, that corrupts the Text, but more accursed is
the gloss, which to corrupt the text dissembleth and concealeth the words of
it. I set down the imputation of righteousness without works, all in a
special letter, as the words of the Apostle. M. Bishop in that special
letter sets down imputation of righteousness, and no more, but without
works, he adds in the common letter, as if they were mine only, and not the
Apostles words; knowing that his devoted Reader, who he knew would not look
into the Text it self, should hereby fail to see both the force of the words,
and the simpleness of his answer. And with the like fraud it is that in the
margent of his answer, he sets down, see the place, Romans 4. verse. 6. as to
insinuate to his Reader, that if he see the place, he shall there see somewhat
for his turn, whereas he knows that his Catacatholikes, for whose sakes he
writes, to keep his credit with them, would hold it sacrilege for them, to
go about to see the place, for fear least the handling of the new Testament
should make them turn Protestants; neither durst he set down the words
himself, least they should even by this text grow to suspicion of his dealing
with them. But I will do that for him which he himself durst not do, the
words of the Apostle being these: Romans 4. 5. 6.
To him that works not, (that is, says Photius, Phot. apud Oecumen. in Romans
4. Ei qui ab operibus siduciam non habet.
to him who has no confidence by works) but believes in him that justifies
the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, even as David pronounces
the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness without
works; Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are
covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not sin. In which
words we see how the Apostle affirms accordingly as I said, an imputation
of righteousness without works; which he expresses to be the reputing of
faith for righteousness, for that thereby we obtain remission and
forgiveness of sins. To this M Bishop answers, that they hold with the
Apostle, that works be not the cause of the first justification, nor do
deserve it, though inspired with Gods grace, they do prepare us and make us
fit to receive the gift of justification. Where I wish it first to be noted,
how he makes works before the first justification, to be inspired with Gods
grace, whereas they hold the first justification to be the first infusion of
the grace of God. Now they hold works before the first justification, not to
be properly meritorious, and yet that works proceeding from Gods grace, are
properly d^sertfull and meritorious, so as that we are come to have grace
before grace, and works meritorious before they be meritorious, and I know not
what, for what the painter list, that must stand upon the wall. But to let this
pass, his answer to the place is otherwise, idle and impertinent; for though
he See of Justification, sect. 21.
tell us, which yet he tells us falsely and against himself, that works be
not the cause of the first justification, nor do deserve it, yet he does not
tell us that either the first or the second justification is the imputation of
righteousness without works, which is the thing by the Apostle spoken of. For
in the imputation of righteousness without works, what is it that is reputed
for righteousness? Faith, says the Apostle, is reputed for righteousness.
Tell us then M. Bishop; is faith with you reputed for righteousness without
works? Spit out, man, and tell us, whether in your first or second
justification you hold that a man for his faith is reputed righteous without
works? This the Apostle teaches, and do you teach the same? No forsooth,
says he, I dare not say so; though the Apostle taught the Romans so, when they
were nouices in the faith, yet that now serves not our turn. Consider it
well, gentle Reader, and thou shall see that his answer is a mere mockery,
and gives no satisfaction to the point. And that it may appear further so to
be, it is to be noted how the Apostle brings David for a witness, of that he
says; who having been long a faithful and justified man (that M. Bishop may
have no shift by his pretense of the first justification) yet still out of his
own present occasioned experience and feeling, pronounces, as the Apostle
says, the blessedness of the man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works. He was in great distress and affliction of bodily sickness,
and in that misery he lay until God had thoroughly humbled him, and brought him
to true and faithful acknowledgement and confession of his sin. Upon this
confession and repentance God remitteth the sin, and mercifully releaseth him
from the grievous punishment that had lien upon him, and hereupon he breaks
out into those words which the Apostle cites; Psalm. 32. 1.
Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered;
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Now therefore to speak
of a man in the state of grace, as David was, this is his bliss, even the
forgiveness of his sins, which is through faith, the imputation of
righteousness without works. And for further confirmation hereof, David
having so spoken of himself, adds in general; Verse. 6.
For this shall every holy man make his prayer unto thee. For this, that is, as
Austin says, August* in Psalm. 31. Pro qua hac? Pro ipsa vema peccatorum.
for the forgiveness of sins. And if the forgiveness of sins be as the
Apostle expounds it, the imputation of righteousness without works, then
the prayer of every holy man, of every one that is godly, is this, that not
having works whereby to be justified, he may by faith in Christ be reputed
righteous, and accepted in the sight of God. Here we have M. Bishop fast tied,
neither is there any way for him to break loose, because by comparing the
Prophets words and the Apostles application thereof, we find, that the holy
or godly man looks for bliss, by imputation of righteousness without
works. Even the holy man prays with David a holy man; Psalm. 143. 2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord; for in thy sight no man
living shall be found just; and therefore prays again as David by the
exposition of the Apostle, has taught the holy man to pray, that faith may be
counted to him for righteousness; that the Lord will impute to him
righteousness without works. Of this imputation of righteousness without
works, St. Austin says; August. Retract. l. 1. c. 19. Omnia mandata facta
deputantur quando quicquid non sit ignoscitur.
All the commandments of God are reputed as done, when that is pardoned which
is not done. And again; Ide^ in Psalm. 118. Conc. 3. In via side^ pro non
peccantibus habentur qu^bus peccata non imputantur.
In the way of faith they are reckoned for no sinners (and therefore are
reputed just) who have not their sins imputed unto them. Thus Bernard says,
that Bernard. in Cant. sermon. 22. Iustitia in absolutione peccatorum.
Christ is made unto us righteousness in the forgiveness of our sins, and
that Ibid. ser. 23. Hominis iustit^^ indulgent^a Dei.
Gods pardon is man's righteousness. To the like purpose it is that Ambrose
says; Ambros. in Psalm. 118. ser. 7. Potest p^^^at^r ho^ ipso iustus esse q^^a
accusator est ^^i.
A sinner may even hereby be just, for that he is the accuser of himself. And
so says Gregory Bishop of Rome; Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 7. Iustus aduocatus
noster iust^s nos d^fendet ^^ iudicio quia (...) ipsos and cognos^^mus and
accusamus iniustes; Non ergo in s^etibus, non in actibus nostris, sed in
aduocati nostri allegatione considamus.
Our just Advocate will in judgment defend us for just, because we know and
accuse our selves to be unjust, and therefore let us not put confidence in our
tears, or in our works, but in our Advocates allegation or intercession for
us. If as touching works, we know and confess our selves to be unjust, and
yet notwithstanding be defended in judgment to be just, what can our justice
be, but the imputation of justice without works? Against this M. Bishop
alleges, that we do not wholly exclude works from justification, because we
require true repentance, which contains many good works, as necessary
thereto. But of this he has received answer Of Justification, sect. 25.
before, that repentance does only make the subject capable of justification,
but is it self no part or cause thereof; that it is as the feeling and pain
of a wound or sore, which causes to seek the medicine for cure and ease, but
it self heals not; that it is as hunger and thirst, which feed not the
body, but provoke the seeking of the meat, whereby it is fed. The penitent man
touched in conscience with the guilt of sin, and seeing thereby the misery
that lies upon him by Gods anger and indignation, denounced against the same,
because he finds nothing in himself or in his own works to help himself,
does therefore betake himself to Jesus Christ, that through faith he may find
in him that justification, which is the imputation of righteousness without
works. Thus is Gal. 3. 24.
the law our Schoolmasters unto Christ, that we may be justified by faith. For
Romans 3. 20.
by the law is the knowledge of sin; Romans 4. 15.
the law works wrath; the law makes it to appear, that Romans 3. 23.
all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God. This true repentance
believes and acknowledges, and thereupon flies to the Sanctuary, which God
has provided, Verse. 24.
We are justified freely by his grace, through the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth to be an atonement or reconciliation
through faith in his blood. As for the good works which M. Bishop says, are
contained in true repentance, they are the fruits of repentance, not the parts
of it; or rather the effects of that faith, whereby repentance becomes true
repentance, August. Epist. 120. Ex hoc quippe incipiunt opera bona ex quo
iustificamur, non quia pr^^esserunt iustificamur.
having their beginning then when we are justified, not going before that we
should be justified thereby. Now what they hold concerning the second
justification, it skilleth not to us; we know they hold many things which they
might very well let go. He tells us that the Apostle speaks not a word
against it, and we tell him that it is a sufficient reason for us to deny it,
because the Apostle treating purposely and at large of justification, says not
a word for it. Albeit it is untrue which he says, that the Apostle says not a
word against it; because he defines, as I have showed, the justification of
the just and godly man (to whom they refer their second justification) to be
the imputation of righteousness without works. As for the words of the
Apostle which he alleges, Romans 2. 13.
Not the hearers of the law are just with God, but the doers of the law shall
be justified, they are far from the intendment of their second justification.
The Apostle though he speak not of their first and second justification, yet
speaks of two kinds of justification, the one presumed of man, the other
taught and given of God; the one pertaining to the Law, the other to the
Gospel; the one by works, the other by faith. The Jews presumed of
justification by the works of the law; they greatly gloried in their name and
in the law; they attributed much to themselves above all other, for having the
use and knowledge of it, and thought the Gentiles in that behalf much
inferior unto them. But the Apostle tells them, that Verse. 11.
there is no respect of persons with God, and therefore if they sinned, no
prerogatives otherwise could acquit them from his wrath. For as on the one
side, Verse. 12.
as many as have sinned without the law, says he, shall perish also without
the law; so on the other side, as many as have sinned in the law, shall be
judged by the law, that is, shall receive that judgment that is pronounced by
the law. For confirmation whereof he adds the words which M. Bishop cites;
Verse. 13.
For the hearers of the law are not just before God, but the doers of the law
shall be justified; thereby signifying that to have the law, or to be formal
and zealous in the hearing of it, is not that that suffices to make a man
righteous with God; and if any man would be justified by the law, he must be a
doer of it, but if he were a trespasser, and sinned against the law, he could
not be justified thereby. For the voice of the law is, Gal. 3. 12.
He that does these things shall line therein, and Romans 10. 5.
Moses thus describes the righteousness of the law, Leuit. 18. 5.
that the man that does these things, shall live therein. Which doing, to what
measure and perfection it must extend is to be known by that sentence, which
the Apostle recites out of the law; Gal. 3. 10.
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them. It is true then, that the doers of the law shall
be justified, who denies it? but they only are doers of the law, which
continue to do all things that are written in the law. What is here then to M.
Bishops second justification, when as this justification by the law requires
the doing of all, and of us even the best, it is true, that Jam. 3. 2.
in many things we offend all, and that Eccles. 7. 22.
there is not a man just upon the earth that does good and sins not? Yea how
crosly does he deal, that whereas the Apostle uses these words to convince
Romans 3. 9.
the Jews of sin, and to beat down their pride in opinion of
righteousness by the law, he alleges them to uphold himself in the same
pride, and to defend thereby justification by the law? Mark, says he, how by
doing of the law men are justified with God. It is true, M. Bishop, and be you
a doer of the law, and you shall be justified thereby. But take heed least
whilst you take upon you to be a doer of the law, there be found sin in you.
If there be sin in you, you are not a doer, but a trespasser of the law, and
must fear the reward of sin, and ^^m. 6. 23.
the reward of sin is death. That made the Apostle say, that Gal. 3. 10.
so many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse; Cap. 5. 4.
they being voided from Christ, and fallen from grace, whosoever are justified
by the law. Therefore he des^red for himself, that (...) 3. 9.
he might be found in Christ, not having his own righteousness which is of
the law, but the righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, the
righteousness which is of God through faith; even that which he calls in the
place here questioned, the imputation of righteousness without works. But
touching imputation of righteousness, M. Bishop says, that the Apostle
speaks not like a Protestant, of the outward imputation of Christ's justice
unto us, but of inherent justice. Where it is much to be observed, to what good
issue this exposition sorteth, and how reasonably it stands with the Apostles
words. For if the imputation of righteousness be, as he says, the imputation
of inherent righteousness, then surely, because inherent righteousness is the
righteousness of works, it must needs follow, that the Apostle by the
imputation of righteousness without works, does mean the imputation of the
righteousness of works without works. Which interpretation, because he saw
it could be taken for no other, but a mad and frantike dream, and yet
perforce must use it, because he knew no better shift, therefore he thought
good to color it the best he could, by curtolling the words alleged, naming
only imputation of righteousness, whereas the Apostle names imputation of
righteousness without works. But let him take the words as the Apostle
sets them down, and then give us his answer, and we shall apparently see
him to be a most impudent man, making no conscience of that he says, but
studying only to blind the Reader, from seeing that truth which he himself
knows not how with any probable show to contradict. Yet he tells us for
conclusion* that there is only a bare sound of words for the Protestants, the
true substance of the text making wholly for the Papists. So then the sound of
the words, by his confession is for us, but inasmuch as the words are very
plain and clear, how may we be informed that the true substance and meaning
of them is wholly for the Papists, when as they contain in show a flat
contradiction to the doctrine of the Papists? We see here the use of that
caveat, which the Rhemists have given to their Reader, aduertising him Rhem.
Testam. Argument of the Epistles in general.
to assure himself that if any thing in Paul's Epistles sound to him contrary
to the doctrine of their Catholic Church, he fails of the right sense. By
this means if Saint Paul say, it is white, yet we must not think that he
means it to be white, if it please their Church to call it black. And
therefore though here he speak of imputation of righteousness without works,
and bring testimony of ancient Scripture for confirmation thereof, yet he must
not be taken to mean that there is any such, or any other, but the imputation
of the righteousness of works, because there is no other approved by the
Roman Church. Well may we think the judgment of God to be fearful upon
them, who are so blind as to be led with such fopperies and gross deceipts.

CHAP. X. That eternal life is merely and wholly the gift of God, and cannot
be purchased by merit or desert.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

PAul teaches that eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus Christ, etc.
to, He tells us again and again, etc.

W. BISHOP.
IN the same place you had a large solution of this objection; but he that has
made a covenant with hell, will not look upon that which might help him to
heaven. We teach with the Apostle, and with his faithful interpreter Saint
Augustine, That eternal life is the gift of God: both originally, because we
must receive grace by the free gift of God, before we can do any thing that
does deserve the joys of heaven; and also principally, the whole virtue and
value of our merits do proceed of the dignity of Gods grace in us, which does
eleuate and give such worth to our works, that they thereby deserve life
everlasting* Notwithstanding, if we take not hold on Gods grace, when it is
freely offered us, and do not concur with it to the effecting of good
works, we shall never be saved; and this our working with the grace of God
deserves heaven: both which are prouedly this sentence of the same Apostle. God
will render to every man according to Romans 2. verse. 6. 7. and 8.
his works, to them truly, that according to patience in good works, seek
glory, and honor, and incorruption, life eternal; to them that are of
contention, and that obey not the truth, but give credit to iniquity, wrath,
and indignation: where you may see in express terms, eternal life to be
rendered and repaid for good works, to such men as diligently seek to do
them; and to others who refuse to obey the truth, and rather choose to believe
lies and to live wickedly, eternal death and damnation.

R. ABBOT.
WHether M. Bishop or I may be thought more likely to flatter himself in an
opinion, of having made a covenant with hell, I leave it to be esteemed by the
whole process of this work, and the God of heaven shall make it one day more
fully to appear. Against his solution of the objection here propounded, he
knows well that I Of Merits, sect. 8.
have returned a replication, which shows the same to be infirm and vain,
and seeing he can fortify it no further, the bare repeating of it is no other
but womanish and idle talking. The Apostle tells us that Romans 6. 23.
eternal life is (...) the free grace or gift of God through I^su Christ our
Lord. We teach, says M. Bishop, that eternal life is the gift of God
originally and principally. Thus by his shifting terms of originally and
principally, he limiteth the Apostles words, and deludeth a maine Theoreme and
Canon of Christian faith, leaving it to be understood, that though eternal
life be originally and principally the gift of God, yet totally and absolutely
it is not so. Which i^ it be true, it must necessarily follow, that as the
Apostle says truly, that eternal life is the gift of God, because in part it
i^ so, so a man may truly say against the Apostle, that eternal life is not
the free gift of God, because in part, and in some sort it is not so. And if no
man may dare in this wise to gainsay the Apostle, then we must acknowledge
that which Origin says, that Origin. in Romans 4. Stipendia, inquit, peccati
mors. Et non addid^^ similiter vt dic^ et; st^pendia a^^^ iustitiae vita
aterna, sed ait, Gratia autem De^ v^^a aet^rna, vt st^pend ^m quod vtique
debi^o and mercedi simile est, retributionem poen^ esse doc^^^t and mortis;
v^tam ver^ aternam soli gratiae consignare^.
the Apostle having said that the stipend of sin is death, did not add in
the like sort that the stipend of righteousness is eternal life, but,
eternal life is the grace of God, that he might teach, that the retribution of
punishment and death is a stipend, which is like to a debt or wages, but might
assign life eternal to grace only. And thus the Apostle himself teaches us
to conceive, when he says; Romans 11. 6.
If it be of grace, then it is not of works; otherwise grace is no grace. For
August co^t. Pelag. and Celest. lib. 2. c 24. Gratia Dei non eri^ grat^^ vll^
modo nisigrat^ita fuer^t omni modo.
grace, says Austin, shall not be grace in any respect, except it be free in
every respect. Idem Epist. 120. c. 19. Haec est gratia quae gratis datur, non
merit^s operantis sed miseratione donantis.
That is grace, says he, which is freely given, not for the merits of the
worker, but by the mercy of the giver. Thus Hierome says; Hieron. Epist ad
Dem^tr^ad. (...) non op^ru^ retributio sed donamis est largitas.
Where grace is, there is not reward of works, but the largess and bounty of
the giver, Leo Epist. 84. Gratia nis^ gratis d^tur, non est gratia, sed merces
retrib^tion meritorum.
Grace, says Leo, except it be freely giu^n is no grace, but a reward and
recompense of merits, leaving it consequent, that if it be the reward and
recompense of merits, then it is not grace. Thus they determine grace and
merit, to be things incompatible, and of so perfect opposition ea^h to other,
as that the one cannot stand where place is yielded to the other. Since then the
Apostle teaches that eternal life, is a matter of grace and free gift, we
must conceive that it is not to be hanged upon man's merit, or if in any respect
it be to be ascribed to the merit of man, it is not grace, because it is not
free in every respect. M. Bishops respects thereof of originally and
principally, are to be sent to the Pelagian school, where they would be
admitted as well as they are amongst the Papists, but in the school of Christ
they are exploded, as derogatory to the grace of Christ, and yielding so much
glory to man, as is the manifest impeaching of the glory of God. And yet so
impudent is he, that he would make St. Austin the author of his respects, whom
Of Merits, sect. 8.
before I have showed to be far off from approving any such. Originally,
forsooth, eternal life is the gift of God, because we must receive grace by
the free gift of God, before we can do any thing that does deserve the joys
of heaven. So then eternal life it self is not the free gift of God, but only
grace which enableth us to work by our free will, and so to deserve eternal
life. And did St. Austin conceive this to be the meaning of the Apostle? Surely
in the place before mentioned I have showed that St. Austin attributes our
good works, not originally only, but fully and wholly to the gift and work of
God, and thereby disclaimeth the merit of man, because what shall man be said
to merit by that, that is wholly and only Gods? Therefore he says that God in
rendering eternal life to good works, does but give August. de Great. and lib.
Arbit. cap. 8. Gratia est pro gratia.
grace for grace, one grace after and for another. M. Bishop would have him
say, that God rendereth merit for grace, but St. Austin will acknowledge no
other but only grace for grace. And the more to beat down the pride of merit,
he says; Ibid. cap. 7. Si Dei dona sunt bona merita tua non Deus coronat
merita tua t^nquam merita tu^ sed tanquam dona sua.
If thy good works be the gifts of God, then God crowns not thy merits as
thy merits, but as his own gifts. Yea he plainly testifies that therefore the
Apostle says, Ibid. cap. 9. Maluit di^^re, Gratia Dei vit^ aeterna vt hin^
intell^g^r^mus non pro meritis nostris Deum nos ad vitam aeternam, sed pro
^iseratione sua perducere.
Eternal life is the grace or gift of God, that we should understand that God
brings us to eternal life, not for our merits, but for his on^ne mercies
sake, alleging to that purpose the words of the Psalm, Psalm. 103. 4.
He crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. As touching his second
limitation, that eternal life is principally the gift of God, because the
whole virtue and value of our merits proceeds of the dignity of Gods grace in
us, which does eleuate and give such worth to our works, that they thereby
deserve life everlasting, the nullity of it is plain by that that has been
said: because if the whole value of the work be to be assigned to the grace
of God, then can no merit be reputed thereby to man; for what should man merit
by that, in the worth whereof he can challenge nothing to be his? I have Of
Merits, sect. 3.
before showed that that whereby a man should be said to merit, must be of
himself. If the value of the thing be of another, let the merit be ascribed to
him of whom it is; but vainly does he claim merit, who has no propriety of
that whereby he should merit. As concerning the value of good works, I shall
have occasion further to speak in the thirteenth chapter, and therefore I
forbear to stand upon it in this place. Only I wish M. Bishop to consider that
which St. Austin briefly says, that August. de Temp. ser. 49. In comparatione
resurrectionis illius stercus est tota vi^a quam genimus, and paulo prius:
Vnusquisque metiatur se quid est modo and quid erit tunc, and inueniet in
comparatione illi^s iustiti^ ista damna esse and stercora.
in comparison of the resurrection all the life that here we lead is but dung;
let every man measure himself, says he, what he is now, and what he shall be
then, and he shall find that in comparison of the righteousness that shall be
then, all now is but dross and dung. Now tell us M. Bishop your opinion; may
we think dross to be worth gold, or the dung of this earth to deserve that
righteousness and glory of heaven? What madness is it to imagine such a value
of desert in that work, which is but dung in comparison of that that it should
deserve? But at once to overthrow all that M. Bishop has here answered, I will
set down what Fulgentius has delivered concerning the place here in hand.
Fulgent. ad Monim. lib. 1. Gratia autem etiam ipsa non unjust dicitur qui^
^^on sol^^^ donis s^is Deus do^^a sua reddit, sed quia tantum etiam ^bi gratia
diuina retributionis exuberat vt incomparabiliter atque inessabiliter omne
meritum, quamuis bon^ and ^^ D^o dat^ humanae voluntatis atque operationis
excedat.
Therefore is eternal life, says he, not without cause called grace, not only
for that God rendereth his own gifts to his own gifts, but also for that the
grace of Gods reward does there so much abound, as that incomparably and
unspeakably it exceeds all the merit of the will and work of man, although
it be good, and given of God himself. By which words he plainly gives us to
understand as on the one side, that God in bringing us to eternal life, does
but proceed in giving, and consummate thereby the gift of salvation, which
from the beginning he freely intended to us, and by calling and justifying and
glorifying us, as by degrees, acts that which he intended, so on the other
side, that in the intermediate gifts of God, there is nothing to take away from
the final gift, the name of grace, because there is no comparison betwixt the
one and the other, that the one should be said in any sort to merit and deserve
the other. But here it is worthy to be noted how M. Bishop trippeth and
crosses himself, who having first told us, that the whole value of our merits
whereby we deserve eternal life, proceeds of the dignity of Gods grace in
us, presently alters the case and says, that we must concur with grace to
the effecting of good works, and this our working with the grace of God
deserves heaven. Surely if the whole value of our merits do proceed of the
dignity of Gods grace, then the desert of heaven arises not of our working
with grace; or if the desert of heaven do arise of our working with grace,
then it does not wholly arise from the dignity of grace. But hereby we may see
that all the words which they use as touching grace, are but hypocrisy and
deceit, and that their true resolution is, that the desert of heaven issues
out of the free will of man, using grace as a tool or instrument for the doing
of works, whereby to deserve the same. Thus of gift they make no gift, and
turn all wholly into merit, and by the free will of man do utterly overthrow
the grace of God, carrying notwithstanding in the mean time a conscience of
shame of that they teach, and coloring all with good works, as Pelagius the
Heretic and his followers in the same case were wont to do. But M. Bishop
will prove all that he says by another sentence of the same Epistle to the
Romans, Romans 2. 6.
God will render to every man according to his works, etc. where he says, we
may see in express terms eternal life to be rendered and repaid for good
works. Where we rather see his pertinacy in error, who rather chooses to
make the Apostle to contradict himself, then to yield to the truth plainly
delivered by the Apostle. But nothing can be devised more fit for answer to
him, or more effectual to stop his mouth, then that which Gregory Bishop of
Rome has purposely set down for satisfaction to those words. Gregor. in
Psalm. Poe^itent. 7. Quod si illa Sanctor^ soelicitas miserecordia est and no
meritis acquiritur, vbi erit quod scriptum est; Et tu reddes vnicuique secundum
opera sua? si secundum opera redditur, quomodo miserecordia a stimabitur? sed
aliud est secundum opera reddere, and aliud propter ipsa opera reddere. In co
enim quod secundum opera dicitur, ipsa operum qualitas intelligitur, vt cui^s
apparuerint bona opera, eius sit and retribut o gloriosa. Illi namque beatae
vitae in qua cum Deo and de Deo viuitur nullus pot^st aquari labor, nulla opera
comparari, praesertim cum Apostolus dicat: Non sunt condignae passiones, etc.
If the felicity of the Saints be mercy, says he, and be not obtained by
merits, how shall it stand which is written; Thou shall render unto every man
according to his works? If it be rendered according to works, how shall it be
esteemed mercy? But it is one thing, says he, to render according to works,
and another thing to render for the works themselves. For in that it is said,
according to works, the very quality of the works is understood, so as that
whose good works shall appear, his reward shall be glorious. For to that
blessed life wherein we shall live with God and of God, no labor can be
equalled; no works can be compared, for that the Apostle tells us; The
sufferings of this time are not comparable in worth to the glory to come, that
shall be reueiled on us. Where we see how he sets it down as a thing
without question to be confessed, that eternal life is mercy only, and is not
to be purchased or gained by merits, and that the Scripture in saying, that God
rendereth to every man according to his works, does not import that God in
giving reward unto good works does any thing for the works sake, as if he
regarded the merit or value thereof, but respects only the quality of our
works, as using the same for a mark only, whereby he will take knowledge of
them to whom he intends to show mercy. At these words of Gregory, me thinks
I see how M. Bishop biteth the lip, and chafeth in his mind to hear him
thus distinguishing like a Protestant, and seriously approving that which he
with scorn has rejected, being spoken by M. Perkins. Of Merits, sect. 17.
O sharp and ouer-fine wit* says he, does God render according to the works,
and does he not render for the works? What, M. Bishop, will you mock Gregory
in the same sort, and twite him with a sharp and ouerfine wit? He has taught
us to distinguish thus; he tells us that it is one thing to render for
works, another thing to render according to works, which since you admit not,
why do you d^ale so impudently, in chalenging to your selves a full and
perfect agreement with the ancient Church of Rome? I might further enlarge this
matter out of Gregory by sundry speeches, tending to the disabling of all
humane works, but that it follows more properly to speak thereof in the
thirteenth Chapter.

CHAP. XI. That concupiscence or lust is sin, even in the very habit and
first motions of it.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

HE tells us again and again that concupiscence is sin; to lust is to
sin, etc. to, S. Paul says of the spirit of adoption, etc.

W. BISHOP.
THe Apostle tells us again and again, that our Savior Christ Jesus, was
made 2. Cor. 5. v. 21.
sin; and yet no Christian is so simple, as to take him to be properly sin,
but the host or satisfaction for sin: so when the Romans 8. verse. 3.
Apostle calls concupiscence sin, we understand him with S. Augustine,
that it is not sin properly; yet so called not unaptly: both because it is
the effect L. b. 1. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 10. and Lib. 1. de Nupt* and
Concupisc. cap. 23.
and remnant of original sin, and does also prick us forward to actual
sin; but if by help of the grace of God we repress it, we are delivered
from the infection and guilt of it. Which S. Paul in the very same Chapter
declares; when he demands: Who shall deliver me Ibid. verse. 25.
from this body of death? he answers presently, the grace of God by Jesus
Christ our Lord. And again, that profound Doctor S. Augustine argues very
soundly out of the same sentence, where concupiscence is called sin: (but now
not I work it any more, but the sin that is in me;) that the Apostle could
not mean sin properly, which cannot ( says he) be committed Lib. 6. cont:
Julian. c. 23.
without the consent of our mind: but that had no consent of the mind to it,
because it was not the Apostle that did work it. Now how can that be the evil
work of a man, if the man himself do not work it? as the Apostle says
expressly, not I do work it. Lastly, the same Apostle teaches, that sin
has no dominion over them that are under grace; which were false, if
concupiscence were properly sin: for that has such dominion over every good
body, that they cannot avoid the motion and sting of it. No not S. Paul could
be clearly delivered 2. Cor. 12. verse. 8.
from that prick of the flesh, though he prayed most earnestly for it:
wherefore by the testimony of S. Paul himself, concupiscence is not properly
sin: no more is it to lust, if lust be taken for the first motions of
concupiscence. But concupiscence when it has conceived Jacob. 1. verse. 15.
( as S. James speaks) that is, by our liking begins to take hold on us,
brings forth sin, yet but venial; marry, when it is consummate by our
consent or long lingering in it, then it engenders death, that is, mortal
sin.

R. ABBOT.
EVen so might the adulterer plead for himself, that as Christ is said to
have been made sin, and yet is not properly sin: so adultery, though it be
called sin, yet is not so called, because it is indeed and properly sin,
but only because it is an effect of sin and draws on to many sins. Surely
in what manner the Apostle says that adultery is sin, in the same manner
does he say that concupiscence is sin, and very untowardly and shamefully
does M. Bishop bring that as a speech of the like kind, whereby it is said,
that 2. Cor. 5. 2^.
Christ for us was made sin. As for that which he cites out of St. Austin, I
have Of Original sin after Baptism, sect* 9.
elsewhere before examined the places, and have showed at large how falsely and
wickedly they abuse him, St. Austin never denying concupiscence in the
regenerate to be sin, but only as sin implies a guilt of punishment, which
to the faithful is remitted, and therefore the condition of sin in that
respect abolished. If we consider the nature of sin in the corruption and
uncleanness of it, St. Austin acknowledges concupiscence to be such an evil
quality as makes us evil, which nothing can do but sin, yea he says that
it is August. co^t. Julian. l. 6. c. 5. Tale ac tammagnum malum, tantum quia
inest, quomodo non tener^t in morte? etc.
so great an evil, as that only for that it is in us, it should hold us in
death, and bring us to everlasting death, but that the bond (that is, the
guilt) thereof is loosed in baptism by the remission of all our sins. I note
these things but briefly, because I choose rather to refer the Reader to the
treaty hereof at large. And thereby he shall perceive how untruly M. Bishop
here says, as by the doctrine of St. Austin, that if by the help of Gods
grace we repress concupiscence, we are delivered from the infection and guilt
of it. Indeed St. Austin says so much of the guilt, but never did he say or
think, that we are or shall be deliuer^^^ from the infection and uncleanness
of it, Aug. Epist. 54. Malos di^it propter vitia infirmitatis humanae donec
totum quo constamus ab omni vitiositate sanatum transeat in eam vitam vbi nihil
omnino peccabitur.
until all whereof we consist, healed from all corruption, shall pass into
that life where there shall be no sin. But if St. Austin will not take his
part, he will prove that which he says by St. Paul himself, in the same
Chapter. He demands, says he, Who shall deliver me from this body of death,
and answers presently, The grace of God by Jesus Christ our Lord. Where we
see how according to his usual manner he sets down the words, as to have
his Reader think, that he tendereth him a proof of that which he says, but
never goes about to show how that which he says is to be deduced therfrom.
And here his falsehood is the greater, for that he alleges the Apostles
words for that which he says, whereas that which he says is utterly
overthrown by the words which he alleges. For let me ask him; does the
Apostle by deliverance from this body of death, mean a deliverance from the
infection of original sin? He will say, yes, because for proof thereof he
cites the Apostles words. Well, but tell us then, do you not believe that
St. Paul was a partaker of the grace of God, and did thereby repress and
resist the motions of concupiscence? Neither will he here dare to say, nay, and
if he should, what Christian man would not spit at him? But then we will ask
him again, if the Apostle by the grace of Christ did resist concupiscence, and
every one that so does, be delivered from the infection thereof, how stands
it that the Apostle did yet remain in case to be delivered from this
infection? Mark, I pray thee, gentle Reader, the Apostle says, who shall
deliver me, giving thereby to understand that he was not as yet delivered. He
says, the grace of God shall deliver me, but he does not say, it has
delivered me from the infection of concupiscence. Here M Bishop is mute; he
has taken a fall in his own trippe, and knows not which way to recover
himself. The Apostle St. Paul though by the grace of God he resisted the
motions of concupiscence, yet was not as yet delivered from the infection of
it. It is false therefore which M. Bishop says, that if by the help of the
grace of God we repress it, we are delivered from the infection of it. I have
Of Original sin, sect. 4.
before showed that the Apostle in naming this body of death, has reference to
this infection, meaning thereby Romans 6. 6.
the body of sin, as he has termed it in the former Chapter, August. de
Temp. ^er. 45. Per concupiscentiam d^ctum est hoc nostrummortis corpus.
which is to be destroyed, and to which by and for concupiscence belongs
death. It is true then which M. Bishop says, that the Apostle in desiring to
be delivered from this body of death, did thereby intend a release from the
infection of concupiscence; but where was his understanding that could not see
that this makes directly against himself, and plainly shows that this
release and deliverance is yet to come, and befalls not unto us so long as we
continue, clothed with mortality and corruption? But he tells us yet further,
that St. Austin out of the same sentence where concupiscence is called sin,
(Now not I work it any more, but sin that dwells in me)* argues very
soundly that the Apostle could not mean sin properly, which cannot, says
he, be committed without consent of the mind. He quoteth for this Lib. 6.
cont. Julian. cap. 23. whereas in that sixth book there are but thirteen
Chapters. But the place which he means I take to be in the eleventh Chapter
of the same book, where St. Austin having mentioned those words of the
Apostle, goes on thus, August. co^^. Julian. l. 6. c. 11. Iam enim motus
desiderioru^ malorum non ipse operabatur, quib^ non consentiebat ad perpetranda
peccata. Peccati autem nomine quod in illo habitabat, ipsam nu^cupabat
co^cupiscentiam, quia peccato facta est and si consentientem traxerit atq,
illexerit, con^ipit paritque pecoutu^.
For now did not he work the motions of evil desires, to which he did not
consent to commit sins. But by the name of sin dwelling in him, says he,
he means concupiscence, because it was caused by sin, and if it draw and
entice a man to consent, does conceive and bring forth sin. Where we may
observe what a vein M. Bishop has of racking and stretching, here being no
cause for him to say that Austin argues so soundly, that concupiscence is not
properly sin, and although it be true ( the committing of sin being always
understood of the outward act) that sin is not committed, but by the consent
of the mind, yet neither does St. Austin here deliver any such rule; and
though he had, yet had it been nothing to M. Bishops purpose, because here is
no question of committing sin, but of the root and motions of sin before
it come to be committed. Which distinction he may observe out of that which the
same Saint Austin in the very same book answers to Julian the Pelagian,
asking August. co^t. Julian. l. 6. c. 4 Explica, inquis, quomodo peccatii
personae illi just possit ascribi, quae peccare nec voluit nec potuit? Aliud
est perpetratio proprioru^; aliud alienorum contagio peccatorum.
how sin can justly be ascribed to that person (namely to the infant) which
neither has will nor power to sin; The committing of a man's own sins is
one thing, says he, the contagion of the sins of others is another thing.
Now the sin whereof we speak here, is the contagion and infection of Adams
sin, Romans 5. 12.
in whom all have sinned, of which St. Austin denies not, but rather freely
confesses, that as a punishment, it hangs upon us, and presses us down,
not only without our will, but also against our will. And therefore whereas in
one place he had defined August. de duab. animab. cont. Manich. cap. 11.
Peccatum est voluntas retinendivel co^sequ^di quod iustitia vetat, and vnde
liberum est abstinere.
sin to be a will of retaining or obtaining that which justice forbids,
and whence it is in a man's liberty to abstain, as if there were no sin but
by the will, he limiteth this definition in his Retractations to that Idem
Retract. lib. 1. c. 15 I^ definitum est quod tantummodo peccatum est, non quod
est etiam p^na peccati. Nam quando tale est vt idem sit and p^na peccati,
qua^tum est quod valet voluntas sub domina^te cupiditate nisi forte si piaest
v^ ^ret auxiliii, etc.
which is only sin, and is not also the punishment of sin. For in that
sin, says he, which is also the punishment of sin, how little can the will
do under the dominion of concupiscence, save only if it be godly to pray for
help. In which words he plainly acknowledges that that against which the
godly will and mind prays for help, is not only the punishment of sin but
also sin, and therefore in the place by M. Bishop cited, must be understood
to restrain the name of sin to actual and committed sin, laying guilt
upon him, by whom it is committed, which concupiscence, as he often teaches,
does not lay upon him that fights against it, because to him it is already
remitted and pardoned, and therefore according to that construction is by the
same St. Austin in sundry places exempted from the name of sin, As for the
words of the Apostle which M. Bishop urges, Romans 7. 17.
Now it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me, he might easily
conceive that he says not so, as to acquit himself absolutely from being the
doer or worker, but only in some sort. For if he be not the doer, why does he
say, Verse. 14.
I am carnal, sold under sin; Verse. 15.
I do that which I hate; Verse. 19.
The evil which I would not that do I; and for conclusion; Verse. 25.
(...); I my self, even very I, in my mind serve the law of God, and in my
flesh the law of sin. And if he be not the doer, who shall it be said to be?
He says indeed that it is sin that does it; but is sin a doer without the
man? Can the accident be an agent without the subject? This negation therefore
must be understood according to that whereby he would not do that which he
did; according to the inner man, according to that wherein he was in part
renewed, and desired to be wholly that that he was thereby. But as touching
this also I have Of Original sin, sect. 3.
before given full satisfaction, and M. Bishop might well have spared himself
this trouble, to repeat the same again. His next argument shows his
learning in divinity, in that he plainly declares that he knows not what the
dominion of sin means. Sin; says he, has no dominion over them that are
under grace, as the Apostle teaches. But this were false if concupiscence were
properly sin. Why so, I pray? Forsooth it has such dominion over every good
body that they cannot avoid the motion and sting of it. This he has sucked out
of his own fingers ends; who would have made this argument but he? Let the
Apostle himself tell us, what Romans 6. 12.
the dominion of sin is, who having said, Let not sin reign in your
mortal body, adds for exposition hereof, that ye should obey it in the
lusts thereof, as to note that then sin is said to reign in us, when we give
obedience to it, to fulfill the lusts thereof. Hereupon St. Austin observes
thus; August. in loan. Tract. 41. Non ait, Non fit, sed, Non regnet. Quamdiu
viuis, necesse est esse peccatu^ in membrie tuis: salte^ illi regnum auferatur;
non fiat quod iubet.
He says not, Let it not be, but, Let it not reign. So long as thou live,
sin must needs be in thy members; yet let the Kingdom thereof be taken
away, let not that be done which it commands. Where we see that the dominion
of sin is then understood to be when we obey, and do that which it
commands; but the denial of this obedience and refusal to do the lust
thereof, that is the taking away of the kingdom and dominion of it. To the
same purpose Gregory Bishop of Rome speaks of the same words, Gregor. Moral.
lib. 14. c. 9. Non ait, non sit, sed non regnet; quia non esse non potest, non
autem regnare in cordibus bonorum potest.
The Apostle says not, Let it not be, but, Let it not reign, because it
cannot but be, but it may be without a kingdom in the hearts of good men. M.
Bishop says, that because it cannot but be in every good man, therefore it
has dominion over every good man; but Gregory says, it cannot but be indeed,
but yet it may be, and be without dominion in the hearts of good men. But
somewhat more largely and effectually he speaks hereof in another place;
Ibid. l. 21. c. 3. Peccatum in mortali corpore non esse sed regnare prohibuit,
quia in carne corruptibili non regnare potest, sed von esse non potest. Hoc
ipsum namque ei de peccato tentari peccatum est, quo quia qua^diu viuimus
perfect omnimodo non caremus, sancta pradicatio quoniam hoc expellere plene
non potuit, ei de nostri cordis habitaculo regnum tulit, vt appetitus illicitus
etsi plerunque b^nis nostris cogitationibus occulte se quasi fur inserit saltem
si ingreditur, non dominetur.
The Apostle forbids sin not to be, but to reign in our mortal body,
because it may be without reigning in corruptible flesh, but it cannot but be
there. For even to be tempted of sin, says he, is sin unto it; which
because we cannot be altogether without so long as we live here, the holy
preaching for that it cannot fully expel and drive it out, takes away from it
the kingdom out of the habitation of our hearts, that unlawful desire albeit
as a thief, it privily thrust in it self many times amongst our good
thoughts, though it enter into us, yet may not have dominion over us. In which
words as we see particularly against that which M. Bishop here says, that the
motion and sting of concupiscence, which Gregory calls unlawful desire or
lust, though it cannot be avoided of the faithful in this life, yet is not
therefore said to have dominion over them (the more absurdly does he make
application of his speech to St. Paul, as though concupiscence, because he
could not be delivered from it, had therefore dominion over him) so we see also
as touching the maine question here in hand, that that motion or sting, even
the very temptation of sin, from which we cannot be freed, so long as we
continue in this life, is sin in us, though it have not any kingdom or
dominion over us. Which is to be observed against the collection which he
makes of the words of St. James, as though there were no sin until
concupiscence gain our liking and consent, which is false if that be true
which Gregory says, that the very temptation of sin, that is, the first
motion of concupiscence is sin; so well do Gregory and he accord, as
touching the meaning of St. James his words, which to have no such meaning as
he pretends, I have plentifully showed Of Original sin, sect. 6.
otherwhere. And that it may be the more fully understood, that Gregory in the
point here handled, bare the same mind that we do, it shall not be amiss to
set down what he has further said, to declare his judgment therein. Greg.
Moral. lib. 18. c. 5. Sciendu^ est quod sunt peccata quae a justice vitari
possunt, and sunt nonnulla quae etiam a justice vitari non possunt. Cuius enim
cor in hac corruptibili earne consistens in sinistra cogitatione non labitur,
vel si vsque ad consensus foueam non mergatur? Et tame^ haec ipsa praua
cogitare, peccare est, sed dum cog^tationi resistitur, a confusione sua animus
liberatur. Men's ergo iustorum etsi libera est a peruerso opere, aliquand^ tamen
corruit in peruersa cogitatione. Et in peccatum ergo labitur, quia saltem in
cogitatione declinatur, and tamen vnde semetipsampostmodum flendo reprehendat,
non habet, quia ante reparat, quam per consensum cadat.
We are to know, says he, that there are sins which the just cannot avoid,
and there are sins which may be avoided by them. For whose heart is there
abiding in this corruptible flesh that does not fall by sinister thought,
though he be not drowned so far as to the pit of consent? And yet the very
cogitation of evil things is sin; albeit whilst the cogitation is resisted,
the mind is delivered from it own confusion. The mind therefore of the just
although it be free from evil work, yet sometimes falls by evil thought.
It falls therefore into sin, because there is a declining at least in
thought, and yet it has not whence afterward with tears to reprove it self,
because it first recouereth it self before it fall by consent. There is no
obscurity in these words; there is here a plain confession that the evil
cogitation before consent and without consent is sin, that to decline in
thought is to fall into sin, and that this is the sin which the just cannot
avoid so long as they live here. And to this purpose it makes much, which
elsewhere the same Gregory tells us by occasion of those words of the
Apostle, which M. Bishop before urged, Idem exposit. in 1. Reg. lib. 6. cap. 2.
Prope finem. Peccatum quod se non operari perhibuit, motum carnis intellexit:
Peccatum autem in se inhabitans originalem culpam, etc. Ex originali culpa fit
peccatum motionis carnis, etc. Manens in nobis illa culpa, nunc doctoris
virtute perdi non potest.
Now it is not I that do it, but sin that dwells in me: By the sin,
says he, which the Apostle says he works not, he means the motion of the
flesh, and by sin dwelling in him, he means original sin, and of
original sin is caused the sin of the motion of the flesh: that sin
continuing in us, cannot now by the power of any teacher be destroyed. Here is
the root, original sin still dwelling and abiding in us, and the motion of
the flesh the immediate effect thereof it self also sin, the same so abiding
as that by no teaching it can be destroyed, and why then does M. Bishop tell us
that original sin after baptism remains not, and that that which
remains is no sin? Surely the faithful man will use David's confession with
the same mind that David did, Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me: and
Gregory takes it that David meant thereby, that Idem i^ Euangel. hom. 39 Nam
cum Propheta di^at, Ecce in iniq^itatibus, etc. sine culpa in mundo esse non
potuit, qui in mundum cum cu^pa venit.
he could not be without sin in the world, who came with sin into the
world, and expounds his words to this effect: Ide^ in Psalm. Poenitent. 4.
Opus est Domine vt miserearis quia ab ineunte vitae primordio in peccati fou^am
i^cidi and concupiscentiae carnalis sordibus inquinata natiuitatis meae initia
contraxi. Non in me illa quam nouiter admisi sola viget iniquitas; ^abeo in me
etiam ex veteri quod ignoscas.
Lord. I have need that thou have mercy upon me, because even from the
beginning of my life I am fallen into the pit of sin and have drawn my first
birth defiled with the uncleanness of carnal concupiscence. Not only that
iniquity which I have lately committed abides in me; I have also in me f^r
thee to pardon of the iniquity that was of old. Thus he confesses that we are
not in the world without the sin which we brought into the world; that for
original sin we still stand in need of Gods mercy, and have still thereof
remaining in us that for which we must crave pardon at Gods hands. This he
spoke according to the ancient doctrine of the Roman Church, and shall we not
rather believe him then M. Bishop, who according to the new learning of their
new Church tells us, Of Original sin, sect. 10.
that in him that is newly baptized, there is no more sin then was in Adam in
the state of innocence; and that original sin is utterly extinguished and
concupiscence in the regenerate is become no sin? Yea, shall we not rather
believe him then the Council of Trent, telling us, that Council. Trident. sess
5. In renatis nihil odit Deus, etc. ita vt nihil prorsus ca^ ab ingress^^ coeli
remoretur.
in the regenerate there is nothing that God hates; nothing to stay them from
entering into heaven. These are absurd paradoxes, of new and late device;
strange to true Christian ears, and abhorred of all true Christian hearts;
contrary to the express and clear determination of holy Scripture, and
fitting only them who have learned to say; Psalm. 12. 4.
With our tongues we will prevail, we are they that ought to speak, who is
Lord over us?

CHAP. XII. Of the spirit of adoption, giving witness to the faithful that
they are the sons of God.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

SAint Paul says of the spirit of adoption; The same spirit bears witness,
etc. to, Paul says, the sufferings of this time, etc.

W. BISHOP.
ANd that we say upon good consideration: for we must not believe with the
Christian faith (which is free from all fear) any thing that is not assured
and most certain. Now the spirit of God does not bear us witness so
absolutely and assuredly, that we are the sons of God, but under a condition,
which is not certain, to wit, that we be the sons and heirs of God; Si
tamen Romans 8. verse. 17.
compatimur, yet if we suffer with him, that we also may be glorified with him:
but whether we shall suffer with him, and constantly to the end bear out all
persecutions, we know not so assuredly, because as our Savior fore-telleth;
There be some that for a time believe, Luc. 8. verse. 13.
and in time of temptation do revolt. Was it not then a trick of a false
merchant, to strike off the one half of the Apostles sentence, that the other
might seem current for him? now no man does more plainly or roundly beat
down their presumption, who assure themselves of salvation, then S. Paul, as
in many other places, so in this very Epistle to the Romans, in these words.
Well, because of their incredulity they ( the Jews) Cap. 11. verse. 20.
were broken off: but thou ( Gentile) by faith do stand, be not too highly
wise, but fear. For if God has not spared the natural boughs, least perhaps
he will not spare thee neither; see then the goodness and severity of God:
upon them surely that are fallen, the severity; but upon thee the goodness of
God, if thou abide in his goodness, otherwise thou shall also be cut off, etc.
Can any thing be more perspicuously declared, then that some such who were in
grace once, afterward fell and were cut off for ever? and that some others
stand in grace, who if they look not (...) to their footing, may also fall and
become reprobate? the Apostle directly fore-warning those men, who make
themselves so sure of their salvation, not to be so highly wise, but to fear
their own frailty and weakness, least otherwise they fall, as many had done
before them. If this plain discourse, and those formal speeches, uttered by
the holy Ghost, will not serve to shake men out of their security of salvation,
I cannot see what may possibly do it.

R. ABBOT.
THis answer of M. Bishops is Of the certainty of salvation, sect. 17.
before examined and exploded, and his new see thing of the same woorts will
never prove to any good broth. We must believe nothing, he says, by Christian
faith, that is not assured and most certain. Well; and therefore that which
the faithful believe, that they are the sons of God, is assured and most
certain, because we are taught to believe it by Christian faith. For that
which the spirit of God testifies, we are to believe by Christian faith. But
the spirit of God testifies to the faithful, that they are the sons of God.
Therefore by Christian faith they are to believe that they are the sons of
God. Romans 8. 15.
We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more, says St. Paul,
but we have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father; The
same spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the sons of God.
The spirit of adoption is so called, as by the gift whereof God actually
adopteth us to be his children. By this spirit it is that we have that inward
conscience and feeling, whereby we can go unto God familiarly and confidently
as unto our Father, and say unto him, as with the mouth so with the heart; Our
Father which art in heaven. Hereby have we a testimony in our hearts that we
are Gods children, because if God be our father, it necessarily follows that
we are the children of God. This comfort then the holy Ghost gives, not by
vocal speech, but by impression of affection, and not as of a thing to come,
but as of a thing already acted and done, accordingly to that which the Apostle
elsewhere says; Gal. 4. ^.
Because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Now hereby we see that M. Bishops answer, that
the spirit does not bear us witness absolutely and assuredly, that we are the
sons of God, but under a condition which is not certain, is merely absurd,
because the being of that that presently is, cannot be said to depend upon the
being of any thing that is to come. Of that that is, we cannot say that it is
not, unless such a condition be made good, but setting aside all respect of
the condition, that that is must be acknowledged to be. The Apostle does not
say, ye shall be the sons of God upon such a condition, but he says, Ye
are sons, even as St. John says: 1. John 3. 2.
Now are we the sons of God; yea, and because ye are sons, says he,
therefore is it that God has sent the spirit of his son into your hearts,
crying, Abba, Father, which spirit ye could not be partakers of but that ye
are sons. This then being already certain, M. Bishop commits a manifest
error to tie it to a future condition, which he says is not certain. Albeit
in annexing this condition to the testimony of the spirit, he does wilfully
and manifestly falsifle the text. For the Apostle does not say as he
pretends, that the spirit bears witness, that we are the sons of God, if
we suffer with him, but says affirmatively, This spirit bears witness with
our spirit that we are the sons of God. And having so said, he goes on to
show what dignity we receive by being the sons of God. And if we be sons,
then are we also heirs, even heirs of God, and ioynt-inheritours with Christ.
Now to declare how we be conjoined unto Christ to be inheritours with him, he
adds those words, if so be we suffer with him that we may also be glorified
with him, not as to make a doubt of the witness of the spirit, but only to
signify what way God has appointed to bring them to their inheritance, to
whom the spirit gives witness, that they are the sons of God, namely by the
Phil. 3. 10.
fellowship of his afflictions, to be made thereby conformable to his death, by
2. Cor. 4. 10.
bearing out about in our bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus; by Col. 1. 24.
fulfilling in our flesh the remainder of his afflictions. And yet neither is
this condition, being taken so to be, any uncertain thing, because what God
has determined and appointed, he himself will effect and bring to pass; and
therefore the Apostle saying of them, to whom that witness of the spirit is
given, Romans 8. 29.
God has predestined us to be made like unto the image of his son, we
cannot in that case doubt, but that the same God Phil. 1. 29.
for Christ's sake does give unto us, not only to believe in him, but also (if
need be, and when time is) to suffer for his sake. We know not assuredly,
says M. Bishop, whether we shall suffer with him, and constantly to the end
bear out all persecutions. But the faithful do believe and know that 1. Cor.
10. 13.
God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, but
together with the temptation will give the issue, that we may able to bear it.
Greg. Moral. l. 28. cap. 7. Inter h^c etiam qui redemit, non relinquit, etc.
Nouit enim conditor noster quando exurgere persecutionis procellam sinat,
quando exurgente^ reprimat. Nouit pro custodia nostra restringe, e quod contra
nos egredi pro nostra excitatione permittit, vt saeuiens nos diluat procella,
non mergat.
Amidst persecutions, says Gregory hereupon, he that has redeemed us does not
forsake us; our Creator knows when to suffer the storm to arise, and when
to stay it from rising. He knows how to restrain that for the custody of us,
which for the exercising of us he suffers to go forth against us, that the
raging storm may wash us and not drown us. And in another place by occasion
of the same words, Ibid. lib. 29. c. 12. Etiam tentationes adversary
dispensando modificat vt aut multae simul non veniant, aut ipsae tatummodo quae
ferri possunt illustratam tam a Deo anima tangant vt cum tactus sui ardore nos
cruciant, perfectionis incendio non exurant.
He so dispenses and orders, says he, the temptations of the adversary as
that they come not too many at once, or that those only which may be borne, do
touch the soul which God has enlightened, that albeit by the heat of the
touch thereof they torment us, yet they may not by burning wast and consume us.
Upon this therefore the children of God build themselves securely, standing
always fully persuaded, that Romans 8. 38.
neither life nor death, neither things present, nor things to come, shall
separate them from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and bold
to say with David, Psalm. 118. 6. Heb. 13. 7.
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do unto me; and with
St. Paul, 2. Tim. 4. 18.
The Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly Kingdom. And of this resolution St. Austin notably instructs us,
where saying that August. in Psalm. 32. Conc. 2. Secura expectans miserecorditer
promitte^tem, miserecorditer and veraciter exhibentem. Et donec exhibeat, quid
agamus? Anima nostra patiens crit Domino. Sed quid si in ipsa paticntia non
durabimus? Immo plane durabimus, quoniam adiutor and protector noster est.
the soul securely expects the Lord, promising in mercy and performing in
mercy and truth, he further questioneth and answers himself in this sort:
But till he perform his promise what shall we do? Our soul shall be patient
to wait upon the Lord. But what if we shall not endure or continue in our
patience? Yes verily we shall endure, because he is our helper and defender. M.
Bishop teaches the faithful to say, We cannot tell whether we shall endure or
not; but St. Austin instructs them to another resolution by faith and trust
in God, Yes verily we shall endure, because God is our helper and defender. But
against this he gives instance by the words of Christ, that there be some
that for a time believe, and in time of temptation go away. Concerning which
words I have answered him Of the certainty of salvation, sect. 8.
before, and to answer him again need go no further then to the very text,
whence he alleges them. He charge me with a trick of a false merchant, as
if I struck off the one half of the Apostles sentence, that the other might
seem current for me, (whether I have so done or not the Reader is to judge by
that that has been said) but here is a false trick indeed committed by him,
in leaving out the words by which he saw and was advertised before, that his
exception is made nothing worth. By the seed sown in stony ground our Savior
describes them, Luke 8. 13.
who when they hear receive the word with joy, but they have no root, which
for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. Where note first that
Christ speaks not this of the good ground, but only of the stony ground, and
therefore it cannot be taken to appertain to them of whom we speak, to whom
the spirit gives witness, that they are the sons of God. But we are yet
further to note what reason he gives why those fall away, which is namely,
because they have no root, and therefore are like unto the tree which for want
of root fastened in the ground, is by every blast of wind easily overthrown.
Now by saying that they fall away because they have no root, he gives us to
conceive that they who have taken root, or are rooted, do not fall away. But
the faithful and children of God are rooted in the predestination and grace of
God, they are Col. 2. 7.
rooted and grounded in Christ, and stablished in the faith; and therefore
Psalm. 1. 3.
their leaf shall never fade, because their Prou. 12. 3.
root shall not be moved; God having made them a promise which he will not
break, Ierem. 32. 40.
I will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. As
for them which fall away, though in respect of outward show and profession,
they be said for a time to believe, yet because their faith has no root,
therefore they never have true faith. And thus Gregory Bishop of Rome
instructs us, that Greg. Moral. lib. 25. c. 8. Propheta intuens tantos hoc
Ecclesiae tempore specietenus credere, quantos nimirunt certum est electorum
numerum summamque transire, etc. Etiam hiad fidem specietenus regni veniunt.
they who are not of the number of the elect do believe but in show, that they
come to the faith of the Kingdom but in show: and in another place, that Ibid.
lib. 34. cap. 13. Aurum quod prauis cius persuasionibus sterni quasi lutu^
potuerit, aurum ante Dei oculos nunquam suit. Qui enim seduci quandeque non
reuersuri possunt, quasi habitam sanctitat^m ante oculos hominum videntur
amittere, sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuer^t.
the gold which by Satan's wicked suggestions, comes to be trodden under feet
like dirt, was never gold in Gods sight; that they who can be seduced never to
return again, seem to lose holiness which they had after a sort before the
eyes of men, but indeed never had it in the sight of God. To be short St.
Austin tells us, that August. de Doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 32. Non reuera Domini
corpus est quod cum illo non e^it in aeternum.
it is not indeed and in truth the body of Christ, which shall not be with
Christ for ever. If they only be the true body of Christ, which shall abide
with him for ever, they they only have true faith, whereby we become members of
that body; and therefore they that fall away as they are no part of the true
body of Christ, so are void also of true faith in Christ. Now therefore M.
Bishop does amiss in going about to shake the testimony of the spirit to the
faithful, by the examples of them that fall away, because of all such they
learn to say with St. John, 1. John 2. 19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us
they would have continued with us. But says he, no man does more plainly or
roundly beat down their presumption, who assure themselves of salvation, then
St. Paul. It is true indeed that the Apostle beats down the presumption of
them who assure themselves only by confidence of outward calling, but the
assurance which he teaches, and we from him, arises from the effect and
testimony of inward grace. If any grow secure and proud upon opinion that they
are members of Christ's Church, and partakers of his Sacraments, neglecting in
the mean time that correspondence of duty that belongs to such profession,
them it concerns which the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 12.
He that thinks he stands, let him take heed least he fall. But to true
Christian souls, humbled in themselves, and rejoicing in God only, the Apostle
speaks far otherwise; 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
We ought to give thanks always for you, brethren beloved of the Lord, because
that God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification
of the spirit and faith of truth, whereunto he has called you by our Gospel,
to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Now of the first sort it is true
that many who have had the outward state and calling of the Church and members
thereof, have been cut off from the state wherein carnally they have gloried
and rejoiced; but of them who have stood indeed by true faith and
sanctification of the holy Ghost, never any has fallen away, as I have showed,
but as they have been partakers of the beginning of the calling of God, so
they have had the end also. The words therefore which M. Bishop cites of St.
Paul to the Romans, Romans 11. 20.
Be not high minded but fear; continue in his kindness; else thou also shall
be cut off, are so to be understood, as I have Of the certainty o^ salvation,
sect. 10.
before showed, as to check the pride and security of carnal Gospellers and
hypocrites, but not to impeach the hope and comfort of Gods elect. Albeit they
have their use in respect of them also, because they serve God for spurs
whereby to stir up and prick forward our dullness, and to awaken us from
that sleep which by the drowsinesse of the flesh, is oftentimes stealing upon
us, thus to continue the standing of them of whom he has determined that they
shall never fall. Who because they stand not by their own strength, being in
themselves and of themselves as subject to fall as any other, are terrified in
respect of themselves, by such caueats and admonitions, that they may the more
in stantly look, and so the more constantly cleave unto him, by whom only it
is that they must stand. And to this effect God turns also the falls of them
that do fall away, whom when we have seen as likely to stand as our selves,
and yet notwithstanding in the end to forsake Christ and utterly to perish, we
are moved thereby not to trust in our selves, but to depend upon God only.
Gregor. Moral* lib. 34. c. 13. Quorum casus vtilitate non modica electorum
prosectibus seruit quia illorum lapsum dum conspiciunt de suo statu
contremiscunt and ruina quae illos damnat istos humiliat. Discunt enim in
superni adiutoris protectione considere dum plerosque co^* spiciunt de suis
viribus ^ecidisse.
Their fall, says Gregory* yields no small benefit for the f^rtherance of
the elect, because whilst they see the fall of them they tremble as touching
their own state, and the ruin which condemns the one is the humbling of the
other. For they learn to trust in the defense of him who helps from above,
whilst they see others fall by resting on their own strength. Now therefore
be it that some who not are, but see me to be in grace and to stand, do
afterward fall and be cut off, this makes nothing against the assurance of
them who are indeed in grace, and do truly believe in the name of the son
of God, who 1. John 5. 11.
believing the record that God has witnessed of his son, that God has given
unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son, are hereby taught Verse.
13. 15.
to know that they have eternal life, and that they have the petitions that
they desire of him. And thus Gregory says, as touching the heavenly City,
Ierus^lem which is above, that Gregor. Exposit. in 1. Reg. l. 1. c. 1. Moral.
Quam familiariter dil^git, suam esse indubitanter credit. Suam na^que hanc
ciuitatemesse cognouerat qui dicebat, scimus quia si terrestris nostra domus,
etc.
he that entirely loves it, does undoubtedly believe it to be his own, For,
says he, he knew this City to be his, that said, 2. Cor. 5. 1.
We know that if our earthly house of this habitation be dissolved, we have a
building which is of God, a house not made with hands eternal in heaven. And
thus says Leo, that Leo de Resurrect. Domini, ser. 2. Quam idco vsque ad
celerrim^m resurrectionem voluit esse mortalem vt credentibus in cum nec
persecutio insuperabilis nec mors posset esse terribilis, cum ita dubitandum
non esset de consortio gloriae sicut dubitandum non crat de communione naturae.
Si ergo incunctanter cord credimus quod ^re profitemur, nos in Christo
crucifi^i, nos sumus mortui, nos sepulti, nos etiam die tertia suscitati.
Christ would have his flesh to continue in case of mortality until his
res^rrection, that to them that believed in him, neither persecution might be
unconquerable, nor death might be terrible, for that they were no more to doubt
of being partakers of glory with him, then they were to doubt of his being
partaker of the same nature with them. If, says he, we steadfastly believe with
the heart that which we profess with the mouth, we are crucified in Christ, we
are dead, we are buried, we are also the third day raised again from the dead.
Ibid. sermon. 1. Non haesitamus diffidentia, nec incerta expectatione
suspendimur, sed accept^ promissionis ex^rdi^ fidei oculis qu^ sunt futura iam
cernimus and natura pronecti^ne gaudentes quod credimus iam tenemus.
We stagger not by distrust, says he again, neither do we hang in uncertain
expectation, but having received the beginning of the promise, we now see with
the eyes of faith the things that are to come, and rejoicing for the
advancement of our nature, we even now hold that which we believe. This is the
assurance of the faithful, even an undoubted belief and knowledge, that the
heavenly City is theirs; a certain and undoubted expectation of the glory of
Christ, whereby they rejoice as being in him already raised again from the
dead, and as already holding and possessing that which they do believe.
Howsoever therefore men are to be shaken out of all carnal security and
presumption of their salvation, yet the godly security and presumption of faith
is not to be denied, and the more we grow in faith, the more does the soul
grow secure and undoubted of God to be our God; presuming, not of our selves,
where indeed we see nothing but cause of fear, but of God only, to say of
him; Psalm. 71. 14.
I will go forth in the strength of the Lord God, and will make mention of thy
righteousness only. And again, Psalm. 124. 7.
Our help stands in the name of the Lord, which has made heaven and earth.
In a word one truth agrees with another, and therefore M. Bishop in opposing
some formal speeches of the holy Ghost, against other the like formal
speeches, which in their true meaning stand very well and agree together, does
no other but deforme the truth, and wickedly takes upon him the patronage and
maintenance of falsehood and untruth.

CHAP. XIII. That the good works and sufferings of this life are not
meritorious, or worthy of the bliss of the life to come.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

PAul says, The sufferings of this time are not worthy of the glory that shall
be reueiled, etc. to, Paul says nothing for those points, etc.

W. BISHOP.
I Say that M. Abbot has gotten such a custom of abusing Gods word, that he
scarce alleges one sentence of it, without one paltry shift or other. The
words of S. Paul truly translated, are: Our sufferings are not worthy to the
glory ( or as our English phrase is) are not to be compared to the glory of,
etc. that is, our labors or pains are not either so great and weighty, or of
so long endurance, as be the joys of heaven: yet through the dignity which we
receive by being made members of Christ, and by the virtue of Gods grace,
wherewith those works be wrought, and by the promise of God, both we are
accounted worthy of heaven, according to S Paul's own phrase; Which (
persecutions) 2. Thessal. 1. v. 5.
you sustain, that you may be counted worthy the Kingdom of God: and our
sufferings meritorious of life everlasting, which S. Paul does very precisely
teach, where he says; that our tribulation, which for the 2. Cor. 4. verse. 17.
present is momentary and light, yet works above measure exceedingly an
eternal weight of glory in us, we not considering the things that are seen,
but that are not seen: and elsewhere is bold to say, That 2. Tim 4. verse. 8.
God had laid up for him a crown of justice, which our Lord will render to me
in that day, a just Judge; and not only to me, but to them also that love his
coming: If God as a just Judge, render the joys of heaven as a crown of
justice, then were they before justly deserved, and the sufferings of them that
deserved them, were in just proportion worthy of them. Thus briefly any
indifferent Reader may perceive, how far S. Paul being rightly taken, is from
affording any relief unto the Protestant cause. They do now, as many
unlearned and unstable men did, even in his own time, (witness Saint Peter)
deprave and misuse certain sentences of his, 2. Pet. 3. verse. 16.
hard to be understood, to their own perdition, and to the deceiving and
undoing of their followers: for in all his Epistles (being understood as he
meant them) there is not one word or syllable, that makes for the Protestants,
or any other Sectaries; and plenty there are of plain texts for the most
points of the Catholic faith. A taste whereof I will give you, as soon as I
shall have made an end of answering unto this his idle discourse.

R. ABBOT.
HEre is nothing said but what has been Of Merits, sect. 10. 19. 20.
already so fully and clearly answered, as that M. Bishop may justly be
ashamed, thus altogether like a Cuckoo to sing over the same song again. I
pray thee, gentle Reader, to see the places by me quoted, and take knowledge
how this trifling wrangler labors to abuse thee, odiously and impudently
insisting upon those things which by testimonies of Scriptures and Fathers are
made so manifest against him, as that he has nothing left to say for his own
defense. He charge me with false translation, because I say that our
sufferings are not worthy of the glory that shall be reueiled, whereas he says
the words truly translated are, Our sufferings are not worthy to the glory.
And what is that, I pray? Our English phrase is, says he; they are not to be
compared to the glory. Well, admit it to be so; but wherein does he mean they
are not to be compared? Forsooth, our labors or pains are not either so great
and weighty* or of so long endurance as be the joys of heaven. Thus whereas he
acknowledges that the word signifies worthy, he notwithstanding quite puts
out worthiness, and in steed thereof puts in length and greatness. But if
where the words are, they are not worthy to the glory, he will needs read,
they are not to be compared to the glory, we suppose that his discretion should
lead him to understand, that it is as touching worthiness, that they are not
to be compared. And does not their own translation instruct him so much, The
passions of this time are not condign to the glory? for what will he make of
condign, but comparable in worth, where there is, as Coster says, Coster.
Enchirid. cap. 7. Est dignitas quaedam operis ad mercedem.
a dignity of the work to the reward; that is, a worthiness of the one, to
merit and deserve the other? Which condignity being denied by the Apostle, as
by their own translation is made good, it follows that the passions of this
time are denied to be comparable in worth to the glory to come, and therefore
that we truly translate that they are not worthy of it. To add nothing further
to that that formerly has been said particularly of the place, I will only
note in general what some writers of the Church of Rome have judged,
concerning the worthiness of works, that according to my maine purpose I may
make it appear, that there is great difference betwixt that Roman Church that
now is, and that that of old was. Hierome says, that Hieron. in Esai. lib. 6.
c. 13. Cum dies iudicij vel dormitionis aduenerit, omnes manus dissoluentur,
etc quia nullum opus dignum Dei iusti^^a reperietur, and non just(...) abitur
in eius conspectu omnis ^iuens, v^de Propheta dic^^ in Psalmo, si (...)ui ta^es
attend^s, Domine, quis (...)bit?
when the day of judgment or death shall come; all hands shall be weakened or
loosed, because there shall be no work found worthy of the justice of God,
neither shall any man living be justified or found righteous in his sight;
whence the Prophet says in the Psalm, If thou, O Lord, wilt mark iniquities,
who shall endure it? To like purpose Leo Bishop of Rome says; Leo in Anniuers.
sermon. 1. N^que enim de qualitate operum nost^orum p^nd^t coelestium mensura
donorum aut in i^^o seculo in quo tota vita ^etatio est, hoc vmc^^que
retribuitur quod meretur, vbi si iniquitates Do^^^aus observaret nullus
iud^cium suum su(...)t.
The measure of heavenly gifts depends not upon the quality of our works,
neither in this world where our whole life is a temptation, is that rendered to
every man which he deserves, where if the Lord should mark iniquities, none
should be able to endure his judgment. Both which places do plainly disable
the works of men in the judgment of God, and do charge them with
insufficiency to the meriting of heavenly reward; but the latter so far
depresseth them, as that we cannot be taken thereby to deserve; or to be worthy
of the benefits of God in this life, and therefore much less the glory of the
life to come. But Gregory Bishop of Rome in this point is most clear,
affirming that Gregor. Moral. l. 8. c 9. Iusti s^ pe^^turos ab^que (...)tate
praes^^int si remo^a p^etate (...) quia hoc ipsum quod ius^^ vidomur viuere,
culpo est si vitam nostram cum i^dicat, h^^c apud ^^ d^^ina miser^cordia non
excusat, etc. Apud eum distric^e iudica^i, ^psi quoque m^cul^s ^nqu^nationis
habent qui per munditiam sanctitatis lucent.
the just know before hand that without doubt they shall perish, if they be
judged without mercy, because even that that we seem to live justly is faulty,
if the mercy of God in judging our life do not excuse the same, and even they
who shine in purity of holiness ^^ue also their spots of filthiness, if they
be strictly and narrowly judged. Ibid. c. 21. Quantalibet i(...)tia polleant,
nequaqu^^ sibi ad ^^^oc etiam vel electi s^fficiu^t si in iudicio districte
requira^tur.
The very elect, says he, howsoever. they excel in righteousness, have not
sufficient in them for innocence if in judgment they be strictly dealt
withal. Therefore he says again, that Ibid. l 9. c. 18. Si r^mola pi^tate
d(...)mur opus nostru^ p^na dignum est quod nos remunerar^ pr^stolamur, etc.
R^slat vt postquam bonum opus agitur lach^ymae expiatumis exquirantur quatenus
ad aeterna praemia meritum rectiop^ris subuchat humilitas pos^^e lationis.
if we be judged without mercy, the work is worthy to be punished, which we
expect to have rewarded, and therefore that tears of expiation are to be
required, that humility of prayer may lift up the merit of good work to the
obtaining of everlasting reward. And thus he makes the holy man Job to say;
Ibid. l. 9. c. 11. Etsi ad opus virtutis ex^reuero, ad vitam non ex meritis sed
ex venia conualesco.
Albeit I grow to the work of virtue* yet I avail not to li^e by merits, but
by pardon and favor. So he brings in David also saying, Ide^ in psalm.
Poenitent. 1. Non de meis meritis confidens vt me saluum facias supplico, sed
de sola miserecordia tua praesum^ns impetrere quod de meis meritis non spero.
I pray thee to save me, not trusting to mine own merits, but presuming to
obtain that of thy mercy only, which I have no hope of by mine own merits.
Now if our just life be faulty, and in our righteousness we find not
sufficient to approve our innocence in the sight of God; if in our best works
we be worthy of punishment, and subject to perish, if God deal severely and
strictly with us; if holy men acknowledge and confess according to truth, that
they have nothing to presume of in their own merits, but that they trust only
to Gods mercy; if amidst our good works it be by humble prayer and request
that we obtain the eternal reward, where is that worthiness of works which
M. Bishop pleads for, and what cause has he to be angry that we say by the
Apostles words, that our good works are not worthy of the glory that is to
come? Or if he will needs be angry, let him be angry with Ambrose, though not
a member, yet a neighbor of the Church of Rome, who plainly expounds the
Apostles meaning to be this, that Ambros. Epist. 22. Vt hortetur ad passione
adiungit, quia omnia quae patimur minora sunt and indigna quorum pro laboribus
tanta rependatur futurorum merces benorum, etc.
all the things that we suffer are too little and unworthy, that for the pains
and labors thereof, so great reward of future good things should be rendered
unto us. Which being so, we see how vainly M. Bishop deals, to tell us a tale
how our works attain to so great worthiness, when as there is no such
worthiness to be found in them. We receive this dignity, says he, by being
made members of Christ, and by the virtue of Gods grace wherewith our works
are wrought, and by the promise of God. Where it is wholly idle and
impertinent, that he mentions the promise of God, for what has the promise
of God to do with the merit of man? God binds himself by promise where
there is no merit, nor any thing whereof to merit, yea where there are
demerits, to give him cause to forbear from promising. Thus says St. Austin;
August. in Psalm. 109. Quicquid promisit, indignis promisit vt no^ quasi
operibus merces promitteretur, sed gratia a nomine suo gratis daretur, quia hoc
ipsum quod just viuit in qua^tum homo po^est just viuere, non meriti humani
sed beneficij est diuini.
Whatsoever God promised, he promised to us being unworthy, that it might not
be promised as a reward to works, but being by name grace might accordingly be
freely given, because to live justly so far as man can live justly, is not a
matter of man's merit, but of the gift of God. And of this promise of God he
says again, that Ide^ in psalm. 88. Non secundu^ merita nostra, sed secundum
miserecordiam illius firma est promissio.
it is sure not according to our merits, but according to his own mercy. Why
then does M. Bishop go about to build the merit of man upon the promise of
God, which is only his free and voluntary mercy? As for the grace of God given
unto us by being members of Christ, true it is, that all our virtue and
goodness proceeds therefrom; but to say nothing that man cannot be said to
merit by that that is the work of God, so far are we from having the justice
of God, hereby bound unto us in respect of our worthiness, as that God has
rather hereby occasion of quarrel against us, for disgracing those gifts
whereby he has graced us, and for blemishing and staining with our corruptions
those good works, which he has vouchsafed to do by us. For as the clearest
water having a troublesome passage through a muddy and unwholesome ground,
contracteth and gathers the corruption and filth thereof, even so the grace
of God having a troubled passage through the corrupt nature of man, which is
continually casting up the mire and dirt of noisome and sinful motions and
desires, gathers thereof a soil and filth, by reason whereof there
proceeds nothing from man that is not corrupted and defiled. Thus Hilary
teaches, and is therein approved by Austin, that Hilar. apud August. cont.
Julian. lib. 2. Memores and co^scij corpora nostra vitioru^ omnium esse
materie^, pro qua nihil in nobis mundum, nihil innocens obtinemus.
we are to remember that our bodies are the matter of all vices, by means
whereof we have nothing in us innocent, nothing clean. Greg. Mor. l. 1. c.
17. Quid est quod in hac vita sine quauis tenuissimi contagij inquinatione
peragatur.
What is there, says Gregory, that can be done in this life without some
defilement of secret contagion? And again, Ibid. l. 31. c. 5 El^cti qu^mdiu in
hac vita sunt sine qua^tulocunque culpae contagio esse non possunt.
The elect so long as they are in this life cannot be without some contagion of
sin. Yea, Ibid. l. 32. c. 4 Nullus in hac vita ita perfectus est vt quamlibet
Deo deuotus sit, inter ipsa quantumcunque pia vota non peccet.
there is none so perfect in this life, says he, howsoever devoted unto God,
as that he sins not amidst his most holy and religious desires. To be short,
Ibid. l. 35. c. 16. Si de his diuinitus districte discutimur, quis inter is^a
remanet salutis locus quando and mala nostra pura mal^ sunt, and bona quae nos
^abere credimus pura bona esse nequaquam possunt?
if God do narrowly sift our doings, what place is there left for salvation,
when as our evil doings are merely evil, but the good things, which we
believe we have, cannot be purely good? If our good works cannot be purely
good, if all that we do, be polluted and defiled with the contagion of sin,
and in all that proceeds from us, there be found uncleanness, if God by the
eye of his severe judgment do strictly view and behold the same, then cannot
any good works of ours be truly said to be worthy of the heavenly glory, yea
they make us rather obnoxious to censure and punishment, if God do not
mercifully remit the defaults of them. Neither do the places by M. Bishop
alleged prove any thing contrary to that we say. The first says only, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
That ye may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, and it is one thing to
be worthy in Gods account and acceptance, which all the faithful are in
Christ; another thing to be worthy by merit and perfection, which no man can
be. Of the former St. Bernard says: Bernard. in dedicat. Eccles. ser. 5 Nos
sumus sed ipsius dignatione, non dignitale nostra, etc. Nec dignatio locum
habet vbi (...)rit praesumpti^ dignitatis.
We are, but it is by Gods dignation or vouchsafing us a^ worthy, not by our
dignity or worthiness; Yea, dignation or vouchsafing has no place, says he,
where there is a presumption of dignity or worth. Of the latter Chrysostom
says; Chrysostom. ad Coloss. homil 2. Nemo talem vitae conuersationem ostendit
vt regno dignus esse possit, sed totum donum est ipsius Dei.
No man shows such conversation of life, as that he can be worthy of the
Kingdom, but this is wholly the gift of God. His second proof is out of those
words, 2. Cor. 4. 17.
This momentany and light affliction works unto us beyond measure an
excellent and an eternal weight of glory. But here we find nothing of our
being worthy of that glory which our affliction does work unto us, and so
far is it from proving our merit and worth, as that Fulgentius uses it
directly to prove the contrary. For having said, that Fulgent. vt supra. cap.
10.
in eternal life the grace of Gods reward does incomparably and unspeakably
exceed all the merit of the will and work of man, though being good and given
of God, as I have before alleged; he brings for confirmation hereof both the
words here capitally handled, The sufferings of this time are not worthy of
the glory to come, and also these words which M. Bishop here further cites:
This momentany and light affliction works unto us above measure an excellent
and an eternal weight of glory. And very plainly does it follow hereof; for
how can the one be deemed to be worthy of the other, when as there is no
measure of proportion, betwixt the one and the other? And may we not then
think M. Bishop well wrought, to bring us a text for proof of a point, the
contrary whereof has been anciently deemed to be proved thereby? His third
proof is out of those words of the same Apostle; 2. Tim. 4. 8.
Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of justice, which God that just Judge
will render unto me at that day. Hereof he collecteth thus; If God as a just
Judge render the joys of heaven as a crown of justice, then were they before
justly deserved, and the sufferings of them that deserved them, were in just
proportion worthy of them. But thou see, gentle Reader, that the point that
tyeth this sequel together, is his own word only; do thou deny it, and he
has no means to make it good. Let him lay his ground where he will; he shall
find nothing whence to build that which he concludes. If he allege that it
is called a crown of justice, let him take his answer from St. Bernard;
Bernard. de Great. and lib. Arbit. Est ergo quam Paulus expectat corona
iustitiae, sed iustitia Dei, non suae. Iustum est quippe vt reddat quod debet.
Debet autem quod pollicitus est. Et haec est iustitia de qua praesumit
Apostolus, promissio Dei.
It is a crown of justice which Paul expects, but of Gods justice, not his
own. For it is just that God pay that which he owes; and he owes that which
he has promised. And this is the justice whereof the Apostle presumes, even
the promise of God. And to this purpose Ambrose says, that Ambros. in Romans 3.
Iustitia Dei dicta est quae videtur esse miserecordia quia de promissione
origi^em habet and cum promissum Dei redditur, iustitia Dei dicitur. Iustitia
enim Dei est quia redditu^ est quod promissum est.
it is called the justice of God, which seems to be mercy, because it has
his original from promise, and when the promise of God is performed, it is
called the justice of God; for it is the justice of God that that be performed
which is promised. The crown of justice then is that which God in justice
yields, not because we have deserved it, but because he himself has
promised it, and therefore M. Bishop here can have no proof to serve his turn.
Neither does he gain any thing by it, though we understand it to be the
crown of our justice, or wherewith our justice is crowned ( Greg. Mor. l 24.
c. 5. Iustitia nostra dicitur no^ quae ex nostro nostra est, sed quae diuina
largitate sit nostra.
it being called our justice, as Gregory says, not which is ours as of our
own, but which by the gift of God becomes ours) because in crowning our
justice, it is verified which the Scripture says; Psalm. 103. 4.
He crowns thee in mercy and loving kindness. Does it follow which he
concludes, that because God vouchsafes to honor our service with reward,
therefore the service which we do is in just proportion worthy of the same
reward? Surely of them which receive this crown of justice it is said, Psalm.
55. 7. Vulgat. Latin.
Thou will save them for nothing: Hieron. adu. Pelag. l. 2. Pro nihilo, inquit,
saluos faciet illos: haud dubium quin iustos qui no^ proprio merito sed Dei
saluatur clementia.
He means undoubtedly the just, says Hierome, who are not saved by their
own merit, but by the mercy of God. If the just be saved by mercy, then cannot
the crown of justice argue any thing for worth by merit and desert. And for
this cause Apoc. 4. 10.
the four and twenty elders, representing the whole company of Gods elect, do
cast down their crowns before the throne of God, saying, Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory and honor and power; thereby disclaiming and renouncing
all worthiness in themselves, that they may yield the acknowledgement thereof
as due unto God only. Another argument M. Bishop seems to take of that that
is said, that God rendereth the crown of justice, as if it could not be said
that God does render, but only to the worth and merit of man. But thereto I
answer with the words of Basil; Basil. in psalm. 114. Manet requies sempiterna
illos qui in hac vita legitimecer. tauerint, no^ tanquam debitum operibus
redditu^, sed ob munificentissimi Dei gratiam in quo sperauerunt exhibita. See
of Merits, sect. 13.
There is eternal rest laid up for all them that lawfully fight the fight of
this life, not to be rendered according to the merit of works (or by way of
debt unto works) but by the grace of our bountiful God, prepared for all them
that trust in him. St. Austin says, that August. in Psalm. 32. cap. 1. No^
dicimus Deo; Domine, Read quod accepis^i, sed Read quod promisisti.
we do not say unto God, O Lord, render that which thou have received, but,
render that which thou have promised. God rendereth then for his promise sake;
he rendereth of grace and favor, and therefore fondly does M. Bishop hereof
go about to frame an argument for merit and desert. And as little help has
he by that he further urges that God does this as a just Judge; for will he
say that a just Judge is always tied to render according to desert? A
malefactor has deserved to die, but the law has confirmed and published a
pardon, or else has yielded him this benefit that if he can read Clerklike,
he shall thereby save his life; and shall not a just Judge frame his sentence
accordingly? Will M. Bishop say that he is no just Judge in such a case, that
dismisseth him with life that has justly deserved death? If he will not say
so, then let him be so wise here as to understand that just judgment proceeds
not always by deserts, but it is the part of a just Judge to judge by laws.
Now we know that as with men, so with God there are laws of rigor and
extremity, and there are laws also of favor and mercy. The law of works is a
law of rigor, Romans 4 15.
a law which causes wrath, because Gal. 3. 22.
it concludes all under sin, by reason whereof Verse. 10.
so many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse; for it is
written, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is every man that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them, and there is no man that continues to do all,
because Iam. 3. 2.
in many things we offend all. Therefore the ministry of this law is called 2.
Cor. 3. 7. 9.
the ministry of death, the ministry of condemnation; and the judgment which
proceeds according to this law, is called by St. Austin August. in Joan.
tract. 22. Judicium damnationis.
the judgment of damnation, because no man escapes damnation that undergoes
this judgment. Against this judgment David prays, when he says: Psalm. 143.
2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, etc. that is, as St. Austin
expounds it; August. de Temp. ser. 49. Ne st^^ mecum in iudicio e^^gendo a me
omnia quae praecepisti and omnia quae iussist^. Nam me inuenies reum si in
iudicium intraue^is mecum. Opus est ergo mihi mi^^r^c^rdia tua potius quam
liquidissimo i^dici^ tuo.
Stand not with me in judgment to require of me all that thou have willed and
commanded; for thou will find me guilty, if thou enter into judgment with me;
I have need therefore of thy mercy rather then of thy mere judgment. The
Apostle St. Paul bearing the same mind, and dreading the same judgment,
desires at that day Phil. 3. 9.
to be found in Christ, not having, says he, mine own righteousness which is
by the law, but the righteousness which is by the faith of Christ, even the
righteousness which is of God through faith. And hereby he leads us to the
consideration of another law, which he calls elsewhere Romans 3. 27.
the law of faith, the tenor whereof is expressed by the words of our
Savior, John 6. 40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the son and
believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. This is a law of mitigation and mercy, whereby is administered grace
and righteousness and life, which could not be obtained by the former law. To
this law are annexed, and thereupon depend many favors and gracious promises
which God has made unto the faithful, grounded upon Jesus Christ the
Mediator of the new Testament, in 2. Cor. 1. 20.
whom they are all Yea, and in him Amen, first granted for his sake, and for
his sake faithfully performed. Now these things being thus decreed and
established by law, God as a just Judge dispenses these favors and graces
accordingly, even by just judgment, consisting here not in examination of
merits, but in discerning the marks and qualities, whereby God will have them
known, to whom by law the covenant of this grace and mercy does appertain.
This judgment St. Austin calls August. in Joan* tract. 22. Iudicium
discriminationis.
a judgment of distinction, whereby God puts a difference betwixt the good
and the evil, accordingly as the same St. Austin expounds those words of
David, Psalm. 43. Vulg. 42. 1.
Judge me O God, etc. August. in Psalm. 42. Distet intereum qui in te cred^t and
eum qui non credit. Par infirmitas, sed dispar conscientia. Par labor. sed
dispar desiderium.
Let there be difference betwixt him which believes in thee, and him which
believes not. There is infirmity alike, but the conscience is unlike. They are
equal in travel and labor, but they differ in desire. And by this judgment
God maintains the cause of the righteous against the wicked, their cause
being just howsoever their merit be nothing, and therefore yields that to the
justification of their cause, which yet they cannot claim by desert of works.
And thus the Apostle in respect of the faithful calls 2 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
it the just judgment of God, whereby he vouchsafith them the Kingdom of God;
for it is just with God, says he, to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you, and to you which are troubled rest with us. It is just with God
and just judgment* because it is so ordered and decreed in the law of faith,
that they shall be reckoned worthy of the Kingdom of God, that do suffer
affliction for the testimony thereof. And so the same Apostle being himself to
receive sentence of death as a malefactor, at the hands of an unjust Judge,
comfort himself in the goodness of his cause and the testimony of his
conscience, that having fought a good fight and finished his course and kept
the faith, he should of a just Judge at that day receive a crown, whereby
against that unjust sentence his justice and uprightness in that behalf,
should be made apparent and manifest to the whole world. This judgment then
proceeding by the law of faith, is tempered and mingled with mercy, as I have
Of Merits, sect. 19.
elsewhere showed, God accepting what we have done, but not requiring what we
have not done, testifying our righteousness, such as it is, but never
questioning our sins. For Aug. Epist. 29. Cum Rex iustus sederit in thron^,
quis gloriabitur se castu^ habere cor? aut quis gloriabitur se esse immunem a
peccato? Quae igitur spes est nisi miserecordia superexultet iudicium?
when the just King shall sit upon his throne, says Austin, who shall glory
that he has a clean heart, or that he is free from sin? and therefore what
hope is there unless mercy surmount judgment? And so in another place; Idem
in psalm. 129. Apud te propitiatio est. Nam si non esset apud te propitiatio, si
iudex solu^ esse velles and miserecors esse nolles, obseruares omnes
iniquitates nost^as and qu^reres ^as, quis sustineret? quis ante te staret and
d^ceret, Innocens sum? quis staret in iudicio tuo? spes ergo vna est quoniam
apud te propitiatio est.
There is mercy with thee; for if there were not mercy with thee; if thou
would be a judge only and would not be merciful, but would mark all
our iniquities and seek after them, who could endure it? who could stand
before thee and say, I am innocent? who should stand in thy judgment? Our only
hope therefore is for that with thee there is mercy. If then with the just
judge there be no hope without mercy, then surely it is not for merit, that the
just Judge rendereth unto us the crown of justice, but according to the law of
faith he crowns his own gifts in us, and us in them, even for his own
mercies sake. M. Bishops arguments therefore are all vanished into wind, and
the indifferent Reader may well perceive that the Protestants cause is better
strengthened by St. Paul, then that it need to stand in fear of such Popish
deluding sophismes. A blind shift he has under pretense of 2. Pet. 3. 16.
some things in St. Paul's Epistles hard to be understood, to color his
cauilling at those things which are professedly disputed and most plainly and
clearly spoken. In all his Epistles, says he, being understood as he meant
them, there is not one word or syllable that makes for the Protestants. But
how I marvel should we attain to understand them as he meant them? May we
learn it of M. Bishop, or are we to go to the Pope to know it of him? Surely
a mad meaning shall we have of St. Paul's Epistles, if we will yield to take
them after their meaning. What way has M. Bishop or the Pope to understand St.
Paul's meaning, that we should not understand it as well as they? or what reason
can they give us why we should not by St. Paul's words understand his meaning,
as well as by their words we understand theirs? Was St. Paul so hard of speech,
as that he wanted words to declare his meaning? or was he so desirous to
conceal his meaning, as that he would speak one thing and mean another, yea
the contrary to that he spoke? Would he be a Protestant in words, when in
meaning he intended to be a Papist? They bewray hereby what they are; be thou
out of doubt, gentle Reader, that they are no welwillers to the Apostles
meaning, that teach so many things contrary to the Apostles words. We see how
perspicuously, frequently, constantly, he teaches the same that we teach*
where to give a meaning different from that which he says, is no other but
maliciously to pervert his meaning. Neither do we affirm any thing by his
words, wherein we have not the certain testimony of the ancient Church
concurring with us, as M. Bishop in all these points sees to his own
confusion; when as in the mean time it is enough with him to cite texts, but
whether they make any thing for proof of that, for which he cites them, it
skilleth not. And this we shall see in that plenty of plain texts, which he
says he has to produce for their vncatholike faith, which when I shall have
examined, it will easily appear to the Reader, whether his discourse or mine
be the more idle. If the taste that he will give us be no better then that
which we have already tasted, it will utterly distaste the Reader, unless he
be such a one as has lost his taste.

CHAP. XIIII. That the Scriptures are loosely and impertinently alleged by the
Papists, for proof of their false doctrines, as namely of Justification before
God, of Free Will, of the Merit of single life, of Relikes and Images, of the
Mass and Transubstantiation, and sundry other such like.
ANSWER TO THE EPISTLE.

PAul says nothing for those points, for the denial whereof M. Bishop
condemns us, etc. to, Well, M. Bishop, let us leave Peter and Paul, etc.

W. BISHOP.. 1.
WE have here a dainty dish of M. Abbots cookery, a large rhetorical
conclusion, deducted out of lean, thin, and weak premises. He assayed to
make a show out of the Apostle, that there was not a little which would serve
the Protestants turn, and cited to that purpose certain sentences out of him:
but so properly, that some of them indeed seemed to sound for him, though they
had in truth a far different sense; others had neither sense, nor sound, nor
syllable for him. Nevertheless as though he had gotten a great conquest, he
sings a triumph, and strikes up a brave victory, that all in Peter and Paul
is for the Protestant, nothing for the Papist. Afterward as it were correcting
himself, he adds nothing, but in show at least serves the Protestants
turn: which is one of the truest words he there delivers. The Protestants
indeed be jolly nimble witted fellows, that can make any thing serve at least
for a show of their cause, and when all other things fail them, Ad fabulas
conuertuntur; they turn their ears away 2. Tim. ^. verse. 4.
from truth (as the Apostle speaks) and fall to fables; and one Robin
good fellow (I woene) for lack of a better, is brought upon the stage, to spit
and cry out: Fie upon Peter, fie upon Paul, that had not remembered to say one
word for Popery, but all for the Protestant. Fie (I say) upon such a cause,
that must be underpropped with such rotten baggage stuff. What shadow of
likelihood is there, that one should tell the Pope such a tale to his face, or
that Erasmus (who was in most points a Catholic) should report it? or could
there be any poor Robin ( excepting M. Abbots himself) so simple and
poore-blinde, that in all the writings of those blessed Apostles, he could not
find one word, that gave any sound or show for the Catholic cause? You have
heard already, that I have to every place picked by M. Abbot out of S. Paul in
favor of their religion, opposed another out of the same Epistle, that
speaks more plainly against them for us: I will here out of the abundance of
testimonies which the same S. Paul (whom the simple Protestants take to be
wholly for them) bears to our doctrine, set down some store even in defense
of those very points, which Master Abbot has made special choice off, to
object against us.

R. ABBOT.
WE note well M. Bishop, that no Cook can f^t your diseased appetite, but such
a one as is brought up in the Popes kitchen, whilst you like better Numb. 11.
5.
the fish, and leekes, and oinions, and garlic of Egypt, then Manna that
came from heaven. We see it commonly so, as has been before said, that corrupt
stomachs are best pleased with the most gross and unwholesome meats, and as
the horse-leach sucketh out of the body the most noisome and putrified blood,
and the Spider in the garden or otherwhere gathers that only which may be
turned to venime and poison; so you out of the body of the Church draw that
only which is noisome and poisonfull, and nothing pleases your humor, but
what serves for the corrupting, both of your self and other men. This is the
cause why my premises and conclusions seem to you so lean, thin, and weak,
which notwithstanding are hitherto found inuincibly, grounded against all those
silly oppositions, wherewith you have encountered them. The sentences which I
have cited out of the Apostle, how simply, yea how shamefully are they
discharged by you, only with an odious reiteration of those things which in my
former answer have been already trodden to the ground? Some of them, you say,
seemed to sound for us though they had in truth a far different sense, but
what slender and miserable shifts have you used to frame them, to signify
otherwise then they sound? Some have neither sense nor sound nor syllable for
us, and yet it is found that both syllable and sound and sense, do wholly
savor and sound out our doctrine against you. Which is so plain both in the
thing it self, and in those iustifications which I have used thereof, as that
I doubt not but that in your own conscience, M. Bishop, I have gotten the
conquest; only it is with you according to that which St. Austin says, August.
de Ciuit. Dei, l. 6. c. 1. Ea putatur gloria vanitatis nullis cedere viribus
veritatis.
This is esteemed the glory of vanity, never to yield to any force of truth.
But here I wish thee, gentle Reader, to observe what a confession he makes of
that that I said, that St. Paul wrote nothing but what in show at least serves
the Protestants turn. It is, says he, one of the truest words he there
delivers. But if it be true that all that St. Paul has written, does in show
at least serve the Protestants turn, then my wonder is acknowledged to be
just, namely that St. Paul should be a Papist, and yet should write nothing but
what in show at least serves the Protestants turn. M. Bishop will have it
thought that in sense and meaning St. Paul is every where against us; but what
a strange thing is it that St. Paul in meaning should be every where against
us, and yet that in show and appearance of words he should speak altogether
for us? Concerning this matter I noted what the Rhemists have said, aduertising
their Reader, that Rhem. Testam. Argument of the Epistles in general.
where any thing in St. Paul's Epistles sounds to him as contrary to the
doctrine of their Church, he fails of the right sense. Herein M. Bishop
joins with them, both confessing that St. Paul's words are against them, but
bearing men in hand that the meaning always is otherwise then the words
import. Thus they gull and abuse the simplicity and folly of them that will
hearken unto them, persuading that that is improbable, incredible, impossible,
that the holy Apostles directed by the spirit of God should speak one thing,
as if they were Protestants, and yet mean another as if they were Papists;
that in belief they should be Papists, and yet should say nothing for
justification of Popery, save only by secret and concealed senses, which cannot
be ^nforced or gathered by the words. Justly are they given over of God to
error and lies, that vvilfully blind themselves from taking knowledge of such
delusion. Now here I was disposed to dally a little with M. Bishop, and to
tell him my imagination, that for anger that Peter and Paul had said nothing in
their behalf, they might happily fare as Robertus Liciensis did in another case
before the Pope, spitting and crying out, Fie upon Peter, fie upon Paul, etc.
M. Bishop being offended at this jest, as 1. Kings 18. ^^.
Baals Priests were at the jesting of Elias, tells his Reader for want of
matter, that I turn from the truth to fables, as the Apostle speaks, (a text
very untowardly applied, if there were occasion to examine it) and that for
lack of a better I bring Robin goodfellow upon the stage. Now that Robertus
Liciensis a Franciscan Friar was indeed a right Popish Robin good fellow* of
whom Erasm. de rat. Concionandi, lib. 3.
Erasmus reports, that preaching on a time very instantly and earnestly, to
stir men up to go against the Turks and Paynims, and coming at length to
lament that none offered themselves to be Captains and leaders in this
service, professes in the end that rather then there should be any want in
that behalf, he would not stick to cast off his Franciscan vveede, and
become himself a Captain or a Soldier amongst them. At which words he
cast off his upper garment, and underneath was attired and furnished as a
Soldier, and so prosecuted this matter for the space of half an hour, and
being afterward questioned why he thus did, confessed that he did it for his
Minions sake, who had told him that she disliked nothing in him, but his
Friars vveede. Whereupon he demanding in what attire he should best content
her, and she answering that she could best like of him in the habit of a
Soldier, he bid her be the next day at Sermon, and she should see him so, and
then played Robin good-fellowes part in that sort as I have said. In the same
place Erasmus tells of that Liciensis, the story to which I before alluded,
Erasm. ibid.
that being on a day to preach before the Pope and his Cardinals, when he saw
them come in with that Princely pomp, and the Pope carried in a chair, and
all men doing worship to him, without any other words begins to cry out, Fie
upon St. Peter, fie upon St. Paul, spitting and turning this way and that way,
and so gate him down again, leaving all astonished at him, some thinking him
to be fallen mad, and other some imagining him to be become an Heretic or a
Pagan. Being afterward examined how he fell to such horrible blasphemy, he
answered that he had prepared a far other matter to speak of, which he
imparted to them, but when I saw you, says he, come in with such pomp and
live so deliciously, and withal considered with my self, how mean, how
painful, and unpleasing a life the Apostles led, in whose places you succeed*
I gathered with my self, that either they were fools that went so hard a way
to heaven, or else that you go the direct way to hell. But of you, says he,
who have the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, I could not misdoubt any evil.
It remained therefore that I should detest the folly of them, who when they
might have lived gloriously and pleasantly as you do, would rather through
their whole life with fasting, and watching, and labor torment themselves. Now
as in this case this Robertus Liciensis cried, Fie upon Peter and Paul, for
their kind of life so unlike to the life of Popes and Cardinals; so I thought
it might be likely that M. Bishop and his fellows in their anger might cry out
upon them for their kind of doctrine, so unlike to the doctrine of Popery, and
containing nothing at all for the trash and trinkets of their profession. M.
Bishop says, that there is no shadow of likelihood that one should tell the
Pope such a tale to his face, or that Erasmus being in most points a Catholic
would report it. But for the inducing of his Reader to this opinion, see a
trick of this honest man. For if he had truly quoted the place as he found it
by me set down, he thought his Reader would perhaps look the place, and so
would find it to be as I had said. But to prevent this, whereas I had noted in
the margent, Erasm. de rat. Concion. lib. 3. he sets down in steed
thereof; Erasmus de ratione, that the Reader when he should search for such a
book of Erasmus, and find no such written by him, might think me to be as
very a cozener as Doctor Bishop himself now is found to be. Let me tell him
once again that Erasmus has written a work, entitled Ecclesiastes or de
ratione Concionandi, in Page 291. as it was printed at Basil by Frobenius, 1535.
the third book whereof he has left to future memory those worthy stories of
Robertus Liciensis, which I have before reported. For conclusion of this
passage he terms me a poor Robin, simple and poore-blinde, that can find
nothing in the Apostles writings for their Catholic cause, telling us that he
has showed the contrary already, and will further show it in those very
points, which I my self have made choice of. But what he has done already we
have seen; it remains to examine the rest that follow that it may appear
whether the simple Protestants do well or not, in taking the Apostle St. Paul
to be wholly for them.

W. BISHOP.. 2.
TO begin with the first, there is plain testimony, that we are justified
before God by works, which I cited before: With God the doers of the law
shall be Romans 2. verse. 13.
justified. There is much for free will, witness this: Let not sin therefore
reign in your mortal body, Ibid. 6. verse. 12. and 13.
that you obey the concupiscence thereof, but neither do you exhibit your
members instruments of iniquity unto sin; but exhibit your selves to God, of
dead men alive, and your members instruments of justice to God: for sin shall
not have dominion over you, for you are not under the law, but under grace. See
how the Apostle makes it in the power and will of every man endued with Gods
grace, either to do well, or to do evil: and that sin has no such
dominion over them, but that they may do well, if they will concur with Gods
grace. Item, that it is not grace which does all, but a man must work with
grace, and exhibit the powers of his soul, as instruments toward the
producing of good works; which is flatly our doctrine of free will. And before
we depart from this matter of justification, as M. Abbot does very quickly, you
shall hear more of it out of the same Apostle: he teaches expressly, that a
man in the state of grace may fulfill the law, in these words. For that which
was impossible to the law, Ibid. cap. 8. v. 3.
in that it was weakened by flesh, God sending his Son in the similitude of
the flesh of sin, even of sin, damned sin in the flesh, that the
justification of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to
the flesh, but according to the spirit. Which is seconded in the thirteenth
Chapter, where he concludes love to be the fullness of the law, having Ibid.
v. 9. and 10.
before said, that he who loves his neighbor fulfilleth the law. And as for
that certainty of salvation, which many Protestants brag of, the Apostle does
wholly dispossess them of it: first in the place before cited, where he
wills them that stand right in the true Romans 11. ver. 20.
faith, to beware that they fall not; and assures them that they shall fall as
others had done before them, if they did not diligently look unto it.
Elsewhere he advises us with fear and trembling to work our Philip. 2. ver.
12.
salvation. Mark how two points of the Protestant doctrine be wounded in one
sentence, and two of ours confirmed: both that we must work our salvation (it
comes not then by only faith) and that with fear and trembling; we are not
then assured of it before hand by the certainty of faith, which excludes all
fear and doubt of it. Now that we ought to have a firm hope of salvation, S.
Paul teaches us: We have access through faith Romans 5. verse. 2.
into this his grace, wherein we stand and glory in the hope of the Sons of
God. Also, For by hope we Ibid. 8. verse. 24.
are saved. Item, we give thanks to God, etc. for the Clooss. 1. verse. 5.
hope that is laid up for you in heaven. With whom S. Peter consorteth: Blessed
be God and the Father of 1. Pet. 1. verse. 3.
our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy has regenerated you
into a lively hope, unto an incorruptible crown, etc. laid up in heaven. Not
to prosecute all the particular points of justification, which have every one
good ground in the Apostle S. Paul, as in that question may be seen; the very
faith, whereby Abraham was and we are justified, is no such kind of faith, as
the Protestants claim to be justified by, that is, by an apprehension and
drawing of Christ's righteousness to themselves: but that faith whereby we
believe all things to be true which God has revealed, as S. Paul declares in
the fourth to the Romans, where he reports; Abraham Romans 4. verse. 19.
to have been justified, by believing that God according to his promise would
give him a Son, and make him the Father of many nations: so that finally
there is not a word in S. Paul, which in his own meaning makes for any one
piece of the Protestants justification; but heaps of testimonies for every
branch of justification as we believe it.

R. ABBOT.
H(...) M. Bishop begins to muster his abundance of (...) like an army of
men, whereof some want a^mes, some legs, some look another way, some turn
quite about and fight against him. He sets down a number of places* but
whether they hit, or cross; or come short, what cares he? let the Reader
look to that. He says they prove this or that, but how they prove it, id
populus curet scilicet; he is too busy to trouble himself about it. As for
example, There is plain testimony, says he, that we are justified before God
by works; namely, Romans 2. 13.
with God the doers of the law shall be justified. But it does not follow that
because the doers of the law shall be justified with God, therefore we are
justified before God by works, because it does not appear that we are doers
of the law. Let him put in for his minor proposition; But we are doers of the
law, and then his absurdity appears, because it is manifest, and our
consciences force us to confess, that we are not doers of the law. For to be a
doer of the law, requires the doing of all that the law commands to be done.
For Iam. 2. 10.
he that keeps the whole law, and yet fails in one point, he is guilty of
all; that is, he is a transgressour of the law which commands all, and
because he is a transgressour of the law, therefore cannot be called a doer of
the law. We therefore who are all transgressors of the law, cannot be said to
be doers of the law, and because we are not doers of the law, therefore cannot
by the law be justified before God. And thus the Apostle tells the Jews,
that Romans 2. 13.
not the hearers but the doers of the law shall be justified, but charge upon
them that they were Verse. 17. etc.
not doers of the law; and grows to this conclusion, that Chapt. 3. 9.
all both Jews and Gentiles are under sin, and hence infers further, Verse
20.
Therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified in the sight of
God. Has not M. Bishop now brought us a goodly proof, that we are justified
before God by works, when as the Apostle uses those very words to enforce
the contrary, that we are not justified by works. As handsomely does he deal
for the proof of free will. There is much for free will, says he, witness
this; Romans 6. 12. 13.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies, that you obey the concupiscence
thereof, etc. Hence he infers, that it is in the power and will of every man
endued with Gods grace, to do well. And who denies but that it is so? who
makes doubt but that the grace of God gives us a power and will to do well?
The question only is, whether there be in us any such power of our selves,
which is not the effect of the grace of God? Thereof we say with St. Austin;
August. de Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. l. 2. c. 18. Labora^t homines inuenire in
nostra voluntate, quid boni sit nostrum, quod nobis non sit ex Deo, and quomodo
inueniri possit ignor^.
Men labor to find in our will what good is ours, which is not in us of God,
and how it may be found we do not know. Otherwise we deny not free will, for
we say that we are Romans 6. 22.
freed from sin, and that John 8. 36.
the son [of God] does make us free. We deny not the power and will to do
well, for we say that Phil. 2. 13.
God does work in us both to will and to do. But because we say that God does
work it in us, and God does make us free, therefore we deny Popish free will,
which is a faculty and power of nature, whereby by an act of our own, which
is not of God, we apply our selves to the grace of God, and adioyne our selves
to work with it. He again collecteth, that sin has no such dominion over
us, but that we may do well if we will concur with Gods grace. True it is,
but still the issue is whence we have this will, or whose work it is, that
we do concur with the grace of God? We say as St. Austin says; August. in
Psalm. 77. Gratia facit sibi cooperantem hominis spiritum in opere bonorum
factorum.
It is the grace of God that makes the spirit of man concurrent with it in the
doing of good works, and with St. Bernard; Bernard. de Great. and lib. Arbit.
Coadiutorem facit cum facit volentem, hoc est, voluntati suae conse^ticu^em.
God makes a man concurrent, when he makes him willing, that is, consenting
to his will. It is true then that man does concur with the grace of God, but
it is grace it self that works it in man to concur with grace. But to
open himself further, he says, that it is not grace which does all, but a man
must work with grace, and exhibit the powers of his soul as instruments, to
the producing of good works. Where again we admit the latter part of his
words, that we must work with grace, and exhibit the powers of our souls as
instruments of good works, but we say again that so to do is the gift of
God. Leo de ieiun. ser. 1. Vt in nobis forma^ suae bonitatis inueniat, dat vnde
ipsi quoque quod operatur operamur.
Who, says Leo, that he may find the image of his goodness in us, gives us
whence to work or do^ the same that he does. But in the first part of the
words he bewraieth his heretical meaning, taken out of the school of
Pelagius, when he says; it is not grace that does all. For hereby he will have
it understood, that man has somewhat of his own, which is not any work of
grace, and that by this power which he has naturally of himself, he works
with grace, and exhibiteth the powers of his soul unto good works. But
Gregory Bishop of Rome was not of this mind, who says of the elect and
faithful, Gregor. in Psalm. Poenit. 7. Qui nihil boni sibi, sed totu^ gratiae
Dei tribuunt, scientes se nihil habere quod non acceperunt: hoc enim operatus
est in eis, qui vasa misericordiae ^ecit eos.
They attribute no good to themselves, but all wholly to the grace of God,
knowing that they have nothing which they have not received; for he has
wrought it in them, who has made them vessels of his mercy. It is not grace
that does all, says M. Bishop ^^ the just do attribute all to grace, says
Gregory. See how well the doctrine of the new Church of Rome agrees with the
old. What the old Church of Rome taught in this behalf, the same also we
teach, not that we have a power of free will in nature, whereby we can follow
whither grace does lead: but what Gregory says of Paul, the same is true in
us, that Gregor. in Ezech. hom. 9. Praeueniens gratia liberum in eo arbitrium
fecerat in bono; libero arbitrio ea^dem gratiam est subsecutus in opere.
the preventing grace of God makes the will free in that that is good, and
then we by freewill do in work follow the same grace. For Idem Moral. lib.
16. cap. 10. Superna pietas prius agit in nobis aliquid sine nobis, vt
subsequente quoque nostro libero arbitrio bonum quod iam appetimus a* gat
nobiscum.
the heavenly grace, says he again, does first of all without us work
somewhat in us (which is that which St. Austin says, Aug. de great. and l.
arbit. c. 17. Vt velimus sine nobis operatur.
Without us he works in us to will, and St. Bernard, Bernard. de great. and
lib. arbit. Creatio (in libertatem voluntatis) facta est and sine nobis.
the creating of us (to freedom of will is wrought without us) that our
freewill following he may ^oe with us that good whereto we are now become
willing. And again in the same place, Gregor. Moral. vt supra. Diuina nos
bonitas and innocents faciat praeucnit; eandem gratiam nostrum liberum
arbitrium sequitur.
The goodness of God pr^^tenteth us to make us innocent, and our free will
follows the same grace. Thus August. de Great. and lib. Arbit. cap. 5. Vt
co^uerteretur gratia Dei era^ sola.
our conversion, as St. Austin says of the Apostle Paul, is the grace of God
only; but when by conversion he has reformed our will, and wrought in us the
love of righteousness, we by this work of grace in us do thenceforth apply
our selves to work with grace, and the work that we do is Gods work, and it
is our work, but no otherwise ours, but that by the gift of God it is wrought
in us, and so becomes ours. Therefore we do not say that the grace of God
so does all as that we do nothing, but whatsoever we do the grate of God it
is that works in us to do it. August. co^t. a Epist. Pelag. lib. 1. c. 6.
Nos quidem ambulamus, verum est, nos obseruamus, nos facimus, sed ille facit vt
ambulemus, obseruemus, faciamus.
We walk, says Austin, it is true, we observe, we do, but he makes us to
walk, to observe, to do^. Even so we suffer not sin to reign in our mortal
bodies, as the Apostle teaches us, but it is ^^ that makes us not to suffer
it to reign. We give the po^ers of our souls as instruments, to the producing
of good works, as M. Bishop speaks, but it is he that makes us to give them
to be so, who August. de Praedest. sanct. cap. 11. Promittit facturum se vt
facia^t quae iubet vt fiant.
promises to cause us to do those things which he commands to be done.
Therefore ^ee p^each to the people of God, as Leo Bishop of Rome did, Leo in
Epiphan. sermon. 5. Cooperatores simus grati^ Dei opera^tis in nobis; non enim
dormientibus proue^it regnum coelorum nec otio de^^d a^^ torpentibus beat^tudo
^tern^tatis ingeritur.
Let us be ioynt-workers with the grace of God that works in us, for the
Kingdom of heaven befalls not to sleepers, neither is the bliss of eternity
thrust upon idle and slothful persons. But yet withal we say with Gregory,
that Gregor. Moral. lib. 29. c. 13. Quod verba praedicationis d^i ab auribus ad
corda des^e^. lunt, solo diuino munere agitur, etc. Per internam gratiam solus
omnipotens Deus praedicantium verbis ad corda and(...)um inutsibiliter aditum
pr^stat.
it is by the only gift of God that the words of the preacher do descend from
the care to the heart; that it is only the almighty God, who by inward grace
inuisibly gives passage for the words of the preacher, to the hearts of them
that hear. Yea with Leo himself we say, that Leo de Quadrag, sermon. 101 Quod
(deitatis hab^tacu^um) licet inchoari and perfici sine suo authore non possit,
habet tamen ab (...) sicante donatum vt etiam labor proprio quaerat augmentum.
the habitation and temple of God (which is every faithful man) which can
neither be begun nor finished without the author of it, has it given of God
by it own labor to seek it own furtherance (...). It vvo^kein then with God
(...) it self to God, but it has it given to ^^ of God (...) to work with
God. By it own labor it seeks it own increase; but it is the gift of God
whereby it labors for this increase. In a word we say with Fulgenti^^
Fulgent. ^d (...) br^ter prohibemtam in nostra side quam in nostro opere
^tanquam nostrum nob^t aeliquid vendcare.
We in no sort s^ffer nay we by who (...) doctrine f^rbidden (...) in our suit
or in our works to challenge to our selves any thing for our own, Nothing is
ours but in (...) sort as Gregory faith; Gregor. Moral. l. 24. cap. 5. Iustitia
nostra dicie^r non quae ex nostro nostra est, sed quae diuin^ ^argitate fit
nostr^.
It is called our righteousness which ^^ not ours as of our own, but which by
the gift of God is made ours; or as Hierome says; Hieron. Epist. ad Deme^riad.
Velle and nolle nostrumest, ipsamque quod nostrum est sine miseratione Dei
nostrum non est.
To will and to nill is ours, but that which is ours, without the mercy of God
is none of ours. This was the doctrine of the old Church of Rome concerning
free will; this we approve and teach; and because we approve this, therefore we
detest the doctrine that is now taught in the Church of Rome, which is quite
contrary to this. But here M. Bishop being come away from justification, and
fallen to a new matter, yet bethought himself upon a sudden that he had some
what further to say of it, and therefore leapeth back again. He was departed
from it to free will; and yet before we depart from i^ faith he* you shall
hear more of ^^ out of the same Apostle, And vvhar shall we hear? He teaches
expressly, says he, that it man in the state of grace may fulfill the law. The
words which he cites for this purpose are these; Romans 8. 3.
that that was impossible for the law in that it was weakened by the flesh; God
sending his some in the similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned
sin in the flesh, that the justification of the law might be fulfilled in vt,
which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit. Concerning which place I
have given full answer and satisfaction Of Justification, sect. 38. 43.
before, to which Prefer the Reader, all(...) it shall not be amiss here
also to say somewhat of it. And first it is worth the while to obs^rue with
what discretion he brings this place to prove in ^s here an ability to
fulfill the law, when as the place ministers to us a certain and infallible
argument to prove the contrary. For the Apostle here affirms an impossibility
in the law to justify and save us, not by any defect of it self, but by
reason of the weakness of the flesh. So long then as this weakness of the
flesh continues, so long must the same impossibility continue also: But this
weakness of the flesh continues so long as we live here. So long therefore
as we live here, there shall be an impossibility of being justified by the law.
For Romans 8. 7.
the flesh is not subject unto the law of God, nor can be; Romans 7. 23.
it rebelleth against the law of the mind, and holds us captive to the law
of sin: Gal. 5. 17.
it lusts against the spirit, and these are contrary one to another, so that
we cannot do the things that we would, and therefore cannot fulfill the law.
Why will M. Bishop go about to dispute against so certain, so clear, and
manifest truth? Now then understanding the justification of the law, as he does
of the righteousness commanded by the law, it is true that the end of Gods
sending his Son was, that sin might be condemned in the flesh, that the
power and life thereof in us might be abolished, and it utterly destroyed, that
sin being taken away the justification or righteousness of the law, may be
entirely and perfectly fulfilled in us for ever. This we say, that God has
intended to do, and has already begun to bring it to effect, but he has
begun only and no^ perfected this work, nor will do till this body of ours
raised again from death and out of the dust of the earth, have cast the slough
of sin, and become clothed with immortality and incorruption. In the mean
time August. de ciuit. Dei. l. 19. c. 27. Ipsa iustitia nostra tanta ^st in hac
vita, vt potius remissione peccatorum constet, quam perfectione virtutum.
our righteousness in this life, says St. Austin, consists rather in the
forgiveness of sins, then in the perf^ction of virtues; and Greg. Mor. l. 5.
c. 9. Ipsa perfectio nostra culpa non caret, nisi hanc seuerus iudex in subtili
la^ce examinis misericorditer penset.
our very perfection, says Gregory, is not free from blame unless God in the
precise ball^nce of his examination do mercifully weigh the same. And from
Gregory did St. Bernard learn to say, that Bernard in fest. omn. Sa^ct. fer.
1. Si districte iudicetur iniusta inuenietur omnis iustitia nostra and minus
habens. Sir Greg Mor. l. 9. c. 11. and l. 21. cap. 15
all our justice or righteousness, if it be narrowly sifted, will be found
v^iust and defective, because August co^t. Julian l. 2. Memores and conscij
illa ipsa corpora vitioru^ omnium esse materiem, pro qua polluti and sordidi
nihil in nobis mundu^, nihil innocens obtinem* ex Plilario.
being polluted and filthy by reason of the corruptions of our sinful
bodies, as Austin alleges out of Hilary, we have nothing in us clean,
nothing innocent, Hilar. in psalm. 118. Gimel. Et nisi glorificat^ in natural
spiritus corpore vita vera in nobis non potest esse natura.
neither can there be in us, says he, the nature of the true life, until the
body be glorified into the nature of the spirit. Now seeing the case of our
righteousness in this life i^ ^a^h, certain it is that the righteousness of
the law is not so fulfilled in us in this life, as that thereby we can be
justified in the sight of God. Yea Leo in Anniuers. suo. ser. 1. In isto seculo
si iniquitates Dominus obseruaret nullus iudicium suum sustineret.
in this world, says Leo, according to the words of the Psalm, if the Lord
would take knowledge of iniquities, none should be able to bear his judgment;
and therefore it remains which the same Leo elsewhere says, that Leo Epist.
81 In quo solo homo se inuenit innocentem.
in Christ only a man finds himself innocent or just; Greg. Moral. lib. 3.
cap. 11. Per hoc cuncta iustificat, quod eum qui sine peccato est pro
peccatoribus damnat.
God hereby justifying us, as Gregory says, for that for us sinners he
condemns him who is without sin. Idem in Ezech. hom. 7. Justus aduocatus
noster iustos nos defendet in iudicio quia nosmetipsos and cognoscimus and
accusamus iniustos.
Our just Advocate therefore, says the same Gregory, will in judgment defend
us for just, if we know and accuse our selves to be unjust, Idem in Eua^gel.
hom. 25. Paratus est poenitentiam nostra^ nobis ad innoce^tiam deputare.
God being ready (for his sake) to repute unto us our penitency for innocence.
Here is then our justification before God, not in that the righteousness of
the law is fulfilled in us, but in that upon our true repentance God reputeth
us innocent for Christ's sake, and in Christ, whom as a sinner he condemned to
death and punishment for our sakes. Now by that that has been said, appears
the answer to his next place, Romans 13. 8. 10.
Love is the fulfilling of the law, and he that loves his neighbor fulfilleth
the law. For what is said of justice or righteousness, must be also understood
of love, because our righteousness inherent consists in love, and according
to the measure of our love, so is the measure of our righteousness. August. de
Not. and Great. c. 70. Charitas inchoata, inchoata iustitia est; charitas
prouecta, prouecta iustitia est; charitas magna, magna iustitia est; charitas
perfecta, perfecta iustitia est.
Charity begun, says Austin, is righteousness begun; charity increased,
is righteousness increased; great charity, is great righteousness; perfect
charity, is perfect righteousness. Since then our justice or righteousness is
very defective and imperfect, as has been showed, the like must be conceived
of our love; and therefore though love be the fulfilling of the law, yet in us
it is not the fulfilling of the law, because in us it is imperfect, and far
short of that which the law requires. As we have the beginnings of love, so we
have the beginnings of fulfilling the law, but that is not sufficient to
justification by the law, because the law requires absolute Gal. 3. 10.
continuance in all that is written therein. Therefore St. Austin very directly
to our purpose says* Aug. Epist. 29. Plenissima charitas qua iam augeri non
potest quamdiu hic homo vi^it est in nemine. Quamdiu autem aug^^ ^i potest,
prosecto illad quod minus est quam debet ex vit^o est. Ex quo vitio non est
iustus in terra qui facit bonum and non peccat. Ex quo vitio non iustificabitar
in co^ spects Dei omnis viuens.
The most perfect charity which can now no further be increased, so long as a
man lives here is found in none, and so long as it may be increased, that that
is less then it ought to be, is by reason of some vice or corruption in us, by
reason whereof there is not a man just upon earth, that does good and sins
not; by reason whereof no man living shall be justified in the sight of God. In
a word love is the fulfilling of the law, when as there is love according to
the tenor of the law. The law says, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Luke 10. 27.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with
all thy soul, with all thy strength. But August. de perfect. iustitiae Rat.
17. Cum est adhac aliquid con^up s^^a^ie carnalis quod vel continendo
sraenetur, non omnimodo ex tota anima d^ligitur Dens. No^ en^m taro sine an^ma
concup^s^^t quauis caro concup^ctre dicatur quia carnaliter anima concupisc^t.
so long as there is any carnal concupiscence says Austin, which by
temperancy or continency is to be refrained, God is not perfectly loved with
all the soul. For the flesh lusts not without the soul, though therefore
the flesh is said to lust because the soul lusts according to the flesh. It
follows therefore that so long as there remains any concupiscence of the
flesh, so long there is not that love which is the fulfilling of the law. But
so long as here we live, there is found in us the concupiscence of the flesh.
Therefore so long as here we live, we never attain to the fulfilling of the
law, and therefore cannot be justified thereby. Neither does the Apostle in the
place by M. Bishop alleged intend any thing concerning justification, but
speaks of fulfilling the law, according to the model of humane life and
conversation, wherein we set the law before us as the rule of our life, and the
mark whereat we a^me and whereto we tend, to which we approach so much the
nearer, by how much the more we abound in love, though we never attain so
sarre as to be justified thereby. In the next place he again opposes against
the certainty of salvation, citing the words of the Apostle, Romans 11. 20.
Thou stand by faith; be not high minded, but fear, etc. Which text he has
cited Chapt. 12.
a little before, and has there had answer of it, and therefore I omit it
here. To th^s he adds another like a two edged sword cutting two ways at
once. The Apostle says; Phil. 2. 12.
Work your salvation with fear and trembling. Mark, says he, how two points
of the Protestants doctrine be wounded in one sentence, and two of ours
confirmed. But it is neither so nor so; the place neither hurts us nor
helps him. We must work our salvation, says he, it comes not then by faith
only. But that follows not; for it does come by faith only, and yet we must
work our own salvation. The title and right of salvation comes by faith
only, but we must work to our selves the possession of it, our good works
being, as St. Bernard says, Bernard. de Great. and lib. Arbit. in sine. Si
proprie appellentur ea quae dicimus nostra merita, via sunt regni, non causa
regnandi.
the way to the Kingdom, though not the cause for which we obtain the
Kingdom. Ephesians. 2. 8.
By grace we are saved through faith, not of our selves, it is the gift of God,
not of works, lest any man should boast; and yet Verse. 10.
we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which he has
prepared for us to walk in, so to bring us to the fruition of that salvation,
which by faith only he has given us freely for Christ's sake. As we are said
Acts 2. 40.
to save our selves, so are we said to work our salvation, not for doing any
thing by virtue whereof we are saved, but for embracing the means, and
following the course whereby God has ordained to give effect and way to that
salvation which Christ only has purchased for us. And thus our salvation is
said 2. Cor. 1. 6.
to be wrought in the enduring of afflictions, not for that afflictions have
any power to save us, but because God, having of his own mercy in Jesus Christ
appointed us to be 1. Pet. 2. 5.
lively stones, for the building of his spiritual Temple, uses afflictions as
his axe, whereby to hew us, and square us, and fit us to be laid in this
building, and Col. 1. 12.
makes us meet, as the Apostle speaks, to be partakers of inheritance with
the Saints in light. To be short, the Apostles intention is plain to exhort
the Philippians, and by them us, that being entered into the state and way of
salvation by faith in Jesus Christ, we go on forward and continue constant in
our way, till God by his mercy bring us to be partakers thereof, even as if
he had said accordingly as we translate, make an end of your salvation in
fear and trembling. But if with fear and trembling, we are not then, says M.
Bishop, assured of it before hand by the certainty of faith, which excludes
all fear and doubt of it. Which foolish paradoxe runs strongly in his head:
a conceit he has gotten, and his babble he will not leave for the tower of
London. Faith, says he, excludes all fear and doubt. But who knows not
that there is greater faith and lesser faith, and that the greater faith is,
the less there is of fear and doubt, but yet all manner of faith excludes
not all fear and doubt. If he scorn to learn of me, let Gregory Bishop of
Rome be Master in this behalf, both to him and me. Greg. Mor. lib. 22. cap.
14. Fides ipsa quae ad bona alia capessenda nos imbuit, plerunque in exordijs
suis and nutat and solida est; and tam certissime habetur, and tamen de eius
siducia adhuc sub dubitatione trepidatur. Pars namque eius prius accipitur vt
in nobis postmodum perfect compleatur.
Faith, says he, which seasoneth us to the receiving of other graces, commonly
in the beginnings thereof is both wavering and sound; we already most
certainly have it, and yet of the assurance thereof we fear and doubt; for we
first receive a part of it that it may be afterward perfectly fulfilled in us.
He brings for example hereof the poor man in the Gospel, to whom Christ
said, Mar. 9. 23. 24.
If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes; and he
answered, Lord, I believe; help my unbelief. Ibid. Vno codemque tempore
clamabat se ctia credere and adhuc ex incredulitate dubitare.
At one and the same time, says he, he cried that he did believe, and yet did
still doubt by unbelief. Ide^ in Ezech. hom. 15. Vno codemque tempore is qui
necdum perfect crediderat simul and cred^bat and mer^du^us erat.
At one and the same time, says he in another place, he which did not
perfectly believe, did both believe, and was also unbelieving. And yet again
in another place he says; It often falls out that faith now is growing in
the mind, and yet by doubting it languisheth in some part; that certainty of
sound faith strengthens one and the same mind, which notwithstanding the
wind of doubtfulnesse shakes by some mutability of unbelief. As namely he
says Idem Moral. l. 10. c. 8. Saepe ^ontingit ^t fides in men^e iam vi^eat,
sed tamen ex part aliqua in dubietate contab^scat. Vnam candemque mentem and
cer^^uao solidae sid^i roborat, and tamen ex aliquantula mutabilitate perfid^e
aura dubictatis versat.
of the man before mentioned; that Ibid. Per sidem sperans and per
infidelitatem fluctuans dicebat, etc. Et exerare certus iam po sidem coeperat,
and adhuc incertus vndas persidiae ex incredulitate ^^lerabat.
hoping by faith, and wavering by unbelief, he said, Lord, I believe; help my
unbelief. He began to pray, says he, certain now by faith, and yet being
uncertain, he bare the waves of unbelief. We see here beside all that has
been formerly said, that says and unbelief, certainty and uncertainty,
assurance and doubt, be blended together in one and the same man, and why does
M. Bishop then professing to be a Romanist, thus absurdly cross the old
doctrine of the Church of Rome? why does he tell us so often, that faith
excludes all fear and doubt? But he commits here a further error in
wresting See hereof the question of the certainty of salvation, sect. 10.
the Apostles words to doubting fear, which is d^strustfull of God, whereas
the Apostle speaks of that godly fear, whereby we are distrustful of our
selves, that we may trust in God only. The Apostle does not say, Work your
salvation in fear and trembling, so as to be always in fear and doubt of
your being saved, but so as that you never dare trust to your selves, or
attribute any thing in this behalf to your own power or work, but always to
give glory unto God, and to depend upon him, seeking to be enabled and
strengthened by his arm, because though you be willed to work your own
salvation, yet you must know that it is God that works in you both to will it
and to work it, even of his own good will. David in the Psalm says; Psalm.
2. 11.
Serve the Lord in fear. What means this, says St. Austin? August. in Psalm.
65. Quid hoc sihi vult? Audi vocem Apostoli. Cum timore, inquit, and tremore,
etc. Quare cum timore and tremore? subiecit causam; D^us est enim, etc. si ergo
Deus operatur ^^te, Dei gratia been operaris, non viribus tuis. Ergo si gaudes
and time, ne forte quod datum est humili auscratur superbo.
Hear what the Apostle says, with fear and trembling work your own
salvation. Why with fear and trembling? He adds the cause, for it is God
that works in you both to will and to do. If God then work in thee, thou
workest well by the grace of God, not by thine own strength. Where we see how
St. Austin understands fear in the Apostles words, as he does in the words
of David, and would M. Bishop be so absurd as to understand David to say, serve
the Lord, so as to be continually in fear and doubt of your own salvation?
And whereas St. Austin says that the Apostle to give a reason why he says,
in fear and trembling, adds those other words, for it is God that works
in you both to will and to do, will M. Bishop be so mad as to couple these
speeches in this sort, Work your salvation, being always in fear and doubt
thereof, because it is God that works in you both to will and to do. What,
is it a reason for us to doubt of our own salvation, because it is God that
works in us both to will and to do? The same St. Austin in another place
citing the same words of the Psalm, Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto
him with trembling; says that August. de corrept. and great. cap. ^. Quid
ostendens nisi cos esse commonitos qui ambulant in via iusta vt in ti^ more Deo
seruiant, id est, non altum sapiat sed timeant, q^od significat, non superbiant
sed humi^es sint, etc. exultent Deo sed cum tremo^e, in nullo gloriantes quando
nostrum nihil sit vt qui gloriatur in Domino glori^tur; ne per^ant de via iusta
in qua iam ambulare coeper^t dum sibi ^oc ipsum assignant quo^ in ea sunt. His
verbis vsus est and Apostolus vbi ait, cum timore, etc. and ostendens quare cum
timore and tremore, ait, d^us est ^^m, etc.
they who walk in the right way are admonished thereby not to be proud, but to
be humble, to rejoice unto God but with trembling, not glorying in any thing
because nothing is ours, that he that rejoices may rejoice in the Lord, lest
they perish out of the right way wherein they have begun to walk, whilst
they attribute it to themselves, that they are in the way. Whereupon he adds,
The like words the Apostle also uses; With fear and trembling work your
own salvation; and to show why with fear and trembling, he says, for it is
God that works in you both to will and to do. The fear then which the
Apostle commends to us, is not a doubting fear, such as is contrary to
assurance of faith, but such as is contrary to presumption and pride and trust
in our selves, and imports humility, lowliness of mind, distrust of our
own strength, that we may rely upon the strength and power of God. Why does
M. Bishop then forgo a plain and manifest construction, to force a meaning
upon the Apostle, which can by no means be sitting or agreeing with the
words? from hence he goes forward to prove, that we ought to have a firm
hope of salvation. But why does he take such pains to prove that which we deny
not? or how is it that he sees not that the proof of that is his own
reproof? For if we must firmly hope for salvation, then we must not stand in
fear of our salvation. But he says, Of the certainty of salvation, sect. 10.
we must stand in fear of our salvation; we must fear whether we shall be
saved or not. Therefore we ought not firmly and steadfastly to hope for it.
These two cannot stand together: we cannot firmly hope for salvation, if we
must stand in fear and doubt whether we shall be saved or not. Last of all he
quarrelleth us as touching the nature of true faith. The very faith, says he,
whereby we are justified, is no such kind of faith as the Protestants claim
to be justified by. What is it then? Forsooth, it is that faith whereby we
believe all things to be true which God has reueiled. And how does that
appear? Marry, St. Paul declares Abraham to have been justified by believing
that God according to his promise would give him a son, and make him the
father of many nations. Which his base and vndiuine conceit of Christian
says, I have exagitated Of Justification, sect. 18.
elsewhere, and I should wonder, but that it is his manner so to do, that the
absurdity thereof being so displayed, he would thus repeat it again, almost
in the same words. It shall be here sufficient thence briefly to answer him,
that the justifying faith of a Christian man is not incident to the Devil. But
the Devil is capable of believing all ^o be true which God has reueiled. The
Devil could believe that God according to his promise would give Abraham a
son, and make him the father of many nations. Therefore justifying faith is
more then to believe all to be true which God has reueiled. That more is
plainly gathered of that which Cyprian says, Cyprian. de dupl. martyrio. Non
credit in Deum qui non in ^o solo collocat totius foelicitatis suae fiduciam.
He believes not in God that does not place or repose in God only the
confidence and trust of his whole felicity and happiness. Justifying faith
then is the reposing of trust and confidence in God only, to obtain of him
eternal bliss and happiness, through the merits and mediation of Jesus
Christ. And this was Abraham's faith, not a carnal belief only, that God
would give him a son, and a great posterity of many nations, but a belief
of a spiritual Genesis 12. 2. Gal. 3. 8. 9.
blessing in his seed, according to the promise of God, both to himself, and
to all the nations of the earth. And this we see in the place which M. Bishop
cites where the Apostle alleging that Abraham's faith was imputed to him for
righteousness, adds; Romans 4. 23.
Now it is not written for him only, but also for us to whom it shall be
imputed for righteousness. What? to believe that old and barren persons may
have children if God say the word, as M. Bishop in the place before mentioned,
very rudely expresses the faith of Abraham? Nay, but to believe in him that
raised up Jesus the Lord from the dead, who was delivered to death for our
sins, and rose again for our justification. This was it which the faith of
Abraham respected. By belief of the promise of God John 8. 56.
he saw the day of Christ. He believed that of his seed should come a Savior
both to himself and to us, who should be delivered to death for our sins,
and rise again for our justification, and by this faith he was justified. For
the same faith saved Abraham that now saves us, as has been before showed.
But the faith that saves us is the faith of the Gospel, the faith of Jesus
Christ, the faith of his Cross, the faith of his Blood, the faith of his Death
and Resurrection. Therefore this was also the faith that saved Abraham. Thus M.
Bishops heaps of testimonies prove for his part heaps of chafe, and not of
corn; they carry a show of multitude, but say nothing at all for him. He is a
^ai^e man that goes about by such allegations to impeach any piece of the
Protestants justification. When he has spent all his paper-shot, the
Protestants justification will remain still.

W. BISHOP.. 3.
NOw I come to the other points named by M. Abbot. There is nothing ( says he)
in S. Paul for the merit of single life. But he is greatly mistaken; for the
Apostle says: That the care of the single and unmarried 1. Cor. 7. verse. 32
33. and 34.
is to please God, and their study to think upon those things that appertain
unto God, and how they may be holy both in body and in spirit; which must
needs be more acceptable in Gods sight, then to be carping for this world, and
caring how to please their yoke-mate. To this we add Monkish vows (of which
if he were worthy to be a good Abbot, he would speak more respectively:)
somewhat S. Paul has of the vow of chasti^y, which is one of their principal
vows, for he avouches certain widows worthy of damnation, because 1. Tim.
5. v. 12.
they broke the same former vow of chastity. And S. Paul himself shore his
head in Cenchris because Act. 18. verse. 18.
he had a vow; which was the vow of a Nazarite, not much unlike for the time,
though much inferior unto the vow of religious persons: see of that vow the
sixth Chapter of the book of Numbers. There is nothing ( says M. Abbot) in S.
Paul of prayer for the dead, which is not true: for he teaches, that some of
the faithful, who have built upon the right foundation, hay, 1. Cor. 3. verse.
13.
stubble, and such like trash, shall notwithstanding at the day of our Lord be
saved; yet so as through fire. Which the ancient Doctors do take to be the
fire of SS. Aug. in psalm. 37. Hieron. lib. 2. cont. Iouin. 13. Ambros. in hunc
locum. Gregor. in psalm. 3. Poenitentialem.
Purgatory. Now if many, whiles the dross of their works be purged, do lie
in fire, it will easily follow thereof, that every good soul who has any
Christian compassion in him, will pray for the release of their Christian
brother out of those torments.

R. ABBOT.
THou may here see, gentle Reader, M. Bishops tergiuersation and manifest
shifting. I propounded out of Theodoret that the Epistle to the Romans
contains all manner doctrines of faith. Upon this ground I noted that the
doctrine of Popery is to be condemned, for that it contains so many points as
necessary articles of faith, whereof there is nothing to be found in the
Epistle to the Romans. Herewith M. Bishop found himself greatly distressed. On
the one side he durst not openly reject the testimony of Theodoret, fearing
least that happily might be some prejudice to him. On the other side he saw he
could not find their religion in the Epistle to the Romans. Now therefore
silently he steals away and betaketh himself to the rest of Paul's Epistles,
not upon any hope that he has that he can thence make good his cause, but for
that he finds there some speeches delivered upon occasions, whereby he can
better give color to some doctrines of theirs, of which the Apostle never
thought. He tells his Reader, that I say there is nothing in St. Paul for the
merit of single life. But my saying was, that in the Epistle to the Romans
which Theodoret affirms to contain all kind of doctrine, there is nothing
said for the merit of single life. Well, let him yet have his way; let us give
him full liberty of the rest of St. Paul's Epistles, and what has he there for
the proof of it. Forsooth, he tells us, that the Apostle says, that the
care of the single and unmarried is to please God, and their study to think
upon those things that appertain to God, and how they may be holy both in body
and in spirit; which, says he, must needs be more acceptable in Gods sight
then to be carking for this world, and caring how to please their yoke-mate.
But here he blinds his Reader, by compounding those things, which for the
discerning of the truth are to be divided. For he will not say that single life
in it self is a caring to please the Lord, and to be holy in body and spirit;
for then the Vestall Virgins of the Romans, and the Hierophantaes of the
Athenians, and all single persons of all sorts shall be pleasers of the Lord,
and all holy both in body and spirit. If in it self it be not so, then for it
self it is not acceptable in Gods sight, but the thing which God accepts is
our care to please him, and to be holy and undefiled before him. Now if
marriage equal single life in holiness and care of pleasing God, what
hinders in this case, but that marriage is as acceptable to God as single
life? But the Apostle notes this to be the preferment of single life, that we
are thereby for the most part better opportuned to attend the things of God,
and to do him service, being thereby freed from many burdens of cares and
troubles, wherewith the husband and the wife are commonly much distracted. Which
notwithstanding must be understood where the gift of continency is had, because
the fire of an incontinent mind causes much more entangling of the thoughts,
and withdrawing of the heart from God, then do any troubles that belong to
married estate. But does it follow that because single life gives greater
liberty to serve God, therefore single life it self is a matter of great merit
with God, the vow thereof the merit of heaven, a work of great perfection, a
satisfaction for sins, both for a man's own sins, and for the sins of
other men? This is the merit of single life whereof I spoke, and which Popery
maintains, and will this foul tail hang to the words of the Apostle? Are
you not ashamed, M. Bishop, thus to dally, and to tell us one thing when you
should prove another? It is true that the care of pleasing God, and being holy
in body and spirit, is much more acceptable unto God, then carking for this
world, and caring how to please a wife; but will you hereof conclude a merit of
single life? Is not single life many times more careful of the things of the
world then marriage? and is not the unmarried often more busied to please his
harlot, then the husband is to please his wife? And will you then argue so
absurdly, and thus wilfully delude them that are not able to understand you?
From thence he comes to Monkish vows, of which, he says, that if I were a
good Abbot, I would speak more respectively. But an Abbot whether to him good
or badde, I yield them no other respect, but to say of them, that as Popery
has framed and practiced them, they are full of sacrilege, impiety,
blasphemy, hypocrisy, and one of those monstrous abominations, wherewith
Antichrist has defiled the Church of God. And what has he now to say for
them? Somewhat forsooth St. Paul has of the vow of chastity, which is one of
their principal vows. Well, let the other vows sink or swim, he cares
not; but being a chaste man he will give us a proof for the vow of chastity,
and that shall be a sure one. St. Paul auoueheth, says he, certain widows
worthy of damnation, because they broke the same firmer vow of chastity. But
what; will he thus wilfully belie the Apostle? Will he set down words of his
own, and make the Reader believe that they are the Apostles words? The
Apostle speaks of some having damnation, because they had broken the first
faith, and will he dare to turn the first faith, into, the former vow of
chastity? As touching this place I have given him such answer Of vows, sect.
7.
before, as that it is impossible for him with any good color to reply. I have
showed that the first faith here spoken of, is the faith and profession of
Baptism, and that Athanasius, Hierome, and Vincentius Lyrinensis, by allusion
to this place do so give us to understand. Moreover, that those young widows
of which the Apostle spoke, did by living in idleness fall to wantonness, and
in their new marriages did wholly forsake the faith of Christ. I declared
further by Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theophylact, that the Apostle seeing such
mischief to grow of choosing young women to be Church-widomes, did wholly
disclaim all choice of such, and willed that those who were already chosen,
though they had promised to continue single and unmarried, yet for eschewing
all danger of the like inconvenience, should betake themselves to marriage. I
have showed by Cyprian, by Austin, Hierome, and Epiphanius, tha^ they who have
vowed single life, if afterward they cannot, or will not contain, that it is
much better for them to marry then to continue unmarried. What does he mean
thus to allege this text again, when it so plainly appears by the
testimony of so many Fathers, that that is false which they would gather
thereby? He would hereby prove their Popish vow of single life, binding men
simply and perpetually from marriage, which it appears is hereby condemned
as a wicked tyranny, and a cruel usurpation upon the consciences of frail
and unstable men. In the next citation he plays his prize. For proof of
their vows he alleges Acts 18. 18.
that St. Paul shore his head in Cenchris, because he had a vow. As well might
he allege the Jews sacrifices of Bulls and Goats, to prove their sacrifice of
the Mass. As well might the Turks and Saracens allege Acts 16. 3.
Paul's circumcising of Timothy, to prove that it is still lawful for them to
circumcise. As well might he prove that every woman after her childbirth is
to offer a pair of turtle Doves, or of young Pigeons, because Luke 2. 24.
the Virgin Mary did so. He says, the vow of the Apostle was the vow of a
Nazarite, and the vow of the Nazarites was wholly a ceremony of the law of
Moses, and will he go about to bring the ceremonies of Moses law into the
Church of Christ? Has he not read what Tertullian says; Tertul. de
Praescript. sub finem. Quis nesciat quoniam Luangelica gratia euacuatur si ad
legem Christu^ redigit?
Who knows not that the grace of the Gospel is made frustrate and void, if
it bring Christ unto the law? What, does every man know this, and does not M.
Bishop know it? Did he never read that which St. Hierome says, and Austin
confirms, Aug. Hieron. Epist. 19. Pronuncias ceremonias Iudaeorum quicunque
obseru^ uerit, sieve ex Judaeis, sieve ex Gentibus, eum in barathrum Diaboli
deuolutum. Ego hanc vocem tuam omnin^ confirmo.
Whosoever either of the Jews or Gentiles observes the ceremonies of the
Jews, he tumbleth himself into the Devils mouth. What have we then to do
with the vow of the Nazarites, that it should be any confirmation of vows, to
be used amongst us? But to show himself notable in his art, he tells his
Reader, that that vow was not much unlike to the vow of religious persons, and
bids him thereof to see the sixth Chapter of the book of Numbers, as if
looking there he should find it so to be. Now for their pupils and scholars,
who must yield to enlarge their throats, to swallow all their Masters googeons,
he knew well enough that they would never, nay they dare not look the
Chapter, and as for others though they find him a liar, what cares he for
that? He that looks into that Chapter, or any other, what shall he find that
may give him cause to think the vow of the Nazarites, like to the vow of
religious persons? The vow of religious persons is a vow of perpetual poverty,
chastity, and obedience, and what is there in the vow of the Nazarites, that
carries any semblance of these things? Number. 6. 2. 3. etc.
He was to forbear wine and strong drink, and all things of the grape, to
suffer no razour to come upon his head, but to let the locks of his hair to
grow; to come at no dead body, not his father, his mother, his brother, or
sister, and by these ceremonies to separate himself to the Lord: but of giving
away all his goods to live in poverty; of forbearing marriage or the company of
a wife; of living under obedience to any man's rules or laws, there is nothing,
I say nothing to be found. Now who can think it safe to trust M. Bishop, that
is not ashamed thus wilfully to falsify, that which is so plainly reported by
the holy Ghost? As for Saint Paul's taking upon him that vow of a Nazarite,
which Saint Luke records, it was but a yielding for the time to the infirmity
of the Jews, becoming 1. Cor. 9. 20. 21
to the Jews a Jew, that he might win the Jews, as he professes
otherwhere. For although in the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, the
ceremonial law of Moses were at an end, and now to be abolished, yet there was
a time to be yielded for instruction and teaching of the Jews, thereby to
withdraw them from the opinion of those things, which so long and by so great
authority even from God himself, both they and their fathers had observed,
that the sudden relinquishing thereof might be no scandal or offense unto
them. St. Austin says notably hereof, that Aug. Epist. 19. Cum venisset fides
qua prius illis obseruationibus praenunciata post morte and resurrectione
Domini reuelata est, amiserant tanquam vitam officij sui; veruntamen sicut
defuncta corpora necessarioru^ officijs deducendae ^^ant quodammodo ad
sepuituram, nec simulate sed religios^, non autem deserenda continuo, vel
inimicorum obtrectationibus tanquam canum morsibus proijcienda.
when the faith fore-shewed by those ceremonies, was after the death and
resurrection of Christ reueiled, they lost as it were the life of their office
or use, but yet as the dead bodies of friends, they were by the office or
service of friends religiously to be brought to their burial, and not to be
presently forsaken or cast to the slanders of enemies, as to the bitings or
gnawings of dogs. But though Ibid. Illo te^pore quo primum gratia fidei
reuelata est, hoc no^ crat pernicio^^: progressu vero temporis perniciosum erat
nisi obseruationes illae ab omnibus Christ ani^ desererentur.
it were not hurtful, as he there says again, that these ceremonies at the
first preaching of the faith, were for a while observed, yet in process of
time it had been pernicious, that they should not have been forsaken of all
Christians, yea it should have been impious to retain them. And has not M.
Bishop then for proof of their vows made good choice of an example, which it
were pernicious and impious to retain in the Church of Christ? But he found
there the name of vow, and that he thought was enough to soppe them, who he
knew would take any thing that he should tell them. From vows he ^larteth to
prayer for the dead, and says that it is not true that in St. Paul there is
nothing for prayer for the dead. And what is there, I pray, for it? He
teaches, says he, that some of the faithful who have 1. Cor. 3. 13.
built upon the right foundation hay stubble, and such like trash, shall
notwithstanding at the day of the Lord be saved* yet so as through fire. But
what is this to prayer for the dead? Marry, the ancient Doctors do take this
to be the fire of Purgatory and if many while the dross of their works is
purged do lie in fire, it will easily follow that every good soul will pray
for the release of them. Thus he tells us what some Doctors do think, and
what he himself gathers thereof, but otherwise of St. Paul himself he can
tell us nothing. It appears not by St. Paul himself that that fire is
Purgatory fire; it appears not by St. Paul himself that we are to pray for
the dead, and therefore in all this M. Bishop has said nothing, because it is
not the question what some have gathered of an obscure sentence of St. Paul,
but what St. Paul himself has delivered, and that in the Epistle to the
Romans where Theodoret witnesses, as I have said, all doctrines of faith to be
contained. But he deals here after the very manner of Heretics, who are wont
to make choice of some figurative and allegorical and dark speeches of
Scripture, which they may construe at their own pleasure, and allege them
according to their own construction, to prove their falsehoods and heresies by
them, when as notwithstanding the plain and evident testimonies of Scripture
do make against them. St. Paul speaks of purpose to give instruction of our
carriage toward the dead, where of Purgatory or prayer for the dead he
teaches nothing. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
I would not, br^thren, have you ignorant, says he, concerning them which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not as other which have no hope; for if we believe
that Jesus is dead and is risen, even so them which sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him. And then showing in what sort God will bring them with Jesus,
he concludes, Wherefore comfort your selves one another with these words. Is
it possible that the Apostle should here omit to give charge of praying for the
dead, if it were religion to pray for them? Nay he tells us of the faithful
departed, that they sleep in Jesus, and of them that sleep in Jesus, Apoc.
14. 13.
the spirit says, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord (which sleep in
Jesus) for they rest from their labors; and if they be blessed and at rest,
then they are not laboring in the restless fire of Purgatory, and therefore
need none of our prayers for release. Albeit if we grant M. Bishop his
Purgatory, yet what is he the nearer for prayer for the dead, seeing they tell
us that Purgatory is Rhem. Testam. Anno^. Mat. 5. 26. in marg.
the prison, spoken of by our Savior Christ, from which there is no coming
forth, until thou have paid the uttermost farthing. If there be no coming
forth until the utmost farthing be paid, why do we vainly trouble our selves
in praying for them? When they have paid all, then they shall come forth, but
till that be done, there is no release. This were a lamentable hearing at Rome,
yea and throughout the whole Popish clergy; for by this means there shall be
no use of all their Offices, and Obsequies, and Pardons for the dead, and
thereby what a large collop shall be cut from them? They are the cause of it
themselves; they tell us that Purgatory is the prison, whence there is no
redemption till thou, not till another for thee, but till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing. But yet let them alone; grant them Purgatory, and they will
shift; they will make their advantage good enough. The worst is that in the
words of St. Paul there is not strength enough to draw it in. The old Father
Origin in an approved work of his, has laid a shrewd block in M. Bishops
way, who citing the words of the Apostle; 1. Cor 3. 12.
If any man build on this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, timber,
hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall
declare it, because it shall be reueiled by fire, and the fire shall try every
man's work of what sort it is, says hereupon; Origin. co^t. Cel^. lib. 4. Si
quis docore potest corporaliter intelligendum esse malos superstrucre lignum,
foen^^, stipulam, apparebit etiam materialem ignem intelligendum and
sensibilem: quod si euidenter figurata est locutio dum mali hominis opera
significantur lignoru^, foeni, stipularu^que nomine, qui fit vt no^ statim
succurrat quomodo ignis accipie^dus sit qui contumat ^igna huiusmodi?
If any man can show that it is corporally to be understood, that evil men do
build upon the foundation wood, and hay, and stubble, it shall appear that we
are also to understand a material and sensible fire; but if it be evidently
and apparently a figurative speech, in that the works of evil men are
signified by the name of wood, and hay, and stubble, how is it that we conceive
not how the fire is to be understood, that consumes these things? Indeed it
is in common sense very improbable, that the words of foundation, building,
gold, silver, pearls, wood, hay, stubble, should all be construed as
figuratively spoken, and the name of fire only should be understood properly of
a material Purgatory fire, specially when as the Apostle himself forces it
to another understanding, by saying, Yet so as it were by fire; for what is
that but as to say, not by fire indeed, but in such sort as may fitly be
resembled and set forth by fire. Yet it is true that some have expounded those
words of a temporary purging fire, as Austin, Ambrose, and Gregory, whom M.
Bishop cites; for as for Hierome he wrongeth him, who only mentions Hieron.
adu. louin. lib. 2. Ipse saluabitur, non tamen absque probatione ignis.
trial of fire, according to the letter of the text, but says nothing to
expound what that fire is. But as they expound it of Purgatory fire, so some
other there be that expound it of hell fire, as namely Chrysostom,
Theophylact, and Photius in Oecumenius; who where it is said, He himself
shall be saved, do understand it that he shall be reserved, and not consumed
to nothing, and so take the meaning to be, Oecumen. ex Phot. in 1. Cor. 3. Ad
hoc manet and seruatur vt per ignem puniatur in seculum. Sic Chrysostom. and
Theophylact. ibid.
that he abides, and is kept to be punished by fire for ever. Now it may fall
out shrewdly on M. Bishops part, if where he looks for Purgatory he find
Hell; but hereby it certainly appears, that there was no tradition of the
Church, to draw Purgatory out of those words of the Apostle. Which
notwithstanding shall much better appear, if we shall further consider the
variableness and uncertainty of writers, in expounding that place, even of
them who have expounded and applied it in that sort. First Saint Austin though
in a Sermon to the people, he yielded to their conceit then growing of
Purgatory fire, and were content thereto to make application of the Apostles
words here in question, yet in diverse other places where with due meditation
he pondereth and waigheth the same words, he still makes other construction
of them. As namely when Dulcitius propounding certain questions to him, he by
occasion falls upon the handling of these words, he deriueth thither what
he has spoken in two other places concerning the same, now approving it the
third time, that August. de 8. Quaest. Dulcit. q. 1. ex lib de Fide and
Operibus. c. 16. Si circa diuitias suas carnali qu^dam teneretur affec. tu,
etc. propter carnale, vt dixi, quem in eis habebat affectum quo talibus bonis
fine dolor carere non posset, ^dificaret super fundamentum lignum, foenum,
s^^pulam, etc. Quoniam affectu dilecta carnali non sine dolor amittuntur, etc.
in little amissione passi detriment^ per ignem quendam dolori^ perueniunt ad
salutem.
by hay, and wood, and stubble, the Apostle meant the too much carnal desire
and love of temporal things, which is often found in the faithful, though not
in so high degree, but that when they come to trial, they are content rather
to forsake all then to forsake Christ. These he says are saved for the
foundations sake, which is Christ, whom they so prefer before all, but Ibid.
ex Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 68. Est quidem ignis tentatio tribulationis, etc.
Isle ignis in hac interim vita facit quod Apostolus dixit, etc. sal^us est
quidem, sic tamen quasi per ignem, quia vrit eum rerum dolor quas dilexcrat
amissarum.
yet so as by fire, whilst they are vexed with the grief and sorrow of the
loss of those things, which they have too much loved. For fire, he says, is
the temptation of tribulation, and this fire in this life does that which the
Apostle says. In the very like sort does he again in another place expound
it; Idem de ciuitat. Dei lib. 21. cap. 26. Sic quasi per ignem; quod enim sine
illiciente amore non habuit, sine vrente dolor non perdet.
Yet so as by fire, because what he has not had without entising love, he will
not loose without vexing grief. And that it may appear that he afterward did
not like that exposition, which M. Bishop cites, he upon another Psalm
handling the words at large, expounds them as in all these places he has
done, Idem in Psalm. 80. Qui aedificat amorem terrenorum super fundamentum regni
coelorum, etc. ardebit amor rer^m temporalium and ipse saluus erit per idoneum
fundamentum. ^t paulo ante; Grau^ter conturb^ntur; foenum and stipula and ligna
ardent. Si tristis perdis, saluus eris tanquam per ignem.
He that builds the love of temporal things upon the foundation of the
Kingdom of heaven, that is, upon Christ, his love of temporal things shall
burn (namely by sorrow and grief in the loss of them) but he himself shall
be saved by the right foundation. Thus very constantly does he understand the
fire spoken of by the Apostle, of the grief and tribulation that God lays
upon the faithful, in bereauing them of those earthly goods which they have
ouer-carnally affected and desired. Now in all these places it is to be noted,
that Saint Austin was so far from expounding that text of the Apostle
concerning Purgatory, as that in every of the former he has signified expressly
that he doubted thereof, and in the last of all denies it expressly. In the
first place he says, De ^ide and Oper. c. 16. Si^^ in ha^ v^^a tantum homines
ista patiuntur, sieve etiam post hac vitam ^alia quae d^ iudicia subsequn^^r,
non abhorret quantum arb^^ror a ratione veritatis iste intell^ctus b^^us
^^ntentiae.
Whether in this life only men suffer such things, or whether after this life
also some such judgments f^llow, the meaning which I have given of this
sentence, as I suppose, abhors not from the truth. In the second place he
says; Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 69. Tale aliquid (...) pest hanc vitam ^eri,
incredibile n^a est, and vtrum ita sit quaeri potest, and aut inueniri, ^ut
latere n^nnullos fidel^s per ignem quendam p^rgatoriii, quato magis un^usue
b^na pereuntia d^lexerunt, tanto tard^^s citi^s^^ saluari.
That some such thing there is also after this life, it is not incredible and
may be enquired of, whether it be so or not, and either be sound or remain
hidden, that some faithful by a kind of Purga^ory fire, by how much they have
either the more or the l^sse loved transitory goods, are either the sooner or
the more slowly saved. The repeating of both these places to Dulcitius without
any reuocation or alteration, may serve in steed of a third testimony of his
doubting of it. And in the last place he says again, De ci^. D^^ lib. 21.
cap. 26. Post istius cor^oris mortem, etc. si hoc (...) ^t^ruall^ (...) tus
defunctorum eiusmodi ignem dicunt^r perpeti, etc. s^^^ ibi tantum, s^u^ and
(...) and (...) vt noa ibi sec^laria quam^^s a damnatione vemalia (...)
inueniant, non redarguo qui^ forsi^an ver^m est.
After the death of this body, if the souls of the dead, in this mean time
till the r^surrection be s^id to suffer some such kind of fire, and whether
there only* or both here and there, or whether here they find a fire of
transitory tribulation, burning their secular desires, that they may not find
it there, I reprove it not* I say not against it, because perhaps it is true.
Here we find, it is not incredible, and it may be disputed whether it be so,
and perhaps it is so: but upon his best advice he could not find in the
Apostles words, or in any other place of Scripture, that certainly it is so.
Yea in the last place which is worthy to be noted, propounding to answer some,
who by pretense of the Apostles words here in question, hoped to be saved by a
Purgatory fire, he uses these words; In Psalm 80. (...), per (...) salaus e^o.
Nam quid est quod art Apostolus; fundamentum aliud, etc. (...) das esse volo;
(...) est enim non vobis dare securitatem malam. Non dabo quod non (...) t^meus
terreo, securos vos saccrem, si securus ^i^rem ego. Ignem aeternum tin. ^^. Non
(...) nisi ignem aeternum; de quo ^lio loco Scriptura dicit, etc.
Brethren I am very fearful; it is not good to give you any evil security; I
will deliver nothing but what I receive; in fear I terrify you; I would
secure you if I could secure my self; I fear eternal fire; I receive or
learn no fire but that that is eternal, of which the Scripture says in
another place, Their fire shall never go out, and so he goes on to expound
the place in such sort, as I have said. Mark this well. St. Austin will
deliver nothing but what he has received, and he professes to have received
no other fire but only eternal fire. Therefore very definitely he says
elsewhere; Hypognost. l. 5. Tertum lo^um penitus ignoramus, un mo nec esse in
Scripturis inuenimus.
We are utterly ignorant of any third place yea and we find in the Scriptures
that there is none, and therefore he divides all the souls of the dead,
either to perpetual joy or perpetual torment, as I have showed Answer to
Doctor Bishops Epistle, sect. 10.
otherwhere. As Austin, so Gregory also, though he expound the place
concerning Purgatory as M. Bishop cites, yet says elsewhere, that Greg. Dial.
(...)c. 39. Hoc de ^^^e tribulationis in hac nobis vita ad^nbito potest
intelligi.
the same may be understood of the fire of tribulation, applied unto us in this
life, and if it may be understood of tribulation in this life, then can it be
no proof for warrant of a Purgatory in the life to come. Now it is true indeed
that Gregory was superstitiously conceipted concerning Purgatory, although
allowing of it only Ibid* De quibusdam (...) culpis; de paruts minim^^que
peceatis.
for very small and light offenses; but it is worth the while to note, how
sometimes the truth forcing it self upon him, he crosses himself in this
behalf, and puts that down in one place which he builds in another. For
he writing upon Job, he says; Greg. Mor. l. 8. c. 8. Quem nequaquam modo
miserecordia eripit, sola post praesons seculum iustitia (...). Hinc Salomo ait
quia lignum ta quocunque loco ce^^derit, etc. qua ^um humani casus tempore five
sanctus, fi^e malignus spiritus egredientem amn^a claustra carnis acceperit, in
(...) secum (...) pern^^tat (...), ^ ater^is suppli^iis vltra ad remedium
creptionis ascendat.
Whom mercy now delivers not, him justice only after this world imprisoneth.
Hereof Solomon says, that in whatsoever place the tree falls, whether
toward the South, or toward the North, there it shall be: because when at the
time of a man's death, either the good spirit or the evil spirit shall receive
the soul going from the body, he shall hold it with him for ever without any
change, that neither being exalted, it can come down to punishment, nor being
drowned in eternal punishments, can thence forth rise to any remedy of
salvation. If after death there be no deliverance, if there be no change, but
as the Angel either good or badde receives the soul out of the body, so it
continues for ever, either exalted to joy or drowned in punishment, then there
can be no Purgatory, then there can be nothing, but either heaven or hell,
where they that come shall abide for ever. He cites for this the same words
of Solomon that we do, and of which Olympiodorus a writer of the same time
says; Olympiodor. in Ecclesi as^. cap. 11. In quocunque loco seu illustri seu
tene(...) depre^edatur ^omo cum moritur, m^ode gradu atque ordine pori^^net in
aeternum; nam vel requiese^^ in lumine foelicitatis aeterae cum justice and
Christo Domino, vel in tenebris cruciatur cum iniquis and huius mundi princip^
Diabolo.
In whatsoever place either lightsome or dark a man is taken when he dies, in
the same degree and order he abides for ever; for either he rests in the
light of eternal felicity with the just and with Christ our Lord, or else he
is tormented in darkness with the wicked, and with the Prince of this world
the Devil. But Gregory again writes an Epistle to his friend Aregius a
Bishop, to comfort him, concerning the death of some belonging to him, wherein
it is worthy to be observed, how consonantly he carries himself to the
doctrine of the Scriptures. Amongst other words we read these; Gregor. lib.
7. indict. 2. Epist. 111. Indecens est de illis taedio afflictionis add^ci,
quos credendum est ad veram vitam moriendo perue. nisse. Habe^t for sitan illi
iustam longi doloris excusationem qui vitam alteram nesciunt, qui de hoc seculo
ad m^lius transiti^ esse non confidunt: nos autem qui nouimus, qui hoc credimus
and docemus, co^tristarinimium de ob^^ntibus no debemus, ne quod apud alios
tenet pietatis speciem, hoc magis nobis in culpa sit. Nam dissidet^c quodamod^
genus est cotra hoc quod quisque pradicat torqueri moestitia, dicente Apostolo,
Nolumus autem vos ignorare, fratres, etc. Hac itaque ratione perspecta,
studendum nobis est vt sicut dix^mus, de mort^^^ non essl^gamur, sed affectu^
viuentibus impendamus quibus and pictas ad (...) and sit ad s^uct^ (...).
It is indecent for us to give our selves to long affliction of sorrow for
them, whom we are to believe to have come by death unto the true life. They
have happily just excuse of long sorrow, who know not any other life, who do not
believe the passage from this world to be to a better world; but we who know,
who believe and teach this, are not to be too heavy for the dead, least that
which with others carries a show of piety, be to us rather a matter of blame.
For it is in a manner a kind of distr^st, to be tormented with heaviness,
contrary to that which he himself does teach. Hereof he cites the words of
Saint Paul to the Thestalonians, which I have before set down, and then
adds; This therefore seeing we know, we are to have care, as I have said,
not to be afflicted for the dead, but to bestow our affection upon the living,
to whom our piety or denotion may be profitable, and our love may yield fruit.
Surely he leaves no place for Purgatory, that teaches to believe that the
faithful in death do attain unto true life, and that their passage from this
world is to a better; neither does he acknowledge any use of Prayers, of Masses
and Trentals, and other Offices and Obsequies for the dead, who says that our
devotion and love yields no fruit or profit to them. He would not have bidden
Aregius not to be afflicted for the dead, but to bestow his affection upon the
living, if he had thought the dead to be in a Purgatory, where they should and
might be relieved by the devotions of the living. Thus he believed and taught,
where he taught advisedly, according to the Scriptures, and thus we believe
accordingly, and what he casually taught otherwise, we reckon it for wood,
and straw, and stubble, which he built upon the true foundation, which now the
daylight of the Gospel has reueiled, and the fire of Gods word consumes,
though he himself by the faith of the said foundation has attained peace.
And this we hold to be the only true application of the Apostles words, and
most fitting to the process of the text, the Apostle making himself a builder
by his preaching, laying Christ for the foundation of his doctrine, and
therefore consequently understanding gold, silver, pearls, wood, hay, stubble,
to be the rest of the doctrine that is preached concerning Christ; either true,
signified by gold, and silver, and pearls; or false, signified by wood, and
hay, and stubble. So did Tertullian of old understand it; Tertul. co^t. Marc.
l. 5. Super quod prout quisque superstruxerit dignam scilicet vel indignam
doctrinam, opus ^ius per ignem probabitur, merces ^i^s per ignem rependetur.
As every man, says he, builds upon the foundation doctrine worthy or
unworthy, his work shall be tried by fire, his reward shall be repaied him by
fire. In the like sort does Ambrose expound it; Ambros. in 1. Cor. 3. Tria
genera posuit praeclara in mundo in quibus bonam doctrinam significauit, etc.
Tria alia genera posuit sedfriuola. In his corrupta and vana doctrina designata
di n^scitur.
He sets down three kinds of things that are excellent in the world, (gold,
silver, pearls,) by which he signifies good doctrine: three other things he
sets down which are but base, (wood, hay, stubble,) and by these corrupt
and vain doctrine is designed. Now if by these things doctrine be designed,
then the fire whereby trial must be made of these things must be understood
accordingly. That cannot be of the Popish Purgatory fire; for it cannot in this
sense be fitted to Purgatory fire, which the Apostle says; Every man's work
shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare^, because it shall be
reueiled by fire, for it is not declared or manifested by Purgatory fire,
whether doctrine be true or false, since it self is so obscure and dark, as
that no man knows where it is. Is it made manifest to us by Purgatory fire,
whether ours or the Popish doctrine be the more true? Nay, but by the word of
God this trial is made, and thereby it appears what is truth, and what is
falsehood, what is right, and what is wrong; and the truth as the gold and
silver is approved and justified thereby, but error and false doctrine, as
wood, and stubble, and hay, is thereby consumed and brought to naught. And thus
Cyril says, as Aquinas alleges him, Cyril. apud Tho. Aquin. in Luc. 12.
Ignem veni mittere, etc. Mos est sacrae Scripture ignem quandoque dicere sacros
and diuinos sermones.
that it is the manner of the holy Scripture to call the sacred words of God
by the name fire: and Chrysostom one where alluding to the words here
handled, expounds Chrysostom. de Poenite^t. hom. 8. Igne examinemus, verbo
scilicet doctrinae.
fire to be the word of doctrine; who though they both make the application of
that construction to reformation of manners, yet considering what has been
said, do both justify the same construction to our use. Now all these things
being well waighed, it well appears how little hold Popish Purgatory has in
those words of the Apostle, and because in the fall of Purgatory is the fall
of prayer for the dead, therefore M. Bishop has yet said nothing out of St.
Paul for prayer for the dead.

W. BISHOP.. 4.
I Come now to Images and Relikes, of which he affirms that S. Paul says
nothing: where was the goodmans memory when he wrote this? or remembering the
matter well enough, was he so fiercely bent to deceive others, that he cared
not what untruth he uttered? The Apostle makes honorable mention of the
Images of Heb. 9. v. 4. and 5.
the Cherubins, placed gloriously in the uppermost part of the Israelites
Tabernacle, which for the holiness thereof was called Sancta Sanctorum.
Further, that within the Arc of the Testament standing in the same place, were
reserved precious Relikes, as the rod of Aaron that blossomed, a golden pot
full of that Angelical food Manna, which God rained from heaven, and the
Tables of the Testament: to which if you join the sentence of the same
Apostle, That all happened to them in figure, and were written 1. Cor. 10. v. 11.
for our instruction; may not we then gather thereby, that Images are to be
placed in Churches, and holy Relikes in golden shrines? And the same Apostle in
the same Epistle, declaring that Jacob by faith adored the Heb. 11. ver. 21.
top of Joseph's rod, which was a sign of his power, does he not give all
judicious men to understand, that the Images of Saints for their holy
representation, ought to be respected and worshipped?

R. ABBOT.
THou may not wonder, gentle Reader, if it grow wearisome to me, to follow
the sent of this Fox, who only casts dust in mine eyes, to stop me from
pursuing him too fast, as being afraid to be otherwise suddenly griped to
death. Observe I pray thee, what proofs he has here brought for Images and
Relikes. He does not only omit wholly the Epistle to the Romans, whence he
was required the proof, but brings arguments so ridiculous, so idle, so
impertinent, as that even hereby it is easily to be discerned, that it is a
desperate cause which he has in hand. For Images he says, that St. Paul
makes honorable mention of the Images of the Cherubims; where he puts in
the Images, as thinking it should be some grace to him, that the Reader not
looking the place, should believe that the Apostle had named Images. But see
further how he stuffeth this skar-crow with his litte^ of idle word^s. He
makes honorable mention of the Images of the Cherubins, placed gloriously in
the uppermost part of the Israelites Tabernacle, which for the holiness
thereof was called Sancta Sanctorum. A simple man would think that this
strowting tale should certainly import some special matter, but it is like the
picture of Beuis, that makes a great show, and strikes never a stroke. Heb. 9.
5.
Over the Arc, says the Apostle, were the glorious Cherubins, shadowing the
mercy seat; but what is this to M. Bishops purpose? Marry, says he, the same
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 11.
that all things happened to them in figure, and were written for our
instruction. Be it so, and what then? May not we then gather thereby, says
he, that Images are to be placed in Churches? You may indeed, M. Bishop, but
it shall be no otherwise then as Spiders do, which gather poison of sweet
flowers. It is true, though it be not proved by the words which he unduly
cites, that all things happened to the Israelites in figure, but did the
Cherubins prefigure the having of Images in our Churches? If they did, we
desire that he make it appear to us, which I think he has not so little wit
as to undertake. If they did not, what a foolish conclusion has he made, that
because there were the Cherubins in the Jewish Tabernacle, figuring something
for our instruction, therefore we may set up Images in Churches. Heb. 9. 11.
The Tabernacle, as the Apostle teaches us, prefigured the body of our Lord
JESUS Christ. The Arc, was the place where God yielded Exodus 25. 22. Numb. 7.
89.
his presence to his people to dwell amongst them, and from which he spoke and
declared his will unto them. The Cherubins, as Of Images, sect. 8.
M. Bishop himself acknowledges, betokened the Angels, pressed and ready in the
presence of God to do his will. What shall now the thing figured be, but that
God in Jesus Christ is always present with us, and his Angels still assisting
in his presence to receive commandments for our behoof, being Heb. 1. 24.
ministering spirits, as the Apostle says, sent forth to minister for their
sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? And must we now let this truth go,
that ministers strength and comfort to our faith, that we may give M. Bishop
room for his blind Idols? But see withal how handsomely this matter is
peeced together. The Cherubins did represent the Angels. What the shape or
fashion of those Cherubins was, neither M. Bishop can tell, nor any man else,
as I have Of Images, sect. 8.
before showed. They were set in the Sancta Sanctorum, as he confesses, where
they were wholly out of sight, and whither no man came, but Heb. 9. 7.
the high Priest only, once every year^. And does not he then very fitly and
substantially allege the example of these Cherubins, for their Images of Men
and Women, to be set up openly in Churches, not only that the people may
behold them, but that they may also fall down to them, worship them, pray to
them, offer and burn incense to them, according to all the abominations of
the Heathen, accustomed to their Idols? Does he find that the Jews took
thereby warrant to set up in the Temple the Images of Abraham, and Isaac, and
Jacob, and other holy Fathers, to do the like to them? Does he not know that
he abuses his Reader hereby, and will he yet go forward so to do? But for
an express and brief answer to him, I cannot say any thing more fitly, then
that which Tertullian of old answered to them, who for defense of their
Image-making, when it was condemned, objected, Tertull. de Idololat. Cur ergo
Moses in eremo simula^hru^ Serpentis ex aere fecit? scorsum figurae qua
dispositioni alicui arcanae praestruebantur, non ad erogationem legis sed ad
exemplarium causae suae, etc. Been quod idem Deus and lege vetuit similitudinem
fieri, and extraordinario praecepto serpentis similitudmem indixit. Si eundem
Deum obseruas, habes legem eius, Ne feceris similitudinem. Si and praeceptum
factae postca similitudinis respicis, and tu imitare Moysen; Ne facias aduersus
legem simulachrum aliqu^d nisi and tibi De^t^ i^sserit.
Why then did Moses in the wilderness make the similitude of a brazen Serpent?
He presumes, that which M. Bishop urges, that all things befell to that
people by way of figure, but says, we are to set figures here aside, which
were appointed for some secret signification; not for the prescribing of a law,
but for sampling the cause of the appointing of them. It is well, says he,
that the same God did by his law forbid any image or similitude to be made, and
by an extraordinary charge appointed the similitude of the Serpent. If thou
regard the same God thou have his law, Thou shall not make the likeness of any
thing. If thou look to the Commandment of making a similitude afterward, do
thou imitate Moses; make no image against the law, unless God himself
command thee. Even so say we to M. Bishop, that the making of the Cherubins by
an extraordinary commandment of God is no warrant for us to break the law of
God. We have the law of God, and that we are to follow, but what God commanded
for special use and signification, we must not draw to an example of
imitation. But to go beyond the example, and from the making of an image for
typical use and construction, to proceed to give to images spiritual worship
and devotion, this is a sin inexcusable, and has no color of defense by any
example of the word of God. Now as this, so that which he says for Relikes
also deserves no other but contempt. The Israelites by the special
commandment of God kept ^xod. 16. 33.
a pot full of Manna, that their posterity might see with what bread the Lord
had fed them. By the like commandment of God Numb. 17. 10.
the rod of Aaron which had blossomed and brought forth fruit, was laid up
and kept for a token to the rebellious, that they might not dare to murmr
against Aaron and his Sons, concerning the Priesthood. By Gods commandment
also, Exodus 40. 20.
the tables of the Testament were put into the Arc there to be kept, both that
and all the rest, being said to have been done, Verse. 21.
as the Lord had commanded Moses. Now here I say to M. Bishop again, let him
in this behalf also imitate Moses, and if God have given any commandment
concerning Relikes, let him by virtue thereof challenge devotion to them. But if
God have commanded nothing thereof, why does he bring the example of things
expressly commanded of God, for warrant of those things that have been
superstitiously devised by men? But it is worthy here to be questioned, by what
Chimicall trick it is, that the golden pot of Manna, and Aarons rod, and the
tables of the Testament, are turned into Relikes, and given us for examples of
Popish Relikes? Popish Relikes are the bodies of Saints, or pieces of their
bodies, or such things as they have worn, or have been applied unto them, as
their coats, their shirts, their shoes, the chains and fetters wherewith they
have been bound; the instruments of the tortures that have been done to them.
These they lay up and keep as matters of great devotion and holiness; in
their solemn Processions they carry them gloriously about, and make the people
do great reverence to them; they show them that the people may behold them,
touch them, kiss them, worship them, pray before them, offer to them; they
teach them to hang them and wear them about their necks, with great confidence
thereby toward God and the Saints, whose Relikes they are, to find help at
their hands; they vow long Pilgrimages to go to the places where these Relikes
are, in belief that God will hear their prayers, rather there then
otherwhere; they promise to them that perform these devotions to them, large
Indulgences and Pardons, to deliver their souls from Purgatory; in the taking
of oaths they lay their hands upon them, as making the Saints their witnesses,
that they say truth. To these Relikes they require such honors to be done,
under pretense that Council. Trident. c. de Reliq. Sanct. Sanctorum Martyr^^ and
aliorum cum Christo viue^lium sancta corpora quae viua me^bra fuerunt Christi
and templa Spir. sancti ab ipso ad aeternam vitam suscitanda and glorificanda a
fidelibus veneranda esse, etc.
the bodies of the Saints were the living members of Christ, and the temples of
the holy Ghost, by him to be raised up again, and glorified unto eternal
life. Now I marvel how M. Bishop will apply these things to the golden pot of
Manna, to Aarons rod, and to the tables of the Testament? Were these the
members of Christ, or the temples of the holy Ghost? or had they any such
application to the bodies of any Saints, as to receive holiness from them? Might
he not as well tell us that the Arc was a Relike, and the Tabernacle, and the
Temple, and all the vtensils and implements thereof? And where I marvel are
the devotions that were done to those Relikes of his? Did the people bow down
to them, did they worship them, or pray to them, or practice those abominable
idolatries to them, which they do to their Relikes? What an impudent man is he
to mock the unskillful Reader with such impertinent allegations, nothing at all
concerning those things for which he brings them? As for that which they
allege for a reason of those abominations, which they practice about their
Relikes, or as they term it of the honor which they do unto them, namely,
for that they have been the members of Christ, and temples of the holy Ghost,
the use of that reason was conceived of old, to serve for the burying of them
in the earth; not for the raking of them out of the earth, to do worship and
devotion to them. And therefore St. Austin affirming, that August de Ciuitat.
Dei, Lib. 1. Cap. 13. Nec idcotamen contemnen, da sunt and abijcienda corpora
defunctor^, maximeque iusto^u^ atque fidelium, quibu^ tanquam organis and vasis
ad omnia bona opera vsus est sanctu^ spiritus, etc. Vnde and antiquoru^
iustorum funera offici^sa pictate curata sunt, and exequiae celebrat^, and
sepultura prouisa ipsique dum viue^ ent de sep^liendis vel eti^ transfere^dis
suis corporibus filijs mandauerunt, etc.
the bodies of the just and faithful, which the holy Ghost has used for
instruments and vessels to all good works, are not to be despised and cast
away, infers that therefore the funerals of the just of old were with all
officious piety regarded, their exequies celebrated, and their burial provided
for, and they themselves whilst they lived gave charge to their children for
the burying of them, or else for transferring them from the place where they
were to be buried otherwhere. He alleges examples, that Tobie in burying the
dead, is commended to have pleased God; that our Savior Christ commended the
good work of the religious woman, which powered the precious ointment upon his
body, as of purpose for his burial; that they are laudably mentioned in the
Gospel, who took the body of Christ from the Cross, and used care to have it
diligently and honorably buried. And thus Origin professing Origin. co^t. Cells.
lib. 8. Solas rationales animas honorare nouimus and earli instrumenta solenni
honor sepulturae dignamur. Meretur enim rationalis animae domicilium non
temere proijci sicut brutorum cadauera, praesertim quod fuit anima been ac
sancte instrumento su^ in certa^inibus vsae recept^culum.
to honor only the souls endued with reason, shows what this honor is,
Their instruments, that is, their bodies, we vouchsafe the solemn honor of
burial. For the habitation of the reasonable soul is of more worth, then
carelessly to be cast away, like the carcasses of brute beasts; specially that
which has been the receptacle of a soul, that has in spiritual fights and
combats well and holily used the body. Now if it be the honor that is to be
done to the bodies of the Saints, to bury them in the ground, then is it a
barbarous dishonor that is done to them in Popery, under the name of piety, to
pull them out of their graves, and to rent them in pieces, and carry one piece
this way, and another another way; the skull to one place, the toe or finger to
another; one tooth hither, and another thither, as amongst them has been
accustomed to be done. Wherein how far they have departed from the ancient
Church of Rome, appears by Gregory Bishop of Rome, who for his time
affirms, that Gregor. lib. 3. Epist. 30. In Romany and totius Occide^tis
partibus omnino intolerabile est atque sacrilegum si sactorum corpora tagere
quisquam fortasse praesumpserit. Quod sl praesumpserit, certum est quia b^c
temeritas impunita nullo m^do remanebit.
in the Roman Church and whole Western parts, it was a thing altogether
intolerable, and a matter of sacrilege to presume to touch the bodies of the
Saints; and if any man do presume so to do, says he, certain it is that his
rashness shall by no means remain unpunished. And having showed diverse
examples of them, who aduenturing too near to the stir^ing or touching of the
bodies of some holy persons, were thereupon greatly frighted, or by death
miscarried, he concludes; Ibid. Quis tam temerarius possit existere, vt h^c
sciens ^orum corpora, non dico tangere, sed vel aliquatenus praesumat inspicere?
Who then knowing these things can be so rash as that he will presume, I will
not say, to touch the bodies of such, but in any sort to look upon them? How
is the world now changed in the Church of Rome, that they dare not only look
upon such buried relikes, but pull them out of their graves, touch them, kiss
them, carry them about as has been before said; and will M. Bishop still
notwithstanding be so impudent, as to say that the religion of the church of
Rome, is now the same that of old it was? For conclusion of this passage he
alleges, Heb. 11. 21.
that Jacob adored the top of Joseph's rod, which was a sign of his power,
which, he says, gives all judicious men to understand, that the Images of
Saints for their holy representation ought to be respected and worshipped. But
what a spi^e has the Apostle put him to, thus to seek for Images upon the
top of Joseph's rod? What meant he to be so sparing in the behalf of the
Roman Church, as that he would not name so much as one holy man, to whom an
Image had been set up to be worshipped in his name? But the Apostle knew no
such; Marry, M. Bishop is able by a Romish art to supply that want, by fetching
an image out of the top of Joseph's rod. He had heard of Garnets image in
the straw, and he thought the top of a (...).
rod or staff to be much more capable of an image. But for the bringing of
this about, he betaketh himself to a translation which is manifestly false,
the Greek text not saying, that he worshipped the top of his rod, but ^ he
worshipped upon the top of his rod, that is, as we translate it, he
worshipped God leaning upon the end or top of his staff. This Thomas Aquinas
acknowledges, and tells us the whole reason hereof. Tho. Aquin. in Heb. 11.
sect. 5. Super fastigium, vt habetur in Graeco, etc. Ipse erat senex, and ideo
portabat virgam; vel recepit sceptrum Joseph donec i^rasset, and antequam
redderet ei, adorauit, non ipsam virgam, nec Joseph, vt quidam male putaueru^t;
sed ipsum Deum, innixus ad cacumen, vel super fastigium virgae cius.
Jacob was an old man, says he, and therefore carried a rod (or staff) or
else he took the scepter of Joseph until Joseph had sworn (namely that he
would bury his father in Canaan, according to his desire) and before he
restored it to him he worshipped, not the rod, nor Joseph, as some have
thought amiss, but God himself* leaning at the top or upon the top of his
rod. We need no more; this is enough to dash M. Bishop out of comfort, and
to bereave him of all hope to find any succor for his Images in this place.
But if any man desire further satisfaction, let him see this place handled at
large in the question of Images the sixteenth section.

W. BISHOP.. 5.
WIth as great facility and no less perspicuity, we do collect out of S.
Paul, that the Saints in heaven are to be prayed unto: for he does heartily
crave the Romans 15. ver. 30.
Romans to help him in their prayers, and hops by the help of the
Corinthians prayers, to be delivered 2. Cor. 1. ver. 11.
from great dangers. Whence we reason thus: If such a holy man as S. Paul was,
stood in need of other men's prayers, much more need have we poor wretches of
the prayers of Saints. S. Paul was not ignorant how ready God is to hear us,
nor of the only mediation of Christ Jesus; and yet as high as he was in Gods
favor, and as well informed of the office of Christ's mediation, he held it
needful to request other far meaner then himself, to pray for him. All this
is good (says a good Protestant) for to instruct us to request the help of
other men's prayers, that are living with us, but not of Saints who are departed
this world. Yes say we, because the Saints in heaven are more charitable and
desirous of Gods honor, and of our spiritual good, then any friend we have
living, and therefore more forward to assist us with their prayers: They are
also more gracious in the sight of God, and thereby better able to obtain our
requests. All which may easily be gathered out of S. Paul, who says; that
charity never fails, but is maruailously increased 1. Cor. 13. ver. 8. Ephesians.
2. ver. 19.
in that heavenly Country. Also, that we are not strangers and forraigners to
the Saints, but their fellow Citizens, and the household servants of God with
them; yea, we are members of the same body: wherefore, they cannot choose but
tender most dearly all our suits, that appertain unto the glory of God, and
our own salvation. They therefore have finally no other shift to avoid
praying to Saints, but to say, that though all other circumstances do greatly
move us thereto, yet considering that they cannot hear us, it is labor lost
to pray to them. To which we reply, and that out of S. Paul, that the Saints
can hear us, and do perfectly know our prayers made unto them; For the
Apostle comparing the knowledge of this life, with that of the life to come,
says: In part we know, and in part we prophecy; but 1. Cor. 13. ver. 9. ^0.
and 12.
when that shall come which is perfect, that shall be made void which is in
part. And a little after: We see now by a glass in a dark sort, but then
face to face. Whence not I, but that Eagle-eyed Doctor S. Augustine De Ciuitat.
Dei, lib. 22. cap. 29.
does deduce, that the knowledge of the heavenly Citizens, is without
comparison far more perfect and clearer, then ever any mortal man's was, of
things absent and to come: yea, that the Prophets (who were endued with
surpassing and extraordinary light) did not reach any thing near unto the
ordinary knowledge of the Saints in heaven, grounding himself upon these
express words of the Apostle: We prophecy in part, that is imperfectly in
this life, which shall be perfect in heaven. If then ( says he) the Prophets
being mortal men, had particular understanding of things far distant from
them, and done in other Countries, much more do those immortal souls,
replenished with the glorious light of heaven, perfectly know that which is
done on earth, though never so far from them: thus much of praying to Saints.

R. ABBOT.
WE collect, says he, as though it were any thing to us what they collect,
when the question is what the Apostle teaches. It is true that the Apostle
heartily craves the Romans Romans 15. 30.
to help him in their prayers, and hops by the help 2. Cor. 1. 11.
of the Corinthians prayers to be delivered from great dangers, but what of
that? Marry, says he, hence we reason thus; If such a holy man as Paul was
stood in need of other men's prayers, much more need have we poor wretches
of the prayers of Saints. But does not the wise man see that he here makes a
rod to whip himself? for if such a holy man as Paul was, standing in need
of other men's prayers, yet craved not any prayers of the Saints that were dead,
but only of the brethren that were alive, does he not teach us to do the like,
that though we be to beg the help of other men's prayers, yet we beg the
same of the living only, not of them that are dead? Yea, but the Saints in
heaven, says he, are more charitable and desirous of Gods honor and our
spiritual good, more forward to pray for us, and more gracious in Gods sight
to obtain our requests. But why then, say I, did not St. Paul rather seek to
the Saints in heaven, then to men living upon the earth? Why did he not say, O
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, pray for us? Why did he not desire God that by the
merits and intercession of the holy Virgin, of Saint Stephen, St. James, St.
Joseph, and such others, he would have mercy upon him? Why did he seek to them
that were far meaner then himself, when he might have gone to those that
were superiors to himself, and more gracious in Gods sight? Did not he know
that charity is maruelously increased in that heavenly Country? that they
tender dearly all our suits? that they can hear us, and do perfectly know
our prayers made unto them? Why did he omit then rather to crave their prayers,
then the prayers of the Romans, the Corinthiaus, and others, to whom he wrote?
M. Bishop cannot here answer any thing to give satisfaction to any reasonable
man, yea it plainly appears by the Apostles example, that all his collections
are but vain and fantastical speculations. Against which we oppose briefly,
that it is Iam. 5. 15.
the prayer of faith which saves, and true faith has it seat Romans 10. 10.
in the heart, and God hears every man's prayer, 1. Kings 8. 39.
as he knows his heart, and Ibid.
he only knows the hearts of all the children of men, and therefore the
Saints know not our prayers, because they know not our hearts. And thus the
Prophet Esaias says; Esaias 63. 16.
Abraham knows us not, and Israel is ignorant of us. Whereupon St. Austin
concludes: August. de cura pro mort. gerenda. c. 13. Si tanti Patriarch^ quid
erga populum ex his procreatum ageretur ignora^erunt, quibus Deo credentibus
populus ipse de illorum stirpe promissus est, quomodomortui suorum rebus atque
actibus cognoscendis adiu^a^disque miscentur? Quomodo dicimus cis fuisse
consultum, qui obierunt antequam venirent mala quae illoru^ obitum consecuta
sunt, si and post mortem sentiunt quaecunque in vita humanae calamitate
contingunt? Et paulo post: Ibi sunt ergo spiritus defunctor um vbi non vident
quaecunque ag^tur aut euen^^nt in ista vita hominibus.
If so worthy Patriarchs did not know what was done, as touching the people
that was descended of them, to whom believing God the same people was promised
to come of their stock, how have the dead to do with the knowledge or helping
of the state and doings of theirs, and how do we say that they were provided
for, who died before those evils came, which ensued after their death, if after
death they understand what evils befall in the calamity of this life. He
concludes; The souls of the dead are there where they see not what things are
done or happen to men in this life. This M. Bishop cannot abide to hear of
from St. Austin, because he thinks it to be great disadvantage to him, and on
the contrary to advantage himself by St. Austins authority, he sticks not
most wilfully and absurdly to belie him, calling him in the mean time the
Eagle-eyed Doctor, after the manner of the Mat. 23. 30.
Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, who garnished the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, but their doctrine they could not abide. First, he sets down St.
Austins ground in the Apostles words, 1. Cor. 13. 9.
We know in part, and we prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is
come, then that which is imperfect shall be done away. And again, Verse. 12.
We see now by a glass in a dark sort, but then face to face. Hereof he
says that St. Austin does deduce, that the knowledge of the heavenly Citizens
is without comparison far more perfect and clear, then ever any mortal man's
was, of things absent and to come. Yea, he alleges these as the very words of
Austin, If then the Prophets being mortal men had particular understanding of
things far distant from them, and done in other Countries, much more do
those immortal souls, replenished with the glorious light of heaven,
perfectly know that which is done on earth, though never so far from them.
For this he quoteth August. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 29. Now would not a
man marvel that M. Bishop should dare to cite such a sentence, as out of
Austin, when Austin has no such? And yet he does so most folsly and
unhonestly, St. Austin saying nothing in that place of the immortal souls now
in heaven, but only of the body and soul conjoined after the resurrection. The
very thing that he propounds to speak of in the beginning of the Chapter, is
this; August. de Ciu. Dei, l. 12. c. 29. Nunc iam quid actari sint in
corporibus immortalibus atque spiritualibus fancti, non adhuc e^rum carne
carnaliter sed spiritualiter iam viuente, quantum Dominus dignatur adiuuare
videamus.
What the Saints shall do in their immortal and spiritual bodies, the flesh
now living no longer carnally but spiritually. To set forth the sight and
knowledge of things, which the Saints shall then have, he takes a conjecture
from the example of Elizeus, Ibid. Si Propheta Helizeus pucrum ^uum G^eziabsens
c^rpore vid^t accipientem munera quae dedit et Naaman Syrus, etc. quanto magis
in illo corpore spirituali videbunt sancti omnia non solum sioculos clauda^t,
verum^tiam vnde sunt corpore absentes? Tunc enim erit perfectum illud de quo
loquens Apostolus, Ex part, inquit, scimus, etc. Itane cum venerit quod
perfectum est nec iam corpus corruptibile aggrauabit animam sed incorruptibile
nihil impediet, illi sancti ad ea quae videnda sunt ^culis corporeis, quibus
Helisaeus absensad seruum suum videndum non indiguit indigebunt?
who being absent. yet saw his servant Gehezi taking gifts of Naaman the
Syrian; How much more, says he, shall the Saints in that spiritual body see
all things, not only though they shut their eyes, but also where in body they
are absent? fir then shall be the perfection, says he, whereof the Apostle
speaks, citing the words which are before set down, and then inferring
again, When that is come which is perfect, and the corruptible body shall no
longer clogge the soul, but being incorruptible shall nothing hinder it, shall
the Saints need bodily eyes for the seeing of things, which Elizeus needed not
for the seeing of his servant? I will not stand here to dispute of the strength
of this collection, nor of St. Austins application of those words of the
Apostle, but we see that here is no such matter as M. Bishop pretends; but
by his collecting head he bath merely coined a sentence of his own. St.
Austin in the one place denies that the Saints now are acquainted with our
matters, and in the other place says nothing to the contrary, but speaks
only uncertainly of the state that shall be after the resurrection from the
dead, and is not M. Bishop in the mean time a trusty man, thus to bolster a
false matter with a forged proof? I conclude with a brief answer to his
ground, that our craving of each others prayers living is a request of mutual
love, but Popish prayers to Saints are prayers of adoration and religion
performed to them. In the one we pray only as fellow members in compassion; in
the other the Saints are made to pray as Patrones by mediation. The one
therefore has no fellowship or agreement with the other, and very deceiptfully
does M. Bishop deal, to bring the pretense of the one for the coloring of the
other.

W. BISHOP.. 6.
NOw to the Mass. The same profound divine Saint Aug. Epist. 59. ad Paulinum.
Ambros. and Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
Augustine, with other holy Fathers (who were not wont so lightly to skimme
over the Scriptures, as our late new Masters do: but seriously searched them,
and most deeply pierced into them) did also find all the parts of the Mass
touched by the Apostle S. Paul, in these words: I desire that obsecrations,
prayers, postulations, 2. Tim. 2. verse. 1.
thanks-giuings, be made for all men, etc. declaring how by these four words
of the Apostles, are expressed the four different sorts of prayers, used in
the celebration of the holy Mysteries. By Obsecrations, those prayers that the
Priest says before consecration: By Prayers, such as be said, at, and after
the consecration, unto the end of the Pater noster: By postulations, those that
are said at the Communion, unto the blessing of the people: Finally, By
Thanksgiving, such as are said after by both Priest and People, to give God
thanks for so great a gift received. He that knows what the Mass is, may by
these words of the Apostle, see all the parts of it very lively paintedout, in
this discourse of S. Augustine; who though he calls not that celebration of
the Sacrament, by the name of Mass, yet does he give it a name equivalent:
Sacri Altaris oblatio; the oblation or sacrifice ^pistola. 59.
of the holy Altar, in the solution of the fifth question, at the exposition of
these words Orationes. As for the principal part of the Mass, which is the
Real presence of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament, S. Paul delivers it
in as express terms as may be, even as he had received it from our Lord: This
is my body which shall be delivered 1. Cor. 11. v. 23.
for you, etc. and adds, that he that eats and drinks it unworthily,
eats and drinks judgment to himself, not discerning the body of our Lord.
And in the Chapter before makes this demand: The Chalice or cup of
benediction, which we bless, is it not the communication of the blood of
Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the participation of the body
of our Lord? Moreover, he speaks of the Church of Rome (being then but in her
cradle) most honorably, saying: Your faith is Romans 1. verse. 8.
renowned in the whole world, and after, Your obedience Romans 16. ver. 19.
is published into every place. But no marvel to the wise, though he did not
then make mention of her Supremacy, for that did not belong to the Church or
people of Rome, but to S. Peter, who (when S. Paul wrote that Epistle) was
scarce well settled there; neither did that appertain to the matter he treated
of.

R. ABBOT.
NOw to the Mass, s^ith M. Bishop; but there is no wise man that reads what
he has here written, but would think that he had done much more wisely to
keep him from the Mass. I cannot tell whether more to pity his folly, or to
detest his wilfulness. See with what a grave preface he enters to a most
ridiculous and childish proof. The same profound divine St. Austin with other
holy Fathers, who were not wont so lightly to skimme over the Scriptures, as
our late new Masters do, but seriously searched them, and most deeply pierced
into them, did also find all the parts of the Mass, touched by the Apostle
St. Paul in these words, I desire that obsecrations, prayers, postulations,
thanks-giuings, be made for all men. This phrase of skimming over the
Scriptures, he learned of his Masters of Rhemes, who upon those words of St.
Paul alleging by that place of Austin, and some other Fathers, that all those
kinds of prayers were publicly used in the Lyturgie of the Church, conclude
thus: Rhem. Testam. Annot. 1. Tim. 2. 1.
So exactly does the practice of the Church agree with the precepts of the
Apostle, and the Scriptures, and so profoundly do the holy Fathers seek out
the proper sense of the Scriptures, which our Protestants do so profanely,
popularly, and lightly skimme over, that they can neither see nor endure the
truth. So then it seems we must diue very deep to find the Mass in the
Scriptures, but we are in doubt that they which go about to diue so deep,
will certainly be drowned, and never find that that they seek for. And tell
us in good sooth, M. Bishop, did St. Austin in your opinion find in those
words, all the parts of your Mass? Nay, did he find that at all, to which
the name of the Mass is by you properly referred? You hold the Mass to be a
proper real sacrifice of the very natural body and blood of Christ, offered
to God for propitiation of the sins, both of quick and dead, and does St.
Austin speak any thing to that effect? or could he find all the parts of the
Mass, without finding this? Yea, that the impudency of him, and his Rhemish
Masters, may the better appear, does St. Austin say any thing there, but what
properly belongs to our Communion, and not to their Mass? Thou shall
understand, good Reader, that Paulinus wrote to Austin, to be instructed by him
of the difference of those sorts of prayers, which St. Paul commends to
Timothy, in the words aforesaid. St. Austin answers him, that Aug. Epist.
59. Illa plane difficillime discernuntur, etc. Aliqua singulorum istorum
proprietas inquirenda est, sed ad ^a liquido peruenire difficile est. Multa
quippe hinc dici possunt quae improband^ non sint, sed eligo in his verbis hoc
intelligere quod omnis vel pene omnis frequentat Ecclesia, vt precationes
accipiamus dictas quas facimus in celebratione Sacramentorum antequam illud
quod est in Domini mensa incipiat benedici: orationes cum benedicitur, and
sanctificatur, and ad distribuendum co^minuitur, quam totam petitionem fere
omnis Ecclesia Dominica oratione co^cludit* Interpellationes sieve postulationes
fiunt cum populus benedicitur. Tunc enim antistites velut aduocati susceptos
suos per manus impositionem miserecordissimae offerunt potestati. Quibus
peractis and participato tanto Sacramento gratiarum actio c^ncta concludit.
they are very hardly discerned; that there is some propriety of every of them
to be enquired of, but very hard it is certainly to attain unto it. For many
things, says he, may be said hereof which are not to be disliked, but I make
choice to understand in these words, that which the whole Church, or almost
the whole accustometh, to take those to be called precations, obsecrations, as
M. Bishop terms them out of their vulgar Latin, which we make in the
celebration of the Sacraments, before that which is upon the Lords table,
begin to be blessed; Prayers, those which are used when the same is blessed,
and sanctified, and broken to be distributed, all which petition almost the
whole church concludes with the Lords prayer: Intercessions, or postulations,
which are made when the people is blessed; for then the Priests as advocates
do offer to the most merciful power, them whom they have received by
imposition of hands. All which being done, and after the participation of so
great a Sacrament, thanksgiving concludes all. Now what is there in all this
that does concern the Mass? M. Bishop tells us, that St. Austin finds all
the parts of the Mass, here touched by the Apostle, and see, says he, all the
parts of it very lively painted out, but can any man but think that he was
scant sober when he looked upon the place, and therefore his eyes being
troubled, thought he saw that which he saw not? Here is the celebration of a
Sacrament, the setting of bread and wine upon the table of the Lord, the
blessing and sanctifying thereof, the breaking of it to be distributed to the
people, the peoples participating of the Sacrament, and in the mean while
prayers, supplications, intercessions, giving of thanks, the very true
description of our Communion, but who sees any thing here appertaining to the
Mass? What, M. Bishop* is there no end of your trifling? will ye still go on
to play the wiseman in this sort? But to help the matter he tells us, that
though he calls not that celebration of the Sacrament by the name of Mass,
yet he does give it a name equivalent, Sacri Altaris oblatio; the oblation or
sacrifice of the holy Altar. It is true indeed that St. Austin names the
oblation of the holy Altar, but nothing at all to M. Bishops use. For willing
to give a reason why the prayers used in the very act of the administration of
the Sacrament, are termed (...), he takes the same from the composition of the
word, and because (...) is often used to signify a vow, therefore he says,
that Ibid. Ea proprie intelligenda est oration quam facimus ad votum, etc.
Vouentur autem omnia quae offeruntur Deo, maxim sancti Altaris oblatio, quo
Sacramento praedicatur aliud nostrum votum maximum quo nos vouimus in Christo
esse mansuros, id est, in compage corporis Christi. Cuius rei Sacramentum est
quod vnus panis, vnum corpus multi sumus. Ideo in huius sanctificatione, and
distributionis praeparatione existimo Apostolum iussisse proprie fieri (...),
id est, orationes.
(...) is the prayer that is made at, or upon a vow. Now all those things are
vowed, says he, which are offered unto God, specially the oblation of the holy
Altar, by which Sacrament is set forth our other greatest vow, whereby we have
vowed that we will abide in Christ, to wit, in the unity of the body of Christ.
The sign or Sacrament whereof is in this, that we being many are one bread,
and one body. Therefore do I think that in the consecration of the Sacrament,
and preparation for the distribution of it, the Apostle appointed those prayers
to be made, which he sets down by the word (...). Where it is worthy to be
noted by the way, how St. Austin crosses M. Bishops Popish doctrine,
concerning vows, as if the same were only See of Vows, sect. 1. etc.
of arbitrary devotions, not of necessary duties, whereas St. Austin makes it
our greatest, or one of our greatest vows, whereby we have vowed to abide in
Christ, and in the unity of the body of Christ, therein vpholden by Leo Bishop
of Rome, who makes it Leo in Anniuers. sermon. 3. Quid tam sa^erdotale quam
vouere de conscientiam puram, etc. Quod cum omnibus per Dei gratiam commune sit
factum.
the most Priestly work of all Christians* to vow unto God a pure conscience,
which are not a matter arbitrary, but necessary for us. But as touching the
point in hand, what St. Austin calls here the holy Altar, we see how he has
before called it, the table of the Lord. And that the Altar was no other, but a
table of wood, it appears very plainly by Optatus, who mentioning the
Donatists breaking of the Altars, says, that Optat. cont. Parmen. lib. 6. Quod
vt immundo opere sacrilegis haustibus ^iberetur calida de fragmentis Altarium
facta est. Et post. Quis fideliuns nescit in peragendis mysterijs ipsa ligna
linteamine operiri? Inter ipsa Sacramenta v^lamen potuit tangi, non lig^um.
they warmed their wine with the fragments or pieces of the Altars, and who
knows not, says he, that in the administering of the holy Sacraments, the
wood, that is, the wooden table, is covered with a linen cloth, so that the
cover may be touched but not the wood. This table was termed an Altar, by
imitation of the Jewish custom of speech, for that Ibid. Altaria, in quibus
vota populi and membra Christi portata sunt, etc. Quid est Altar nisi seeds
and corporis and sanguinis Christi?
the peoples vows, as Optatus speaks, that is, their offerings, and the
members or body of Christ, were borne and laid thereupon, the Altar being, as
he says, the seat or place of the body, and of the blood of Christ. This
consecration of the body and blood of Christ, they called an oblation or
sacrifice, De consecrat. did. 2. cap. Hoc est. Vocatur ipsa immolatio car
nisquae sacerdotis manibus fit Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, non rei
veritate sed significante mysterio.
as it was called the Passion, Death, and crucifying of Christ, not in the
truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery, because it was the Sacrament
and commemoration of Christ's oblation, and sacrifice of his own body and
blood. For Aug. Epist. 23. Nonne semel in seipso immolatus est Christus? and
tamen in Sacramento no^ solum per omnes Paschae solennitates, sed omni die
populis immolatur: nec vtique mentitur qui interrogatus eum responderit
immolari. Si enim sacrame^ta quandam similitudine ear^ rerum quarum sunt
Sacramenta non baberent omnino Sacramenta no^ essent. Ex hac autem similitudine
plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sient ergo secundum quendam
modum Sacrament^ corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, etc.
Sacraments, says Austin, have a semblance of those things whereof they are
Sacraments, and because of this semblance, they take the names of the things
themselves. As therefore the Sacrament of the body of Christ, is after a
certain manner the body of Christ, according to the former phrase of Optatus,
so though Christ in himself were but once offered, yet in the Sacrament he is
said every day to be offered for the people, namely, because there is every day
in the Sacrament a memorial and semblance of that once offering. It is truly
said by Cyprian, that Cypr. l. 2. Epist. 3. Passio est Domini sacrificium quod
offerimus.
the passion of Christ is the sacrifice which we offer, and because the passion
of Christ is not now really acted, therefore the sacrifice which we offer, is
no true and real sacrifice. Now therefore, the oblation of the Altar, of which
St. Austin speaks, has no reference to the Mass, which they hold to be a
proper and real sacrifice, but is described by himself here again, to import
only our Communion, which is the celebration of the passion of Christ, when of
the prayers which he refers to the oblation of the Altar, he says again,
as we have seen, that the Apostle appointed the same to be made at the
sanctifying or consecrating of the Sacrament, and preparation for the
distributing thereof. The sanctifying and distributing of the Sacrament, is our
Communion, but as for the Popish Mass, it imports not any distribution to
the people, but only offering to God, albeit they mock both God and Men, by
retaining still the words of the old Communion, saying every day; Canon.
Missae. Vt quotquot ex hac Allarts participatione sacrosanctum (...) tui corpus
and sai guinem sumpserimus omni benedictione coelesti and gratia repleamur.
That all we who by this participation of the Altar shall receive the sacred
body and blood of thy son, may be fulfilled with thy heavenly benediction and
grace, whereas save only the Priest, none are partakers of the Sacrament, but
only once in the year, and then partakers only of the Sacrament of Christ's
body, but secluded from his blood. But now strange it should seem, that the
Apostle in those words should be thought to have any intention of the
sacrifice of the Mass, who in the Epistle to the Hebrews, if it were he,
whilst he destroys the Jewish Priesthood, for the advancing of the
Priesthood of Christ, argues impregnably to the disauowing of all real
sacrifice, thenceforth in the Church of Christ. Whilst he affirms, but Heb.
7. 23. 24
one Priest in the new Testament, in steed of many in the old, he absolutely
takes away all the rank and succession of Popish Priests. Therefore Cyril
says, and is therein approved by the Council of Ephesus, Cyril. Epist. 10. ad
Nestor. Nec praeter ipsum alteri cuipid homini sieve sacerdotij nomen, sieve rem
ipsam ascribimus.
We ascribe not the name of Priesthood, or the thing it self, to any other but
to Christ only. August. co^t. Faust. l. 22. c. 17 Vnus verus Sacerdos, Mediator
Dei and hominum, etc.
The only true Priest, as St. Austin calls him, Ibid. l. 20. c. 18. Verum
sacrificium, etc. quo eius Altar solus Christus impleuit.
Who only, says he, has filled Gods Altar with true sacrifice. Whilst he
limiteth the sacrifice of Christ, to his Heb. 7. 27. and 10. 10.
once offering of himself, Heb. 9. 12.
by the shedding of his blood, and denies plainly his Heb. 7. 27. and 9. 1. 25.
often offering, he disclaimeth the Popish sacrifice, which is often offered,
not from year to year only, but from day to day, after the manner of the
Leuiticall sacrifice, which is therefore argued not to have taken away sins,
Heb. 10. 1. 2.
because it was often offered. For Verse. 18.
where there is remission of sins, there is no more offering for sin. Where
there is therefore still offering for sin, there is a denial of the purchase
of remission of sins. But in the Mat. 26. 28.
shedding of the blood of Christ, who doubts but that there is remission of
sins? Who then can doubt but that after the shedding of the blood of Christ,
there is no more offering or sacrifice for sin? Therefore St. Austin says;
Aug. cont. aduersar. leg. and proph. lib. 1. cap. 18. Singulari and solo vero
sacrificio Christi pro nobis sanguis effususest.
For the sovereign and only true sacrifice, the blood of Christ was shed for
us. If the shedding of the blood of Christ be the only true sacrifice, then is
there no true sacrifice in the Popish Mass, and therefore St. Austin never
understood the Apostles words of any Popish sacrifice. Well, though the Apostle
say nothing for the sacrifice, yet he says somewhat. M. Bishop tells us, for
the principal part of the Mass which is the Real presence. But what? is the
Real presence now the principal part of the Mass? They will have us by the
Mass to understand a sacrifice; and the Real presence may stand without any
sacrifice, and so by this means we shall have a Mass without a Mass. But
what says the Apostle for the Real presence? Forsooth, he delivers it in as
express terms as may be, even as he had received it from our Lord, This is my
body which shall be delivered for you, etc. and adds, that he that eats and
drinks it unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to himself, not
discerning the body of our Lord. We see the words; we read them daily; but
we cannot see in them the Real presence. Christ says there, This is my body,
but he does not say, This is my body really present. He tells us that the
unworthy receiver incurreth judgment for not discerning the Lords body, but he
does not tell us that this is for not discerning his body really present. M.
Bishop should here have given us a sound reason, that these words do
necessarily enforce a real presence, and cannot be verified, but by the
granting thereof. For if there may be another interpretation of these words
standing well with Scriptures, approved by Fathers, confonant and agreeable to
the nature of all Sacraments, then how childishly, how vainly does he deal
only to set down the place, and to say it is a proof for the real presence?
Nay, see how by alleging places in this sort he circumuenteth himself, and
destroys by one place that which he seeks to fortify by another. For
whereas Transubstantiation is the foundation and ground of Real presence, the
latter place which he cites is the bane of Transubstantiation, and gives us a
convenient and true exposition of the former words, without any necessity of
Real presence. For how can it stand which the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 10. 16.
The bread which we break is the communion of the body of Christ, if the
Popish doctrine of transubstantiation be true, that there is no bread to
break? It is true which St. Paul says, that it is bread which we break:
therefore it is false which the Papists say, that the bread by consecration is
substantially turned into the body of Christ, and cease thenceforth to be
bread. And this the Apostle inculcateth again and again in the former place,
1. Cor. 11. 26. 27. 28.
As often as ye shall eat of this bread, etc. Whosoever shall eat of this
bread, etc. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread, etc.
and yet notwithstanding all this, it must be denied to be bread. But of this
bread he tells us, that it is the communion or participation of the body of
Christ, and thereby gives us a true and certain exposition of the words of
Christ, This is my body, that is, this bread is the communion or participation
of my body, signifying that though in natural substance and being it be but
bread, yet by sacramental understanding and effect, it is to the due and
faithful receiver the communion of the body of Christ. For by Gods institution
and ordinance, Cypr. sermon. de Resurrect. Christi. Quod videtur, and nomine, and
virtute Christi corpus censetur.
the visible element, as Cyprian says, is accounted both in name and power the
body of Christ, and therefore in the due receiving of the Sacrament, is the
participating of Christ's body, as on the other side, the not discerning of the
Sacrament, is the not discerning of the body of Christ, which to us the
Sacrament is, though in it self it be not so. Now the body of Christ is here
understood, as given for us, and his blood, as shed for us, and therefore the
communion of the body and blood of Christ, is the participation of his Passion,
Death, and Resurrection, so that the Sacrament is to us as Optatus says,
Optat. cont. Parmen. lib. 6. Pignus salutis aeternae, tutela sidei, spes
resurrectionis.
the pledge of eternal life, the protection of our faith, the hope of our
resurrection. There was cause therefore why our Savior Christ should say of
the Sacrament, This is my body, because to us it is in effect the body of
Christ, though really it be not so, but Tertu^l. co^t. Marc. lib. 4 Hoc est
corpus m^um, id est figura corporis mei
the figure of his body, as Tertullian expounds; August. co^t. Adima ^t. c.
12. Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum
corporis sui.
the sign of his body, as St. Austin speaks; Hieron. in Mat 16. Vt veritatem
corporis and sang^^is sui rep^aesentaret.
the representation of his body, as Saint Hierome understands it; Gelas.
cont. Eutych. and Nestor. Imago and similitudo corporis and sanguinis Domini in
action mysteriorum celebratur.
the image and similitude of his body, as Gelasius terms it; Chrysostom. in
Mat. Op. imperf. hom. 11. Non verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis eius.
not his very body, but the mystery of his body, as Chrysostom most expressly
teaches. For conclusion of this section, he poppeth without any division, into
a speech of the Church of Rome. I made it a wonder, that S. Paul writing to the
Romans, should say never a word of the prerogative of that Church, or of the
Pope. M. Bishop for answer to this says, that he speaks of the Church of
Rome, being but then in her cradle, most honorably. And how? forsooth, he
says to them, Romans 1. 8.
Your faith is renowned in the whole world, and again, Romans 16. 19.
Your obedience is published into every place. In which places we see a great
testimony and commendation of their faith, that then was, but yet we see no
privilege or prerogative of that Church. What he said of the R^mans, the same
he said of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
Your faith which is toward God, is spread abroad in all places, and what has
the Church of Rome to challenge ther^ by, more then the Church of Thessalonica?
We see M. Bishop does as his fellows do; he will needs be saying
something, though that which he says be as good as nothing. He saw well enough
that he had said nothing; but mark, how thereupon he bewrays his own shame.
No marvel, says he, to the wise, though he did not then make mention of her
supremacy, for that did not belong to the Church or people of Rome, but to S.
Peter. O wisdom, and what hindered that he spoke nothing of S. Peter's
supremacy in that Church? Marry, because as yet he was scarsly well settled
there, neither did that appertain to the matter he treated of. Just the nail
on the head. In all his book he has not uttered a truer speech; the supremacy
of S. Peter did not indeed appertain to the matter the Apostle treated of. I
showed before out of Theodoret, that the Epistle to the Romans contains all
kind of Christian doctrine. The supremacy of S. Peter appertained not thereto,
and therefore the Apostle has said nothing of it in that Epistle. But if it
had been a part of Christian doctrine, had it not been as pertinent to the
matter he treated of, to write somewhat of it, as it was to write Romans 16. 3.
5. etc.
so many salutations to so many private and particular men? Was it appertaining
to the matter he treated of, to commend to the church of Rome Ibid. Verse. 1.
Phoebe a servant of the Church of Cenchrea, and did it not appertain thereto,
to commend unto them Saint Peter, the supreme Pastor and Bishop of the whole
Church? And what though he were not as yet well settled there? would not S.
Paul therefore put to his helping hand, that he might be settled? He says for
Phoebe; Verse. 2.
that ye receive her in the Lord, as it becomes Saints, and that ye assist
her in whatsoever business she has need of your aid; and would he not
request them as much for the receiving of S. Peter to his place, and assisting
him therein? And what though the supremacy belonged not to the Church or people
of Rome, but to Saint Peter? did it not yet concern the Church and people of
Rome, to know the supremacy of S. Peter? And though the supremacy belonged to
S. Peter, did there no prerogative thereby grow to the Church of Rome? Pope
Benedict says, that Extrauag. comm. l. r. tit. 3. Sancta Romana. Matter
vniuersorum Christi fidelium and Magistra.
the Roman Church is the Mother and Mistress of all that believe. Pope
Nicholas the third says of Peter and Paul; Sext. de clect. c. Fundamento. lsti
sunt qui Romanam Ecclesiam in ha^c gloriam prouexerunt, vt sit gens sancta,
populus electus, c^uitas Sacerdotalis and R^gia, per sacra^ b^alt Petri sed^
caput totius orbis effecta.
These are they who have advanced the Roman Church to this glory to be a holy
nation, an elect people, a Priestly and Kingly City, being by the holy s^ate of
S. Peter, made the head of the whole world, and what should the Apostle then
mean, if this be true, to say nothing of all this glory? M. Bishop himself
has told us before, that Chapt. 1.. 2
the church of Rome is the Rock, upon which the whole Church is built, and
against which the gates of hell shall never prevail; that all Churches ought
to agree with the Church of Rome, for her more potent principality; that
falsehood in matters of faith can have no access unto the Sea of Rome. Could
all these things be so, and yet the Apostle writing to them, to say nothing
hereof? Surely M. Bishops dunghill reasons (give me leave, gentle Reader, so to
call them as they be) are very insufficient to satisfy any wise man, but that
the Apostle in that large Epistle would certainly have said somewhat of the
dignity of the Roman Church, and the Supremacy of St. Peter, and the Bishops
there, if it had been so Bellarm. Epist. ad Blacwel. Archipresbyt. Vnum ex
pr^cipuis fidei nostrae capitibus and religionis Catholicae fundamentis.
chief a point of Catholic religion, as they would now have it taken to be.

W. BISHOP.. 7.
OF Pardons S. Paul teaches in formal terms, which both the Church of
Corinth and he himself gave unto the incestuous Corinthian, that then
repented: these be his words. And whom you have pardoned any 2. Cor. 2. verse.
10.
thing, I also, for my self also, that which I have pardoned, if I have
pardoned any thing, for you in the person of Christ, that we be not
circumuented of Satan. What can be more manifest, then that the Apostle did
release some part of the penance of that incestuous Corinthian, at other men's
request; Which is properly to give pardon and indulgence. And if S. Paul in the
person of Christ could so do, no doubt but S. Peter could do as much; and
consequently, other principal Pastors of Christ's Church, have the same power
and authority.

R. ABBOT.
MAy we not think it strange, that M. Bishop should thus dare in the sight of
God and the world, to abuse the holy word of God? He knows well that in the
Scriptures there is nothing to give any signification of the Popes Pardons? It
is an abomination brought into the Church of latter time; a thing unknown to
the ancient Fathers, and never heard of for a thousand years or more, after
the time of Christ. Syluester Prierias, one of the Popes great champions,
confesses with a mouth full of blasphemic; Syluest. Prier. cot. Luther
conclus. 56. Indulgentiae non innotuere nobi^ author^tate Scripturae, sed
authoritate Ecclesiae Romanae, Romanorumque Pontificum quae mayor est*
Indulgences or Pardons have not been known to us by the authority of the
Scriptures, but by the authority of the Church of Rome, and Bishops of Rome,
which is greater then the Scriptures. Alphons de Cast. adu. haer. lib. 8. tit.
Indulgentiae. Inter omnes res de quibus in hoc opere disputamus nulla est, quam
minus aperte sacrae literae prodiderint, and de qua minus vetusti scriptores
dixerint. Et post; pro indulgentiarum approbatione sacrae Scripturae testimoni^
apertum deest.
There is nothing, says Alphonsus de Castro, which the Scriptures have
declared less plainly, or whereof the old writers have said less. There is no
plain testimony of Scripture for the approving of them. And yet M. Bishop, no
skimmer over the Scriptures, I warrant you, but a man of great observation and
insight into them, will take upon him to have found where S. Paul teaches of
Pardons, not obscurely, or darkely, but in very formal terms. He cites to
this purpose the words of S. Paul, concerning the incestuous excommunicated
Corinthian, now much humbled by repentance, and having given thereof great
satisfaction and testimony to the Church; 2. Cor. 2. 10.
Whom you have pardoned any thing, I so do also; for my self also what I have
pardoned, for your sakes I have done it in the sight of Christ, that we be not
circumuented of Satan. Here he says, that the Corinthians and S. Paul himself
did give a pardon: he did release some part of the penance of that incestuous
Corinthian, which is properly to give pardon or indulgence. Just as well fitted
as if he had put a Goose quill to a Wood-cocks tail. He might even as well
have alleged our Bishops as giuers of Popish Pardons, because they do release
to men upon occasion some parts of penance, enjoined them for criminal
demeanours; and had he not made a great speak, if he had so done? What, are we
come to understand by the Popes Pardons, the releasing of Penitents, from the
bond of excommunication, for the restoring of them again to the communion of
the Church? It is true which he says of this, that if S. Paul could so do, S.
Peter could do as much, and other principal Pastors of Christ's Church have
the same power and authority; who doubts hereof? But we speak of a power
which the Pope challenges as proper to himself, to give Pardons and Libels of
Indulgence, or to give authority to others, to give the same out of the Church
treasury, of the supererogations of Saints, not for absoluing Penitents in foro
Ecclesiae, but in foro Coeli, for releasing of souls from Purgatory, and for
giving of them remission for so many days, or years, or hundreds, or
thousands of years, not only to men for themselves living, but also for their
friends dead, and that for doing such and such devotions, or paying so much
money for such or such use, or aiding him in his wars against Christian
Princes, or doing any other work and service that he requires. A lewd and
wicked devise, and practice of the Popes of some latter ages, and as lewdly
colored by M. Bishop, by pretense of that that does in no sort appertain unto
it. For all that the Apostle intends in the words alleged, is that, which
St. Ambrose briefly expresses thus, Ambros. in 2. Cor. 2. Orat ne adhuc
exulcerato aduersum illum animo, durum esset illis habere cum illo co^munionem
Ecclesiae.
He prays them that they would not any longer by a mind exasperated against
him, be hard to have with him the communion of the Church. This is the
forgiveness, this is the pardon that he desires in his behalf, that inasmuch
as he has sufficiently showed himself penitent for his fault, they will no
longer forbear to have Christian society and fellowship with him. M. Bishop
therefore would never have brought us this place for Popes Pardons, but that by
a resolute course of impudency, he makes choice to say any thing, rather then
to say the truth.

W. BISHOP.. 8.
THe last of M. Abbots instances is, That S. Paul says nothing of traditions:
wherein he shows himself not the least impudent; for the Apostle speaks
of them very often. He desires the Romans to mark them that make dissentions
and scandals, Romans 16. ver. 17.
contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and to avoid them: but the
doctrine that they had then learned, before S. Paul sent them this Epistle, was
by word of mouth and tradition (for little or none of the new Testament was
then written:) wherefore the Apostle teaches all men to be avoided, that
dissent from doctrine delivered by Tradition. And in the Acts of the Apostles
it is of record, how S. Paul walking through Syria, and Silicia, confirming the
Churches, Commanded Act. 15. verse. 41.
them to keep the precepts of the Apostles and of the Ancients. Item, when
they passed through the Cities, they delivered unto them to keep the decrees
Act. 16. verse. 4.
that were decreed by the Apostles and Ancients, which were at Jerusalem: and
the Churches were confirmed in faith, etc. Where it also appears, that those
decrees were made matter of faith, and necessary to be believed to salvation,
before they were written. He does also charge his best beloved Disciple
Timothy, To 1. Tim. 6. ver. 20
keep the Depositum ( that is, the whole Christian doctrine, delivered unto
him by word of mouth, as the best Authors take it) avoiding the profane
nouelty of voices, and oppositions of falsely called knowledge. Again, he
commands him to commend to faithful 2. Tim. 2. verse. 2.
men, the things which thou have heard of me by many witnesses. Was not this to
preach such doctrine as he had received by Apostolic tradition without
writing? And further (which suppresseth all the vain cauils of the sectaries)
he says: Therefore Brethren stand and 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 15.
hold the Traditions which you have learned, whether it be by word or by our
Epistle: where you see that some Traditions went by word of mouth, from hand to
hand, as well as some others were written, and were as well to be holden, and
stood too, as the written, proceeding from the same fountain of truth, Gods
spirit. Thus much in answer unto the instances proposed by M. Abbot, which he
very ignorantly and insolently avouches, to have no proof or sound of proof
out of S. Paul.

R. ABBOT.
HEre M. Bishop plays the Iugler again, and casts a mist before his
Readers eyes, by altering the state of the question betwixt us and them. For
the question is not whether the doctrine of truth have been at any time
delivered by Tradition, that is, by word of mouth without writing, but whether
after the old and new Testament written, and the Canon of the Scriptures
established and confirmed, there be any thing further to be received for
doctrine of faith and truth, appertaining to salvation, that is not contained
in the Scriptures. Tradition as he here speaks thereof is confounded with
Scripture, because it is one and the same doctrine, first preached by word of
mouth, and afterward committed to writing in the Scripture, but Tradition, as
we question it, is divided against Scripture, and imports doctrine over and
beside that, which is now taught us by the Scriptures. We know well that the
doctrine of salvation, until the time of Moses, was only taught by word of
mouth, but is that an argument to prove that now that we have the Scriptures,
we must also receive unwritten Traditions besides the Scriptures? Nay, when it
seemed good to the wisdom God, to commit his word to writing, he would not
do it in part only, but fully and perfectly; so that Exodus 34. 4.
Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and said of that which he wrote, Deuteronomy.
12. 32.
What I command thee, that only shall thou do unto the Lord; thou shall put
nothing thereto, nor take ought therefrom. Therefore, although the word of God
were afterward also delivered by word of mouth in the Preachings and Sermons
of the Prophets, yet were they in their Sermons to preach no other doctrine,
neither did they, but what had authority and warrant by Moses law. Now their
Sermons being also written for exposition and application of the law of Moses,
and a further supply added of the Scriptures of the Apostles and Evangelists,
how much more ought we to content our selves with the Scriptures, without
adding to them, or taking from them, receiving and believing only those things
that we are taught thereby, as being assured of that which the Scriptures
themselves teach, that 2. Tim. 3. 15.
the Scriptures are able to make a man wise unto salvation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Hereby then appears M. Bishops fallacy, in the
citing of those texts which he has here alleged. St. Paul willed the Romans
Romans 16. 17.
to mark and avoid them, that made dissensions and scandals, contrary to the
doctrine which they had learned. True it is, and what then? But the doctrine,
says he, which they had then learned, before St. Paul sent them this Epistle,
was by word of mouth and Tradition, for little or none of the new Testament was
then written. Mark what he says, before St. Paul sent them this Epistle; for
hereby he in a manner acknowledges that St. Paul comprised in this Epistle
the doctrine, which they had before learned by Tradition. The Apostles
intendment then appears plainly to be this, that they should shun those
which dissented from the doctrine which they had hitherto learned by Tradition,
that is, by preaching and word of mouth, the sum whereof he had now sent them
written in this Epistle, that they might henceforth learn to shun them that
dissented from the same doctrine, delivered to them in the Scriptures. How
ill-fauouredly then does M. Bishop argue out of these words, that we are now
to receive other doctrines then are contained in the Scriptures? There can no
argument be rightly framed out of that text, whereof it can be any harm to us
to grant the conclusion. If he will set it in due order, it must be this; The
doctrine which the Romans had learned, they had learned hitherto by Tradition;
but the Apostle teaches them to avoid such as dissented from the doctrine
which they had learned; therefore he teaches them to avoid such as dissented
from the doctrine, which they had hitherto learned by Tradition. This we grant,
and what will he conclude thereof? Surely, if he will infer any thing against
us, he must go on and say; But they learned somewhat then by Tradition, which
is not since delivered in the Scriptures. Which if he will say, we require
proof of it, and the text which he here alleges, will yield none. We say
that the whole doctrine which the Apostles first delivered by Tradition and
word of mouth, they committed afterward to writing, each his part as God
inspired and directed for comprehending of the whole. Seeing therefore they
were tied to shun all that dissented from the doctrine received by the
Tradition and Preaching of the Apostles, we having the same doctrine contained
in the Scriptures, are likewise tied to shun all doctrine, that has not
testimony of the Scriptures. Albeit it is here further to be noted, how rashly
M. Bishop says, that the doctrine which the Romans had learned, they learned
only by Tradition and word of mouth, inasmuch as the Apostle tells us, that
the Gospel, as it Rom 1. 2.
was promised in the Scriptures of the Prophets, so was also Romans 16. 26.
preached by the Scriptures of the Prophets, so that St. Luke tells us, that
the noble Jews of Berhea hearing the Apostles preaching, Acts 17. 11.
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, and that our
Savior Christ when he sent them forth to preach, Luke 24. 45.
opened their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures, that so
they might be enabled for their preaching. I have Chap. 4.. 5.
before showed out of Gregory and others, that the whole faith which the
Apostles preached, they received from the Scriptures of the Prophets, and
therefore they delivered not the Gospel only by Tradition, but what they
taught, they confirmed by the Scriptures. So then the Apostles admonition to
the Romans, will fall out to be this, that they should avoid them that
dissented from the doctrine which they had learned by the Scriptures, though
not yet by the Scriptures of the new Testament, yet by the Scriptures of the
old, Luke 24 27. 44.
the law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms, Aug. cont. 2. Gaudent. lipist.
l. 2. cap. 23. Quibus Dominus testimonium perhibet tanquam testibus suis.
which Christ named for his witnesses, and whereof he said; John 5 39.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they that testify of me. The two next proofs which he brings, are
such, as that he justly deserves to be dubbed for them. It is of record, says
he, how St. Paul Acts 15. 41.
walking through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches commanded them to
keep the precepts of the Apostles, and of the Ancients, and Acts 16. 4.
when they passed through the Cities, they delivered unto them to keep the
decrees, that were decreed by the Apostles and Ancients which were at
Jerusalem, and the Churches were confirmed in the faith. And what hereof? It
appears, says he, that those decrees were made matter of faith, and
necessary to be believed to salvation, before they were written. Yea were? But
did not you know, M. Bishop, that those decrees were written when they were
first made? Did you not read that James so propounded, Acts 15. 19. 20.
My sentence is that we write unto them, etc. Did you not find that it was
executed afterward accordingly; Verse. 23.
They wrote letters after this manner, etc. and namely to the brethren that
were in Syria and Cilicia, of whom you speak? But all is one: any thing will
serve the turn to tell them that will never search whether you lie or not.
With as much discretion and fidelity does he allege the other places which
follow. Paul charge his Disciple Timothy 1. Tim. 6. 20.
to keep the depositum, that is, says he, the whole Christian doctrine
delivered unto him by word of mouth, as the best Authors take it. But who are
those best Authors, that so take it? Forsooth, Doctor Allen and the rest of
his Rhemish Masters; for other he can name none: we should certainly have
heard of them if he could. Again, Paul says to Timothy, 2. Tim. 2. 2.
Commend to faithful men the things which thou have heard of me by many
witnesses. Was not this, says he, to preach such doctrine as he had received
by Apostolic Tradition without writing? No, M. Bishop, there is no necessity
to take it so. He received the doctrine of the Gospel by the preaching of the
Apostle, but it does not follow, that therefore he received it not in writing,
yea the Apostle even there tells him as I have before alleged, 2. Tim. 3. 15.
The Scriptures are able to make thee wise unto s^luation, through the faith
which is in Christ Jesus. To answer him in a word as touching that depositum,
and the things which Timothy had heard of Paul, he himself will not doubt,
but that those things which are written do appertain thereto. The words then
having a necessary construction of those things that are written, how will he
make it appear to us, that they have further reference also to some things
that are not written? They must perforce grant that a great part of those
things is written, and how do they prove that not the whole? The same do I
answer him, and have answered him before, concerning the words which he
cites to the Thessalonians: 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
Hold the Traditions (the things delivered unto you) which you have learned,
whether by word, or by our Epistle. He calls Traditions those things which
he had written to them in that Epistle. He had not set down in that Epistle
all the doctrine of the Gospel, which is contained in other Scriptures, which
all notwithstanding he had by word preached unto them. He wills them
therefore to hold fast, both the things which he had written to them in his
Epistle, and all the things which he had preached unto them, which are written
otherwhere, this we are sure of; but how may we be sure, that he meant to
commend to them the holding fast of those doctrines, which are neither written
in that Epistle nor otherwhere? Surely, if the words may have a sufficient
meaning, being understood of those things which are written, though not in that
Epistle, yet in other either Gospels or Epistles, then vainly are they
alleged as a necessary proof, for receiving of doctrines which are not
written any where. And therefore whereas M. Bishop infers; You see that some
Traditions went by word of mouth, from hand to hand, as well as some others were
written, he shows that he himself sees not what he says, because the place
proves only that the Apostle wrote not all in the Epistle whereof he
speaks, but that all otherwise is not written, it proves not, and that all
is written that is necessary to eternal life, I have before sufficiently
proved out of the very doctrine it self of the ancient Roman Church. Now
therefore it is neither ignorance nor insolency, nor impudency in me, to say
that the Apostle says nothing for Popish Traditions, but it is M. Bishops
treachery, to bring texts to that purpose, to deceive thereby simple men, when
as they have plain and clear construction otherwise.

W. BISHOP.. 9.
I Could (were it not to avoid tediousness) add the like confirmation of
most controversies, out of the same blessed Apostle; as that the Church is the
pillar and 1. Tim. 3. ver. 15.
ground of truth: wherefore any man may most assuredly repose his faith upon
her declaration. That Christ gave Pastors and Doctors to the edifying of that
his mystical Ephesians. 4. verse 11. and 13.
body, until we meet all in the unity of faith, etc. Therefore the Church
shall not fail in faith until the day of judgment, nor be invisible, that
has visible Pastors and Teachers. Also that Priests are chosen from Hebr. 5.
verse. 1.
among men, and appointed for men, in those things that appertain to God, that
they may offer gifts and sacrifices for sin. That Preachers and Priests are
1. Cor. 3. verse. 9.
Gods coadiutors and helpers, and not only idle instruments. That S. Paul and
Timothy did save other 1. Cor. 9. ver. 23.
men, and therefore no blasphemy to pray to Saints, to help and save us. That
S. Paul did accomplish those 1. Tim. 4. v. 16.
things that want to the passions of Christ in his flesh, for Christ's body
which is the Church, therefore Christ's passion does not take away our own
satisfaction. That he gloried in preaching the Gospel of free cost, * Coloss.
1. v. 24.
which was a work of supererogation. That Ephesians. 5 v. 32.
Marriage 1. Cor. 9. ver. 16.
is a great Sacrament. That 1. Tim. 4. v. 23.
grace was given to Timothy, by the imposition of the hands of Priesthood:
whence it follows, that Matrimony and holy Orders be true and perfect
Sacraments. But what do I? I should be too long, if I would prosecute all that
which the Apostle has left in writing, in favor and defense of the Roman
faith. This (I doubt not) will suffice to confront his shameless impudency,
that blusheth not to affirm, there was not a word in S. Paul that sounded for
the Catholic, but all (in show at least) for the Protestant. As for S. Peter,
I will wholly omit him, because the Protestants have small confidence in him.

Here I may be bold, I hope, to turn upon M. Abbot this dilemma and forked
argument, which S. Augustine framed against the Man^chean Adimantus: Ho^ si
Lib: 1. cont. Adimant.
imprudens fecit, nihil caecius; si autem sciens, nihil sceleratius: If M.
Abbot did ignorantly affirm Saint Paul to have said nothing for the Roman
Catholics, what could be more blind, then not to be able to discern any
thing in such clear light? if he said it wittingly, knowing the contrary, then
did he it most wickedly, so to lie against his own conscience, to draw after
him self, other men into error and perdition.

R. ABBOT.
Mark here, I pray thee, gentle Reader, how warily M. Bishop speaks. He
says that he could in most controversies add the like confirmation, willing
hereby to have thee understand, that as all his confirmations hitherto have
been nothing worth, so all the rest should be stark naught. And that thou
may believe him herein, he takes course presently to give thee assurance
of it. St. Paul says, 1. Tim. ^. 15.
The Church is the pillar and ground of truth. Wherefore any man, says he, may
most assuredly repose his faith upon her declaration. Well; but ask him
hereupon, Why then do not you, M. Bishop, repose your faith upon the
declaration of the Church of England? Not so, will he say; for this is the
proper privilege and prerogative of the Church of Rome. Wisdom, and how
comes this to be proper to the Church of Rome? Does your book tell you so?
Do you not see that the Apostle uses those words, namely of the Church of
Ephesus, where Timothy was Bishop, and therefore leaves them appliable in the
like sort to every particular Church, and therefore as well to the Church of
England, as to the Church of Rome? And what exception has he to the contrary,
but that as the Church of the living God has been from the beginning of the
world, so it has been from the beginning of the world the pillar and ground
of truth? and can he make it good that there has been from the beginning a
Church privileged, thereby from being led into error, that all men might
always infallibly rest themselves upon the sentence of that Church? If not,
how can he upon this ground conclude that now, which was not then, and what he
cannot find to have been in the Church of Jerusalem, what likelihood is
there, that it should be now found in the Church of Rome? But it has been
sufficiently declared before, that Part. 3. Confutation of Doctor Bishops
Answer to Master Perk^ns Advertisement, etc. sect. 2.
to be the pillar and ground of truth, is the common duty of every Church, not
any prerogative of the Roman Church, and notes what the Church always by
calling ought to be, not what in act and performance it always is. Therefore
this first confirmation of M. Bishops is but a paper shot; it makes a great
noise, but wounds not. The second is like the first. Ephesians 4. 11.
Christ gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors, and
Doctors, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, till we all meet
together in the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God, etc. Hence
he infers thus; therefore the Church shall not fail in faith, until the
day of judgment, nor be invisible that has visible Pastors and Teachers.
Urge him here a little further as touching this not sailing in faith, and thou
shall see how he will go from the Church to the Church of Rome, and from the
Church of Rome to the general Council, and from the general Council to the
Pope, and all both Pastors, and Doctors, and Church, and Council, serve but
for a saddle whereon the Pope rides in his royalty, saying as a Council of
old vpbraided him, Auent. Annal. l. 7. In cuius front nomen contumeliae
scriptum est; Deus sum, errare non possum. Synod. Reginoburg.
I am God and cannot err. They rest the privilege of not erring in the Pope,
and may we not think this text well alleged, to prove that the Pope cannot
err, who is in truth neither Pastor nor Doctor, but a Hireling and a Thief?
The words of the Apostle serve to instruct us that Christ Jesus being ascended
up on high, provides for his Church, raising up Pastors and Doctors, for the
ends which he there expresses, but he does not say that Pastors and Doctors
are always answerable to those ends. God gave the Priests and Levites for the
like blessing unto Israel, and it was said of them, Deuteronomy. 33. 10.
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law. And yet there was a
time when it was said of them, Ierem. 2. 8.
The Priests said not, Where is the Lord? and they that should minister the law
knew me not: the Pastors offended against me, and the Prophets prophesied in
Baal, and went after things that did not profit. And again, Malach. 2. 7*
The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at
his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts; but ye are gone out
of the way; ye have caused many to fall by the law, etc. And again, Os^ 9. 8.
The watchman of Ephraim should be with my God, but the Prophet is the snare of
a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God. And is it not so
also many times in the state of the Church of Christ? Is it not so often times
that they whom he has given for Pastors and Doctors to his Church, become
Apoc. 6. 13.
stars fallen from heaven to earth, void of true light themselves, and
therefore giving no light to others? Have there not been infinite complaints
hereof in the Church of Rome, of the negligence and ignorance, and inability of
them, who have sitten in place of Pastors and Doctors in the Church? Did M.
Bishop never read in Matthew Paris, an Epistle devised as sent from hell,
Math. Paris. in Will. Conq. Satanas and omne contubernium infernorum omni
Ecclesiastico coetui gratias e^^sit quod cum in nullo voluptatibus suis
deessent tantum numerum subditarum sibi animarum suae praedicationis incuria
paterentur ad inferna descendere qua^tum secula nunquam retroacta viderunt.
wherein Satan and all the company of hell, did send thanks to the whole
Ecclesiastical order, for that whereas in nothing they were wanting to their
own pleasures, they suffered by their neglect of preaching such a great number
of souls under them, to go to hell, as no ages past had seen the like. Was
there in this mean time no failing in faith, when Clemangis, as Espencaeus
witnesses, complaining of the want of the knowledge, and reading of Gods word,
said, Claud Espe^c. Digress. in 1. Tim. l. 1. c. 11. Vbi id nec legitur, nec
auditur, fidem perire and labefactari necesse est, vt hodie, proh dolor,
omnibus fere locis cernimus vt ad te^pora propinquare videamus, de quibus
Dominus, putas filius hominis, etc. ex Clemang.
Where the word of God is neither read nor heard, needs must faith perish and
decay, as now a days, alas, in all places almost we see, so as that we see, it
approaches to the times, whereof our Savior says, Think ye when the son
of man comes, he shall find faith upon the earth? or when things Ibid. ex
Agobert. Antiphonarium correximus, amputatis quae superflua, leuia, falsa,
blasphema, ridicula, phantastica videbantur.
false, blasphemous, ridiculous, Pius 5. Offic. Beat. Mar. in Princip.
Huiusmodi fere omnia officia vanis superstitionum erroribus reserta.
erroneous, superstitious, were brought into the service of the Church, and
Li^dan. apud Espenc. vt supra. Preces secretae mendis turpissimis conspurcatae.
the prayers thereof were filthily corrupted? or when Cor. Agripp. de vanit.
scient. cap. 17. Hodie tanta in Ecclesijs Musicae licentia est, vt ^^^am vna
cum Missae ipsius Canone obscoenae quaeque cantiunculae interim in organis
par^s vices habeant.
filthy songs had equal place or course with the Canon of the Mass? And what?
will not M. Bishop say as all his fellows do, that the Pastors and Doctors of
all the Eastern parts have gone astray? will he not acknowledge that all
those Churches have failed in faith? What is become of the Church of Ephesus,
to which the Apostle wrote these words now in question? What of the Church of
Corinth, of Colosse, of Thessalonica, and the rest? If this, the truth of the
Apostles words reserved, might befall to them, what says he for other
Churches, more then he does for them? If M. Bishop will say that the words
have some special reference to the Pastors and Doctors of the Church of Rome,
we hold him a most ridiculous man, that takes upon him to see, that which
amongst so many ancient interpreters of the place, never any man saw before
him. Once again I say that Christ has given Pastors and Doctors to his
Church, as of old, Ezech. 3. 17. and 33. 7.
he gave watchmen to the house of Israel. He has prescribed them their office
and duty, and appointed the work that they shall do. When they perform their
duty faithfully and carefully, they are the salvation of the people, and bring
many unto glory. But if they neglect their duty, and leave the work of God
undone, the people perish under them, and they become guilty of their
destruction. And thus it befalls often in the public state of the Church,
even to the ruin thereof, that thieves and robbers thrust themselves, or
creep by stealth into the places of Pastors, who sometimes cannot, sometimes
will not teach, and sometimes teach error and lies, in steed of truth,
whilst they measure their teaching by Tit. 1. 11.
filthy lucre, and by Romans 16. 18. Thil. 3. 19.
serving their bellies, in steed of serving Jesus Christ. The Apostle does not
say they cannot err: he does not say that the Church under them cannot fail
in faith. Only God amidst all ruins and desolations provides for his Elect*
and in the want and default of ordinary Pastors, raises up other spirits, and
uses other means, for the effecting of his good purpose concerning them, so
guiding them, not as that they never err in faith (they err often grievously,
and are misled with the customs and superstitions of their times) but so as
that they never err finally as touching any truth, the knowledge and faith
whereof he has made necessary to eternal life. Now whereas M. Bishop
concludes out of the same place, that the Church shall never be invisible, as
which has always visible Pastors and Teachers, he therein shows his absurd
looseness and carelessness of arguing, because though the Apostle affirm
Pastors and Teachers in the Church, yet he does not so much as intimate any
way, that they are always visible. What is there in the Apostles words,
whence he should in any sort gather, that there is a perpetual visible state
and succession of Pastors and Teachers? Be it that there is a perpetuity of
succession to be gathered from hence, yet it does not follow that there is a
perpetual visibility thereof. It is enough here thus to reject him as an idle
Sophister, and indeed not worthy of so much as the name of a Sophister, that
will bring a conclusion there where he has no sl^ew of footing for it;
otherwise of the visibility or inuisibility of the Church, I have spoken
sufficiently Part. 3. Answer to Doct. Bishops Preface, sect. 17. and Co^futat.
of his Answer to M. Perkins Advertisement. sect. 6.
otherwhere, and it were too long to dispute here. His next matter is a bare
recital of a text without any collection made therefrom, imagining in his
blind understanding, that it is a plain assertion of that that he would
prove by it. He makes St. Paul to say, that Priests are chosen from among
men, and appointed for men in those things that appertain to God, that they
may offer gifts and sacrifices for sin. Where it is first to be noted how to
serve his own turn, he falsifieth the Apostles text, and reads, Priests are
chosen from amongst men, for that the Apostle says, Every high Priest is
chosen from amongst men. By saying Priests, hoe would extend the words as to
be understood of their Popish Priesthood in the Gospel, whereas the Apostle
by naming a high Priest, appropriateth his words to Aarons Priesthood in the
law. For even in the Popish Priesthood there is no high Priest, the power of
sacrificing being indifferently common to them all, and no more belonging to
Popes and Bishops, then to the meanest hedge-Priest or Curate in the world.
Seeing then the Apostle speaks of a Priesthood which admits a high
Priest, which the Popish Priesthood does not, certain it is, that the words
can have no reference to Popish Priesthood. Therefore the Fathers universally
apply this text, as the drift of the holy Ghost most plainly leads them, to
the Leuiticall Priesthood only, neither did they ever dream of any
Evangelical Priesthood intended herein. Ambrose declares the purpose of the
Apostle to be this, Ambros. in Heb. 5. Vt consueto Sacerdotu^ more qui in lege
fuit, ad altius, id est, Christi sacerdotium eos perd^ceret qui adhuc infirmi
fueru^t, and propterea modum carnalis Pontificis introducit.
that by the accustomed manner of the Priests in the law, he might bring them
being weak, to the higher or more excellent Priesthood of Christ; therefore,
says he, does he bring in or set down the manner or condition of the
carnal high Priest. Theodoret says, Theodoret. ibid. Doce^s quod etiam in
lege non Angelus vt pro hominibus sacerdotio fungatur electus est, sed homo pro
hominibus, etc. Haec dixit Apostolus non nobis Pontifi^atus regulas volens
ostendere, sed ad dicendum de Pontificatu Domini viam muniens.
He teaches that even in the law there was not an Angel chosen to execute the
office of Priesthood for men, but a man was chosen for men, and, The Apostle,
says he, speaks these things, not to set down rules of the high
Priesthood, but to make way to the Priesthood of Christ. We see they both
take the words as spoken of the Priests in the law, of the carnal high Priest
and Priesthood, and to make way to the treaty of the Priesthood of Christ,
and therefore not to be understood themselves of Christ's Priesthood, either
executed by himself, or by him instituted, if there were any such, to be
executed by men. But this appears more plainly by Chrysostom, who says,
that Chrysostom. in Hebr. hom. 8. Vult ostendere beatus Paulus quam multo melius
sit testamentum h^c quam vetus.
the Apostle here goes about to show, that the new Testament is much better
then the old. Where Theophylact saying the same, adds further; Theophyl. in
Heb. 5. Vult arguere nouum vetere Testamentum long esse praestantius,
orditurque sacerdotalia munera ipsa confer, cum priscorum sacerdotum illorum,
tum Christi, ostenditque maximum in modum excellere Christi sacerdotium.
He begins to compare the Priestly duties, both of those old Priests and of
Christ, and shows that the Priesthood of Christ does most highly excel.
Oecumenius goes yet further, and particulateth the difference; Oecumen* in
Heb. 5. Vult hic osten. lere nonum testamentum praestantius esse veteri, and
hoc intcrim facit velut ind^cta a sacerdotibus comparatione quod illud quidem
homines habuit sacerdotes, hoc autem Christum.
He goes about to show, says he, that the new Testament is more excellent
then the old, and this he does by bringing in a comparison of the Priests, that
the old Testament has men for Priests, but the new has Christ. Now if there
be here an intention of a comparison, betwixt the old Testament and the new,
and the words cited by M. Bishop, belong to a part of the comparison, to set
forth the Priesthood of the old, then does he very absurdly apply them to an
assertion of Priesthood in the new, and by taking away the distinction of the
parts, does utterly overthrow the whole comparison. Yea, and if one part of the
difference betwixt the two Testaments, consist in this, as Oecumenius hence
observes, that in the old Testament men are Priests, then more absurdly does
M. Bishop deal, to force these words to the maintenance of their Popish
Priesthood, whereby men are Priests in the new Testament, as well as in the
old. But there is yet further proof that the words belong only to the
Leuiticall Priesthood, in that he names it a Priesthood, appointed to offer
gifts and sacrifices for sins, there being herein implied another difference,
that in the old Testament the Priests offered gifts and sacrifices for sins,
but in the new Testament, Christ our Priest offers up himself. And this
opposition Theophylact expresses out of these words in question; Theophyl.
in. Heb. 5. Qui Patrem conciliandi gratia seipsum obtulit, a^ij vero alia
quaeda, donum videlicet and sacrificium.
Christ, says he, to reconcile us to his Father offered up himself, but the
other offered other things, to wit, gifts and sacrifices. The same Primasius
also sets down from the same words, Primas. ibid. Quod dicit, v^ offeral
dona and sacrificia, etc. illi pro suis delictis offereba^t sacrificia, boues
scilicet, arietes, hircos and caetera talia, Chrislus ve^^ seipsum.
They offered for their sins sacrifices of Oxen, Rams, Goats, and such
like, but Christ offered himself. If the words then have their understanding
of a Priesthood; offering other sacrifices then Christ offers, who has
offered up himself, and do import an opposition betwixt the Priesthood of
Christ, and the Jewish Priesthood, then can we not here understand M. Bishops
Priesthood, wherein they take upon them to offer the same that Christ offered,
even Christ himself, and to be Priests of the same order as Christ is. Here
then we see what conscience M. Bishop uses in the allegation of this text,
for their Priesthood and Sacrifice of the Mass, when as it has no affinity
or agreement with it, but goes wholly another way. Yea his iniquity, and the
iniquity of his fellows in this behalf, is so much the greater, in that it
being the Apostles drift in this Epistle, to exclude all Priesthood and
Sacrifice for sin, save only the personal Priesthood and sacrifice of Christ
only, they dare presume thus to wrest some sentences, spoken by the way of the
Jewish Priesthood in the law, as if they extended to another Massing
Priesthood, to be continued in the Gospel. But against this their devised
Priesthood, pretending daily to sacrifice Christ, when as it is no other, but
a mere blasphemy, and derogation to the sacrifice of Christ, we are armed by
that the Apostle tells us, that Heb. 7. 27.
Christ needs not daily to offer up sacrifice, that Heb. 9. 25.
he is entered into heaven, not to offer himself often, because Heb. 10. 14.
by one offering he has made perfect for ever them that are sanctified,
having thereby purchased Mat. 26. 28.
remission of sins, and Heb. 10. 18.
where remission of sins is, there is no more offering for sin. The words
are plain, every eye may discern them, that because by Christ's once offering
there is remission of sins, therefore there is now no more offering for
sin, and therefore no Priesthood for that use. Howsoever therefore use and
custom have brought the name of Priesthood into the language of the Church,
yet as touching the propriety and truth thereof, we say as before with Cyril,
Cyril. ad Neslor. Epist. 10. Nec praeter ipsum alteri cuipiam homini sieve
sacerdotij nomen sieve rem ipsam ascribimus.
We ascribe not the name of Priesthood, or the thing it self, to any other
man, save to Christ, and therefore do wholly disclaim M. Bishops Priesthood.
To which notwithstanding to get some further color, he falsifieth another text
of the Apostle, as if it had been said; Priests are Gods coadintours and
helpers, whereas the Apostle has no name of Priests, nor any intendement at
all of such Priests as M. Bishop speaks of, but of Apostles, Preachers, and
Ministers of the Gospel, he says; 1. Cor. 3. 9.
We are Gods helpers, or laborers together with God. Now who denies this?
who says that Preachers are only idle instruments, as he here obiecteth? who
does not rather imagine that he is scant right, that makes motion of such a
causeless and idle quarrel? But much more may we think that his head stood
awry in his next conclusion; That St. Pauld and Timothy did save other men; and
therefore it is no blasphemy to pray to Saints to help and save us. For tell
us M. Bishop, do not you tell your Disciples, that the end of your calling and
travel is to save souls? Do not you bear them in hand that to save them,
you adventure the loss of your own lives? And what? because you in your
opinion do save them, must all men in your opinion also make prayers to you,
to help and save them? or will you have men before due time to say. O St.
William, help us, and save us? Iam. 5. 20.
He that conuerteth a sinner from going astray, saves a soul from death, and
does it follow that thenceforth we must pray unto him, to help and save us?
Yea many a time it comes to pass, that he which thus saves another, is
found a reprobate himself, and does it yet follow that we must pray to him?
Paul and Timothy saved men as all Preachers do, by preaching the way of
salvation, by Acts 11. 14.
speaking the words unto them, by which they were saved. They saved them, to
whom they preached; them to whom they preached not, they saved not, nor can be
said to save us otherwise, then as Gods instruments, they have left unto us in
writing the word of the Gospel, by the faith whereof we obtain salvation.
And does it follow, that because they thus saved men when they were alive,
therefore we must pray to them when they are dead? or because they saved men by
their preaching when they were alive, must we pray to them to help us and save
us by their merits and intercessions, now they are dead? or because Paul and
Timothy saved men by their preaching, must we pray to our Lady, to holy
Virgins, and other Women, that they will help us and save us, that preached
not? What sharp eyesight do men get by being at Rome, that can look as
far into a text as they do into a mil-stone, and can see more in it, then
ever they thought of that were the writers of it? Can we doubt but that the
Roman religion may be proved by Scripture, when as we see so pregnant places
for the proof of it? or may we not rather think them besotted and bewitched,
that rest their faith and salvation upon such proofs? The like faculty and
dexterity we see in the next proof; St. Paul did accomplish those things that
want to the passions of Christ in his flesh, for Christ's body which is the
Church; therefore Christ's passion does not take away our own satisfaction. Of
which place and his construction thereof I have Of Satisfaction, sect. ^.
formerly said so much, and so plainly laid open his abuse of it, as that for
very shame he should have for borne to apply it any more to that effect. There
is no Father of the Church, no ancient writer that has either so expounded the
place, or affirmed the doctrine that they gather from it. It is a mere
Antichristian devise, full of blasphemy and indignity to the Son of God,
forged only for advantage of filthy lucre and gain, so that we may justly
wonder that they dare thus wrest holy Scripture to the defense of it. But does
St. Paul say any thing there that sounds for satisfaction? He tells us
that for the Churches sake he fulfilleth for his part, that which is wanting,
or yet behind of the afflictions of Christ, but does he any way import that
this is to satisfy for sin, or to redeem the Church either from temporal
or eternal punishment? The Father Heb. 2. 10.
has consecrated Jesus the Prince of our salvation through afflictions. Luke
24. 26.
It behooved him first to suffer, and so to enter into his glory. God then
having Rom 8. 29.
predestined us to be made like unto the image of his son, it follows,
that Verse. 17.
we must also suffer with him, that we also may be glorified with him. And
because we are members of Christ, who has made the Church Ephesians. 1. 23.
his body, and the fullness of himself, and has called the whole, himself
the head, and us the body, by the one name of 1. Cor. 12. 12. Gal. 3. 16.
Christ, professing expressly, M^^. 25. 4^, 45.
What ye have done to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it
unto me, therefore our afflictions and sufferings are called 2. Cor. 1. 5.
the sufferings and afflictions of Christ, whero^ therefore there shall be some
what behind, and to which there shall be still somewhat wanting until the
passions and sufferings of the whole body, even of all the elect, shall be
accomplished and fulfilled. To St. Paul then it belonged, being a member of the
body of Christ, to drink of this cup, and to be baptized with this baptism,
but no otherwise did it belong to him, then it belongs to all the faithful,
neither does he profess any thing here to be fulfilled by him, but what must
successively, and in order be fulfilled by them all. Thus and no otherwise did
Gregory Bishop of Rome understand the Apostles fulfilling of the remainder of
the afflictions of Christ. Gregor. Expo^t in 1 Reg. lib 4. cap 4. p^ope finem.
No omnia nostra Christus expleuit. Per crucem qui. them suam omnes redemit, sed
remansit vt qui redimi and cum eo regnore nititur crucifigatur. Ho^ profectore
fiduum viderat qui dicebat, si compatimur, and conregnabimus; quasi dicot, Quod
expl^uit Christus no^ valet, nisi ei qui id quod remansit adimplet. Hinc beatus
Petrus Apostolis dicit, Christus passas est pro nobis, etc. H^nc Paulus ait^
A^^mpleo ^a quae desunt p^sso^ Christ^m co^pore meo
Christ, says he, did not fulfill all that appertains to us. By his Cross
indeed he redeemed all, but it remains that he that seeks to be redeemed
and to reign with him, must also be crucified. This, says he, he saw to be
remaining which said, If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him; as if he
said, That which Christ fulfilled avails not, but to him who fulfilleth that
which yet remains. Hereof St. Peter says; Christ suffered for us, leaving
you an example that ye should follow his steps. Hereof St. Paul says; I
fulfill in my body those things which are yet wanting to the passion of Christ.
He attributes redemption which is the satisfaction for our sins, wholly to
the Cross of Christ, but signifies withal that God has appointed, that they
shall be joined with Christ, in Phil. 3 10.
the fellowship of his affl^ctions, that shall be partakers of his redemption,
and that this is the fulfilling of that that is wanting of the passions of
Christ. Now whereas he says that he does this for the Churches sake, he
means no other thereby, then when he says to the Corinthians; 2. Cor. 12 15.
I will most gladly be bestowed for your souls, and to the Ephesians; Ephesians 3.
^.
I am a prisoner in the Lord for you Gentiles, and to the Philippians, Phil 2.
17.
I will gladly be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, and to
Timothy; 2. Tim. 2. 10.
I suffer all things for the elects sake, that they may also obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory. What; did he intend in
all these places by his sufferings, to satisfy for their sins, or to
purchase salvation for them? Nay, but to confirm and strengthen them in the
faith of Christ, whereby they should attain forgiveness of sins and
salvation; to encourage and comfort them, to bear the Cross of Christ, and to
suffer in the same-sort, because that is our way to come to Christ, the Apostle
adding immediately in the place to Timothy; Verse. 11.
It is a true saying, that if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him;
if we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him. To be short, to the same
purpose St. John says, 1. John 3. 16.
Christ has laid down his life for us; therefore ought we also to lay down
our lives for the brethren, namely as St. Austin expounds it, Aug. in Joan.
tract. 47. Sic and nos debemus ad ^dificandamplebem, ad fidem offerendam anima^
pro fratribus ponere.
for the confirmation of the faith, for the edification of the people of
Christ, and Idem in 1. Joan. tract. 5. Nolite dubitare m^ri pro confessione
veritatis vt caeteri vos imitentur.
doubt not, says he again, to die for the confession of the truth, that
others may imitate and follow you. I do thee wrong, gentle Reader, to trouble
thee here again with so long answer to these words; I refer thee to the
place before quoted, where thou shall find more large and full satisfaction
concerning the same. M. Bishop adds further, that Paul gloried in preaching
the Gospel 1. Cor. 9. 15.
of free cost, which was a work of supererogation. Works of supererogation,
they call those which have no commandment of God to bind us to the doing of
them, but they are wholly subject to the election and will of man, adding great
perfection to a man if he do them, but leaving him still in the state of
justice and righteousness, though he do them not. But this work of the
Apostle is not a work of that sort, because, as the case then stood, if he had
done otherwise then he did, he had failed in his love to God, and in the care
that he was to have of the success of the Gospel of Christ. It is true
indeed, that 1. Cor. 9. 14.
the Lord has ordained that they which preach the Gospel should line of the
Gospel, and has given them liberty and authority, to require and take a
retribution of things, belonging to the use and necessity of this present life.
But this, as all other, 2. Cor 13. 10.
power is given of the Lord for edification, and not for destruction, and
therefore where the use thereof stands, not with edification, but tends
rather to destruction, it concerns a man in his duty of fidelity toward God,
to for bear his liberty, and to abridge himself of claiming that which
otherwise were lawful for him. And this was the Apostles case, who seeing that
by his receiving maintenance of the Corinthians, he should grow obnoxious to
the slander of the false Apostles, and that likely to prove to the great
disadvantage of the Gospel of Christ, chose rather to supply his wants by the
labor of his hands, and by the benevolence of other Churches, and so to preach
the Gospel without being chargeable unto them, that so there might be no let
to the passage of it. All this the Apostle himself signifies, when he says
in the place cited, 1. Cor. 9. 12.
We have not used this power, but do suffer all things, that we should not
hinder the Gospel of Christ; that is, says Primasius, Primas. in 1. Cor. 9.
Ne illi quibus Euangelizamus per not offendant, aduersarijs accepta occasion
deuorantibus. Sic Hi^. ron. ibid.
that they to whom we preach offend not by our means, whilst the adversaries
hereby take occasion to devour them. And again: Verse. 18.
I make the Gospel of Christ free from cost, that I abuse not mine authority
in the Gospel. Had it been no fault to abuse his authority in the Gospel?
Had it been no fault to hinder the Gospel of Christ, when it lay in his
power, though with some wrong to himself, to do otherwise? If this could not
be without fault, then the Apostles preaching the Gospel of free cost, was
here a necessary duty, neither could he in this case otherwise do without
breach of that trust, that was committed unto him by Jesus Christ. The
application that St. Ambrose makes of this example, clears the matter very
fully; Ambros. in 1. Cor. 9. Forma vult esse caeteris, vt vbi vident no^
expedire, etiam licitis non vtantur; si quo minu^, de licit^ fient rei quod sic
sumunt vt ad detrimentum proficiat.
The Apostle, says he, will be an example to others, to forbear the use of
things lawful, where they see the same not to be expedient, or if not, even by
that that is lawful they become offenders by taking the same so as grows to
detriment and hurt. He alludeth to that, which the same Apostle says in
another place, 1. Cor. 10. 23.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not exp^dient; all things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not, giving to understand that things
absolutely lawful, when by a circumstance or upon occasion they fall out not
to be expedient, become thereby so far forth unlawful. And August. de
adulterin coniug. lib. 1. c. 18. Tunc no^ ex^edit, id quod licitum est quando
permittitur quidem, sed vsus ipsius potestatisali^s affert impedinentum salutis.
then, says Austin, is that not expedient which is lawful when it is
permitted or left to our power, but the use of this power causes to others a
hinderance of salvation. In which case to relinquish our power, and to remit
our liberty of things lawful, is not a work of supererogation, but a duty of
charity, which 1. Cor. 13. 5.
seeks not her own only, but regards what may stand with the profit and
salvation of our brethren. Neither is there only herein an office or duty of
charity toward men, but also toward God; who requiring us Luke. 10. 27.
to love him with all our heart, with all our soul, with all our mind, with
all our strength, binds us thereby to use all our power, and to apprehend and
entertain all means and occasions to further and advance the glory of God.
Leo in Ieiun. sept. men's. ser. 5.. ^ In nullo nos. vult ab amoris suivinculis
relaxari.
In nothing, says he, will he have us to be released from the bonds of his
love; Greg. Mor. l. 10. c. 4. Vt qui perf^cte D^o placere* d^sideret, sibi de
se ^ihil relinqua^.
He will have a man, says Gregory, leave himself nothing of himself. The
Apostle therefore in preaching the Gospel to the Corinthians of free cost,
though he omitted therein a liberty which God by special provision and
ordinance has yielded in that case, yet the occasion waighed where he did it,
he did no more then in generality of duty God requires and commands, who
will have his favors so to be a commodity unto us, as that they be no wrong to
him, and our liberty so to be urged and used, as may stand with charity, that
it be not a snare to our brethren, or a wound to them whom we should seek to
heal. M. Bishop therefore is yet to seek for his works of supererogation:
St. Paul will yield him no help for them; and a simple man would I hold him
for alleging this text for the proof thereof, but that I know he is tied to
go that way, that other Roman Hackneis have gone before him. Next, and for
conclusion, he comes to the Sacraments, and although he cannot bring color
for their whole five superadded Sacraments, yet he shows his good will, by
alleging somewhat for two of them, but still has ill hap and comes too
short of the mark that he aymeth at. For marriage he alleges the words of
St. Paul, as commonly they do, Ephesians. 5. 32.
This is a great Sacrament. Sacrament, say they, out of their vulgar Latin,
whereas considering the use of the word Sacrament that now is, they should
rather say mystery or secret as we do. Albeit if the very word Sacrament in
their vulgar translation, be sufficient to prove a Sacrament in that sense,
wherein the number of Sacraments is questioned betwixt us and them, they may
tell us of a greater number then now they do, and add Ephesians. 1. 9.
the Sacrament of the will of God; Ephesians. ^. 9.
the Sacrament hidden from the ages past; 1. Tim. 3. 16*
the Sacrament of Godliness; Apoc. 1. 20.
the Sacrament of seven Stars; Apoc. 17. 7.
the Sacrament of the woman sitting upon the Beast, and sundry other, of which
their interpreter uses the word Sacrament, as well as he does concerning
Marriage. But the Masters of Rhemes acquit themselves in this behalf,
affirming that Rhem. Testam. Annot. Ephesians. 5. 32.
they do not gather this only of the word Mystery in Greek, or Sacrament in
Latin, both which, they say, they know have a more general signification, and
that in the Scriptures also, which being so, how idly does M. Bishop deal,
only to bring us the very word for proof, that Matrimony is one of the
Sacraments, properly so called of the grace of Christ. But the greater is his
fault, and the fault of his fellows also, in drawing this text to that
purpose, inasmuch as the Apostle expressly declares, that the mystery or
secret, which he intends, is concerning Christ and his Church. This is a
great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and his Church; that is, says
Hierome, in his lesser Commentary, Hieron. in Ephesians. 5. Ego hoc, inquit, in
Christo intelligendum dico and in Ecclesia.
I say that this is to be understood in Christ and in the Church. And thus Leo
Bishop of Rome wholly understands it, saying, Leo Epist. 22. Quicunque in
Christo non confitetur corpus humanum, nouerit se mysterio incarnationis
indignum, nec eius Sacramenti habere consortium, quod Apostolus praedicat
dicens, Quia membra sumus corporis eius, etc. Et expone^s quid per hoc
significaretur adiecit, Sacramentum hoc magnum est, ego autem dico in Christo
and in Ecclesia.
Whosoever confesses not in Christ an humane body, let him know himself
unworthy of the mystery of the incarnation, and that he has no participation
or fellowship of that Sacrament, whereof the Apostle speaks, saying, for we
are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones; for this shall a man
leave Father, and Mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and they two shall be
one flesh, and expounding what was signified hereby, he adds, This is a great
Sacrament; but I speak of Christ and of the Church. He uses the word
Sacrament, as the Latin Fathers commonly do, as it extends to all things
that are mystical and spiritual; but as touching the place, is so far from
conceiving Marriage, here intended to be made a Sacrament, as that he refers
the Sacrament or secret here spoken of, altogether to the myst^^ie of the
incarnation, and the spiritual conjunction, and union betwixt Christ and his
Church. To the very same effect speaks St. Austin, and much more to the
purpose, because he touches the very point in hand; August. in Joan. Tract. 9.
Illud vnum quatum mysterium de Christo continet quod praedicat Apostolus
dicens; Et erunt duo in carne vna, Sacramentum hoc magnum est. Et nequis istam
magnitudinem Sacramenti in singulis quibusque hominibus vxores habentibus
intelligeret, Ego a^tem dico in Christo, etc. Quod est hoc Sacramentum magnum,
Erunt duo in carne vna? Cum de Adam and Bua Scriptura Geneseos loqueretur, vnde
ventum est ad haec verba: Propterea ^^linquet homo patrem, etc.
That one thing which the Apostle mentions, saying; They two shall ^e one
flesh, this is a great Sacrament, how great a mystery does it contain
concerning Christ? And that no man should understand this greatness of
Sacrament in all men that have wives, he says, But I speak of Christ and of
the Church. What is this great Sacrament, says he, They two shall be one
flesh? Marry, when the Scripture of Genesis spoke that whence it proceeds to
those words, for this cause shall a man leave Father and Mother, etc. In which
words we see that St. Austine is so far from M. Bishops Popish construction
and application of this Text, as that he plainly denies the matter of
Sacrament here spoken of, to appertain to the common Marriage of Men and
Women, and refers the same wholly unto Christ and his Church, figured and
resembled in our first Parents Adam and Eve, and that in some things proper to
them only. Hereto belongs that which he says; Ibid. Paulo post. Dormit Adam
vt fiat Eua; moritur Christus vt fiat Ecclesia. Dormienti Ad^ fit Eua de
latere, mortuo Christo lancea percutitur latus, vt pro^luant Sacrame^ta quibus
formetur Ecclesia.
Adam sleeps that Eve may be made; and that the Church may be made Christ
dies. Whilst Adam sleeps Eve is made for him out of his side; and the side
of Christ being now dead, is stricken through with a spear, that the Sacraments
may issue forth, by which the Church is framed. Whereof Leo also adds in the
place before cited, Leo vt supr. Quae de Sponsi ^arne prodijt quando ex latere
crucifixi mana^te sanguine and aqua, Sacramentum redemptionis and
regenerationis accepit.
The Church came out of the flesh of her Bridegroom, when blood and water
issuing out of the side of him being Crucified, she received the Sacrament of
redemption and regeneration. Where when they teach as the rest of the Fathers
do, that the Sacraments of grace, whereby the Church is framed, issued after a
sort out of the side of Christ, and do note, which of it self is plain, that
two only Sacraments in water and blood issued out of the side of Christ, the
Sacrament of regeneration in Baptism, and the Sacrament of redemption in the
Lords supper, they give us plainly to understand that there are only two
Sacraments properly so called, which are the seals of grace, and of the
righteousness of faith, and therefore that the Popish addition of five
Sacraments, whereof they name Matrimony for one, is utterly to be exploded. And
we may further question with them, as touching Marriage, namely, how it
stands, or with what reason that it should be with them a Sacrament, a holy
institution, a sacred action, ministering grace of justification, and yet should
withal in respect of their Clergy and Monkery be unholy and profane? Gregory
of Valentia tells us, and so does Bellarmine, that Gregor. de Valent. de
coeli ba^t. cap. 5. Consuetudo con^ugalis etsi per se ipsa peccatum no^ sit,
tamen turpitudinem q^anda atque pollutionem ex peccato p^ouenientem habet etc.
Maioris sactitatis gradus decet cosqui sanct^ssimum sacrificiumtractat^^i sunt.
Ide^ Bellar. l. de Cler. c. 19.
the company of Man and Wife, though it be not sin in it self, yet has a
turpitude and pollution proceeding of sin, and that a greater degree of
holiness becomes them, that are to meddle with the holy sacrifice. But how
then does another puney Jesuit tell us, that Answer to Bells challenge, art. 3.
chapter 1.. 9.
lawful copulation is a good work, and gives grace, and is meritorious, and
impetratorious of Gods favor and reward; yea, that it is the consummation of a
Sacrament; for Ibid.. 8.
though Marriage have the essence, says he, yet has it not the perfection of
a Sacrament before copulation: Ibid.. 10.
it begins to be a Sacrament by the mutual consent of the parties, but it
is perfected by their copulation? What? is it a good work, sacramental,
meritorious of grace and reward, and yet is there in it turpitude and
pollution? Albeit we much more wonder, that thus affirming of coni^gall
copulation, they tell us notwithstanding, that Coster. Enchir. cap. 15.
Sacerdos si fornicetur aut domi co^cubinam fo^eat, etsi graui sacrilegio s^se
obstringat, grauius t^men peccat si contrahat matrimonium?
a Priest if he commit fornication, or keep a concubine at home, though he
commit great sacrilege therein, yet sins more grievously if he marry a
wife. What? is open sin more tolerable in their Priests, then a holy
Sacrament? can Priesthood stand with fornication, and can it not stand with
the meritorious and sacramental work of Marriage? have they been content in
this behalf to wink at filthiness and uncleanness, and to give tolleration
of it, when they have in the mean time condemned the ordinance of God? May I
not here say as Saluianus of old said; Saluian. de provident. Dei lib. 5. Quid
ag^s stulta persuasio? peccata interdixit Deus, non matrimonia.
What meanest thou, O fond conceit? God has forbidden sins; he has not
forbidden Marriage. What, M. Bishop? is this your making of marriage a
Sacrament? Give me leave to tell you as the truth is, the Devil himself, yea
all the Devils in hell, could not devise to bring Gods holy institution into
contempt, or to give way and furtherance to filthiness and uncleanness, more
cunningly then you have done. Your next pretended proof is, that holy Orders
is a Sacrament, because St. Paul says, that grace was given to Timothy by the
imposition of the hands of Priesthood. The words of the Apostle are; 1. Tim.
4. 14.
Despise not the gift or grace that is in thee, which was given thee by
prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery or Eldership. To
which those other words are answerable, which he uses afterward; 2. Tim. 1.
6.
I put thee in remembrance to stir up the gift or grace that is in thee, by
the putting on of my hands. Where we see well what the Apostle ^aith, but how
M. Bishop should from hence conclude, that there is a Sacrament of Order, we
cannot see. For as for the grace whereof the Apostle speaks, it is manifest,
that it is a grace or gift of calling and office, not any sacramental or
iusti^ying grace. So speaks he otherwhere, Romans 12. 6.
seeing we have graces or gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that is
given unto us, whether prophecy, or office, or teaching, or exhorting, etc. so
again, Ephesians. 4. 11.
Christ ascending gave gifts unto men, some Apostles* some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors, and Teachers, signifying that he appointed these
callings, and raised up men fu^nished with correspondent gifts and graces, for
the edification of his Church. Of such gifts St. Peter exhorts, 1. Pet. 4. 10.
Let every man as he has received the gift so minister the same one to another
as good disposers of the manifold grace of God. Such a gift, such a grace
Timothy had received, by being called to be an Evangelist, and endued with
gifts of the holy Ghost, for the fulfilling of the work thereto belonging.
Thus Theophylact expounds it; Theophyl. in 1. Tim. c. 4. Doctrinae hoc loco
gratiam dicit quam ille cum Episcopi munere fungeretur accepit.
He means the grace of teaching which he received, when he should perform
the office of a Bishop. So Primasius; Primas. ibid. Negl^git gratia^ qui
acceptum talentum non exercet, etc. Cum ordinatione acceperat gratiam vel
docendi vel intelligendi.
He neglects this grace who does not exercise the talent which he has
received. Timothy with ordination received the grace either of teaching or
understanding. In like sort Oecumenius; Oecumen. ibid. Gratiam, hoc est,
doctrina^ vel Episcopi munus; nam gratiae Dei erat quod iuuenis meruisset
Pastor fieri.
Grace, that is, doctrine or the office of a Bishop; for it was of the grace of
God that he being young attained to be made a Pastor. Ambrose also speaks to
the same effect: Ambros. ibid. Si rector popult ab his dissimulat, negligit
gratiam d^tam sibi.
If the guide of the people fail to teach and exhort, he neglects the grace
that is given to him. By all these it appears, that the grace here meant, is
only a temporary gift, belonging to the exercise of a function in the Church
given in those times miraculously, and in extraordinary wise, so as that the
same was sensibly apprehended, as appears by that that is said of Simon
Magus, that Acts 8. 18.
he saw that through laying on the Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given,
and is otherwise also plainly to be perceived. Very absurdly therefore does M.
Bishop apply this place to their Sacrament of Orders, where it is manifest that
no such grace is given, yea and to prove it to be a Sacrament, because here is
mention of grace given; whereas the grace of Sacraments is no temporary gift,
but that invisible eternal grace of remission of sins, and sanctification of
the holy Ghost, whereby the inner man is renewed from day to day, and the soul
prepared and furnished unto eternal life. And thus we are come to an end of
his proofs of their religion out of St. Paul's Epistles. He tells us that he
should be too long if he would prosecute all, but be thou assured, gentle
Reader, that he has made here as good choice of his proofs, as his wit would
serve him, and thou see what they are, and may by these esteem what all
the rest would be, impertinent, idle, detorted, wrested, strained, carrying no
show, no color, when they are looked into of any such matter as he pretends.
Albeit thou art also to remember that all this while he has sitten beside the
cushion, the thing propounded being that of Theodoret, that the Epistle to the
Romans contains in it all kind of doctrine; whence I inferred, that since the
doctrine of Popery teaches so many things, whereof there is nothing to be
found in the Epistle to the Romans, it cannot be that doctrine which was at
first delivered to the Church of Rome. To this he should have directly
answered, and have showed us that their Popery is to be proved by the Epistle
to the Romans. But from this he steals away, and to dawbe up this breach as
well as he can, he makes a scambling shift out of the rest of the Epistles,
and catches here and there a sentence, as much to the purpose as if he had
said nothing. But the trimmest jest of all is his answer to that which I urged
as touching St. Peter, whom they have made the founder and head of their
Church, that it is strange that he should forget the triple crown; that he
should say nothing for Popery, no not a word; that nothing hinders in either
of his Epistles, but that he must be taken for a Protestant. What does M.
Bishop say to this? Mark it well, gentle Reader, for it is a learned answer,
and such as may give thee great satisfaction in the cause. As for St. Peter,
says he, I will wholly omit him, because the Protestants have no confidence
in him. Where I may very well use the words of St. Austine, as touching the
like dealing of Petilian the Donatist; Aug. contlit. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 57.
Videatis quam inuicte positum sit, contra quod ille nihil tutius inuenire
potuit qu^m silentium.
Mark how inuincibly this is set down, against which he could find no way
more safe then to say nothing. What? St. Peter to be theirs, so nearely, so
entirely, and yet to say nothing for them? to be wholly the same that the
Papists now are, and yet writing two Epistles, to write nothing tending
thereto? to say nothing at all, but what we say? Look upon the Epistles which
they attribute to the Bishops of Rome that succeeded, and what a work is there
in them, concerning the exaltation of St. Peter, concerning the dignity and
authority of the Church of Rome by him, over all other Churches? and what? is
it not strange that St. Peter himself, if he had been of the same spirit,
should say nothing thereof? nothing of all the religion which is now proper to
the Church of Rome? nothing, but what wholly stands with the Protestants
religion? Will M. Bishop thus ridiculously babble that the Protestants have no
confidence in St. Peter, when as he can allege nothing that St. Peter says
against them? or can we be persuaded that the Papists have any confidence in
him, when as they can tell us nothing that he has said for them? M. Bishop,
you object to me in this matter shameless impudency, but I wish the Reader to
consider by this answer of yours, to whom the title of shameless impudency
does most justly belong. As for your forked argument, I doubt not but you your
self see and know that I am out of the danger of it, but I fear that the one
grain of it has already given you a deadly wound. I am afraid that it will
be found that you have wittingly and wilfully rebelled against God. I fear
there is a sting in your conscience, pricking and vexing you day and night,
which howsoever you for the present violently oppress, yet you are not able to
pull out. Take heed and beware in time; if you do not glorify God by your
conversion and confession of his truth, God will certainly glorify himself in
your destruction.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 18. line 24. so, read to. p. 19. l. 11., for all, r. for all, ibid. l.
33. you, r. your. p. 27. l. 11. accords, r. accorded. p. 28. l. 2. in marg.
scrip. sit. r. scripsit. p. 66. l. 19. in marg. Part. 1. r. Chapt. 1. p. 144.
l. 2. Achan, only, r Achan only. p. 179. l. 10. in marg. cedite. r. incedite.
p. 214. l. 33. these Kings? to whom have they, r. these Kings to whom they
have. p. 245. l. 34. in marg. creatum, quae, r. creatum secundum piam fidem,
quae. p. 291. l. 21. they they, r. then they. p. 334. l. 19. widomes, r.
widows. p. 363. l. 21. a matter, r. matters.


