THE HISTORY OF Great Britannie

Declaring the success of times and affairs in that Island, from the Romans
first entrance, until the reign of EGBERT, the West Saxon Prince; who reduced
the several Principalities of the Saxons and English, into a Monarchy, and
changed the name of Britannie into England.

AT LONDON, Printed by Valentine Simmes. 1606.

The Race and Succession of the Roman Emperors from Julius Caesar to Domitius
Nero.
Sextus Caesar. 1 Julius Caesar Dict. Perp. 3. years. Accius Balbus Iulia. C:
Octa: Presid: of Maced: Accia Scribonia, the sister of L: Scribonius Libo: the
first wife of Aug: 2 Oct: Augustus Emperor 56. years. Livia, the relict of
Nero ( father of Tiberius) the 2 wife of Aug Iulia, the wife of Vipsanius
Agrippa. 3 Tiberius Nero, Emperor 23. years. Drusus Agrippina. Germanicus. 5
Claudius Nero, Emp: 13. years and 9. months. Valeria Messalian. 4 C: Ca^igula
Emperor 3. years and 10 months. Agrippina, the wife of Dom: Nero. 6 Nero,
Emperor 14 years. Britannicus.




Lieutenants in Britannie under the first five Emperors of Rome.
During the several reigns of Julius Caesar, Augustus, Tiberius, and Caius,
the Romans had no settled form of government in any part of the I Will.

Lievtenants under Claudius the Emperor.
Aulus Plautius, ( the first Lieutenant in Britannie.) Ostorius Scapula. Didius
Gallus Auitus.
The Princes, and men of special note among the Britans.
In the time of Julius Caesar.
Cassibelin Prince of the Trinobantes. Petty Rulers in Kent.
Cingetorix. Carvilius. Taximagulus. Segonax.
Mandubratius the Traitor, whose father Imanentins preceeded Cassibelin in the
government of the Trinobantes.
Cuno-belin, Prince of the Trinobantes, in the time of Augustus Sons of
Cunobelin, in the time of Caius.
Admimus Cataracacus.
Togodumnus, a son of Cuno-belin, in the time of Aul. Plautius government,
under Claudius the Emperor. In the time of Ostorius Scapulaes government under
Claudius the Emperor.
Cogidunus ( advanced by the Romans) Caractacus, the renowned Prince of the
Silures. Cartismandua, Princess of the Brigantes.

THese two Parts of the History, may seem not improperly to bear the name of
Great Britannie, in that (for the most part) they contain certain general
reports of the affairs of the whole Island, which was afterward divided into
the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland: Howbeit in the Second Part, the
accidents and occurrents in the state of Scotland, (then called
North-Britannie) are either purposely omitted, or touched very briefly, both
to avoid confusion, by entermingling them with the imperfect relations of the
dismembered governments of the Saxons and English, in the South parts of the
I Will: and also (for that England and Scotland, having bin (many hundred years)
two distinct Monarchies, and that of Scotland the more ancient) it may be
thought, perhaps, most meet, that there should be several Histories of the
English and Scottish Nation, from the first erection of either Kingdom, until
the union of them both: (the title of Britannie in the mean time remaining
indifferent, as well to the one, as to the other.)

The first Part is divided into three Books.
The first Book.
Declaring the state of Britannie under the Romans, from Julius Caesar, his
first entrance into the I Will, until the death of Claudius the Emperor; in whose
time, the East part of the I Will was subdued, and brought into the form of a
Province.

The second Book.
Declaring the state of Britannie under the Romans, from the death of Claudius
the Emperor, until the reign of Domitian; in whose time, the utmost limits
of the I Will were discovered, and the greatest part thereof reduced into a settled
Provincial government.

The third Book.
Declaring the state of Britannie under the Romans, from the death of Domitian
the Emperor, until the reign of Honorius; in whose time the I Will of Britannie
was abandoned by the Romans, and the inhabitants thereof left wholly to their
own government.

The second Part is divided into two Books.
The first Book.
Declaring the state of affairs in Britannie after the Romans had given over
the government there, until such time as the Saxons and English obtained it.

The second Book.
Containing an Epitome, or a short (imperfect) relation of the chief
occurrents in every one of the seven Principalities of the Saxons, and
English, until Egbert the West Saxon Prince reduced them into a Monarchy.

The beginning of the Reign of Egbert the first English Monarch.

THE FIRST PART OF the History of Great Britannie.
The first Book. C. IVL. CAESAR DICT. PERP.
portrait of Julius Caesar
The first CHAPTER.
The Original of the Britans. C. Julius Caesar making war in Gallia,
intends a voyage into Britannie. C. Volusenus is sent to discover the Sea
Coasts of the I Will. The Nature, and customs of the Britans.

IT is recorded by the most true, and ancient of al Histories, that the Isles of
the Gentiles, and north parts of the world, were first divided and inhabited,
by the posterity of Iaphet; from whose eldest son called Goneer, the
Cimbrians (as Writers report) derived their name and descent, imparting the
same to the Gauls and Germans, and consequently to the Inhabitants of this I Will,
as being originally descended from the Gauls, that came over hither at the
first, either upon a natural desire (which men commonly have to discover
places unknown, or to avoid the assaults of other Nations encroching upon
them; or happly to disburden their native soil, by seeking new habitations
abroad. And this opinion of the Britans first coming out of G^llia, seems the
more probable, in regard both of the situation of this Island, in neernesse to
that continent, and also of the uniformity of language, religion and policy,
between the most ancient Gauls, and Britans.

Touching the name of Britannie, with the Governors and state thereof before
the Romans arrival, as they are things not to have been neglected, if any
certain knowledge of them had been left us, by approved testimonies of former
ages: so I think it not now requisite, either to recite the different
conjectures of other men, or of my self, constantly to affirm any thing
concerning the same; as well for that those matters have been already handled
at large by our modern Writers, as also for that I suppose, in aiming at such
antique Originals (there being but one truth amidst many errors) a man may much
more easily shoot wide, then hit the mark. I purpose therefore (omitting
Etymologies of words, and variety of opinions concerning the first inhabitants
and their doings) to take the name and affairs of this I Will, in such sort, as
they were first known to the Romans, in the time of Julius Caesar, when the
Roman state, (which had tried all kinds of government, as namely that of Kings,
then of Consuls, Tribunes, and Decemvirs) began to be usurped by a few, and
soon after submitted it self to one. For about the four and fiftieth year
before the birth of our Savior Christ, Caesar being then governor of Gallia
for the Senate and people of Rome, and having brought some part of that Country
under obedience, intended a voyage with an army into Britannie, partly, upon
pretense of revenge (for that the Britans had diverse times aided the Gauls in
their wars against the Romans) and partly, to satisfy himself with sight of
the Island, and knowledge of the Inhabitants, and their customs; whereto he might
perhaps be the more readily induced, by reason of his own natural inclination
to undertake great and difficult attempts, and with the increase of his own
glory, to enlarge the limits of the Roman Empire, unto which at that time the
soveraigntie of the whole world was, by divine providence, allotted. And to
this end he thought good to be first informed of the nature of the people, and
of such havens in the I Will, as were most commodious to receive any shipping,
that should come thither; whch things were in a manner unknown to the Gauls, by
reason the Ilanders suffered none to have access to them, but merchants only;
neither knew, even they, any other places, then the sea coasts, and those parts
of the I Will, that confronted the continent of Gallia. Whereupon, Caesar supposing
it necessary to make some discovery, before he adventured himself in the
action, sent Caius Volusenus in a long Boat, with instructions to inquire of
the quantity of the Island, of the conditions of the Inhabitants, of their
manner of making war, of their government in peace, and what places were fittest
for landing. After which dispatch made, himself with all his forces (which
were newly returned from making war beyond the Rhene) marched into the
Country of the The ancient inhabitants of the Counties of Guines and Bolonois
in Picardie.
Morini, from whence was the shortest cut into Britannie: for there he had
appointed his shipping to meet him.

In the mean time, his purpose being known to the Britans, by report of the
Merchants (that traded with them,) diverse States of the I Will, (either fearing
the greatness of the Roman power, or affecting innovation for some private
respects) sent over Ambassadors, who promised, in their names, to deliver
hostages, for assurance of their obedience to the people of Rome: But Caesar,
though he was fully resolved to enter the Island, yet courteously entertained
their offer, exhorting them to continue in that good mind, as a mean to draw
on the rest, in following the example of their submission. For the better
effecting whereof, he appointed Comius the chief Governor of the The people
of Artois.
Atrebates (as a man, whose wisdom and faith he had tried, and whom he knew to
be respected of the Britans) to accompany the Ambassadors in their return,
giving him in charge to go to as many Cities, as would permit him access; and
to persuade the Rulers to submit themselves, as some of their Nation had
already done: and further, to let them know, that himself with all convenient
speed, would come thither.

The Princes of the I Will, being as yet unacquainted with any civil kinds of
government, maintained quarrels and factions amongst themselves, whereby, while
one sought to offend another, and to enlarge his own part, by encroching upon
his neighbors (not observing, that what they gained in particular one of
another, they lost all together in the general reckoning) they made an open
passage in the end, for the Romans to conquer the whole, (a thing common to
them with other Nations, who have found the like effects to proceed from the
like causes.) For, the most part of the Britans, in those days, delighted in
war, neglecting husbandry, or perhaps not then knowing the use of it. Their
manner of living, and customs, were much like to those of the inhabitants of
Gallia. Their diet was such as Nature yielded of her self, without the
industry of man: for though they had great store of cattle, yet they lived
(especially in the inland Countries) with milk. It was held among them, as a
thing unlawful, to eat of a hare, a hen, or a goose, and yet they nourished
them all for recreations sake. Their apparel was made of the skins of
beasts, though their bodies were (for the most part) naked and stained with
woad, which gave them a bluish color, and (as they supposed) made their
aspect terrible to their enemies in battle. Their houses were compact of
stakes, reeds, and boughs of trees, fastened together in a round circle. They
had ten or twelve wives apeece common among them, though the issue were always
accounted his, that first married the mother, being a maiden. They were, in
stature, taller than the Gauls, in wit, more simple, as being less civil.

By this time, Volusenus, (who durst not set foot on land to hazard himself
amongst the barbarous Ilanders) returned to Caesar, (namely, the fifth day after
his setting forth) and made relation of such things as he had seen, and heard,
by report, in roving up and down the coast in view of the Island.

CHAP. II.
Caesar sayleth toward Britannie. The Britans empeach his Landing. The great
courage of Cassius Scoeva, one of Caesar's soldiers.

Caesar having composed some tumults in the hither part of Gallia, that he
might leave no enemy behind his back to annoy him in his absence, pursued the
enterprise of Britannie, having, to that end, prepared a Navy, which consisted
of about four score ships of burden (a number sufficient, as he thought, for
the transportation of two Legions) besides his long boats, wherein the
Quaestor, the Lievtenants, and other officers of the Camp were to be imbarqued.
There were also eighteen ships of burden (that lay wind-bound about eight miles
from the Port) appointed to waft over the horsemen. P. Sulpitius Rufus, a
Lieutenant of a Legion, was commanded to keep the haven it self with such
power, as was thought sufficient. These things being thus ordered, and a good
part of the summer now spent, Caesar put out to sea about the third watch of
the night, having given direction, that the horsemen should embarke in the
upper haven, and follow him; wherein, while they weresomewhat slack, Caesar
with his shipping, about the fourth hour of the day, arrived upon the coast of
Britannie, where he beheld the Cliffs possessed with a multitude of barbarous
people, rudely armed, and ready to make resistance.

The nature of the place was such, as by reason of the steep hills (enclosing
the sea on each side in a narrow strait) it gave great advantage to the
Britans, in casting down their darts upon their enemies underneath them. Caesar
finding this place unfit for landing his forces, put off from the shore, and
cast anchor, expecting the rest of his Fleet; and in the mean time, calling a
counsel of the Lievtenants, and Tribuns of the soldiers, he declared unto
them, what he had understood by Volusenus, and directed what he would have
done; warning them, that (as the state of the war, and specially the
sea-service required) they would be ready to weigh anchor, and to remove, to,
and fro (upon occasions) at a beck, and in an instant.

This done, having advantage both of wind, and tide, he set forward with his
Navy, about four Leagues from that place, and then lay at anchor in view of
the open, and plain shore. But the Ilanders, upon intelligence of the Romans
purpose, had sent thither (before Caesar's coming) a company of horsemen and
chariots called Esseda, (which they then used in their wars) and following
afterward with the rest of their forces, empeached their enemies from landing,
whoseships, by reason of their huge bulks, (drawing much water) could not come
near to the shore: so as the Roman soldiers were thereby enforcedin places
unknown (their bodies being charged with their armor) to leap into the water,
and encounter the Britans, who assailed them nimbly with their darts, and drove
their horses and chariots, with main force upon them: The Romans being
therewith terrifyed, as men unacquainted with that kind of fight, failed much
of the wonted courage, which they had showed in their former land-services; and
Caesar perceiving it, caused the long boats (which seemed more strange to the
barbarous people, and were more serviceable, by reason of their swiftness in
motion) to put off, by little and little, from the greater ships, and to row
toward the shore, from whence they might more easily charge the Britans, with
their arrows, slings, and other warlike engines, which (being then unknown to
the Ilanders, as also the fashion of the ships, and motion of the oars in the
long boats, having stricken them with fear and amazement) caused them to make
a stand, and afterward to draw back a little.

But the Roman soldiers making no haste to pursue them, by reason of the
water, which they suspected in some places to be deep and dangerous: the
Standardbearer of the Eagle of the Tenth Legion, praying, that his attempt
might prove successful to the Legion, cried out with a loud voice in this
manner. Fellow Soldiers, leap out of your boats and follow me, except you
mean to betray your Standard to the enemy: For mine own part, I mean to
discharge the duty I owe to the Common wealth, and to my General. This said,
he cast himself into the water, and carried the Standard boldly against the
Britans. Whereupon, the soldiers exhorting one another to follow the Ensign,
what fortune soever might befall) with common consent, leapt out of their long
boats, one seconding another; and so, wading through the water, at length got
to shore, where began a sharp and bloody fight on both sides: The Romans were
much encumbered, by reason that they could neither keep their ranks, nor fight
upon firm ground, nor follow their own standards; for every one as he came on
land, ran confusedly to that which was next him.

Some of the Britans (who knew the flats, and shallow places, espying the
Romans, as they came single out of their ships) pricked forward their horses,
and set upon them, overlaying them with number, and finding them vnwealdy and
unready to make any great resistance, by reason of the depth of the water, and
weight of their armor, while the greater part of the barbarous people with
their darts assailed them fiercely upon the shore: which Caesar perceiving,
commanded the Cock-boates and Skowts, to be manned with soldiers, whom he
sent in all haste to rescue their fellows.

There was a soldier of Caesar's company, called Cassius Scaeva, who, with some
other of the same band, was carried in a small boat, unto a rock, which the
ebbing sea, in that place, had made accessible. The Britans espying them, made
thitherward: the rest of the Romans escaping, Scaeva alone was left upon the
rock, to withstand the fury of the enraged multitude, that assailed him with
their darts, which he received upon his shield, and thrust at them with his
spear, till it was broken, and his helmet and shield lost: then being tired
with extreme toil, and dangerously wounded, he betook himself to flight,
and, (carrying two light harnesses on his back) with much difficulty recovered
Caesar's Tent, where he craved pardon for making so bold an attempt, without
commandment of his General. Caesar did both remit the offense, and reward the
offender, by bestowing upon him the office of a Centurion.

This was the Scaeva, who afterward gave good cause to have his name remembered
in the Roman story, for (...) memorable service he did to Caesar, in the time
of the civil wars between him and Pompey, at the battle near Dyrrachium.

The Romans having at length, got footing on dry land, gave a fresh charge
upon the Britans, and in the end, enforced them to turn their backs, and leave
the shore, though they could not pursue them far into the Land, for want of
horsemen, ( Caesar's accustomed fortune failing him in this one accident.)

CHAP. III.
Some of the Britans submit themselves to Caesar. The Romans Ships are
scattered by tempest. The Britans secretly revolt.

THe Britans, after this overthrow, assembling themselves together, (upon
consultation had amongst them) sent Ambassadors to Caesar, promising to deliver
in pledges, or to do whatsoever else he would command them. With these
Ambassadors, came Comius of Arras, whom Caesar had sent before out of Gallia,
into Britannie; where, having delivered the Message he had then in charge, he
was apprehended, committed to prison, and now after the battle, released. The
chief States of the Britans, seeking to excuse their attempts, laid the blame
upon the multitude, who being the greater number, and wilfully bent to take
arms, could neither by persuasion, nor authority, be restrained: and they
pretended their own ignorance, as being a free people, and not experienced in
the customs of other Nations. Caesar, although he reprooved them for making
war in that manner, (considering that of their own accord, they had sent
Ambassadors to him (before his arrival in Britannie) to desire peace: yet was
content to pardon them, upon delivery of pledges, whereof some he received
presently, and the rest being to come from remote places, he appointed to be
sent in by a certain day; So the Britans were dismissed to return into their
Countries, and in the mean time there came diverse Princes from other parts of
the I Will, to submit themselves and their Cities to Caesar.

The fourth day, after the Romans landing, the ships before mentioned,
appointed for transportation of Caesar's horsemen, having a favorable gale of
wind, put out to the sea, from the upper haven, and approaching near the
Island, in view of the Roman Camp, asodaine storm arose, and scattered them,
driving some of them back again to the Port, from whence they came, and some
others upon the lower part of the Island westward, where, after they had cast
anchor, (their keeles being almost overwhelmed with the waves,) they were
carried, by violence of the storm in the night, into the maine, and with very
great peril, recovered a harbor in the continent.

The same night, the Moon was at the full, at which time commonly, the Sea in
those parts, is much troubled, and overfloweth the banks, by reason of the high
tides, (a matter unknown to the Romans) insomuch, as the long boats, which
transported the army, then lying upon the shore, were filled with the flood;
and the ships of burden; that lay at anchor, were beaten with the storm, and
split in pieces, the greater number of them perishing in the water, and the
rest being made altogether unserviceable, (their anchors lost, and tacklings
broken:) Wherewith the Romans were much perplexed, for that they neither had
any other ships to transport them back again, nor any means to repair what
the tempest had ruined: and Caesar had formerly resolved to winter in Gallia,
by reason he was unfurnished of vittaile to maintain his army during the
winter season. Which being known to the chief States of the Britans, (who had
met together about the accomplishment of such things, as Caesar had commanded
them) they supposed a fit opportunity was offered them to revolt, while the
Romans wanted horsemen, shipping, and all manner of provisions; the number of
their forces seeming also the less, in respect of the small circuit of their
Camp, ( Caesar having transported his Legions without any carriages, or such
like warlike necessaries.) Whereupon they concluded to keep them from
vittaile, and to prolong the war till winter; assuring themselves, that if
they could either vanquish the Romans, or bar them from returning thence,
there would no foreign Nation after them, adventure to set foot again in
Britannie. And hereupon they conveyed themselves by stealth, out of the Roman
Camp, and gathered company to them privily from diverse parts, to make head
against their enemies.

CHAP. IIII.
Caesar repaireth his Navy. A skirmish by land between the Britans and Romans.
The Britans retire, and with new forces assail the Romans, but in the end are
put to flight. Caesar returns into France.

CAEsar, albeit he were ignorant of the Britans purpose, yet supposing that the
state of his army, and the loss of his ships were known to them, and
considering that they had broken day with him, in detaining the pledges
contrary to the contract, he suspected that which afterward proved true. And
therefore to provide remedies against all chances, he caused Corn to be brought
daily out of the fields into his Camp, and such ships as could not be made fit
for service, were used to repair the rest, and such other things as were
wanting thereto, he appointed to be brought out of the continent; by which
means, and the diligence of his Soldiers, with the loss of twelve Ships, the
rest of his Navy was made able to bear sail, and brook the Seas again.

While these things were in doing, the Seventh Legion, (according to custom)
was sent forth a forraging; till which time, the Britans revolt was not
certainly known, for that some of them remained abroad in the fields, and
others came ordinarily into the Roman Camp. The Warders in the Station before
the Camp, gave notice to Caesar, that the same way which the Legion went,
there appeared a greater dust, then was wont to be seen. Caesar mistrusting
some new practice of the Britans, commanded the Companies (that kept ward) to
march thither, appointing two others to supply their rooms, and the rest of
his forces to arm themselves with speed and follow him. When he approached near
the place discried, he perceived his soldiers to be overcharged with the
Britans, who assailed them on all sides with their darts. For the Britans
having conveyed their Corn from all other parts (this only excepted) and
suspecting that the Romans would come thither, lay in the woods all night, to
intercept them: and finding them dispersed, and unready, they suddenly set
upon them, (as they were reaping) killing a few of them, and disordering the
rest, with their horses and chariots.

The manner of their fighting in Chariots was thus; First, they used to ride
round about their enemies forces, casting their darts where they saw
advauntage, and oftentimes with the fierceness of their horses, and whirling
of their Chariot wheels, they broke their enemies ranks: and being gotten in
among the troops of horsemen, they would leap out of their Chariots, and fight
on foot. The Chariot-drivers in the mean time withdrew themselves by little and
little out of the battle, and placed themselves in such sort, as their masters
(being over-matched by their enemies) might readily recover their Chariots, so
that in their fighting they performed the offices, both of horsemen in
swiftness of motion, and also of footmen in keeping their ground; and by daily
use, and exercise, they were grown so expert in managing their horses, as,
driving them forcibly down a steep hill, they were able to stay or turn them
in the mid way, yea, to run along the beam, to stand firm upon the yoke, and
to return thence speedily into their Chariots again.

The Romans being much troubled with this new kind of fight, Caesar came in
good time to the rescue. For upon his approach, the Britans gave over the
skirmish, yet keeping still their ground as masters of the field, and the
Romans for fear, retired themselves to their General, who thought it no point
of wisdom, to hazard his forces in a place unknown: but having stayed there
awhile, conducted the Legions back again to his Camp, and in the mean time,
the Britans that were in the field, dispersed themselves, and shrunk away.

After this there were for many days together, continual tempests, which kept
the Romans in their camp, and hindered the Britans from making any open
attempt, though they sent messengers secretly into diverse parts of the I Will,
publishing abroad, what a small number of their enemies was left, what great
hope there was of a rich booty, and what apparent likelihood of recovering
their liberty, if they could drive the Romans from their Camp: And hereupon
in short time they assembled a great number of horse and footmen, to put their
purpose in execution. Against which, Caesar (understanding thereof) made
preparation for defense, having gotten also about thirty hors-men (which
Comius of Arras brought over with him) whose service he supposed very
necessary, if the Britans (according to their woonted manner) should seek to
save themselves by flight. The Legions were placed in battle array before his
Camp. Then the Britans began the fight, which had not long continued, when they
gave back, and fled, the Romans pursuing them as far as they durst, killing
many whom they overtooke, and burning houses and towns as they returned to
their Camp.

The same day the Britans sent Ambassadors to Caesar, desiring peace, which
after long suit, was granted, upon condition, that the number of the pledges
(which was before required) should be now doubled, and speedily sent over into
Gallia. For the Aequinoctial drawing near, Caesar made haste thither, doubting
his crazed ships would not be well able to brook the Seas in winter: whereupon
taking advauntage of the next fair wind, he embarked his forces about
midnight, and with the greatest part of his Fleet, arrived in the continent.
The Roman Senate (upon relation of these his services) decreed a Supplication
for him, for the space of twenty days.

CHAP. V.
Caesar's second expedition into Britannie. The Britans fortify themselves in a
wood, from whence they are chased by the Romans. Caesar's Navy distressed by
tempest.

IN the spring of the year following, Caesar having pacified some tumults in
Gallia, prosecuted the enterprise of Britannie, and to that end he had prepared
a Fleet of new ships, well appointed, and commodiously built for landing his
forces (the want whereof he had found before, to his great loss) and a
sufficient army consisting of five Legions, and a proportional number of
horse, which he embarked at Callice.
Portus Iccius about the Sunsetting, having a fair Southern wind to set them
forward; which failing them about midnight, the tide diverted their course, so
as in the morning he discovered the Island on his left hand: and then following
the turning of the tide, he commanded his soldiers to use their Oars that
they might reach that part of the I Will, where they had found best landing the
Summer before; wherein they took such pains, as their ships of burden kept
way with their long boats and lighter vessels. About noone they landed on the
shore, where there appeared no man to make resistance: the cause whereof was (as
Caesar afterward learned by such prisoners, as he took) for that the Britans
having assembled themselves together in arms at the Sea side, were so
terrified with the sight of the ships (which of all sorts were esteemed above
eight hundred sail) that they left the shore, and ran to hide themselves in
the vpland Country. Caesar (upon intelligence by fugitives, where the British
forces lay) leaving at the Sea side, ten Cohorts, and three hundred horse to
grade the ships then lying at Anchor, (whereof Quintus Atrius had the charge)
marched forward with the rest of his army in the night, about twelve miles into
the land, where he espied a multitude of Britans flocked together near a
river, having gotten the upper ground, from whence they began to charge the
Romans with their horse and Chariots; but being repulsed by Caesar's hors-men,
they fled, and hid themselves in the woods, in a place which being notably
strengthened both by Nature and Art, they had used as a fortress in their
civil wars among themselves. For by reason there were many great trees cut
down, and laid overthwart the passages round about, there could hardly any
entrance be found into the wood; howbeit the Britans themselves would often times
sally forth upon advantage, and empeach the Romans, where they attempted to
enter. Hereupon Caesar commanded the Soldiers of the Seventh Legion to make a
A warlike engine made of boords, covered over with raw hides, to serve for
defense against fire, or stones in scaling a wall.
Testudo, and to raise a Mount against the place; by which means, after loss
of men on both sides, the Romans in the end got the Fort, and chased the
Britans out of the wood; but Caesar would not suffer his Soldiers to pursue
them far, in regard the place was unknown, and a great part of the day being
then spent, he thought it fit to bestow the rest in fortifying his Camp.

The next day in the morning, he sent out hors-men and footmen three several
ways to pursue them that fled; but, before they had gotten sight of the
Britans, certain hors-men sent from Quintus Atrius (who had charge of the
shipping) brought news, that a great tempest the night before had distressed
his ships, and beaten them upon the shore, their Anchors and Cables being not
able to hold them, nor the mariners to guide them, or to endure the force of
the storm. Whereupon Caesar caused the Legions, and hors-men to be sent for
back again, and marched with speed toward the sea side, where he found his
Navy in ill plight; forty of his ships being clean cast away, and the rest
with great difficulty seeming likely to be recovered. For effecting whereof, he
took some Shipwrights out of the Legions, and sent for others out of the
continent; writing to Labienus (who had the charge of certain Legions there,
and the guard of Portus Iccius) that he should prepare as many ships as he
could, to be sent over unto him with expedition. And though it were a work of
great toil; yet he thought it necessary to have all the ships haled on
shore, and to be brought into the camp, where his landforces lay, that one
place might be a safeguard to them both. In the accomplishment hereof he spent
ten days (the soldiers scarce intermitting their labor in the night time,
till all was finished.

CHAP. VI.
Cassibelin is chosen by the Britans to be their Leader. The Britans assail
the Romans, but with ill success. Caesar with his army wadeth over the river
of Thames.

CAEsar having fortified his Camp, and left there the same forces (which were
before appointed to keep the harbor) returned to the place, whence he
dislodged upon Atrius his advertisement, where he found the number of the
Britans much increased by confluence of people from sundry parts within the
Island. The chief commandment and direction for the war, was by public
consent of the States of th'Ile, assigned to Cassibelin; the bounds of whose
territory were divided from the maritime Cities, by the river Thamisis, and
were distant from the Sea about four-score miles. There had been of long time
continual war between him, and some other Princes of the Countries near
adjoining: but now (both parts fearing to be overrun by a foreign enemy)
neglected private respects, and joined their forces together, appointing him to
be their leader, as a man of whose valor, and sufficiency in militare affairs
they had good experience.

The Roman army being come in view of their enemies Camp, the Britans pressed
forward to begin the fight with their hors-men and Chariots, and Caesar sent
out his hors-men to encounter them, so as the battle was maintained with
great resolution on both parts, and the event thereof seemed doubtful, till in
the end, the Britans gave ground, and fled through the woods to the hills, many
of them being slain in the chase, and some of the Romans also, who
adventerously pursued them too far.

Not long after, while the Romans (suspecting no danger) were occupied in
fortefying their camp, the Britans sallyed suddenly out of the woods, and made
an assault upon the Warders, that kept station before the Camp, to whose aid
Caesar sent out two Cohorts (the chief of two Legions) which making a lane
through the midst of the British forces, joined themselves with their
distressed fellows, and rescued them from the peril, though Quintus Laberius
Durus, a Tribune of the Soldiers was slain in that enterprise. But new Cohorts
coming to supply the former, the Britans were repulsed, and sought to save
themselves by flight. By the manner of this skirmish, (which was fought in view
of the Roman Camp) the Romans perceived the advauntage, which the Britans had
of them, and how ill themselves were appointed for such a kind of fight, when
by reason of the weight of their armor, they could neither pursue such as fled,
nor durst leave their Ensigns, nor were able (without great disadvantage) to
encounter the British hors-men, which often times gave ground of purpose; and
having withdrawn themselves by little and little from the Legions, would leap
out of their chariots and fight on foot; the manner of their fighting with
horses and Chariots, being alike dangerous to those that retired, and those
that pursued. Besides, they divided their forces into companies (when they
fought) and had several stations, with great distances between them, one
troop seconding an other, and the sound and fresh men yielding supplies to the
wounded and weary.

The day following the Britans were descried upon the hills a far off,
scattred here and there in great numbers together, being not very forward to
begin a new fight, till Caesar having sent out three Legions, and all his
hors-men, under the conduct of C. Trebonius the Lieutenant, to go a forraging,
they flocked suddenly together from all parts, and set upon the forragers, not
sparing to assail the Ensigns and Legions themselves, who strongly resisted
them, and made them turn their backs, when the Roman hors-men also eagerly
pursued them, never giving over the chase (as being confident in the aid of
the Legions that followed them) until they had driven them headlong before
them, killing all those they overtooke, and giving the rest no time, either to
gather themselves together, or to make a stand, or once to forsake their
Chariots. After this overthrow, many of the barbarous people (who had come from
diverse parts to aid their Countri-men) shrunk away; and Caesar
understanding, what course the rest of the Britans meant to hold in prosecuting
the war, led his army to the bounds of Cassibelins Country, upon the River
of Thames, which was passable on foot, in one place only and that with some
difficulty. When he came thither, he perceived that the Britans had great
forces in readiness on the further side of the River, the banks whereof were
fortified with sharp pointed stakes, or piles, (about the bigness of a man's
thigh, and bound about with lead,) pitched near the shore, to empeach their
passage; and some others of the same kind (the remnants whereof are to be seen
at this day) were planted covertly under water in the maine River. Whereof
Caesar having intelligence (by some Fugitives, and prisoners that he had taken)
commanded the hors-men, first, to enter the River, and the Legions to follow,
so as (the dangerous places being discovered) the Romans waded through (their
heads only appearing above water) and charged the Britans with such violence,
as they forced them to forsake the shore, and betake themselves to flight.

CHAP. VII.
The Britans surprise the Roman horsemen. The treachery of Mandubratius the
Britan, whom Caesar protecteth. Cassibelin wearied with ill success of the
war, submits himself to Caesar. Tribute imposed upon the Britans. Caesar
saileth into France.

CAssibelin seeing no likeli-hood to maintain the war any longer by force,
dismissed the greater part of his power, and keeping with him about four
thousand Chariots only, retired into the woods, and places of most safety,
driving men and cattle before him out of the fields, all that way, by which he
knew the Romans should pass with their army, whose hors-men (as they roved up
and down to take booties) he surprised with his Chariots, and distressed them
in such sort, as they durst not march forward, but keeping themselves in their
strength, gave over their former purpose, and from thence-foorth sought only
to annoy the Britans, by spoiling and burning their houses and towns.

In the mean time the The ancient Inhabitants of Middlesex and Essex.
Trinobantes, one of the chief States in those parts, sent Ambassadors to
Caesar, promising to submit themselves, and to be at his commandment. There
was also one Mandubratius, who had fled over to Caesar, when he was in Gallia,
and was now become a follower of his fortune, while preferring the satisfaction
of his own discontented humor, before the advancement of the common cause, he
served as an instrument, to betray his native Country, abusing the credit which
he had with his Countrie-men, by working their submission, to his own
dishonor, and the advantage of a foreign enemy. His father Imanentius,
(having bin sometimes chief ruler of the City of the Trinobantes, and well
esteemed among them) was slain by Cassibelin the present Governor, against
whom the Citizens desired Caesar to protect Mandubratius, and to commit unto
him the government of their City; which Caesar granted upon deliverie of a
certain number of pledges, and a sufficient proportion of vittaile for
provision of his Army. Hereupon diverse petty States there about, sent
Ambassadors, and yielded themselves to Caesar, who understood by them, that
Cassibelin his Town (being well stored with men, and cattle,) was not far
from thence. This town (as all others so called of the Britans in those days)
was only a circuit of ground enclosed with woods, and marshes, or else
entrenched with a rampire of earth about it. Caesar coming with his Legio^ to
this place, (which he found very strong, as being fortified, both naturally,
and also by the industry of man) began to assail it on both sides. The
Britans having expected a while the event of the enterprise, and perceiving
themselves unable to withstand the assault, issued out at a back way, where
many of them being slain, and some taken (as they fled,) the town it self,
and all the provisions within it, were left as a spoil to the Romans.

While these things were in doing among the Trinobantes, Cassibelin dispatched
messengers into the country of Kent.
Cantium, that lies upon the sea. The inhabitants of those parts were then more
civil, and better furnished to make war than any other of the I Will. The
country at that time was governed by four Kings, (as Caesar himself calls
them) either for that they had among them a kind of absolute government in
several, or else, for that being the Register of his own acts, he supposed it
would be more for his glory to be reputed a conqueror of Kings. Their names
were Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, whom Gassibelin then
required to raise all the power they could make, and on the sudden to assail
the Roman forces, that guarded their ships at the sea side. This was attempted
accordingly, but with ill success, for that the Romans having timely
advertisement of their purpose, prevented the execution thereof, by setting upon
them as they drew near the Roman army; and so, after a great slaughter made
of the Britans ( Cingetorix a noble captain, and one of their Princes being
taken prisoner) the Romans returned in safety to their Camp.

Cassibelin, hearing of the unhappy issue of this enterprise, after so many
losses sustained on his part, (his Country being wasted with war) and
himself in a manner forsaken, by the revolt of the cities round about, (which
most of all discouraged him) sent Ambassadors to Caesar by Comius of Arras,
offering to submit himself upon reasonable conditions.

Caesar determining to winter in Gallia (the state of his affairs there
requiring it) and the summer being almost spent, commanded that he should
deliver certain pledges for assurance of his obedience, and that he should
offer no wrong, nor give cause of offense to Mandubratius, or the Trinobantes,
whom he had taken into special protection. And then having imposed a Tribute,
to be paid yearly by the Britans, to the people of Rome, he marched toward
the seaside, where he embarked his forces, and arrived with them safely in the
continent.

Thus Caesar having rather showed some part of Britannie to the Romans, then
made a conquest of the whole: supposed he had done sufficiently for his own
glory, in undertaking a matter so rare and difficult in those times. At his
coming to Rome, he presented there certain captives (which he had taken in
the British wars) whose strangeness of shape and behavior filled the
peoples eyes, both with wonder, and delight. He offered also in the Temple of
Venus genetrix a surcote embrodered with British Pearl, as a Trophy, and
spoil of the Ocean, leaving to posterity a perpetual remembrance of his
enterprise in this Island, to the honor, both of his own name, and of the Roman
nation.

CHAP. VIII.
Augustus succeeds Julius Caesar in the Empire. The state of the Britans in
his time under Cuno-belin their Governor. The first British coin. The birth of
our Savior Christ. Tiberius the Emperor forbeareth to attempt any thing in
Britannie.

AFter the death of Julius Caesar (by reason of the civil wars among the
Romans) the I Will of Britannie was for a time neglected, and Augustus Caesar
being settled in the Empire (which was then grown to such greatness, as it
seemed even cumbred therewith) accounted it good policy to contain the same
within his known bounds: Besides, the attempt was like to prove dangerous, and
a matter of very great expense, to send an army so far off, to make war
with a Barbarous Nation, for desire of glory only (no special cause besides
mooving thereto.) Howbeit (as some writers report) about twenty years after
Julius Caesar's first entrance, Augustus intended a voyage hither in person,
alleging for pretense of the war, the wrong offered to the Roman state, by
such princes of the I Will as had for certain years withheld the tribute, which
Caesar his predecessor had imposed. Upon intelligence whereof, the Britans sent
over Ambassadors, who meeting the Emperor in The Countries between the rivers
Garonne, and Seine in France.
Gallia Celtica, declared their submission, and desired pardon: And the better
to win favor, they had carried over certain gifts of good value, to be
presented, as offerings in the Roman Capitol (having already learned the Art
to flatter for advantage, and to appease Princes by rewards.) Hereupon, a
conditional peace was granted them, and the Emperor having pacified some
troubles in Gallia, returned to Rome. Then began the Ilanders to pay Tribute,
and custom for all kind of wares which they exchanged with the Gauls, as
namely Ivorie boxes, Iron chains, and other trinkets of Amber, and glass,
which were transported to and fro both out of Gallia, and Britannie.

They are following, the Britans having failed in performance of conditions, he
prepared for another expedition; but being set forward on his voyage, the
revolt of the The Biscayans.
Cantabrians, and The ancient inhabitants between Gallicia and Portugal.
Asturians, stayed him from proceeding any further therein. After which time
the Britans were left to themselves, to enjoy their liberty, and use their
own laws without empeachment by foreign invaders; for that the Romans
(having found the sweetness of peace, after long civil wars) sought rather
to keep in obedience such Provinces as had bin before time brought under
subjection, then by attempting new conquests, to hazard the loss of that they
had already gotten.

In those days the Country of the Trinobantes in Britannie, was governed by
Cuno-belin, who kept his residence at Malden in Essex.
Camalodunum. He began first to reclaim the Britans from their rude behavior:
and to make his estate more respected, he afterward caused his own Image to
be stamped on his Coin after the manner of the Romans, man's (a custom never
used among the Britans before his days, and but then newly received by the
Romans themselves; for before that time the Britans used Rings of Iron, and
little plates of brass of a certain weight in stead of coin. During the time
of his government, the divine mystery of humane redemption was accomplished by
the birth of our Savior Christ, ( Augustus Caesar then possessing the Roman
Empire, which he afterward left to Tiberius his adopted son, a wary and
politic Prince, who following the advice and example of Augustus, did never
attempt any thing in Britannie, nor maintain any garrison there: howbeit the
Britans at that time were well affected to the Romans, as appeared by the
entertainment, which their petty Princes gave to some Soldiers of the Roman
army in Germany, who in crossing the seas, were by force of weather cast upon
the coast of Britannie, and from thence in courteous manner sent back to
Germanicus their General.

CHAP. IX.
The ridiculous expedition of Caius Caligula the Emperor, intending a voyage
into Britannie. His vaineglorie and cruelty.

Caius Caligula succeeding Tiberius in the Empire, had a meaning doubtless to
have invaded the I Will of Britannie, had not his rash entrance into the action,
and his ill success in the German war, overthrown the enterprise; by reason
whereof he brought nothing to effect, but only made a ridiculous expedition,
(answerable to the vanity of his humor) bringing an army into the hither parts
of Belgia, and there having received into protection Adminus (whom Cuno-belin
his father had banished) and certain other British Fugitives, that came with
him) he writ vaunting Letters to the Senate, as though the whole Island had
yielded it self, having given special charge to the Messenger, that his
letters should be carried in a Chariot to the Forum, and not delivered to the
Consuls, but in a full Senate, and in the Temple of Mars. Afterward drawing his
forces down to the sea coasts of Belgia (whence with wonder he beheld the high
Cliffes of the I Will possessed with barbarous people) he placed his Soldiers in
battle array upon the shore, and himself entering into a long Boat, was rowed
a little way upon the Sea. But not daring to adventure further, he returned
speedily to land, and then commanding a charge to be founded, as though he
would have begun a fight, he appointed his Soldiers to gather Cockles, and
Muskles in their Helmets, tearming them spoils of the Ocean, and meet to be
preserved, as offerings due to the Capitol. For this exploit, he afterward at
his coming to Rome, was not ashamed to demand a Triumph, and divine honors to
be assigned him; but finding the Senators, for the most part, unwilling to give
their assent, he burst out into threats, and had slain some of them in the
place, if they had not speedily avoided his fury. After this, himself in open
assembly made a declaration of his journey, and what adventures he had passed
in the conquest of the Ocean (as himself vainly termed it) whereat the common
people, either for fear, or flattery, gave a general applause; which he
(taking it as a testimony of their desire to have him placed among their gods)
rewarded in this shameful manner: He caused a great quantity of gold and silver
to be scattered on the ground, and certain poisoned Caltrops of Iron to be
cast among them, whereby many were killed, partly with those envenomed engines,
and partly with the press one of another (each man being earnest in gathering,
and supposing another man's gain his own loss:) So naturally was he inclined
to all kinds of mischief, as he spared not the lives even of those, whom he
thought to deserve best at his hands.

CHAP. X.
Claudius succeeding Caius in the Empire, sends Aulus Plautius with an army
out of France into Britannie. The Roman soldiers are unwilling to be
transported thither: and entering into mutiny, are appeased by Narcissus the
Emperors favorite. Plautius charge the Britans, and takes Cataratacus
their captain prisoner, for which he afterward triumphs.

Claudius the Emperor, with better advise then Caius his predecessor, and with
much better fortune, undertook the action in the third year of his reign;
and first, by persuasion of Bericus a British fugitive, and others, whom the
Romans had received into their protection (a matter that much discontented the
Britans, and stirred them up to revolt) he sent Aulus Plautius a Roman Senator,
a man well experienced in militare affairs, to take charge of the Army then
remaining in Gallia, and to transport it into the Island, whereat the Soldiers
grudged, complaining, that they should now make war out of the world, and by
protracting time with unnecessary delays, they discovered openly their
unwillingness to enter into the service, till Narcissus a favorite of Claudius,
being sent to appease them, went up into Plautius his Tribunal seat, and there
in an Oration, declared to the Soldiers the causes of his coming, and
exhorted them not to shrink, for fear of uncertain dangers: That the
enterprise it self, the more perillons it seemed, the more honorable it would
be to atchieve it: that themselves were the men whom the heavens had ordained
to enlarge the bounds of the Roman Empire, and to make their own names famous
in the utmost parts of the earth. But the Soldiers at the first being moved
with disdain, cried out in seditious manner ( Io. Saturnalia,) as though they
had been then ready to solemnize a feast, at which the Custom was, that
servants should wear their Masters apparel, and represent their persons.
Howbeit Narcissus giving way to their fury for the present, did afterward
prevail so far with them, as partly for shame, and partly for hope of
reward, they seemed content to follow Plautius, whither soever he would conduct
them.

Then were the Soldiers that were Citizens of Rome.
and Soldiers of foreign nations in league with the Romans.
Auxiliarie soldiers divided into three parts, so to be embarqned, to the end,
that if they should be empeached in one place, they might land in another. In
crossing the Sea, their ships were shaken, and beaten back with a contrary
wind; albeit their courage failed not, but rather increased, by reason of a
fiery leame shooting from the East toward the West (the self same way that
they directed their course) which they interpreted as a token of good success.
And thereupon hoising sail, they set forward again, and with some difficulty
(through the contrariety of wind and tide,) arrived in the Island without any
resistance, by reason that the Britans doubted not their coming; but then
finding themselves surprised on the sudden, they ran dispersedly to hide
themselves in Woods and Marshes, holding it their best course, rather to
prolong the war, and weary their enemies by delays, then to encounter them
in the open field. But Plautius with much labor and hazard found out at
length, their chief place of retreite, where he killd many of them, and took
prisoner Cataratacus their Captain, one of the Sons of Cuno-belin, (not long
before deceased.) For this exploit the Roman Senate did afterward grant him a
Triumph, which the Emperor Claudius honored with his own person, accompanying
him as he went up into the Capitol.

CHAP. XI.
Plautius the Lieutenant pursues the service in Britannie. Vespasian (serving
under him) was in danger to have been slain, or taken, by the Britans, if he
had not been rescued by Titus his son. The Britans pass over the river of
Thames, and assail the Romans that follow them. Togodumnus a British Prince is
slain in the fight. Plautius being in distress, desisteth for a time from
further prosecution of the war.

THe The ancient inhabitants of the Counties of Gloucester and Oxford.
Boduni (then living under the government of the The ancient iuhabitants of the
Counties of Buckingham, Bedford, and Hartford.
Cattieuchlani) betook themselves to the protection of Plautius, who leaving
garrisons in those parts, marched toward a river, over which the Britans
supposed that the Romans could not pass without a Bridge, and therefore
imagined themselves safe, having pitched their Camp on the other side of the
water. But Plautius sent over certain Germans (who being accustomed to swim
over rivers with swift currents even in their armor) found an easy passage to
the further bank, and there set upon the Britans, wounding the horses which
drew their Chariots, and by that means overthrowing their riders, and
disordering their whole power. ^hen was Flauius Vespasian (who had the leading
of the Second Legion, and Sabinus his brother, appointed to pass over, and to
charge them on a sudden as they were dispersed. Some of the Britans being
slain, and some taken prisoners, the night made an end of the skirmish. The
next morning the rest of the dispersed rout showed themselves upon the shore,
and gave occasion of a new fight, which continued a long time, with equal
advantage, till C. Sydius Geta being in danger to have been taken, recovered
himself, and at the last enforced the Britans to retire; For which service he
had afterward Triumphall honors assigned him, although he were no Consul. In
this conflict Vespasian (being beset round about by the barbarous people) was
in great danger, either to have been slain, or taken, if he had not been
timely rescued by Titus his son, who then exercised the office of a Tribune
of the Soldiers, and began in his tender years to give some proof of his
valor. After this battle, the Britans withdrew themselves to the mouth of the
river Thamisis, near the place where it falls into the sea, and being skillful
in the shallowes and firm grounds, passed over in safety, whenas the Romans
that pursued them, (not knowing the dangerous places) were often times in great
hazard. Some of the Germans that were most forward to adventure (by reason of
their skill in swimming) as soon as they had got to the further shore, were
compassed about and killed by the barbarous people, and the rest of the Roman
army that followed, was much distressed in the passage, and sharply assailed at
their coming on land; where began a bloody fight, in the which Togodumnus a
British Prince, one of Cunobelins sons was slain; whose death did nothing
abate the courage of the Britans, but rather enflamed them with desire of
revenge: for the effecting whereof, they gathered together new forces, from
diverse parts of the I Will. Plautius fearing the greatness of their power, and
being straightened in a place of disadvantage, and danger, proceeded no further at
that time, but fortifying only such towns as he had already taken,
advertised Claudius of the doubtful state of his affairs.

CHAP. XII.
The valor and fortune of Vespasian in the British war. He subdueth the I Will
of Wight. The Expedition of Claudius the Emperor into Britannie. He defeateth
the Britans, and planteth a Colonie of old soldiers at Maldon in Essex. His
son is surnamed Britannicus. At his return to Rome, he is honored with a
Triumph. The Christian faith first received in Britannie, in the reign of
Claudius.

IN the mean time, Vespasian was employed in other places of the I Will, where
fortune seemed to lay the foundation of that greatness, unto which he
afterward attained; For in a short space, he fought thirty times with the
Britans, overcomming two warlike nations, and taming the fierce The ancient
Inhabitants of the counties of Somerset, Wilton, and Southhampton.
Belgae, whose ancestors, coming hither at the first out of Gallia Belgica,
either to take booties, or to make war, gave the name of their own Country to
such places as they had subdued: (a custom commonly used among the Gauls, when
they seated themselves in any part of this Island.)

With like fortunate success Vespasian proceeded in attempting, and conquering
the I Will The I Will of Wight.
Vectis, that lies on the South side of Britannie, when Claudius the Emperor
being now furnished of all things necessary for the British expedition, set
forward with a mighty army, consisting of horsemen, footmen, and Elephants.
He marched first to Ostia: from thence to Massilia: the rest of the voyage he
made by land to Bolein in Picardie.
Gessoriacum in Gallia, where he embarked. His forces being safely transported
into the I Will, were led toward the river Thamisis, where Plautius and Vespasian
with their power attended his coming; so the two armies being joined together,
crossed the river again. The Britans that were assembled to encounter them,
began the fight, which was sharply maintained on both sides, till in the end, a
great number of the Ilanders being slain, the rest fled into the woods,
through which the Romans pursued them, even to the town of Maldon in Essex.
Camalodunum, which had bin the royal seat of Cunobelm, and was then one of
the most defensible places in the dominions of the Trinobantes. This town they
surprised, and afterward fortified, planting therein a Colonie of old
soldiers, to strengthen those parts and to keep the inhabitants there in
obedience. Then were the Britans disarmed, howbeit Claudius remitted the
confiscation of their goods; for which favor the barbarous people erected a
Temple and an Altar unto him, honoring him as a god. Now the States of the
country round about, being so weakened by the loss of their neighbors, and
their own civil dissentions, as they were unable to resist the Roman power
any longer, began to offer their submission, promising to obey, and live
peaceably under the Roman government; and so, by little, and little, the hither
part of the I Will was reduced into the form of a Province.

In honor of this victory, Claudius was diverse times saluted by the name of
Imperator, contrary to the Roman custom, which permitted it but once for one
Expedition. The Senate of Rome also, upon advertisement of his success,
decreed, that he should be called Britannicus, and that his son should have
the same title, as a surname proper and hereditarie to the Claudian family.
M^ssalma his wife (the monster of her sex for impudency and lascivious life)
had the first place in counsel assigned her, (as Livia the wife of Augustus
sometimes had) and was also licenced to ride in a Chariot. At his return to
Rome (which was the sixth month after his departure thence, having continued but
sixteen days only in the I Will, he entered the city in a Triumph) performed
with more then usual ceremonies of state, whereat certain Presidents of
Provinces, and banished men were permitted to be present. On the top of his
palace was placed a Crown set with stems, and foreparts of ships, which the
Romans called ( Corona navalis) as a sign of the conquest of the Ocean.
Diverse Captains that had served under him in Britannie, were honored with
Triumphal ornaments; Yearly plays were appointed for him, and two Arches of
Triumph adorned with Trophies were erected, the one at Rome, the other at
Gessoriaoum, (where he embarked for Britannie) to remain to succeeding ages,
as perpetual records of his victory; So great a matter was it then accounted,
and a work of such merit, to have subdued so small a part of the Island.

About this time (as it may be probably conjectured Christian Religion being
yet green, and of small growth, began to cast forth some small sparkles of her
brightness in the I Will of Britannie: whither Christians of Rome, and other
Countries (then flying persecution) resorted for safety, and quietness, as to
a place remote, and by reason of the wars, and troubles there, not much
subject to Inquisition: whenas also diverse Britans remaining at Rome (where
Christianity then increased) either for hostages, or detained as prisoners, or
happly for some private respects of profit, and pleasure, had opportunity and
liberty to converse with the Roman Christians, and to be by them instructed,
and confirmed in the faith of Christ.

CHAP. XIII.
Ostorius Scapula is sent by Claudius the Emperor to succeed Plautius in the
office of Lievtenancie. The Britans in diverse parts of the I Will take arms, but
are speedily suppressed. The Roman General seeks by lenity to purchase the
good opinion of the Britans.

IN these terms stood the state of Britannie, when Plautius the Lieutenant was
revoked, and the prosecution of the war committed to P. Ostorius Scapula, who
at his landing found all in an uproar, the Britans (that were yet unconquered,)
raunging the Confederates country, and using the greater violence, for that
they supposed the new Captain, as unacquainted with his army (the winter also
being then begun) would not come forth to encounter them; but he knowing well,
that in such cases, the first success breeds, either fear, or confidence,
drew together with speed his readiest Cohorts, and made toward them, slaying
such as resisted, and pursuing the residue, (whom he found stragled abroad)
lest they should make head again. And, that a faithless and cloaked peace
might not give, either the Captain, or soldier any time of idle repose, he
disarmed all those whom he suspected, and hemmed them in with Garrisons between
Nen, the river on which Northampton is seated (as it is co^iectured.)
Antona, and I he river of Severne.
Sabrina.

The first that began to stir, were the The ancient Inhabitants of Norffolke,
Suffo^k, Cambridgeshire, and Huntingtonshire.
Icenians, a strong people, and unshaken with wars, as having of their own
accord in former times, sought the Romans alliance and amity. The Countries
also adjoining near unto them, following their example, prepared themselves to
fight, choosing a place that was compassed about with a rude trench, which had
a narrow entrance to empeach the coming in of horsemen. That fence the Roman
Captain, (although he wanted the strength of the Legions) went about to force
with the aid of the Confederates alone; and having placed his Cohorts in
ranks, he set his Troops of horsemen also in like readiness: Then giving the
sign of battle, he assailed the Rampire, and brake it, disordering the
Britans, who being stricking with a kind of remorse for their rebellious
attempts, and seeing the passages stopped up on al sides, showed very great
courage and valor in defending themselves (as it falls out often times, where
extremity of danger it self takes away all fear of danger.) In this fight M.
Ostorius the Lievtenants son was crowned with an Oken Garland, as an
honorable reward for saving a Roman Citizen.

Now by the slaughter of the Icenians, the rest of the Britans (who stood upon
doubtful terms, as wavering between war and peace) were well quieted, and
Ostorius led his army against the The Inhabitants of a part of Chessh^^e (as
it is coniectured.)
Cangi, whose country he spoiled and wasted while the inhabitants durst not
come into the field, but privily surprised such as they found straggling behind
the Roman army, which was now come near the sea coast, that looks toward
Ireland, whenas certain tumults stirred among the The Inhabitants of
Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham, Westmerland and Cumberland.
Brigantes, brought back the General, who thought it best, not to enter into
any new action, before he had made all sure in those parts; howbeit, upon his
coming thither, some few of the Brigantes (that first began to take arms)
being taken and put to death, the residue were pardoned, and the Country
quieted. For the General wisely considering, that in such cases, lenity
sometimes prevails, where force and rigor cannot, did seek to win favor of
the Britans by courteous usage of such, as either fled unto him for protection,
or else, by the fortune of war fell into his hands, sometimes pardoning them,
sometimes rewarding them, and sometimes using them in service against their
own nation, as he did Cogidunus a British Prince, upon whom he had bestowed
certain Cities in free gift, according to an ancient custom among the Romans,
who used even Kings themselves for instruments of bondage. But the The ancient
Inhabitants of South Wales.
Silures could neither by cruelty, nor fair means be held in, so as the
General saw there was no way to keep them under, but with a garrison of
Legionarie Soldiers; and to that end the Colonie at Camalodunum (consisting of
a strong company of old Soldiers) was brought into the subdued Country, to
defend it against such as should rebel, and to make the confederates more
willing to live in obedience.

CHAP. XIIII.
Ostorious the Roman General makes war upon the Silures and Ordovices, the
ancient Inhabitants of South Wales, and North Wales. Caractacus their captain
being overthrown in battle, flies for succor to Cartismandua the Princess
of the Brigantes, who then inhabited that part of the I Will which now conteyneth
the counties of York, Lancaster, Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland. He is
betrayed and delivered to Ostorius.

THen the army marched against the Silures, who besides their natural
boldness, relied much upon the strength of Caractacus their leader, a man that
had waded through great dangers, and had bin fortunate in many adventures,
having gotten thereby such reputation, as he was preferred before all the
British captains. But as in policy and knowledge of the country, he had an
advantage of the Romans: so perceiving himself to be unequally matched in
strength, he removed the war to the The ancient Inhabitants of North Wales.
Ordovices, who entering into the action with him, (as fearing alike the Roman
power) resolved jointly to hazard the chance of war. And hereupon they
prepared for battle, having chosen a place very commodious for themselves,
and disadvantageable for their enemies. Then they went to the top of an hill,
and where they found any easy passage up, they stopped the way with heaps of
stones, in manner of a rampire. Not far off, ran a River with an uncertain
foord, where, upon the bank, a company of the best soldiers were placed, for
a defense in the fore-ward. The leaders went about, exhorting, and encouraging
the common soldiers, using such persuasions as might best fit their humors,
and the present occasion; and Caractacus himself, coursing up and down,
protested, that that day, and that battle, should be either the beginning of
recoverie of liberty, or of perpetual servitude. Then he called upon the
names of his auncesters, that had chased Caesar the Dictator out of the I Will,
and had delivered them from hatchets, and Tributes, and protected their wives
and children from shame and violence. While he uttered these, or the like
speeches, the people round about him made a noise, and every man swear,
according to the religion of his Country, that neither their enemies weapons,
nor their own wounds, should make them to give over. That cheerful cry,
terrified and astonished the Roman General, and the rather, when he considered
how he was couped in, having the river beneath him, the fort before him, the
high hills hanging over it, and all things on every side threatening danger and
destruction to the assailers. Howbeit his soldiers demanded the battle,
crying, That there was nothing which valor could not overcome. The Prefects
and Tribunes, using the like speeches, added courage to the rest.

Then Ostorius having viewed the places of difficult access, led his Soldiers
(being hot and eagre of the fight) unto the further side of the river, and from
thence to the Rampire, where while they fought with their Darts, they had the
woorst, but having broken down the rude compacted heap of stones with a
Testudo, and both armies coming to handie strokes upon equal advauntage, the
Britans turned their backs, and ran to the hill top, the Romans pursuing them,
both with their light and heavy armed soldiers, the one assailing with darts,
and the other (as they marched thick together) breaking the ranks, and beating
down the barbarous people, who had neither head-peece, nor armor to defend
themselves, so that being hedged in between the Legionarie soldiers, and the
Auxiliaries, the greatest part of them were slain in the place.

At this assault Caractacus his wife, and daughter were taken prisoners, and
his brethren yielded to the enemies; but himself driven to extremity, escaped
by flight into the Country of the Brigantes, hoping to receive some aid of
Cartismandua the sovereign Lady there. But, as it falls out commonly with
men in adversity, to be forsaken and left succorlesse: so instead of finding
the relief which he expected, he fell into the danger which he little doubted.
For Cartismandua, either fearing her own estate, or thinking to win favor of
the Conqueror (as Princes often times make use of one another misfortunes to
serve their own turns) detained him in prison a while, and afterward delivered
him to Ostorius, who was exceeding glad that he had gotten him, and forthwith
sent him to Rome, as a prize of great worth, and the happy fruits of nine
years service in the wars.

CHAP. XV.
Caractacus the British Prince is sent to Rome, and presented there before
Claudius the Emperor. His habit, speech, and behavior. He is pardoned, and
dismissed.

THe report of Caractacus misfortune was soon spread throughout the Isles and
Provinces adjoining, for his name was renowned in most parts of Italy, and
each man desired to see him, who had so long time withstood, and contemned that
power, which held all the world in awe, and obedience. The City of Rome for
many days together was filled only with talk of him, and expectation of his
coming; and the Emperor himself as a Conqueror, by extolling his own
worthiness, covertly added more glory to the conquered. The people assembled
together, as it were to see some notable and rare spectacle. The Emperors guard
in arms were orderly placed in the field before the camp. After this
preparation made, the prisoners, and Trophies were presented in this manner;
First the vassals of Caractacus going foremost, bowed their bodies to the
people, as they passed, and seemed by their rufull countenances to discover
their fear. The caparisons, chains, and other spoils taken in the war,
were carried after them. Then Caractacus his Brethren, his Wife, and Daughters
followed; and last of all came Caractacus himself. His body was naked, for
the most part, and painted with the figures of diverse beasts. He ware a chain
of iron about his neck, and another about his middle. The hair of his head
hanging down in long locks (curled by nature) covered his back and shoulders,
and the hair of his upper lip being parted on both sides, lay upon his breast.
The rest of his body was shaven all over. Neither was his behavior less
noted, then the strangenes of his habit: For he neither hung down his head,
nor craved mercy (as the rest did) but went on boldly with a settled and stern
countenance, till he came before the Emperors Tribunal seat, and there
standing still a while, he after spoke these, or the like words.

If either my virtues in prosperity, had been answerable to the greatness of
my estate, or the success of my late attempts to the resolution of my mind, I
might have come to this City, to have been entertained, rather as a Friend,
than as a captive to be gazed upon; For it should have been no disgrace for
the Romans, to have admitted into society with them, a man royally descended,
and a commander of many warlike Nations. But what cloud soever Fortune has
cast over my estate, she is not able to take from me those things, which the
heavens and Nature have given me: (that is,) the dignity of my Birth, and the
courage of my Mind, which never failed me: I know it is a custom among you, to
make your Triumphs, the spectacles of other men's miseries, and in this my
Calamity, as in a Mirror, you do now behold your own glory. Yet know, that I
was sometimes a Prince, furnished with strength of men, and abiliments of
war; and what marvel is it, that I have now lost them, since your own
experience has taught you, that the events of war are variable, and
uncertain? I thought that the deep Waters, which like a Wall enclose us,
(whom the heavens seem to have placed far off, in another world by it
self,) might have bin a sufficient defense for us against foreign invasion:
But I see now, that your Desire of soveraigntie admits no limitation, since
neither the danger of an unknown Sea, nor the distance of place, can any longer
warrant our safety and liberty. If you will needs command the whole world,
then must all men become your vassals, and live under a forced obedience. For
mine own part, so long as I was able, I made resistance, being unwilling to
submit my neck to a foreign Yoke. The law of natural reason allows every
man to defend himself, being assailed, and to withstand force, by force. Had I
yielded at the first, thy glory, and my mis-hap had not bin so renowned, but
both of them would soon have been forgotten. Fortune has done her woorst, and
we have now nothing left us, but our lives, which if thou spare (having power
to spill) thou shall do that which best beseems a great Mind, and a noble
Nature.

The Emperor hearing this speech, and wondering to see such boldness and
constancy of mind in a dejected estate, pardoned both him, and the rest of his
company, commanding them to be unbound, and so dismissed them.

CHAP. XVI.
What opinion the Romans held of Caractacus. Triumphal honors assigned to
Ostorius for taking him. The Britans assail the Roman camp in the Country of
the Silures. The principality of South Wales. The death of Ostorius the
General.

FOr many days together, Caractacus his Fortune ministered matter of discourse
to the Lords of the Senate, who affirmed the spectacle of his captivity to be
no less honorable, then that of Syphax the Numidian King, over whom P. Scipio
triumphed, or that of Perses, whom Paulus Aemilius vanquished, or of any other
Kings, that had in former times been taken in war, and showed to the people.
Then public honors of triumph were decreed for Ostorius, whose fortunes being
now at the highest, began afterward to decline, by reason, that either
Caractacus (the object of his valor) being removed, he supposed he had made a
full conquest, and therefore followed the service more carelessly: or else, for
that the residue of the Britans, having compassion of the misfortune of so
mighty a Prince, and being eagre of revenge, renewed the war; for they
assailed the Legionary Cohorts which were left behind to build fortresses in
the Silures Country, killed the camp-Maister, and eight Centurions, besides
some of the forwardest soldiers, and they had put all the rest to the sword,
if speedy rescue had not come from the villages and Forts adioining. Diverse
other sallies they made, as time and place gave them advantage, prevailing
sometimes by strength, sometimes by policy, and sometimes by chance. The
Principal motive, that enduced the rest to take arms, was the example of the
Silures, who were most resolutely bent, as being exasperated, by reason of as
peech that the Roman Emperor had used, which was: That he would root out the
name of the Silures, as the Sicambrians had been in former time. This made
them bold and desperate to adventure, as men knowing their destiny before
hand. Many skirmishes they had, in surprising the scattered troops of the
Roman soldiers, and often times with good success, in taking rich booties,
and prisoners, and distributing the spoils among their neighbors, by which
means they drew them also to revolt. In the mean time, Ostorius wearied with
care and travail, ended his life.

CHAP. XVII.
Aulus Didius is sent by Claudius the Emperor to take charge of the army in
Britannie. Venutius the husband of Cartismandua Princess of the Brigantes,
upon private coffeehouse takes arms against the Romans. The death of
Claudius the Emperor.

Claudius the Emperor being advertised of the death of Ostorius, sent Aulus
Didius to take charge of the army in Britannie, where notwithstanding all the
haste he made, he found all out of frame: Manlius Valens with his Legion having
encountered the Britans with ill success, which by report of the Ilanders, was
made greater then indeed it was, to terrify the new Governor, who also made
use of the same policy to serve his own turn; for, by increasing the fame of
that which he heard reported, he supposed, either to win greater praise, if he
prevailed, or to purchase a more favorable censure of his actions, if he
miscarried. The Silures had made many roades into the subdued Country,
wasting, and spoiling round about, when Didius the Lieutenant, upon his first
arrival, entering into the field, restrained their outrage, and for a while
kept them in some awe.

After Caractacus was taken, Venutius, a Prince faithful to the Romans, and
protected by them (so long as Cartismandua his wife and he agreed together)
upon private coffeehouse began a new rebellion. For Cartismandua (whom the
Romans specially favored for the deliverie of Caractacus) abounding now in
peace, wealth, and plenty (which are commonly the nurses of licencious living)
fell in love with Velocatus one of her husbands servants, and forgetting in the
end her own honor, preferred him before Venutius, who being deeply touched
with such an open injury, and disgrace, raised a power, to expel her and her
Paramour out of the Kingdom. The war seemed at the first, to have been
maintained between themselves, and their private followers only, till
Cartismandua, by policy, had taken Venutius his brother, and certain of his
kinsmen: and then the Inhabitants round about, fearing the event, and
disdaining to be brought under the servile yoke of a woman, declared themselves
for Venutius, and with a choice number of youthful and well experienced
Soldiers, invaded the Country: whereof Didius having timely intelligence, sent
certain Cohorts to encounter them. Hereupon insued a sharp Conflict, the
success whereof was much doubted in the beginning, but in the end the Romans
prevailed. The like fortune also had Caesius Nasica with his Legion; For Didius
himself, as a man stricken in years, and fitter to direct, then execute, used
(for the most part) the ministry of other men, keeping that which his
Predecessors had gotten, and building only some few Castles, and places of
Defense within the land, to win thereby, a fame of augmenting the office.

The year following, Claudius the Emperor, (by the treachery of Agrippina his
wife, who practiced to prevent Britannicus, and to prefer her own son Nero
to the Empire) died of poison: leaving to posterity no greater fame of any
thing by him attempted during his government, then of his fortunate Expedition
into Britannie.

The end of the first Book, of the first part of the History of Great Britan.
The succession of the Roman Emperors from Nero, unto Domitian.
6 Nero Emperor 14. years. 7 Galba Emperor 7. months 8 Otho Emperor 4.
months 9 Vitellius Emperor 8. months. 10 Vespasian. Emperor 9. years and
11. men. 11 Titus Emperor 2. years. 12 Domitian Emperor 15. years.





Lievtenants in Britannie from the beginning of Neroes reign, until the end
of Domitians.
Lievtenants under Nero.
Veranius. Suetonius Paulinus. Petronins Turpilianus. Trebellius Maximus.
Lievt. under Galba.
Trebellius Maximus.
Lievt. under Otho.
Trebellius Maximus.
Lievt. under Vitellius.
Vectius Bolanus.
Lievt. under Vespasian.
Petilius Cerealis. Julius Frontinus. Julius Agricola.
Lievt. under Titus.
Julius Agricola.
Lievt. under Domitian.
Julius Agricola. Salustius Lucullus.
The Princes, and men of special note among the Britans.
In the time of Suetonius Paulinus government under Nero the Emperor.
Prasutagus, Prince of the Icenians. Voadica (the warlike) his wife. In the time
of Julius Agricolaes government, under Domitian the Emperor. Galgacus, Prince
of the Caledonians. In the time of Salustius Lucullus government, under
Domitian the Emperor. Arviragus.
THE FIRST PART:
The second Book.
NERO CL: CAES: AVG: GER: P. M. TR. P. XI. P. P.
portrait of Nero

The first CHAPTER.
Nero succeeds Claudius in the Empire. The Province in Britannie is governed
by Veranius, after whose death the charge is committea to Suetonius Paulinus.
The I Will of Anglesey is subdued. The doctrine and manners of the religious
Druydes.

THis was the state of the affairs in Britannie, when Claudius the Emperor
died, leaving the Roman Monarchy to Nero his adopted son, who (after his
first five years spent) being given over to all kinds of vice, neglected the
government both at home and abroad, not daring to enter into any militare
action; and it was thought that he would have revoked the army out of
Britannie, if very shame in detracting from his fathers glory, and loosing
that which he had won, had not withheld him.

About that time Veranius was Governor in Britannie, where the shortness of
his continuance suffered him not to effect any great matter; for he died in the
first year of his government, and then was the Province assigned to Suetonius
Paulinus, one of the most famous men of that age for militare affairs. His
good success at his first entrance, in subduing nations, and establishing
Garrisons (where need required) made him bold to assail the I Will of Anglesey.
Mona, (lying in the West part of Britannie) as having been a common
receptacle of Fugitives during the war. In his passage thither, he left the
Country behind him (as he marched) unfurnished in diverse places, laying it
thereby open to all oportunities of annoyance. At his arrival, the barbarous
people rudely armed, standing upon the shore, made show of their purpose to
resist: The women in mourning attire (their hair about their ears) shaking
burning firebrarnds like Furies of hell, ran up and down, and the Druydes
lifting up their hands toward heaven, filled the air with cries and curses.

These Druydes were certain Priests, had in great reverence among the Britans.
They kept their residence, for the most part, in shadie and dark groves (as
fittest places for devotion.) Among all trees, they most esteemed the Oak, as
hallowed, and without the which, they could not perform their superstitious
rites. Their sacrifices were both private and public. They instructed the
youth of Britannie, and decided controversies, civil, and criminal. If any man
refused to stand to their award, he was forbidden to be present at their
sacrifices, which was accounted the greatest punishment that might be; for
thereby he was reputed a notorious offender, exempt from the ordinary
protection of the laws, incapable of any preferment, and all men would fly
his company. Amongst these Priests, there was always one that had the chief
authority; and he being dead, the worthiest of them that survived, succeeded
in his place. If there seemed to be an equality of worthiness among more then
one, then the choice was made by plurality of voices. At one certain time in
the year, they used to hold a Sessions in Gallia, in some consecrated place,
where they heard and determined causes; For the superstition was first carried
thither out of Britannie. They had immunitie from all manner of Tributes, and
from service in the wars; by reason of which privileges, they drew to them
many followers, whom they taught a great number of verses by heart, supposing
it unlawful to commit those sacred things to writing; whereas in other
matters, as well public, as private, they used the Greek letters. And this it
is likely they did, either for that they would not have the knowledge of their
superstitious rites laid open to the common people, (in whom ignorance seems
to engender a kind of devotion) or else, for that they would have their
scholars to trust the more to their memory, while they wanted the help of
writing. They preached that the soul was immortal, and that after the death
of one man, it went into another. By this persuasion, they stirred up men to
virtue, and took away the fear of death (the maine obstacle of glorious
adventures.) Other things they taught also concerning the motion of the
Stars, the situation of the earth, and the power of their profane gods.

The strange behavior of these religious Priests, and the outcries of the
people of Mona, so amazed the Roman soldiers, that like men inchaunted, they
stood still without motion, till the Captain spoke unto them, and encouraged
them to adventure, not fearing a flock of feelie women, or frantike people;
and then boldly giving the charge, he soon disordered and dispersed them,
making himself master of the field: which done, the Roman soldiers entered
the Towns, and placed garrisons there, felling the woods, which the
Inhabitants superstitiously reputed holy, by reason of the Altars, whereupon
they sacrificed the blood of captives, and prophesied of the success of their
own affairs, by viewing the entralls of men, whom they had killed.

CHAP. II.
The Britans oppressed by the cruelty and covetousness of the Roman officers,
discover their greevances one to another. Prodigious signs foregoing the
subversion of the Roman Colonie. The Britans take arms under the conduct of
Voadica.

IN the mean time Prasutagus Prince of the Icenians, a man renowned for his
riches, did by his last will, make the Roman Emperor his heir, (jointly with
two of his daughters,) supposing, that thereby his principality, and family
should have been maintained in good estate, and protected from violence after
his death: all which fell out contrary to his hopes; for his kingdom was made
a prey to the Soldiers, Voadica his wife whipped, his daughters deflowred,
such as were of his family made slaves, and the wealthiest men of his Country,
either by open force, or surmised pretenses, deprived of their goods, and
dispossessed of their inheritance. Besides that, Seneca one of Neroes
counsailors, having forced diverse of the better sort of the Britans, to take
great sums of money of him upon usury, did then, for his private gain,
exact the payment of the principal upon a sudden; to the utter undoing of his
debtors: and Decianus Catus the Receiver of the revenues of the province.
Procurator in Britannie, renewed the Confiscation of their goods, which
Claudius the Emperor had pardoned. The soldiers placed in the Colonie at
Camalodunum, had thrust the owners and ancient Inhabitants out of their houses,
terming them slaves, and drudges, and abusing them in all reproachful manner.
The Temple erected in the honor of Claudius, was an eie-sore, and continual
burden unto them, while the Priests Augustales that attended there, wasted the
wealth of the inhabitants, under the pretext of religion. To these common
grievances of the afflicted people, the present occasion seemed to offer means
of redress, while the Roman General was making war in Mona. Whereupon they
resolved to take arms, inciting the Trinobantes and other Nations (that were
not wholly brought under subjection) to do the like. Then they began to
discourse of the miseries of bondage, to lay their injuries together,
aggravating them by their own Constructions, and complaining, that their
patience had profited them nothing, but to draw heavier burdens upon them, as
men that would gently bear: That whereas in former times they had only one
Commander, now there was two thrust upon them, the Lieutenant to suck their
blood, and the Procurator their substance, whose disagreement was the vexation
of the subject, and agreement, their utter undoing, while the one burdened them
with Soldiers and Captains, the other with wrongs, and indignities: that the
lust and covetousness of these their enemies, laid hold upon all persons,
without exception: that though in the field, he that spoyleth, be commonly the
stronger, yet themselves were, by Cowards and weaklings (for the most part)
dispossessed of their houses* bereft of their Children, enjoined to yield
Soldiers for other men's behoof, as though they were such a kind of people, as
knew how to do any thing else, save only to die for their own Country; For
otherwise there was but a handful of Soldiers come over, if they did but
reckon their own number, considering withal, that Germany had already
shaken off the yoke, having no Ocean Sea, but a river to defend it: that the
causes then moving them to take arms, were just, and honorable; namely to
recover their liberty, and to defend their Parents, Wives, Children, and
Country; whereas the Romans had nothing to provoke them to war, but their
own covetousness, and wanton lust, and were likely enough to depart (as
Julius Caesar had done) if themselves would imitate the virtues of their
progenitors; and not be dismayed with the doubtful event of one skirmish, or
two, seeing that men in misery have commonly more courage (then at other
times) and more constancy to continue: and now the heavens themselves seemed
to pity their poor estate, by sending the Roman Governor out of the way,
and confining the army (as it were) into another Island; by which means,
opportunity of revenge, and hope of liberty was offered: and finally, that
being assembled, to devise, and deliberate together, they had obtained the
hardest point in an action of that nature, wherein it were more danger to be
taken consulting, then doing. With these and the like speeches they stirred up
one another, each man laying open his own particular greevances, and adding
them to the common cause.

About this time, diverse prodigious signs were noted to portend the
subversion of the Roman Colonie, as namely, an Image of Victory falling down
reversed at Camalodunum; Strange noyses sounding in the air: Strange
apparitions seen in the sea: The Ocean bloody in show: and the print of men's
bodies upon the sands. Diverse constructions were made of these things as
ominous, whether that they proceed of some natural causes (though not always
observed,) or else, that they do necessarily forego the ruin and change of
great States. Howbeit commonly in such cases, men's minds do mis-give them,
while they frame the future event of things answerable to their own fearful
imaginations; and great alterations falling out sometimes after like accidents,
they superstitiously suppose them, to be always the certain forerunners of
destruction. The apprehension of these things, at the first, struck the Romans
with greater fear, by reason of the absence of their General, and thereupon
they required the aid of Catus Decianus the Procurator, who sent a small
company badly armed, to renforce the garrison. The old soldiers that had
been left within the Town, (although few in number) yet trusting to the
franchize of the Temple, and not doubting the secret conspiracy of their
confederates, were in a manner careless, as in times of peace, following their
pleasures, and making no provision for defense. The Britans, having in the
mean time, taken arms under the conduct of Voadica, a Lady of the blood of
their kings (for in matter of government they made no difference of sex) and
being informed of the state of the Colonie, determined first to assail the
towns and forts in their passage thither, which they attempted accordingly,
and with no great difficulty surprised the greatest number of them.

CHAP. III.
The Britans take arms under the conduct of Voadica. Her Oration to her
Soldiers. The Roman Colonie is surprised. Cerealis coming to succor it,
hardly escapes with life. Catus the Procurator flies into France.

THe good success the Britans had in taking in some places of defense, as they
marched forward, made them desirous and adventurous to invade the Colonie it
self: and Voadica as their leader, being a woman of a great spirit, and comely
personage, (apparelled in a loose gown of diverse colors, with a golden
chain about her neck, and a light spear in her hand) standing upon a heap
of Turves, the better to be seen (her daughters on each side of her) with a
shrill voice uttered these, or the like words:

It is no new custom for the Britans to make war under the leading of women,
ennobled by their birth and descent; the examples of former times can well
witness the experience thereof. Howbeit at this present, I will disclaim all
titles of dignity, and prerogatives of blood: and what difference soever there
is in our estates, yet shall our fortune, in this action, be indifferent and
common to us both. I shall not need to repeat that, which you all know but too
well; namely, what miseries we have endured under the tyranny of this proud
Nation. You have had the trial both of liberty and bondage, and I doubt not,
but you find now, how much the one is to be preferred before the other; and
howsoever some of you heretofore, for private respects, have inclined to the
Roman governors, as favorers of their usurped soveraigntie: yet I suppose you
will now confess with me, that freedom in a poor estate, is better then
golden fetters. For what abuse can there be named so vile, or indignity so
disgraceful, that has not bin offered us, without respect of degree, age, or
sex? we till our grounds, and sweat for other men, that reap the sweat of our
travells; the wealth that we gather to maintain our selves, and our families,
is by other men wastfully and riotously misspent; we have nothing our own,
but what they leave us, and nothing left us, but labor and vexation; our
bodies and estates being consumed, to satisfy their ambition and covetousnes;
We have not so much as our heads toll-free: so narrowly are we sifted, from the
highest to the lowest. Other subdued Nations are yet by death freed from
bondage; but we, even after death seem to live still in thraldom, while we
are enforced to pay tribute, as well for the dead, as the living. What! are we a
nation so contemptible, that we can serve to no other use, then to be slaves?
or so unhappy, that death it self can not acquit us from being miserable? How
long shall we give way to our own wrongs? Shall we hope for reformation of
these abuses? Nay, we have hoped too long, and by patient bearing of one
injury, we have drawn on another. Why should we not rather seek to redress
them? for if we enter into due consideration of our selves, what are the Romans
more then we? our bodies are as strong as theirs: our numbers greater. We have
agilitie of body, (our women no less then our men) to run, to leap, to swim,
and to perform all warlike exercises; for which (indeed) we are naturally more
fit, then for the spade, plough, or handy-crafts. And how soever the Romans may
seem fortunate by the folly, or weakness of other Nations: yet are they not
comparable unto us, whom Nature has framed to endure hunger, cold, and labor,
and to be content with things necessary only. For to us every herb and
root is meat, each river, and spring yields us drink, while we seek no
further, then to appease hunger, and quench thirst; each tree serves for
shelter against storms in winter, and for shadow against the parching heat of
summer, we need no other beds then the earth, nor covering then the heavens;
whereas they must have their joints suppled with hot baths, sweet ointments,
and soft couches, and their bodies pampered with wine, dainty fare, and all
kind of effeminate niceness and delicacie. These be the properties, wherein
they imitate their master Nero, who has only the shape of a man, being indeed
a woman, or rather, neither man nor woman, but a monster of nature, a singer, a
fiddler, a stage player, a murderer, and one that excels other men as far
in vice, as he does in pre-eminence of degree. Besides all this, the cause of
our war is just, and the Divine powers (that favor justice,) have made our
first attempts prosperous: and me thinks, that the necessity of our case,
were able to make, even Cowards, valiant. Your ancesters could make head
against Julius Caesar, and the Emperors Caligula, and Claudius. The Germans
have lately freed themselves by that memorable overthrow of the Roman Legions,
under the conduct of Quintilius Varus; and shall not we, (who scorn to be
reputed inferior to the Germans in valor) be confident in our own strength,
and boldly adventure? considering that if we prevail, we recover our lost
liberty, if we be forced to retire, we have woods, hills, and marshes for our
refuge, and if we die, we do but sell those lives with honor, which we cannot
possess with safety. For mine own part, you shall find me no less ready to
execute, (when time serves,) then I am now to advise and exhort you: my self
having determined, either to vanquish, or die; If any of you be otherwise
minded, then live, and be slaves still.

With these and the like speeches, she inflamed the hearts that were already
kindled, and persuading the Britans to pursue their enemies, as Dogs and
Woolves do fearful Hares and Foxes, she let slip out of her lap a quick
Hare, at whose running through the camp, the Britans showted, apprehending it
as a matter ominous, and fore-signifying the Romans flight. And thereupon they
cried, that they might be speedily led to the Colonie it self, (as the seat of
their slaverie) which at their first coming they surprised, killing, spoiling,
and consuming all with sword and fire, except the Temple only, into which the
Soldiers fled as a Sanctuary, though it could not long protect them from the
violence of the furious multitude. Petilius Cerealis the Lieutenant of the
Ninth Legion, coming to succor the Garrison, had all his footmen slain, and
himself with a few horse hardly escaped. Catus the Procurator, knowing himself
to be odious to the Britans, (by reason of the extortions he had committed in
his office,) fled secretly into Gallia.

CHAP. IIII.
Suetonius returns with his army out of Anglesey. The Cities of London, and
Verlam, are taken, and spoiled by the Britans. The Romans and Britans make
preparation for a set battle.

SVetonius, upon intelligence of the revolt, returned out of Mona, and led his
army with some difficulty toward London, (a place not known at that time by
the name of a Colonie,) but famous only for concourse of Merchants and
traffic. There he stayed a while, as doubting what course to take: the small
number of his forces, and the ill success of Cerealis making him more wary;
and he supposed it would be a work well worth his labor, if with the loss of
one Town, he could preserve the rest, that were likely to revolt. Whereupon,
furnishing his defective Companies with such able men as were then in the
Town, although the Londoners with tears implored his aid, and desired his
aboade there for their defense: yet he marched forward, leaving behind him all
such, as either by reason of their age, sex, or other infirmities could not
follow, or else, for love of the place, (as being bred and born there) would not
abandon it. The town being thus weakly guarded, was taken by the Britans, and
the people therein put all to the sword. The like calamity befell the
free-towne of An ancient City, with whose ruins saint Albans was built.
Verulamium, by reason that diverse of the Britans finding their own strength,
forsook their forts, and assailed the most notable and wealthy places,
enriching themselves with the spoil of their enemies, whom they hanged, burned,
and crucified, exercising all kinds of cruelty that a mind enraged with desire
of revenge, could devise. They took no prisoners, either to preserve for
ransom, or to exchange, according to the laws of war, but slew both
Citizens and Confederates to the number of about seventy thousand. Suetonius
with the Fourteenth Legion, seconded by the Standard-bearers of the Twentieth,
and some Auxiliaries, made haste to encounter the Britans, and resolved without
further delay, to try the chance of a set battle. Then he pitched in a place
that had a narrow entrance, with a thick wood for a defense behind him, and a
fair wide plain before his Camp. The Legionarie Soldiers were marshalled
together in thick ranks, the light harnessed enclosing them about, and the
horsemen making wings on each side. Poenius Posthumus the Campe-Master of the
Second Legion, was appointed to lead the fore-ward, but he contemptuously
refused the charge.

In the mean time the Britans ranged abroad in great troops, triumphing for
their late good success, and being encouraged by the example of Voadica their
General, were fiercely bent to assail the Roman camp, supposing now, that no
force was able to resist them. And they had brought their wives with them, and
placed them in Wagons about the utmost parts of the Plain, to be the
beholders of their valiant acts, and witnesses of their expected victory.

CHAP. V.
The Oration of Suetonius the Roman General unto his Soldiers. The fight
between the Romans and Britans. The Britans are overthrown. Voadica poysoneth
her self. The death of Poenius Posthumus.

SVetonius being now ready to join battle, though he perceived that his
Soldiers, were not much dismayed with the sight of so great numbers scattered
upon the Plain; yet he supposed it not unnecessary to use some speech to
them, by way of exhortation, and therefore began in this manner:

I can not now use many words to exhort you; the time permits it not, and the
present occasion requires rather deeds then words. Yet let not our small
number discourage you, considering that your ancestors, with a smaller number
have undertaken greater matters; and that, where many Legions have been in the
field, a few Soldiers have carried away the victory; What a glory shall it
be for you then, if with so small a power, you can purchase the praise of a
whole army? There is no fear of Ambush; the Woods guard you behind, and on the
Plain before you lies your enemies Camp, wherein you may behold more women
then men, and the men themselves for the most part, unarmed, and not likely to
endure the points and strokes of our weapons, which they have so often felt to
their smart. It stands you now upon, to approove your selves the same men you
are reputed to be. This is the time, either to recover that you have lost, or,
to loose that which you shall never recover. You fight now, not for honor
only, but for Honor and Life. Remember that you are Romans, whose glory it
is to do, and suffer great things. The fortune of this battle will either give
us peaceable possession of that our forefathers have won, or for ever deprive
us of it; What shall become of you, if you be taken, the woeful experience of
your Countrymen, most miserably massacred before your eyes may sufficiently
testify. Revenge therefore both their wrongs, and your own, and no doubt, but
the gods themselves (who never leave cruelty unpunished) will assist you. It is
better for us to die in this Action, then by yielding, or flying, to outlive
the praise of our own worthiness. But whether we live or die, Britannie shall
be ours; for if we live and recover it, our posterity ever after shall be able
to defend it; and though they should not, yet shall our bones keep continual
possession of it. Take courage therefore, and fear not the loud and vain
showts of a disordered multitude, but boldly give the assault, and keeping your
selves close together, pursue the fight, without thinking of the spoil, till
you have made a full end. For the victory once gotten, al things else will of
themselves fall to your share.

With these, or the like words, the old Soldiers were pricked forward, and
Suetonius perceiving it, gave the signal of battle. The Legions kept the
strait, as a place of defense, till the Britans had spent their Darts: and then
they sallyed out into the Plain, (the Auxiliaries, and the horsemen making
way) and pressed into the thickest troops of the barbarous people, who being
unable to endure the fierceness of the assault, turned their backs, thinking
to save themselves by flight; But by reason their wagons, placed about the
Plain, had hedged in the passages on all sides, few of them escaped. The
residue, as well women as men, were put to the sword, and their dead bodies
(mingled with the carcases of their Horses and Chariots) were heaped one upon
another. The number of the Britans slain in that battle, was reported to be
about fourscore thousand, and of the Romans about four hundred only, and not
many mo wounded in the conflict. This days service was renowned among the
Romans, as comparable to those of ancient times in the free Commonwealth.
Voadica disdaining to fall into her enemies hands, ended her life by poison:
and Poenius Posthumus seeing the good success of the Fourteenth and Twentieth
Legions, (for that by disobaying the General, contrary to the discipline of
war, he had defrauded his own Legion of their part of the glory in the
action) for very grief slew himself.

CHAP. VI.
Suetonius renforceth the Roman Garrisons. Variance between him, and
Classicianus the Procurator. Polycletus is sent by Nero the Emperor to examine
their doings. Suetonius is discharged of the army, which he delivers up to
Turpilianus.

THen Suetonius having gathered together his dispersed troops, certain
Legionarie soldiers and Cohorts of Auxiliaries were sent him out of Germany,
to renforce the Garrisons, and to make an end of the war. Some of the Britans
that either openly resisted, or elsstood doubtfully affected, were put to the
sword, and some that escaped the sword, died of famine for lack of corn, (a
calamity incident to them, as to a people given rather to war then
husbandry:) The rest found means to relieve themselves by the Romans
provision; And though some overtures were now and then made for a treaty of
peace, yet the Britans would not very readily hearken thereto, by reason they
much doubted their safety, as imagining that their guiltiness of the
rebellion, had excluded them from all hope of pardon; and they feared also the
private displeasure of the Lieutenant, who (though otherwise a singular man)
yet seemed to show too much hautie and hard dealing toward them that yielded
themselves, and in some sort, under pretext of the public service, to revenge
his own injuries.

Besides Julius Classicianus (who was sent to succeed Catus) being at variance
with Suetonius, had given out, that a new Lieutenant was coming, and that he
was such a one, as being void of malice, or the pride of a Conqueror, would be
ready to receive into favor all such as would yield themselves. He wrote
Letters also to Rome, signifying to the Senate, that they should look for no
end of the war in Britannie, so long as Suetonius continued the government
there; and that the ill success which he had in the service, was to be
attributed to his own ill carriage of himself; and the good, to the fortune of
the Common weal. Hereupon Nero sent Polycletus a Libertine into Britannie, to
examine, and report the state of the affairs there, and to enterpose his
authority, as a mean to reconcile the Lieutenant, and the procurator, and to
win the Britans to embrace peace. At his landing in the I Will, the Roman
soldiers there seemed to fear and reverence him; and the causes of his
coming were diversely reported at the first. But the Britans derided him; for
(as men being borne free) they knew not till that time, the power of Libertines
(men made free) but rather marvailed, that a Captain, and an army which had
achieved so great an enterprise, could be brought to obey, and yield an
account of their actions to a base bondslave, (as they termed him.)

These things, howsoever they were censured by others: yet they were reported
to Nero in such manner, as the reporters thought might best content him: and
Suetonius, after the loss of some of his shipping, was commanded (the war
being not yet finished) to deliver up the army to Petronius Turpilianus, who
had (but even a little before) given over his Consulship.

CHAP. VII.
Trebellius Maximus succeeds Turpilianus in the government of the Province.
Discord in the army between Trebellius and Celius. The death of Nero the
Emperor, and succession of Galba, Otho, and Vitellius. The valor and fortune
of the Fourteenth Legion.

TVrpilianus was a man of a soft spirit, and being a stranger to the Britans
faults, was the more tractable and ready to remit them; by which means,
having composed the former troubles, he delivered up his charge to Trebellius
Maximus, whose unfitness for action, and want of experience in militare
matters, gave the more boldness to the Britans, that began now to discover the
defects of their Governors, having learned both to flatter and dissemble, in
conforming themselves to the present times, and occasions for their advantage,
and for the most part, yielding themselves to those pleasures, which Security
uses to engender, even in minds well disposed by Nature. For Trebellius,
besides his insufficiency, abused the authority of his place, to enrich
himself by polling the Common soldiers, and Roscius Coelius Lieutenant of the
Twentieth Legion whetted them on against him, as against his ancient enemy; so
that in the end they brake out into heinous terms, the one objecting matter of
crime against the other: Trebellius charged Coelius with factious behavior.
Coelius again Trebellius with beggering the Legions; and the discord betwixt
them grew so far, that Trebellius being despised, as well by the Aids, as
the Legions (both of them sorting themselves to Coelius his side) was in great
fear of his life: the danger whereof he sought to prevent, rather by flying
away, then by executing any exemplarie Justice upon offenders. In the mean
time, the Soldiers neglecting the ancient discipline of war, fell to
mutiny, and all kind of riot, as men that had rather be doing ill, then doing
nothing. And afterward, Trebellius taking again his former place, as it were
by capitulation, seemed to govern only at the discretion of his Soldiers, who
finding his weakness, and want of Judgment to use his authority, took upon
them to do what they listed: and herewith also the Lieutenant himself seemed
contented, as being now given over altogether to a slothful kind of life
(terming it peace and quietnesse^) for which the death of Nero the Emperor,
and the civil discord at that time between Galba, Otho, and Vitellius,
contending for the soveraigntie ministered some color of excuse.

Not long before this time, the Fourteenth Legion (famous for many great
attempts, and growing now more insolent then the rest,) was revoked out of the
I Will, to have been sent to the Streights about the Caspian Sea, though
afterward upon intelligence of the revolt in Gallia, and Spain, (when Julius
Vindex took arms against Nero) it was retained about the City of Rome for a
safeguard to those parts. In the turbulent times that ensued Neroes death, it
took part with Otho against Vitellius, at the battle near Bebriacum, where
Otho was overthrown; and Vitellius after the victory, suspecting the
Soldiers of that Legion, (as knowing their great stomachs, and ill affection
toward him) thought it expedient to join to them the Bands of Hollanders.
Batavian Cohorts, that by reason of the inveterate hatred between them, they
might one oppose the other, and himself in the mean time remain more secure.

CHAP. VIII.
Vectius Bolanus is sent by Vitellius the Emperor, to take charge of the Army
in Britannie. Vespasian succeeds Vitellius in the Empire. The government of
the Province assigned to Petilius Cerealis, who soon after leaves the same to
Julius Frontinus.

VEctius Bolanus, a man not much unlike Trebellius in some respects, was sent
over by Vitellius; during the time of whose Government, the like disorders
continued still in the Camp, saving that Bolanus, by the mildness of his
nature (being not touched otherwise in his reputation) had purchased love, and
good will, in stead of fear and obedience. In his time diverse choice men of
war taken out of the Legions in Britannie, were conducted to Rome by
Hordeonius Fla^cus in aid of Vitellius. But when Vespasian made war for the
Empire, Bolanus refused to send Vitellius any succor, by reason that the
Britans finding the Romans state encumbred with civil dissension, began to
revolt in diverse places of the I Will, and some of them also showed themselves
openly in favor of Vespasian, who had carried himself honorably in
Britannie, when Claudius was there, and seemed now by many ominous predictions,
to be a man specially marked for the Empire.

The death of Vitellius quenching the flame of civil broils among the Romans,
confirmed the possession of the Empire to Vespasian, who showed the care and
respect he had of the I Will of Britannie, by employing great Captains, and good
soldiers there. The Lievtenantship was then assigned to Petilius Cerealis, a
man that had given good proof of his sufficiency in former services. Upon his
first entrance into office, he invaded the Country of the Brigantes (the most
populous state of the whole Province) the greatest part whereof, (after many
bloody battles) was either conquered, or wasted, and the hope of the Britans
greatly abated, whenas Julius Frontinus (whose reputation was nothing impaired
by the fame of his predecessor) took upon him the charge, which he afterward
executed with great commendation, in subduing the strong and warlike Nation of
the Silures, among whom he seemed to fight, not only with men (whose strength
and valor was able to make opposition against his attempts) but also with
Mountains, streights, and places of very difficult access.

CHAP. IX.
Julius Agricola assigned by Vespasian the Emperor to be Lieutenant of the
Army in Britannie, subdueth the Ordovices [the ancient Inhabitants of
North Wales,] and makes a full conquest of the I Will of Anglesey. The carriage
of himself at his first entrance into government.

IN this estate Julius Agricola (having bin trained up for the most part in the
British war) did find the Province at his first coming thither. He crossed
the narrow Seas about the midst of Summer; at which time, as though the season
of the year had bin past to begin a new war, the Roman soldiers attended an
end of their travel, and the Britans a beginning of annoyance to their enemies.
The Ordovices a little before he landed, had almost cut in pieces a troop of
horsemen that lay upon their borders. Upon which attempt, the country being
awaked, as desirous of war, allowed the example, and some stayed to see how
the new Lieutenant would take it. Agricola in the mean time, although the
summer was spent, and the Bands lay dispersed in the Province (his soldiers
having fully presumed of rest for that year, and diverse officers of the army
being of opinion, that it were better to keep, and assure the places suspected,
then to make any new attempt:) yet (all this notwithstanding) he resolved
directly to encounter the danger; and gathering together the Ensigns of the
Legions, and some few Auxiliaries (because the Ordovices, durst not descend
into indifferent ground) himself first of all, (to give others like courage)
marched up to begin the assault. And having in that conflict destroyed almost
the whole Nation of the Ordovices, and knowing right well, that Fame must with
Instance be followed, (for as the first should fall out, so the rest would
succeed:) he deliberated to conquer the Island of Mona; from the possession
whereof, Paulinus had been formerly revoked by the general rebellion of
Britannie: But ships being then wanting (as in an enterprise not intended
before) the policy and resolutenesse of the Captain, devised a speedy
passage. For he commanded the most choice of the Aids (to whom all the shallows
were known, and who (after the use of their Country) were able to swim in
their armor if need were) to lay aside their carriage, and putting over at
once, suddenly to invade it. Which thing so amazed the Inhabitants (who
supposed that the Romans would have stayed a certain time for ships, and such
like provision by Sea,) that now believing, nothing could be hard or invincible
to men, which came so minded to make war, they humbly entreated for peace,
and yielded the Island. Thus Agricola at his first entrance into office (which
time others used to consume in vain oftentation, or ambitious seeking of
Ceremonies) entering withal into labors and dangers, became famous indeed, and
of great reputation. Howbeit he abused not the prosperous proceeding of his
affairs, to vanity, or braving in speeches; for he esteemed it an Action not
worthy the name of a Conquest, to keep in order, only persons subdued before:
neither decked he with Laurel his letters of advertisement, but by stopping and
suppressing the fame of his doings, he greatly augmented it, when men began to
discourse upon what great presumptions offuture success, he should make so
light an account of so great actions, already performed.

CHAP. X.
Agricola reformeth abuses in the Province. His courage, industry, and wisdom
set forth as commendable qualities in a General. The death of Vespasian the
Emperor, whom Titus his son succeeds in the Empire.

AS touching the civil government, Agricola knowing how the province stood
affected, and being taught also by experience of others, that arms avail
little to settle a new conquered state, (if violence and wrongs be permitted)
determined at the first to cut off all causes of war and rebellion. And
beginning at home, he first of all reformed his own house, (a point of more
hardness to some men, then to govern a Province.) He committed no manner of
public affairs to bondsman or Libertine. He received no soldier near his
person, upon private affection of partial suitors, nor upon commendation, or
entreaty of Centurions, but elected the best, and most serviceable. He would
look narrowly into all things, yet not exact all things to the utmost: light
faults he would pardon, and the great severely correct, not always punishing
offenders, but often times satisfied with repentance, choosing rather, not to
prefer to office, such as were likely to offend, then after the offense, to
condemn them. The augmentation of Tribute and corn, he tempered, with equal
dividing of burdens, cutting away those petie extortions, which grieved the
Britans more then the tribute it self. For the poor people, in former times
were constrained, in a mockery, to wait at the Barn doors, which were locked
against them, and first to buy corn, and after sell at a low price. Several
ways also, and far distant places had been assigned them by the Purveyors
appointments, for carrying provisions from the nearest standing camps, to
those which were far off, and out of the way, (petty officers in the mean
time, making a gain thereof, by sparing some, and charging others at their
pleasure) so as that which lay open to all, and at hand, was turned only to
the private profit of a few. By repressing these abuses in his first year, a
good opinion was conceived of the peace, which either by the negligence, or
partiality of former Lievtenants had been no less feared, then war. In
times of service he was very painful, and often times more adventurous in his
own person, then was fit for a General; for himself would always appoint
his ground for pitching the camp, and also be the first man in prooving the
Thickets, Bogges, or any other places of danger, not suffering any corners or
secret harbors unsearched, but wasting and spoiling every where with sudden
incursions and assaults. Howbeit, when by these means he had terrified the
Britans, then would he again spare and forbear, as hoping thereby to allure
them to peace; whereupon many Cities (which before that time stood upon terms
of equality) gave hostages, and meekly submitted themselves, receiving
garrisons, and permitting the Romans to fortify a work performed, with such
foresight and judgment, as nothing was ever attempted against them, while he
continued in office, whereas before that time, no new fortified place in all
Britannie escaped vnassailed. Thus far had Agricola proceeded, when the news
came that Vespasian was dead, and Titus his son invested in the Empire.

CHAH. XI.
Agricolaes policy to plant civilitie among the Britans. He leads his army
without resistance unto Edenbourgh Frith in Scotland.

THe Winter ensuing was spent in a most profitable and politic devise. For,
whereas the Britans were rude, and dispersed, and therefore prone upon every
occasion to war, Agricola, that he might induce them by pleasures to
quietness and rest, exhorted them in private, and commanded his Soldiers to
help them to build Temples, Houses, and Places of public resort, commending
such as were forward therein, and checking the slow and idle persons, seeming
thereby, to impose a kind of necessity upon them, while every man contended
to gain the Lievtenants good will. Moreover the Noble-mens sons, he took
and caused to be instructed in the Liberal Sciences, preferring the wits of
the Britans, before those of the students in Gallia; the Britans also
themselves being now curious to attain the eloquence of the Roman language,
whereas they lately rejected the speech. After that, the Roman Attire grew to
be in account, and the Gown much used among them: and so by little and little,
they proceeded to those common provocations of vices, namely sumptuous
Galleries, hot Baths, and exquisite banquetings; which things the ignorant
people termed civilitie, though it were in deed a badge of their bondage.

In the third year of his Government, he discovered new Countries, wasting all
before him, till he came to the firth of The river T^eed.
Taus. Which thing so terrified the Northern Britans, that although the Roman
Army had bin toyled and wearied with many sharp conflicts, yet they durst
not assail it; whereby the Romans had the more leisure to encampe themselves,
and to fortify: wherein Agricola was either so skillful, or so fortunate, that
no Castle planted by him, was either forced by strength, or upon Conditions
surrendered, or (as not defencible) forsaken. In all these Actions Agricola
never sought to draw to himself the glory of any exploit done by another, but
were he Centurion, or of other degree that had achieved it, he would
faithfully witness the fact, and yield him always his due commendation.

The fourth year of his office was spent in viewing and ordering that, which
he had overrun: and if the valiant minds of his Soldiers, and the glory of
the Roman name could have so permitted it, there should have been no need to
have sought other limits of Britannie, then were at that time discovered. For
The Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland.
Glota, and Edenborough Firth.
Bodotria, two arms of the two contrary Seas, shooting mightily into the
land, are only divided asunder by a narrow partition of ground, which passage
was guarded and fortifyed with Garrisons and Castles, so that the Romans were
now absolute Lords of all on this side, having cast their enemies, as it were
into an other Island.

CHAP. XII.
What opinion the Romans had of the conquest of Ireland. Agricola sets out a
Navy to discover by Sea the utmost limits of the Island, and marches himself
by land into the Country of the Caledonians, [the ancient Inhabitants of the
North part of Scotland.] The Roman Camp is assailed, and delivered from danger
by the coming in of Agricola.

THe fifth year of the war, Agricola subdued with many and prosperous
conflicts, strange nations, before that time unknown, and furnished with
forces that part of Britannie, which lies against Ireland: And this he did,
more for hope of advantage, then fear of danger. For if Ireland might have
been won, (lying (as it does) between Britannie and Spain, and commodious
also for Gallia) it would aptly have united to the use and profit one of the
other, those strongest members of the Empire. The Nature and fashions of the
Irish, did not then much differ from the British, but the Ports and Haven
Towns in Ireland were more known and frequented, by reason of greater resort
thither of Merchants. Agricola having received a Prince of that Country,
(driven thence by civil dissension) did under color of courtesy and
friendship retain him; till occasion should serve to make use of him. It was
afterward reported, that with one Legion, and some few Aids, Ireland might
then have been won and possessed, and that it would have been also a mean
to have kept Britannie in obedience, if the Roman forces had been planted each
where, and liberty (as it were) clean banished out of sight.

Now in the Summer following, because a General rising in arms of the further
Nations beyond Bodotria, was feared, (the passages being all beset with the
power of the barbarous people,) he manned a fleet to search the Creekes and
harbors of the ample region beyond it, backing them first of all with a navy,
and with a goodly show bringing war, both by land and sea. And ofttimes it
chanced that the horsemen, and footmen, and the Sea-souldier met, and made merry
in the same camp, each man extolling his own prowess and adventures, and
making their vaunts and comparisons souldier-like, some of the woods and high
mountains that they had passed: others of dangers of Rocks and Tempests that
they had endured: the one, of the land and the enemy defeated: the other, of
the Ocean assayed, and subdued. The Britans, (as by the Prisoners it was
understood) were much amazed at the sight of the Navy, supposing that (the
secrets of their Sea, being now disclosed) there remained no refuge for them,
if they were overcome. Whereupon the Caledonians, arming with great
preparation, and greater Fame, (as the manner is of matters unknown) began to
assail their enemies Castles; and some of the Roman Captains (which would
seem to be wise, being (indeed) but Cowards) counseled the General to retire
on this side Bodotria, and rather to depart of his own accord, then to be
driven back with shame. In the mean season Agricola had knowledge, that the
Britans meant to divide themselves, and to give the onset in several
companies: Whereupon lest he should be enclosed about, and intrapped, either by
their multitude, or by their skill in the Passages, he marched also with his
army divided in three parts: which when it was known to the Caledonians, they
changed advise on the sudden, and uniting their forces together, jointly
assaulted, by night, the Ninth Legion, as being of weakest resistance: and
having slain the watch, (partly asleep, and partly amazed with fear) they
broke into the camp, and were fighting within the trenches, when Agricola
having understood by spies, what way the Britans had taken, and following their
footsteps, commanded the lightest horsemen, and footmen to play upon their
backs, and to maintain the skirmish. When the day drew near, the glittering
of the Ensigns dazeled the eyes of the Britans, who being daunted with fear
of danger on each side, began to draw back: and the Romans, like men that were
now out of peril of their lives, did fight more cheerfully for their honor,
freshly assailing the Britans, and driving them to their own gates, where in
the very straits the Conflict was sharp and cruel, til in the end the
Britans were forced to fly, whilst the Roman forces severally pursued them,
contending with a kind of emulation, the one to have helped the other, and the
other to seem to have needed no help. Upon the success of this battle, the
Roman Soldiers presuming, that to their power al things were easy, and open,
cried to the General to lead them into Caledonia, that with a course of
continual Conquests, they might find out the utmost limits of Britannie. Now
such as before the battle were so wa^ie and wise in adventuring, waxed
forward enough after the event, and grew to speak gloriously of themselves,
[such is the hard condition of war; if aught fall out well, all challenge a
part: misfortunes commonly are imputed to one:] Contrariwise the Britans
(presupposing, that not true Valor, but the cunning of the General, by using
the occasion, had carried away the victory,) abated not much their wonted
courage, but armed their youth, transported their children and wives into
places of safety, and sought by assemblies, and religious rites, to establish
an association of the Cities together. And so for that year, both parties as
(...) departed incensed away.

CHAP. XIII.
The Northern Britans with common consent arm themselves to repulse the
Romans. The Oration of Galgacus the chief of their Leaders.

IN the beginning of the next summer, Agricola sending his Navy before, (which
by spoiling in sundry places, should induce a greater, and more uncertain
terror,) followed himself with his army by land, having drawn to his party
some of the valiantest Britans (whom by long experience in peace, he had found
most faithful) and so armed at the Mount Grantz-ba^e in Scotland.
Grampius, where the Britans had lodged themselves before. For they were not
altogether dejected with the unfortunate event of former battle, but now, as
men prepared for all chances, they attended nothing else but revenge, death, or
servitude; and being taught at the length, that common danger must be repelled
with mutual concord) by leagues and ambassages they had assembled the power of
all the Cities together, in number above thirty thousand armed men (the view
being taken) besides a great company of youth (which daily flocked to them)
and lusty old men renowned in war, and bearing the badges due to their
honor; at what time Galgacus, for Virtue and Birth, the principal man of all
the Leaders, seeing the multitude hotly demand the battle, is said to have
used this, or the like speech.

When I consider the cause of this war, and out present necessity, I have
reason (me seems) to presume that this day, and this our general agreement,
will give a happy beginning to the freedom of the whole Island. For we have al
hitherto lived in liberty, and now no land remains beyond us: no sea for our
safety: the Roman Navy (as you see) surveying and invironing our coasts; so
that combat and arms which men of virtue desire for honor, the dastard must
also use for his security. The former battles which have with diverse events
bin fought with the Romans, had their refuge and hope resting in our hands. For
we the flower of the British Nobility, and seated in the furthest part of
th'ile, did never yet see the borders of those countries, which were brought
under servile subjection (our eyes being still kept unpolluted, and free from
al contagion of tyranny.) Beyond us is no land: besides us none are free: us
only hitherto, this corner and secret harbor has defended; You see the
uttermost part of the land is laid open, and things the less they have bin
within knowledge, the greater is the glory to atchive them. But what nation is
there now beyond us? what else but water and rocks? and the Romans Lords of all
within the land, whose intolerable pride in vain shall you seek to avoid by
service and humble behavior. They are the robbers of the world, that having now
left no land to be spoiled, search also the sea. If the enemy be rich, they
seek to win wealth: if poor, they are content to gain glory to themselves, whom
neither the East nor West can satisfy, as being the only men of al memory,
that seek out al places, be they wealthy, or poor, with like greedy affection.
To take away by main force, to kill and spoil, falsely they term Empire and
Government, when all is waste as a wilderness, that they call peace. His
children and blood each man holds by nature most dear, and yet even they are
pressed for Soldiers, and carried away to be slaves, we know not where. Our
sisters and wives, though they be not violently forced, as in open hostility,
yet are they under the color and title of friends and guests, shamefully
abused. Our goods and substance they daily draw from us, rewarding us only
with stripes and indignities. Slaves which are borne to bondage, are sold but
once, and after are fed at their owners expenses: But Britannie daily buieth,
daily feeds, and is at charges with her own bondage. And as in a private
retinue, the fresh man and last commer is scoffed at by his fellow servants: so
in this old servitude of the whole world, they seek only the destruction of
us, as being the latest attempted, and of al others, in their opinion, the most
vile. We have no fields to manure, no mines to be dug, no ports to trad^ in;
and to what purpose then should they keep us alive, considering that the
manhood, and fierce courage of the subject does not much please the jelous
Sovereign? and this corner (being so secret and out of the way) the more
security it yields to us, the greater suspicion it works in them. Seeing
therefore all hope of pardon is past, it behooveth you at length to show courage
in defending and maintaining both your safety and honor. The Icenians led by a
woman, fired the Roman Colonie, forced the castles, and had the prosecution of
the war bin answerable to so luckie a beginning, the Southern Britans might
then with ease have shaken off the yoke, and prevented our peril. We, as yet,
never touched, never subdued, but borne to be free, not slaves to the Romans:
we (I say) are now to make proof of our valor, and to show in this encounter,
what manner of men Caledonia has reserved in store for her self. Do you think
that the Romans be as valiant in war as they are wanton in peace? No, you are
deceived. For they are grown famous, not by their own virtue, but by our
jarres and discord, while they make use of their enemies faults, to the glory
of their own army, composed of most diverse nations; and therefore, as by
present prosperity it is holden together: so doubtless (if fortune frown on
that side) it will soon be dissolved: unless you suppose the Gauls and
Germans, and (to our shame be it spoken) many of ou^ own nation (which now
lend their lives to establish a foreign usurper) to be led with any true hearted
and faithful affection. No, it is rather with terror and distrust, (weak
workers of love:) which if you remove, then those which have made an end to
fear, will soon begin to hate. All things that may encourage, and give hope of
victory, are now for us. The Romans have no wives to harten them on, if they
faint; no parents to vpbraid them, if they fly. Most of them have no Country
at all, or, if they have, it is some other men's. They stand like a sort of
fearful persons trembling, and gazing at the strangeness of the heaven it
self, at the sea, and the woods. And now the heavens (favoring our cause) have
delivered them, mewed up (as it were) and fettered into our hands. Be not
terrified, or dismayed with the vain show and glittering of their gold and
silver, which of themselves do neither offend, nor defend. And think, that
even amongst our enemies, we shall find some on our side, when the Britans shall
acknowledge their own cause, the Gauls remember their old freedom, and the
rest of the Germans forsake them, as of late the Vsipians did. What then should
we fear? The castles are empty, the Colonies peopled with aged and impotent
persons: the free cities discontented, and distract with factions, whilst they
which are under, obey with ill will, and they which do govern, rule against
right. Here is the Roman General, and the army: there Tributes and Mines,
with other miseries, inseparably following such as live under subjection of
others; which, whether we are to endure for ever, or speedily to revenge, it
lies this day in this field to determine. Wherefore being now to join
battle, bear in mind, I beseech you, both your ancestors (which lived in the
happy estate of liberty) and your successors, who, (if you fail in this
enterprise) shall live hereafter in perpetual servitude. This speech
(delivered with great vehemency of voice and action) was cheerfully received
by the Britans with a song (after their barbarous fashion) accompanied with
confused cries, and acclamations.

CHAP. XIIII.
The Romans prepare themselves to fight. The Oration of Agricola the General
unto his Soldiers.

AS the Roman Cohorts drew together, and discovered themselves, while some of
the boldest pressed forward, the rest put themselves in array, and Agricola
(albeit his soldiers were glad of that day) and could scarce with words have
bin withheld; yet supposing it fit to say somewhat, he encouraged them in
this wise:

Fellow Soldiers, and Companions in Arms, your faithful diligence and
service, these eight years, so painfully performed, by the virtue and fortune
of the Roman Empire, has at length conquered Britannie. In so many journies,
so many battles we were of necessity to show our selves, either valiant
against the enemy, or patient and laborious, above, and against Nature it
self. In all which exploits, we have both of us so carried our selves
hitherto, as neither I desired better Soldiers, nor you other Captain. We
have exceeded the limits, I, of my predecessors, and you likewise of yours. The
end of Britannie is now found, not by fame and report, but we are with our
arms and pavillions, really invested thereof. Britannie is found, and subdued.
In your marching heretofore, when the passage of Bogges, Mountains, or Rivers
troubled and tired you, how often have I heard the valiant Soldier say; When
will the Enemy present himself? When shall we fight? Lo, now they are put
out of their holes, and here they are come. Lo now your wish: Lo here the
place for trial of your virtue, and all things likely to follow, in a good and
easy course, if you win: contrariwise all against you, if you loose. For, as
to have gone so much ground, escaped the woods and Bogs, and passed over so
many arms of the sea, are honorable testimonies of your forwardness: so, if
we fly, the advantages we have had, will become our greatest disadvantage. For
we are not so skillful in the Country: we have not the like store of
provision: we have only hands and weapons, wherein our hopes, our fortune, and
all things else are included. For mine own part, I have been long since
resolved, that to show our backs, is dishonorable, both for Soldier and
General, and therefore a commendable death is better then life with reproach,
(Surety and Honor commonly dwelling together;) Howbeit, if aught should
mis-happen in this enterprise, yet this will be a glory for us, to have dyed
even in the uttermost end of the world, and of Nature. If new Nations and
Soldiers unknown, were in the field, I would, by the example of other Armies,
encourage you: But now I require you, only to recount your own victorious
exploits, and to ask counsel of your own eyes. These are the same men, which
the last year assailed one Legion by stealth in the night, and were suddenly,
and (in a manner) by the blasts of your mouths, overthrown. These, of all the
other Britans, have been the most nimble in running away, and by that means,
have escaped the longest alive. For, as in forests and woods, the strongest
beasts are chased away by maine force, and the cowardly and fearful scared
only by the noise of the Hunters: so, the most valiant of the British nation,
we have already dispatched; the rascal heird of dastardly cowards only
remains. And lo, we have now at length found them, not as intending to stay
and make head against us, but as last overtaken, and by extreme passion of
fear, standing like stocks, and presenting occasion to us in this place, of a
worthy and memorable victory. Now therefore, make a short work of our long
warfare, and to almost fifty years travail, let this day impose a glorious
end. Let each of you show his valor, and approove to your Country, that this
army of ours could never justly be charged, either with protracting the war,
for fear, or upon false pretenses, for not accomplishing the Conquest.

CHAP. XV.
Agricola marshalleth his forces. The battle between the Romans and the
Northern Britans. Part of the British Army is defeated.

AS Agricola was yet speaking, the Soldiers gave great tokens of their fervent
desire to fight, and when he had ended his speech, they joyfully applauded it,
running straitwaies to their weapons, and rushing furiously forward: which the
Roman General perceiving, forthwith ordered his army in this manner. With the
Auxiliarie footmen, he fortifyed the middle battle. The horsemen he placed in
wings on both sides. The Legions he commanded to stand behind, before the
trench of the Camp, to the greater glory of the victory, if it were obtained,
without Roman blood, or otherwise for assistance, if the foreward should be
distressed. The Britans were marshalled on the higher ground fitly for show, to
terrify their enemies: the first troop standing on the plain, the rest on the
ascent of the hill, rising up as it were by degrees, one over another: the
middle of the field was filled with Chariots and horsemen, clattering and
running round about. Then Agricola finding them to exceed him in number, and
fearing lest he should be assailed on the front and flanks, both at one
instant, thought it best to display his army in length, and although by that
means the battle would become disproportionably long, and many advised him to
take in the Legions: yet he confidently rejected the counsel, and leaving his
horse, avanced himself before the Ensigns on foot. In the first encounter
before they joined, both sides discharged, and threw their darts. The Britans
employing both Art and Valor, with their great swords and little targets,
defended themselves, and wounded their enemies, till Agricola espying his
vantage, appointed three Companies of Hollanders
Batavian Cohorts, and two of the The ancient inhabitants of the Territory of
Liege, in the Low Countries.
Tungrians, to press forward, and to bring the matter to handy strokes, and
dint of sword; which they, by reason of their long service, were able readily
to perform, to the prejudice of the other side, in regard of their little
bucklers, and huge swords. For, the swords of the Britans being weighty, and
blunt pointed, were no way fit, either for the close, or open fight. Now, as
the Batavians began to strike them on the faces with the pikes of their
bucklers, and (having over-borne such as resisted) to march up to the
mountains: the rest of the Cohorts (gathering courage upon emulation)
violently beat down all about them, and running forward, left some of the
Britans half dead, some wholly untouched, for haste, and desire to have part
of the glory in winning the field. In the mean time, both the Chariots of the
Britans, mingled themselves with their enemies battle of footmen, and also
their troops of horsemen, (albeit they had lately terrifyed others:) yet now
themselves (beginning to fly) were distressed by the vn-evennesse of the
ground, and the thick ranks of their enemies, who continued the fight, till
the Britans, by maine weight of their own horses and Chariots, were borne
down one upon an other; the masterlesse horses affrighted, running up and
down with the Chariots, and many times over-bearing their friends, which
either met them, or thwarted their way.

CHAP. XVI.
The other part of the British Army is overthrown. The Romans pursuing the
Britans through the woods) in danger to have been intrapped. The lamentable
estate of the Britans.

NOw the Britans (which stood aloof from the battle, upon the top of the
hills, and did at the first (in a manner) disdain the small number of their
enemies) began to come down by little and little, and sought to fetch a
compass about the backs of the Romans, which were then in train of winning
the field. But Agricola suspecting as much, opposed them with certain wings of
horsemen, purposely retained about him for sudden dispatches, upon all
chances, and repulsed them as fiercely, as they ran to assail. So the counsel
of the Britans turning to their own hurt, the Roman wings were commanded to
forsake the battle, and follow the flight. Then were there pitiful
spectacles to be seen; pursuing: wounding: taking prisoners: and then killing
such as were taken, as soon as others came in the way. Then whole Regiments of
the Britans, (though armed, and more in number) turned their backs to the fewer:
others unarmed sought their own death, offering themselves voluntarily to the
slaughter. The fields every where were imbrued with blood: Every where weapons
lay scattered: wounded bodies: mangled limbs: some slain outright: some half
dead: some yielding up the ghost: and yet, even at the last gasp, seeming by
their countenances to discover both anger and valor. Such of the Britans, as
in flying, recovered the woods, joined themselves together again, and
intrapped unawares, some of the Roman Soldiers, that unadvisedly followed, not
knowing the Country; And if Agricola had not, by his presence and direction
assisted at need, setting about them his most expert footmen, (as it were in
form of a Toil) and commanding some of his horsemen to leave their horses,
(where the passage was narrow) and others to enter single, on horseback, where
the wood was thin, doubtless the Romans had taken a blow, by their over much
boldness. But after that the Britans saw them again in good array, and
orderly following the chase, they fled, (not in troops as before, when they
attended each other, but utterly disbanded, shunning all compapany) toward the
desert and far distant places. The darkness of the night, and satiety of
blood, made an end of the chase. Of the Britans were then slain about ten
thousand: of the Romans, three hundred and forty; amongst whom, the chief man
of note was Aulus Atticus, the Captain of a Cohort, who upon a youthful
heat, and through the fierceness of his horse, was carried into the midst of
his enemies. That night the winners refreshed themselves, taking pleasure in
talking of the victory, and dividing the spoil. But the Britans being utterly
discouraged, crying, and howling, (both men and women together) took, and drew
with them their wounded persons: calling the not wounded: forsaking their own
houses, and in despite, setting them on fire: then seeking holes abroad to
lurk in, and having found them, straitwaies again forsaking them: sometimes
communicating Counsels together, and conceiving some little hope: and then by
and by dejected and desperate: sometimes moved with pity at the sight of
their kinsfolks and friends, and sometimes stirred with rage and envy, in
thinking and speaking of their enemies, and (which was most lamentable) some of
them, by way of compassion and mercy, killing their own children and wives.

CHAP. XVII.
The Britans are dispersed, and unable to renew the war. Agricola commands
the Admiral of his Fleet to sail about Britannie. He planteth Garrisons upon
the Northern Borders, between the two arms of the Sea. Domitian the
Emperor, being advertised of his fortunate success in the British war, is
tormented with envy and jealousy. Agricola yields up the Province to
Salustius Lucullus.

THe day following did more plainly discover the greatness of the victory, by
the calamity of the vanquished. Desolation and silence every where: the smoke
of the houses fired, appeared a far off: no sallies out of the woods: no
stirring in the mountains: no man to make resistance, or to meet with the
Roman spies, who being sent abroad into all quarters, found by the print of the
Britans footesteps, that their flight was uncertain, and that they were no
where in companies together, but scattered in diverse places, and altogether
unable to make any new attempt upon the sudden. Wherefore Agricola, the summer
being now spent in this journey, and the time past for employment elsewhere,
brought his army into the borders of the The ancient inhabitants of Eskdale in
Scotland, (as it is conjectured.)
Horrestians Country, where having received hostages of the inhabitants, he
commanded the Admiral of his Navy, (being furnished with Soldiers, and
sufficient strength for that purpose) to sail about Britannie, whither the
fame and terror of the Roman name, was already gone before. Then he planted
Garrisons upon the borders between Glota and Bodotria, and disposed of his
footmen and horsemen in the wintering places within the Province.

Thus, after many conflicts, about the space of one hundred thirty six years
from Julius Caesar's first entrance, the utmost limits of Britannie, and the
Isles of the Orchades lying on the North side of it, were by the valor and
industry of Julius Agricola, first discovered, and made known to the Romans:
and the South part of the I Will, in the fourth year of the reign of Domitian,
(being in the year of our Redemption 86.) reduced into a full Province, the
government whereof, was peculiar to the Roman Emperors themselves, and not at
the disposition of the Senate.

This state of affairs here, Agricola signified by letters (without any
amplifying terms) to Domitian, (the successor of Titus, his brother in the
Empire) who after his manner, with a cheerful countenance, and grieved heart,
received the news, being inwardly pricked with anger and disdain, to think,
that his late counterfeit Triumph of Germany (wherein a show was made of
slaves, boght for money, attired like captives of that Country,) was had in
derision, and justly scorned abroad; whereas now a true and great victory (so
many thousands of enemies being slain) was current in every man's mouth;
Besides, he esteemed it as a most perilous point in a State, that a private
man's name should be exalted above the name of a Prince; and he supposed, that
he had in vain suppressed the study of Oratory, and all other politic Arts,
if he should in military glory, be excelled by another; for matters of other
kinds (as he supposed) might more easily be passed over: but to be a good
Commander of an Army, was to be above a private estate, (that being a virtue
peculiar for a Prince.) Domitian being tormented with these and the like
conceits, and musing much in his closet alone, (which was commonly noted, as a
sign of some mischief in working) thought it best for the present, to cloak
and dissemble his malice, till the heat of Agricolaes glory, and the love of
his soldiers were somewhat abated (for as yet Agricola remained in office.)
Wherefore he commanded, that all the honors of Triumphall ornaments, the image
Triumphall, and what else was usually bestowed in lieu of Triumph, should in
most ample and honorable terms, be awarded him in Senate: And then sending a
successor, he caused a bruit to be spread, that the Province of Syria, (which
was then void, and specially reserved for men of great quality) should be
assigned to Agricola. The common opinion was, that Domitian, sending one of his
most secret and trustrie servants unto him, sent withal, the commission of
Lievtenancie for Syria, with private instructions, that if Agricola, at the
time of his coming should be still in Britannie, then it should be delivered:
if otherwise, it should be kept back; and that the same man meeting Agricola
as he crossed the seas, without speaking to him, or delivering his message,
returned again to Domitian. Whether this were true, or fained upon a probable
surmise, as agreeable to the Princes disposition, it could not directly be
affirmd; but in the mean season, Agricola had yielded up the Province in good
and peaceable estate unto Cneus Trebellius, or rather (as some writers report)
to Salustius Lucullus.

CHAP. XVIII.
Agricola returns to Rome, and is admitted to the presence of Domitian the
Emperor. He betaketh himself to a retired life. He is poisoned. Salustius
Lucullus his successor in the Government of the Province, protecteth Arviragus
the British Prince. He is put to death by the commandment of Domitian.

AGricola, lest his coming to Rome should have bin noted, by reason of the
multitude, of people, which would have gone out to see, and meet him, did
warily cut off the occasion of that courtesy, entering the City by night; and
by night, (as he was commanded) came to the palace, where being admitted to
the Princes presence, and received with a short salutation, and no further
speech, he sorted himself with other Gentlemen of his rank, carrying himself
ever after very temperately and warily in all his actions, as knowing the
present state of those times, and the dangerous inclination of the Emperor
himself, who being (as all other Princes are commonly) more fearful and
jealous of the good, then the bad, envied in him, those virtues, and that
honorable reputation, whereof himself was not capable; Yet, as good deserts
cannot be hid, (true worthiness shining even in darkness it self:) so the
retired life which Agricola led, did nothing diminish his glory, but rather,
like water sprinkled upon a burning fire, increased, and continued the heat
thereof. Diverse times was he accused in his absence (which ministered to his
ill willers opportunity of working his disgrace,) and as often in abse^ce was
he acquitted, the opinion only of his good deserts, and no matter of crime
giving the occasion, while such as highly commended him to the Emperor,
(seeming his friends, but being (indeed) the most pestilent kind of enemies)
procured underhand his peril and ruin in the end. Howbeit, the ill success
of the Roman armies in diverse Provinces at that time, serving as a foil to
set out his honorable actions, drew him perforce into glory: and Domitian
made pretenses of his purpose to employ him, thinking thereby to satisfy the
people, who then complained of the want of good Leaders. But Virtue, that never
continues long time in prosperous estate, (as being the common object of
envy,) hastened the death of Agricola, who (as the constant fame went,) was
made away by poison, and that not without the Emperors knowledge, and consent.
These things concerning Agricolaes government in Britannie, I have set down
particularly, as they are reported by Cornelius Tacitus, who writ the story of
his life, which remains to the world, as a perpetual monument of the doings
of the one, and the writings of the other.

Salustius Lucullus succeeding Agricola, left little memory of himself, by
doing any thing here, either for that no occasion was then offered to show
himself in action, or else, for that the fame of so worthy a predecessor
blemished his reputation. For having held the office but a short time, he was
by commandment of Domitian put to death, for suffering certain Spears of
new fashion, to be called by his own name.

About this time Arviragus a Britan by birth, and education, did govern (as
King) part of the I Will of Britannie, the Romans accounting it a point of policy
to permit the Britans sometimes to be ruled by Princes of their own Nation,
whose aid and counsel, they might use (upon occasions) to the pacifying of
rebellions, and the establishing of their own greatness; For the common
people, (whose affection does often times sway the fortunes of great Princes) are
much more easily brought under the obedience of their own Countrymen, then of
strangers.

The end of the second Book of the first Part of the History of Great
Britannie.
The succession of the Roman Emperors, from Nerva Cocceius unto Honorius, in
whose time the Romans gave over the government of Britannie.
13 Nerva Cocceius, reigned one year, and four Months. 14 Vlpius Trajanus, (
a Spaniard) nineteen years, and six months. 15 Aelius Adrianus, twenty
years. 16 Antoninus Pius, twenty three years. 17 M. Aurel: Antoninus
Philosophus, nineteen years. L: Verus, his Colleague in the Empire. 18 Aurel.
Commodus, ( the son of Antoninus Philosophus) thirteen years. 19 Aelius
Pertinax, six months. 20 Didius Iulianus, seven months. 21 Septimius Severus
Brit: eighteen years. Pessenius Niger, Usurpers. Clodius Albinus. 22 Anton:
Bassianus Caracalla Brit: ( the eldest son of Sept: Severus) six years.
Geta, Caesar Brit. ( the younger son of Sept. Severus.) 23 Opilius Macrinus,
one year, and two months. 24 Varius Heliogabalus ( the base son of Caracalla
4. year. 25 Alexander Severus ( a kinsman of Heliogab.) 13. year. 26 Iul:
Maximinus, three years. Caesar's elected.
Balbinus, Pupienus,
27 Gordianus, ( the father, with his two sons, and his Nephew) six years.
C. Valens Hostilianus Caesar.
28 Philippus the Arabian, five years. 29 Decius Trajanus, two years. 30
Vibius Pallus Hostilianus ( with his son Volusianus) two years. 31 Aemilius
( of Mauritania) three months. 32 Licinius Valerianus, fifteen years. 33
Gallienus ( the son of Valerianus) nine years. Valerianus ( the brother of
Gallienus Caesar.) Cassus Labienus Posthumus, Caes. 34 Flavius Claudius, two
years. 35 Aurelius Quintillus ( the brother of Claudius. 17. days. 36
Valerius Aurelianus, five years, and six months. 37 Tacitus, six months. 38
Annius Florianus ( the brother of Tacitus) sixty days. 39 Valerius Probus,
six years, and four months. 40 Carus Narbonensis, two years. Caesar's, the
sons of Carus.
Numerianus, Carinus,
41 Dioclesianus, twenty years. Maximianus Herculeius Caesar. 42 Constantius
Chlorus, four years. 43 Galerius Maximus, eleven years. Caesar's.
Severus, Maximianus,
44 Maxentius, ( the son of Maximian) six years. 45 Licinius, fourteen
years. 46 Constantinus Magnus, thirty years. Magnentius Usurper. The three
sons of Constantine the Great.
Constantinus, Constans,

47 Costantius, 24. years, 48 Iulianus Apostata, one year, six months. 49
Iovinianus, eight months. 50 Valentinianus, twelve years. Valens ( his
brother) Caesar.
51 Gratianus, six years. Valentinianus, Caesar. Theodosius, Caesar.
52 Theodosius, three years. 53 Arcadius, thirteen years. 54 Honorius
twenty eight years.
Lievtenants in Britannie from Nerva Cocceius his entrance into the Government
of the Empire, until the reign of Honorius the Emperor.
Lievtenants under the Emperors Nerva and Traianus.
There is no mention of any Lievtenants in Britannie, during the time of their
government.
Lievetenants under Adrian: Brit.
Julius Severus. Priscus Licinius.
Lievtenants under Antoninus Pius.
Lollius Vrbicus. Brit.
Lievtenants under Antoninus Philosophus.
Calphurnius Agricola.
Lievtenants under Commodus.
Vlpius Marcellus. Helvius Pertinax. Clodius Albinus. Iunius Severus.
Lievtenants under Pertinax.
Clodius Albinus.
Lievtenants under Did: Iulianus.
Clodius Albinus.
Lievtenants under Sept. Severus Brit.
Heraclianus. Virius Lupus.
From the time of Bassianus Caracalla, the Successor of Severus, unto
Constantine the great, there is no mention in approoved Histories of any
Lievtenants in Britannie.

Deputies under Constantine the Great.
Pacatianus.
Deputies under Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great.
Martinus. Alipius.
Deputies under Honorius.
Chrysanthus. Victorinus.
Princes and secular men of special note among the Britans.
In the time of Calphurnius Agricolaes government, under M. Aur. Antoninus
Philosophus.
Lucius surnamed Lever-Maur, the first Christian Prince in Britannie.
In the reign of Aurelianus.
Bonosus, Usurper of the Empire in Britannie.
In the reign of Constantius the youngest son of Constantine the Great.
Magnentius Taporus, usurper of the Empire in Britannie.

Archbishops of London from the time of Lucius, until the coming in of the
Saxons.
1 Thean. 2 Clavus. 3 Cador. 4 Obinns. 5 Conanus. 6 Paladius. 7 Stephanus. 8
Iltut. 9 Dedwinus. 10 Thedredus. 11 Hilarious. 12 Guidilinus. 13 Vodinus, who
lived, when the Saxons first entered the land.
THE FIRST PART:
The third Book.
IMP: NERVA CAES: AVG: P. M. TR: P. P. P.
portrait of Nerva

CHAP. I.
Nerva Cocceius succeeds Domitian in the Empire, leaving the same soon after
to Vlpius Trajanus. Adrianus, the successor of Trajan, sends Julius Severus
into Britannie, to defend the borders of the Province, against the incursions
of the Northern Britans. The Emperor himself with an Army, enters the Island,
and builds there a wall of Turves, for defense of the Province. Licinius
Priscus is Governor of Britannie.

HItherto has been declared the success of times and affairs in Britannie,
under the first twelve Emperors of Rome; the same being recorded by such
Writers, as had best means to understand the truth thereof, and were the
principal Registrers of things done by the Romans in those times. As for the
occurrents ensuing the death of Domitian, until the reign of Honorius, (in
whose time the Roman government ceased) they are imperfectly reported, or a
great part of them merely omitted: so that I am forced, of many things to make
only a bare and brief relation, as unwilling, by adding or diminishing, to
alter, in substance, what Antiquity has left us, or to fill up blancks with
conjectures or projects of mine own invention. And therefore, howsoever this
Book following, (which comprehends the acts of many more years then the
former) may seem to carry with it, a kind of disproportion from the other
two, and likewise in respect of the style and composition, to be somewhat
differing from them: yet, the cause thereof ought to be imputed to the very
matters themselves, (being, for the most part, fragments, and naked memorialls,
(the loose ends of Time) without observation of circumstances, or congruitie in
substance,) which will hardly admit any method fitting a continuate History:
And I owe so much love and reverence to Truth, as I would rather expose her in
the meanest and worst habit that Time has left her, then by disguising her, to
abuse the world, and make her seem a counterfeit.

DOmitian the Emperor being slain, Nerva Cocceius, (a Prince much honored for
his virtues) succeeded in the Empire; But in what estate the affairs of
Britannie then stood, the histories of those times make no mention, either for
that the Emperor being a man stricken in years, and disposed to ease and
quietness, employed himself, rather in reforming abuses at home, then in
maintaining war abroad, or else, for that the short continuance of his
government, did not suffer him to enter into any great actions in places so
remote; for having held the Empire little above a year, he left the same, by
death, to Vlpius Traianus, a Spaniard, whom he had adopted, for his valor and
wisdom, (beginning even then the first president of electing strangers.

In his time, some of the Britans, desirous to free themselves from the Roman
tyranny, entered into rebellion, but wanting means to effect what they had
begun, they soon gave over the enterprise. Howbeit Aelius Adrianus, (who
succeeded Traian in the Empire) having intelligence, that the Northern Britans
made incursions into the Province, sent over Julius Severus to empeach their
attempts; but before he could make an end of the war, he was revoked and sent
into Syria, to suppress the Jewish rebellion; and Adrian the Emperor himself
came with an Army into Britannie, where he encountered those Northern riders,
recovered such Forts as they had taken, and forced them to retire to the
Mountains and woods, whither the Roman horsemen, without danger, could not
pursue them. And then fortifying the borders of the Province, by raising a wall
of Turves, about eighty miles in length, (between the mouths of the rivers
The river Eden in Cumberland.
Ituna and The river Tyne in Northumberland.
Tina,) to defend the inhabitants thereof, from the sudden assaults of their
ill neighbors, he returned triumphantly to Rome. This exploit wan much
reputation to the Roman Army, and no small honor to the Emperor himself, who
was then called, The Restorer of Britannie, and had the same inscription
figured in the stamp of his Coin.

Now the Britans dwelling within the Province, seemed, for the most part;
patiently to bear the yoke, (which Custom had made less painful, and they
obeyed the more willingly, as standing in need of the Romans help against
their own Country men, whose cruelty was now as much feared, as in former
times the invasion of strangers. Whereupon they conformed themselves to the
Roman laws, both in martial and civil affairs, which were then principally
directed by Licinius Priscus, who had been (not long before) employed by
Adrian the Emperor, in the expedition of Jury, and was at that time
Propraetor of Lieutenant.
Britannie.

CHAP. II.
Lollius Vrbicus is Lieutenant of Britannie under Antoninus Pius, (the
successor of Adrian the Emperor.) He erecteth another wall of Turves, for
defense of the Province, and appeaseth the Brigantes, (the ancient inhabitants
of the Counties of York, Lancaster, Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland,)
beginning to revolt. Seius Saturninus Admiral of the British Fleet, gardeth
the Sea coasts. M: Aurelius Antoninus surnamed Philosophus, succeeds
Antoninus Pius in the Empire: and Calphurnius Agricola, Lollius Vrbicus
(Britannicus) in the Province.

A Ntoninus Pius succeeded Adrianus the Emperor, when ( Lollius Vrbicus being
Lieutenant) the Northern people made a road into the Province, but were beaten
back by the Roman forces that lay upon the borders: and then was there another
wall of Turves built by commandment of the Lieutenant, to strengthen those
parts, with a double rampire. In the mean time, a new war was kindled among
the The ancient inhabitants of the Counties of York, Lancaster, Durham,
Westmerland, and C^mberland.
Brigantes, that annoyed some of the Roman confederates: but by the discretion
of the General, it was quenched before it came to a flame. For Lollius
Vrbicus, upon the first rumor of the revolt, marched thither with part of the
army, leaving the rest behind to guard the borders: and Seius Saturninus,
Admiral of the British Fleet, being well appointed by Sea, lay upon the North
side of the I Will, to defend the Coasts, and (upon occasions) to further the
land-service; by this means the Brigantes were easily reduced to obedience,
even by the presence only of the Lieutenant, who for his good service done in
Britannie, during the short time of his employment there, obtained the surname
of Britannicus.

Antoninus Pius being dead, and Marcus Aurelius surnamed Philosophus, possessed
of the Empire: Calphurnius Agricola was made Lieutenant of the Province, who at
his first entrance into office, understood of some new tumults raised during
the vacation; but partly, by policy, in preventing occasions, and partly, by
show of force, (his very name striking a terror in the inhabitants, by reviving
the memory of Julius Agricola) he in short time appeased them, deserving
thereby great commendation, though the glory of such exploits, was, for the
most part, attributed to the Emperors themselves, (the labor and peril in
attempting, and commonly disgrace and envy after victory) remaining only, as
rewards to their ministers.

CHAP. III.
Elutherius the Bishop of Rome, sends Preachers into Britannie, to instruct
the inhabitants there in the Christian Faith. Lucius, the first Christian
Prince in Britannie. The planting and propagation of religion among the Britans.

NOw was the time come (namely, about one hundred and fourscore years after
the birth of our Savior) when Christian religion, which many years together
had been (for the most part) shadowed with the dark clouds of heathenish
superstition, began to discover it self more openly in this Island, by the
means of Lucius, surnamed Lever-Maur, who by permission of the Roman
Lieutenant, did govern, as King, a great part of the Province. For it
appears by the testimony of some ancient Writers, that Britannie received
the Christian faith, even in the infancy of the Church, immediately after the
death of our Savior Christ, whose Apostles and Disciples, (according to his
commandment) published and dispersed the same in diverse Regions, partly by
themselves in their own persons, and partly by their ministers; among whom
were sent into Britannie, Simon Chananaeus, that after his peregrination in
Mauritania, (as it is reported) was slain, and buried in the Island:
Aristobolus a Roman, of whom Saint Paul in his Epistles makes mention: and
Joseph of Arimathia, a Nobleman of Jury, specially remembered of posterity, for
his charitable act in burying the body of our Savior. This man was appointed
by Philip the Apostle, (then preaching the Christian faith in Gallia) to
instruct the ancient Britans, among whom he began first, (as some write) to
institute an Eremiticall life, in a place then called Avalonia, and afterward
Glastenbury, where himself, and his companions, imitating the austerity and
zeal of solitude, which they had observed in Mary Magdalen, (with whom they
traveled out of Jury unto Marsilia in France) sequestered themselves from all
worldly affairs, that they might freely intend the exercise of piety, which
they professed. Yea, some Writers of former ages have constantly affirmed, that
the Apostles, Saint Peter and Saint Paul, in their own persons at several
times, came into Britannie: and that afterward one Sueton, a Noblemans son
of that Country, being converted by such Christians as first planted the faith
there, and called (after his baptism) Beatus, was sent by them to Rome, unto
Saint Peter, to be better instructed and confirmed in Christianity: and that
in his return homewards thorough Switzerland, he found in the inhabitants
there, such a desire and readiness to receive the Christian faith, as he
resolved to continue in that place, where he erected an Oratorie to exercise a
Monastical life, and departed the world about the year of Grace, 110. But,
who were the very first teachers, and at what time the Christian faith was
first of all received there, it is not certainly known; howbeit it is likely,
(as I have before remembered) that in the expedition of Claudius the Emperor,
(which was about the third year of his reign, and twelve years after the
assention of our Savior) some Christians of Rome, and scholars of the
Apostles themselves, (by occasion of those wars, and by reason of the
intercourse of affairs between both Nations) became first known to the
Britans: who in process of time, were drawn by the exhortations and examples
of their teachers, to embrace the truth: the unblameable life of those
religious men, mooving sometimes even their Princes (though yet unbelieving) to
protect and regard them, as Lucius then began to do. Besides that, the Roman
Lievtenants also, as well in Britannie as other Provinces, did sometimes
tolerate the exercise of Christian Religion, as not altogether disliking it,
howsoever for worldly respects, they forbear to show themselves openly in
favor of it. But Lucius declared his inclination thereto after another manner;
For inwardly disliking the profane superstitions then used among the Romans,
and being informed of the great constancy, virtue, and patience of the
Christians at Rome, and other places, in suffering persecution and Martyrdom
for the faith of Christ, whereby the number of Christians (whom many men
esteemed for the miracles which they wrought) was (contrary to common
expectation) daily increased: that Pertinax and Tre^ellius, two worthy Senators
of Rome, had been lately converted from Paganism, to Christianity: that
Marcus Aurelius, (the Roman Emperor then reigning) began to conceive a better
opinion of them, then himself and his predecessors had done: and so much the
rather, by reason he had (not long before) obtained a famous victory against
his enemies; the prosperous event whereof, he attributed to the prayers of the
Christians at Rome: Upon these considerations, Lucius determined to be
instructed in the Religion which they professed: and first of all, he commanded
Elvanus and Meduinus, (two learned men of the British Nation) to go to Rome,
(where Elutherius was then Bishop) to require some meet persons to be sent
into Britannie, to instruct him and his people: for which purpose, Fugatius and
Damianus, were specially appointed by Elutherius, with all speed to repair
thither; where they afterward (not without some danger by tempest upon the
seas) arrived, and applied themselves both by doctrine and example, to perform
the charge committed unto them: the success therein proving answerable to
their endevors. For the Prince and his family was by them baptized: some of
the inhabitants that had formerly received the faith, were confirmed therein,
and others that remained yet in their infidelity, were converted to
Christianity.

CHAP. IIII.
Lucius Sends to Rome for the Laws of the Empire. The The counsel of
Elutherius Bishop of Rome touching same. Idolatry suppressed in Lucius his
dominions, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction established there. The first
Archbishop of London.

But Lucius the Prince (having received instructions from the Sea of Rome, for
the direction of himself, and his people, in the profession and exercise of
Christian Religion) was desirous also to order his temporal estate, according
to the Roman policy, and to that end solicited Elutherius the Bishop, to send
unto him the laws of the Empire, out of which he might collect, and compose
some certain ordinances for the administration of civil Justice; whereupon
Elutherius sent Letters to the Prince, commending therein his former zealous
disposition in embracing the Truth: then exhorting him to read, with humility
and reverence, the holy Scripture (the divine law) which he had lately received
in his dominions, and out of that (by Gods grace and advise of faithful
Counselors) to collect meet observations for the framing of laws necessary
for the preservation of his estate: which observations so collected, and laws
so framed, he did affirm to be much better, then the Imperial Constitutions
of the Romans, or any other whatsoever: that, to make laws, and execute
Justice, was the proper office of a Prince, who was upon earth the Vicar of God
himself, and received from him that title and authority, to the end he should
use the same to the good of the Catholic Church, and of the people living
under his obedience. Hereupon Lucius began first of all to provide for
establishment of that Religion, whereof he was become at the self same time,
both a professor and practiser. Then was the worshipping of Images forbidden.
The seats of the Arch-Flamins at London, York, and Chester, were changed into
the Seas of three Archbishops in the same places, and those of the Flamins,
into so many Bishoprikes, whereby the Temples vowed by Idolatrous Priests to
profane gods, were consecrated to the service of the only true God. His
temporal estate also he adorned with good and profitable laws, comformable to
the rule of Christian Religion; whereupon ensued the blessings of Plenty and
Peace in his days.

It is reported, that he was founder of a Church at Cornhill in London, which
he dedicated to Saint Peter, placing therein one Thean, an Archbishop, to have
a superintendence over the other Bishops within his principality: and that the
Metropolitan seat continued there in the succession of 13. Archbishops (about
the space of 400. years) until the coming of Augustine the Monk, who
translated the Archbishoprike from London to Canterbury.

And now Christianity (being thus generally received among the Britans) kept
on her course untainted, and without opposition, till the time of Dioclesian
the Emperor, who kindled the fire of that raging persecution (the last and
longest in the Primitive Church) which consumed the lives of many Christian
Martyrs, as well in Britannie, as other places. But returning to the reign of
Lucius, and considering the state of Britannie under his government: we may
justly admire the felicity of those times, ascribing to the Britans for their
greatest glory, that among all other nations, they had the happiness to see
and enjoy the first Christian Prince.

CHAP. V.
The Northern Britans breaking down Adrians wall upon the borders, enter and
annoy the Province. Vlpius Marcellus, being sent by Commodus the Emperor to
take charge of the army in Britannie, beats them back. The rare virtues of
Vlpius Marcellus the Governor. He is dimissed of his office.

THis was the state of the Church in Britannie, when new troubles began to the
disturbance of the Province. For the Northern Britans making a breach in the
wall, which Adrian the Emperor had built, and finding the borders but weakly
guarded, entered the Province, and surprising the Roman General, killed many of
his Soldiers, then ranging the countries: they wasted and spoiled every where
without resistance, till Vlpius Marcellus being sent over by Commodus the
Emperor, stayed their fury, and with great difficulty, forced them to retire
within the Wall. By which means the Province being quieted, he applied
himself to reform abuses in his Camp, reviving the ancient discipline of
war, which had been for a time discontinued among the Roman soldiers, whom
long service, and many victories had made bold to say, and do often times more
then became them. For Marcellus indeed was a man somewhat austere, in
reprooving and punishing: otherwise very temperate: diligent in time of war:
not idle in peace: his diet was the same which the common Soldier used: in
quantity more sparing: for he would eat no bread, but such as was brought
from Rome: which he did, to the end he might avoid excess, and take no more
then sufficed Nature (the stalenesse of the bread having taken away all taste,
that might either please the sense, or provoke the appetite.) The day time, for
the most part, he spent in viewing his Camp, in training young Soldiers, and
giving direction to Officers. In the night he wrote Letters, and made his
dispatches into diverse parts of the Province, (as occasion required.) He slept
very little, by reason of his thin diet, and much business (wherewith he was
continually occupied;) for he thought [that he which slept a whole night
together, was no meet man, to be either a Counselor to a Prince, or the
Commander of an Army.] Every Evening he used to write instructions upon
twelve Tables made of Linden tree, which Tables he delivered to one of his
servants, appointing him to carry them at sundry hours of the night, to
certain of his Soldiers, who thereby supposing that their General was still
waking, and not gone to his bed) were the more careful in keeping the watch,
and preventing sudden attempts in the night season. He was severe in execution
of justice: not to be led by favor: nor to be corrupted by bribes. He levied
money, only as necessary for the war, not to enrich himself, or his
friends, as other governors in former times had done; for he never preferred
his own private, before the public; nor a wealthy estate before an
honorable reputation. The fame of these virtues as they made him much
respected, both of his own Soldiers, and of the Britans: so they procured
Envy, which always follows Virtue inseparably, as a shadow does the body.
For Commodus the Emperor understanding, how Marcellus had carried himself in
Britannie, was much displeased therewith; and doubting lest he should grow too
great, he thought it best to cut him off. But some accidents happening in the
mean time, to make him change that purpose, he only sent Letters of
discharge, and so dismissed him of the Office.

CHAP. VI.
A Mutiny in the Roman army. Perennius undertakes to appease it. He is
accused, and put to death. Helvius Pertinax being sent by Commodus to pacify
the tumults in the army, is in danger to be slain. He makes suit to be
discharged of the Lievtenancie.

AFter departure of Marcellus, the army having been kept in by hard hand, and
finding now the reine let loose, upon asuddaine began to be mutinous, and
refused openly to acknowledge Commodus for their Emperor. These disorders,
Perennius, one of his favorites took upon him to redress, by displacing such
persons as he suspected, and committing their offices to men of meaner
quality: wherewith the Legions were much discontented, disdaining, that in
steed of Senators, and men of Consular degree, they should now be governed by
vpstarts, and base Companions. In the heat of these broils, about fifteen
hundred Soldiers forsook the army, and went to Rome, where they exhibited to
the Emperor, a Bill of Complaint against Perennius, whom they charged as the
chief Author of the dissension in the Army, by bringing in new customs, by
exceeding his commission, and doing things derogatory to the majesty of the
Roman Empire. These, and other things, (as well false as true) were objected
against him by the multitude, who for the most part, dislike such as exercise
authority over them, and keep no measure in their affections, either of love,
or hatred. But, (that which touched to the quick) was an accusation of treason
put up against him, for conspiring against the life of the Emperor, and in
seeking to advance his son to the Empire. This point was quickly apprehended
by Commodus, who thought that the suspicion of the fact, or the report only to
have intended it, was a sufficient cause of condemnation, howsoever the party
accused was indeed, either guilty, or innocent. Hereupon Perennius was
declared Traitor, and delivered to the Soldiers, who stripped him of his
apparel, whipped him with rods, and in the end, cruelly murdered him.

Then Helvius Pertinax (a man of mean fortune by birth, as having risen from
the state of a common Soldier to the dignity of a Commander) was sent into
Britannie to appease the tumults there. He was one of them that Perennius had
before discharged from bearing office, and sent into Liguria, where he was
borne. At his first entrance, he attempted by force to suppress the rebellion
of the army, adventuring so far in a skirmish, that though he escaped with
life, yet was he left among the dead, and supposed to be slain. Afterward
proceeding with better advise, and success, he compo^ed the troubles, severely
punishing the principal offen^^^^, and using some rigor in revenging his own
inju^^es; by which means growing odious to the Soldier, and distrusting his
own safety, he made suit to be discharged of the Lievtenantship.

CHAP. VII.
Clodius Albinus succeeds Pertinax in the government of the Province. He is
honored with the title of Caesar. Being suspected of Commodus the Emperor, he
retireth himself from affairs. Helvius Pertinax, and Didius Iulianus are
elected Emperors successively after the death of Commodus. Severus succeeds
Iulianus in the Empire. Heraclianus is Governor of the Province, which he
afterward resigneth to Virius Lupus. War between Severus the Emperor, and
Clodius Albinus. The death of Albinus.

THen was the government of the Province assigned to Clodius Albinus, a man of
noble birth, very forward, and for the most part, fortunate in his attempts:
for which the Emperor Commodus, either upon fear, or favor, did honor him
with the title of a Caesar, though Albinus seemed unwilling to accept it; and
afterward discovered his disposition more openly, in affecting the ancient
free state. For, upon a false report of the death of Commodus, he made an
oration to the Legions in Britannie, in favor of the Senate, whose government
he had commended, and preferred the same before that of the Emperors. But
Commodus being advertised thereof, sent Iunius Severus with all speed, to take
charge of the Army. In the mean time, Albinus retired himself from affairs,
till Commodus was dead, and Pertinax elected Emperor. Then he combined
himself with Didius Iulianus, whom the soldiers (that then made open sale of
the Empire,) had elected after the death of Pertinax. But Iulianus being
infamous for his vices, and failing to perform his promise made to the
Soldiers, was in a short time forsaken of them, and afterward murdered. Upon
report of Iulianus his death, Septimius Severus (a man adorned with excellent
gifts of nature) was declared Emperor; and for that he feared Clodius Albinus,
(who then had recovered the government of Britannie) he made him his associate
in the Empire, and sent Heraclianus to be Lieutenant of the Province, which,
Heraclianus soon after resigned to Virius Lupus. But desire of Soverainty,
(that cannot long endure equality of degree) made the one jealous of the other,
and the fire of ambition (that had been smothered for a time) burst out at
length into a flame. For Severus having pacified some tumults in the West part
of the world, and after many conflicts subdued, Pescenius Niger, (who usurped
the Empire in the East) pretended the breach of Association, as a color to
make war upon Albinus, who understanding thereof, transported over the seas,
a mighty Army, furnished with abundance of vittaile out of the I Will it self,
which then (through the industry of the inhabitants, applying themselves to
tillage and husbandry,) yielded plenty of grain, and served the Romans as the
Garner of the West Empire, out of which they carried yearly great quantities
of corn, to maintain their Armies in Gallia and Germany. Near Lions in
France.
Lugdunum in Gallia, Severus encountered with Albinus, whose forces were there
defeated, and himself slain.

CHAP. VIII.
Severus the Emperor, makes preparation for a voyage into Britannie. The
civil government of the Province, committed to Geta his younger son, whom
Papinianus the famous Lawyer assisteth in the administration of Justice there.
Severus with Bassianus his elder son, marches toward Caledonia. Mortality
in the Roman Camp. The Caledonians obtain peace upon conditions. Bassianus
takes the charge of the army, and Severus his father returns into the
Province.

THen Severus made preparation for his voyage into Britannie, which by reason
of the often change of Governors, was grown much out of order; and although
the Britans, upon intelligence of his purpose, did send over Ambassadors, to
offer their voluntary submission: yet the Emperor (in whom neither age nor
sickness had abated the heat of ambition) would not directly accept thereof,
but entertained them with delays, till all things were in readiness for his
expedition: [So earnest a desire he had to pass into the furthest part of
Britannie, and to purchase the surname of Britannicus, as an honorable
addition to his other titles.] His two sons Bassianus (commonly called
Caracalla) and Geta, he took with him, as doubting their agreement in his
absence. To Geta his younger son, after his arrival in Britannie, he
committed the government of the Province there for civil causes, wherein
Aemilius Paulus Papinianus the famous Lawyer, (who as chief minister of
Justice under him, had his Tribunal seat at York.
Eboracum) was appointed to assist and direct him.

Severus himself, and Bassianus with the Army, marched Northward against the
The ancient inhabitants of the hither part of Scotland.
Meatae, a people bordering upon the Caledonians, and in league with them.
Virius Lupus (but a little before) had assaied to enter the Country by force,
when the Meatae (standing upon their own strength) withstood him, and forced
him in the end, to purchase his peace with money. Then Severus hastened into
Cal^donia, where finding the passages uncertain and dangerous, by reason of
the fennes, ^oods, and deep waters; he caused trees to be felled, and bridges
and cawseis to be made, for his Soldiers to ma^ch over. The Caledonians in the
mean time, sallied out of the woods, and charged the Romans, who were much
encombred for want of firm ground, and were oftentimes forced to trace the
Country, and to disperse themselves in several companies, seeking places of
advantage: by which means, a great number of them perished, while the
barbarous people (lying in ambush, and sometimes leaving their cattle abroad,
as a train to draw them within danger) suddenly surprised and killed them,
before they could recover their Camp. This was an unfortunate journey to the
Romans, who, besides the loss which they sustained by their enemies, were
afflicted with diseases, by reason, partly of the unwholesome waters which they
drank, and partly of the contagious air that infected their spirits: yea,
many times they killed one another; for such as through feebleness could not
keep rank in marching, were slain by their own fellows, that they might
not be left a prey to their savage enemies. There died in this enterprise,
about fifty thousand Romans; Yet would not Severus withdraw his forces thence,
till the Caledonians made offer to treat of peace, whereto he then hearkened
the more willingly, for that he saw the difficulty, and (in a manner)
impossibility to bring that Northern part of the I Will, wholly under subjection,
by reason of the rocks, mountains, and marshes: as also for that the Country,
being (for the most part) barren and unfruitful, the benefit thereof was not
deemed likely to countervaile the charge, in getting, and keeping it. The
conditions were, That the Caledonians should first dis-arme themselves, and
deliver part of the Country, (lying next the Province,) into the Romans
possession, and that from that time forward, they should attempt nothing
against the public peace: Which Articles agreed upon, and assurance taken for
the performance, Severus retired himself into the Province, leaving his son
Bassianus to take charge of the Army, which after the Emperors departure, grew
careless and dissolute: wherewith the General seemed nothing displeased,
either for that he was by his own nature inclined to the worst; or else, for
that he hoped thereby to win the Soldiers favor, as a mean for his
advancement to the Empire, after his fathers death, which he had oftentimes
attempted by indirect practices, most unnaturally to procure.

CHAP. IX.
The Caledonians invade the Roman Camp, and carrying away the booties which
they had taken, are pursued, and put to the sword by the Romans. Severus the
Emperor repaireth Adrians wall, cutteth a Trench, and carries it thwart the
Island from Sea to Sea. He falls sick at York. His counsel to his sons.
His death.

IN the mean while, the Caledonians, (notwithstanding the late contract)
understanding what disorders were in the Roman Camp, suddenly invaded it,
killing, and taking booties, which they shared with their neighbors (borderers
of the Province) that had assisted them in the enterprise. Severus being
greatly incensed therewith, sent part of the Army to pursue the Caledonians,
expressly commanding, that they should be all put to the sword, without respect
of age, or sex. This sharp manner of proceeding, did somewhat quail the hope
of the Northern Britans, who fled into the remote parts of Caledonia: and
Severus having rather stayed, then ended the troubles, (as intending to
prosecute the war with more advantage) spent some time in repairing and
enlarging Adrians Wall, which he carried th'wart the Island, from Sea, to Sea,
intrenching and fortifying it with bulwarks and square towers, in places most
convenient (to give warning one to another upon any sudden assault) for defense
of the borders. Then being wearied with age, sickness, and travail, having
his mind also much grieved with the disloyal and unnatural practices of his
son Bassianus, he withdrew himself to York.
Eboracum, a Colonie of the Romans, being then the Station of the Sixth Legion,
called Victrix, and afterward growing to be one of the chief places of
account among the Brigantes. For these Stations of the Roman Legions, were
commonly the seed-plots of towns and cities, both in this I Will, and diverse
other parts of the Empire.

It was reported, that in his passage thither, a Moore, with a Cypress garland
on his head, did meet and salute him by the name of a God: and that, at his
entrance into the City, he was by error of the Soothsayer, (that guided him)
brought into the temple of Bellona: and that black beasts, being appointed for
sacrifice, did of themselves follow him to his Palace. These things, howsoever
they fell out accidentally: yet they were interpreted as ominous, in respect of
the event. And now Severus perceiving his death to approach, called before him
some of his Counselors and chief Captains, unto whom he is said to have
spoken in this manner:

It is now about eighteen years, since I was first declared Emperor by the
Army in Pannonia; during which time, with what care, pain, and travail, I
have weilded this vast body of the Empire, my continual employment in wars,
both at home and abroad, may witness sufficiently. For, at my first entrance,
I found the State encumbered every where, and now I shall leave it peaceable,
even to the Britans. The future prosperity whereof, must depend upon the
mutual agreement of my two sons. For neither multitude of men, nor abundance
of treasure, are so availeable to defend and maintain Commonweals, as Amity
and Unity between Governors. For, by Concord, (we see,) that small things grow
to greatness, whereas by Discord the greatest fall to ruin. I must now leave to
them (as my successors,) the Imperial Diadem, that which Bassianus has so
long thirsted after, though he know not yet, whether it be a thing to be
wished, or feared, as having not proved the difference betwixt a Prince, and a
private person. But ambitious minds are carried blindfold, they wot not
whither, in desiring that, which having once obtained, they can neither keep,
without great care, nor leave, without extreme peril; such a thing is
Soverainty, whose greatness is not contained in it self, but consists, for
the most part, in the opinion, and depends upon the dispositions of other
men. It is Virtue only, not glorious titles, which makes men truly great. My
self at this present may serve for an example, to show, upon what a weak
foundation, humane greatness is built. For, I have been all things, though
now it avail me nothing: seeing I must pay my debt to Nature, and after all my
exploits in the East and West parts of the world, (I) must die (as I may say)
out of the world, in a strange Country, if any Country may be termed strange to
the Romans, who have now by conquest, made all Countries their own. I exhort
you therefore, as you tender the welfare of the Roman Empire, of your own
selves, and your posterity, be true and faithful to my sons, as you have
been to me, assisting them with your counsel, and persuading them to mutual
concord, as the maine pillar to support, both their estates, and your own.

When he had uttered these, or the like speeches, he turned aside, and shortly
after yielded up the Ghost.

CHAP. X.
Bassianus practices with the army to make him sole Emperor, by excluding
Geta his younger brother. The cruelty of Bassianus. The Funerals of Severus the
Emperor. The state of Britannie from Bassianus to Gallienus, not mentioned in
Histories. Some of the Thirty Tyrants usurp the government in Britannie in
the time of Gallienus. Bonosus a Britan does the like in the reign of
Aurelianus. Victorinus a favorite of Probus the Emperor, murdereth the
Governor of the Province. Vandals, and Burgundiaus, seat themselves in
Britannie. The Britans licenced to plant Vines. Carus succeeding Probus in the
Empire, assigns Britannie to Carinus one of his sons, who possesses it,
till Dioclesian is declared Emperor. C. Carausius Admiral of the British
fleet, is sent to sea to guard the Coasts of Gallia, and Britannie, against
Pirates.

BAssianus being advertised of his fathers death, practiced with the Soldiers,
by bribes, and fair promises, that he might be declared sole Emperor: whereto
when he could not persuade them, for the reverence they bare to his father
Severus, he made a league with the Northern Britans that then assailed the
borders, and returned to Eboracum, to meet with Iulia the Empress his mother
in law, and Geta his brother. There he caused the Physicians to be put to
death, for not ridding his father sooner out of the way, as he had commanded
them. Then he appointed secretly to the slaughter, all those, that for their
virtue and wisdom had been esteemed, and advanced by his father, and all such,
as having been Tutors to him and his brother, advised them to mutual concord.
This done, he entered into consultation about his fathers funerals, which were
solemnised by the army with all due rites, according to the ancient custom in
times of war. The ashes of the dead body being put into a Golden Vrna, were
afterward by Iulia the Empress (accompanied with the two Caesar's) carried to
Rome, where Severus, after the usual ceremonies, was consecrated a god.

Now the affairs of Britannie, for the space of about fifty years together,
were passed over in silence, as being either omitted, through the negligence of
Writers in that age, or perishing, through the calamity of the times that
ensued under the Emperors following, namely, Popilius Macrinus, (the successor
of Bassianus) Varus Heliogabalus, Alexander Severus, Maximinus, Gordianus the
first, second, and third, Philippus Arabs, Decius, Valerianus. But when
Gallienus (who succeeded Vacerian) had obtained the Empire, the Roman state was
much encumbred, and oppressed with her own forces, while certain Captains
(commonly called, The Thirty Tyrants) disdained the government of so cruel,
and dissolute a Prince as Gallienus, and being chosen Emperors by the armies
which they commanded, usurped absolute authority in diverse Provinces. Among
these, Collianus, Victorinus, Posthumus, Tetricus, and Marius, (as Histories
report) ruled in Britannie. The Roman Empire, Flavius Claudius, Valerius
Aurelianus, Tacitus, and Valerius Probus, held successively after Gallienus.

In the time of the forenamed Aurclianus the Emperor, it is not to be
forgotten, that Bonosus a Britan by birth, and famous for excess in drinking,
invaded the Empire with Proculus, usurping Britannie, Spain, and That part of
France which at this day contains the Provinces of Narbonne, Provence, and
Dauphine.
Gallia Braccata. But being afterward vanquished by Probus the Emperor, he
hanged himself; whereof there went a common jest among the Soldiers, that [a
drinking vessel, not a man was hanged vp]

Then the Governor of the Province in Britannie being preferred to the office,
by means of Victorinus a Moore (a man in great favor with Probus the Emperor)
began to raise sedition among the Soldiers there; with which practice Probus
secretly acquainted Victorinus, who supposing himself touched with the
imputation of his crime, whom he had recommended and advanced to the government
there, desired leave of the Emperor to go into Britannie, where (giving it out,
that he fled thither for safeguard of his life) he was courteously entertained by
the Governor, whom he afterward murdered privily in the night, and then
speedily returned to Rome: having, by this devise, appeased the tumults in the
Province, and approved his fidelity to the Emperor.

About this time (as it is reported) certain Vandals and Burgundians (which
had invaded Gallia) being vanquished by Probus, were sent into Britannie, where
they seated themselves, and did afterward good service to the Romans, in
suppressing rebellious attempts there: though the Emperor then sought to win
the Britans favor, rather by clemency, then rigor: licencing them to plant
Vines, and make wine, and to do other things, as well for their pleasure as
profit.

Then Carus succeeding Probus in the Empire, assigned Britannie, Gallia,
Spain, and Illyricum, to Carinus, one of his sons, who possessed the same,
till Dioclesian was declared Emperor: in whose time the Province was peaceably
governed, the borders being strongly guarded with forts, and bulwarks against
foreign invasion; but the sea coasts, both of Gallia and Britannie, were much
annoyed with Pirates of lower Germany, against whom, C. Carausius, as Admiral
of the British fleet, was sent to sea.

CHAP. XI.
Carausius usurps the Empire in Britannie, in the joint reigns of Dioclesian
and Maximianus, who assume to them Maximinus, and Constantius Chlorus for
assistants by the name of Caesar's. Carausius is slain by Alectus, and Alectus
by Asclepiodatus. London taken, and sacked by the Franks (the ancestors of the
French) whom the Romans encountering, deprived of their booties.

CArausius was a man, by birth of low degree, though otherwise worthy of the
highest, if his own ambition, and the guiltines of his actions, had not
pricked him forward, to seek it by unlawful courses, and to boulster out
wrong by that authority, which is the ordinary mean appointed to punish it;
for in short time he grew very rich, by taking great store of shipping and
treasure, which he detained to his own use, without restoring the same to the
right owners, or rendering account thereof to the Emperors officers. Whereupon
Maximianus Herculeus (whom Dioclesian had taken to be his Associate in the
Empire) being then making war in Gallia, surprised the principal men of
Carausius his faction at Bolein in Picardie.
Gessoriacum, and gave commandment, that Carausius himself should be made
away. But Carausius being privily advertised thereof, and knowing, that then
there remained for him no mean fortune betwixt the life of a Prince, and the
death of a Traitor, entered forthwith into actual rebellion, making his party
strong both by sea and land, in drawing discontented persons into the action,
and alluring the Northern Britans to join with him, upon hope of spoils to be
gotten in the province, which he then ruled with a kind of absolute authority,
and soon after usurped there the Imperial ornaments.

The Roman state being shaken in diverse places, either by the negligent
government, or ambitious attempts of Captains, and Commanders of armies,
(which gave occasion to whole Nations and Provinces to revolt:) The two
Emperors declared Galerius Maximinus and Constantius Chlorus, as their
assistants by the name of Caesar's. Then was Maximinus sent into Persia, and
Constantius into Britannie against Carausius, But before Constantius arrived
there, Carausius was slain by the practice of C. Alectus his familiar friend,
who then usurped the Empire, as Carausius had done before. And understanding
that Constantius was coming over with a great power, he resolved to meet him
upon the Sea, and impeach his landing; for which purpose he lay with his Navy
upon the Coast of the I Will I Will of Wight*
Vectis; but his hopes failing him, by reason the Romans in a thick mist did
recover the land, before he could discover them, he prepared his forces to
encounter them in a set battle near the shore. Constantius (having
determined to try the utmost of his fortune) to take away from his Soldiers
all hope of return, did first set his ships on fire, and afterward gave the
charge upon Alectus, whose Army was (for the most part) composed of Mercenarie
men, consisting of Britans, Franks, Germans, and diverse other Nations, who
fought not all with like courage: for after the first encounter, some of them
turned their backs, forsaking their Commander, whoescaped the fury of the
battle by flight, though he was shortly after taken, and slain by
Asclepiodatus the Captain of the Emperors guard.
Praefectus Praetori^. The The ancient Inhabitants of Franconiae in Germany,
that afterward seated themselves in France.
Francs that served under Alectus, fled to the City of London, which (being
weakly guarded) they rifeled and sacked, though they did not long time enjoy the
spoil; for part of the Roman Army coming thither (rather by error in
mistaking their way, then of set purpose) assailed them, took away their
booties, and put the most part of them to the sword. This victory restored
again to the Roman Empire, the Province of Britannie, which had been usurped
about seven years by Carausius, and three years by Alectus.

CHAP. XII.
The persecution of Christians in Britannie under Dioclesian the Emperor. The
death of Saint Alban the first British Martyr.

NOw began the storm of persecution for Christian Religion to arise under
Dioclesian, who commanded, that throughout the Dominions of the Empire, the
people should offer sacrifice only to the gods of the Emperors, and that such
as refused so to do, should be punished with diverse kinds of cruel death.
Hereupon the Christians, (being then dispersed in diverse parts of the world,)
not fearing any torments that tyranny could devise, made public profession of
their faith, which they constantly maintained, and willingly sealed with their
blood. Amongst many others that died in Britannie for that cause, Alban, an
Inhabitant of the famous free City An ancient City sometime near Saint Albans.
Verulamium, is specially remembered as the first British Martyr, who being yet
but a Pagan, received into his house a Christian, one of the Clergy named
Amphibalus, that fled from his persecutors: and observing his devotion in
watching, fasting, and praying, became in the end a follower of his faith and
virtue. And to the end that his guest might escape the hands of them that
pursued him, he put on his garments, offering himself to the Soldiers that
were sent to search his house, and in that habit was presented to the Judge,
before whom he made confession of his faith, reprooving the profane rites of
heathenish superstition. Whereupon he was committed to the Tormentors to be
whipped, and persisting in his constancy, was afterward beheaded on the top
of an high hill near the City.

It is reported, that the Tormentor (who was first appointed to behead him)
perceiving a miracle wrought by him, as he went to the place of execution,
refused to do his office, casting the sword out of his hand, and prostrating
himself at Saint Albans feet, desired earnestly that he might either die for
him, or with him, rather then live to be the minister of his death; whereupon as
a professor of that faith, whereof he had been long time a persecutor, he
drank of the same cup with Saint Alban, and in steed of the sacramental sign
of Baptism, was washed in the bath of his own blood. It is also written of
Saint Alban his executioner, that his eyes fell out of his head at the very
instant, that the Martyrs head (being severed from the body) fell to the
ground; But whether it were the pleasure of God in the first planting of his
truth here, to approve the same by miracles; or whether the incredulity of
that Age, might give Writers occasion to report more then the truth, I will not
take upon me to censure. There suffered also in Leyceste^.
Legecestria about the same time, and for the same cause, Aaron and Julius: and
in sundry other places of this I Will many other, as well women as men, who gave
testimony of their patience, in praying for their persecutors, and also of
their piety by doing things miraculous, which moved the Pagan Princes at the
last to cease their tyranny, as being rather wearied with afflicting the
Christians, then the Christians themselves with enduring the affliction; Such
power has man being assisted with divine grace, to do, and suffer, even above,
and against Nature it self. The manner of Saint Albans death being engraven
upon a Marble stone, was set up within the City for a terror to the
Christians, who afterward erected a Temple in that place, which was accounted
venerable for many ages after the destruction of Verulamium: out of whose
ruins, an other Town was raised, continuing the name and memory of Saint
Alban the Martyr even to this day. Not many years after, Amphibalus also (who
converted S. Alban) being apprehended by the Roman Soldiers, for preaching the
Christian faith unto the Britans, was put to death, near the place where Saint
Alban his disciple had suffered Martyrdom before him.

CHAP. XIII.
A brief Relation of the state of the British Church, from the reign of
Dioclesian, unto the coming of Austen the Monk, who converted the Saxons and
English to the christian Faith.

THe storm of persecution afterward ceasing, when Dioclesian yielded up the
government, gave free passage to the profession of christian religion, both in
Britannie, and other parts of the Western Empire, till such time as Arrius, a
Priest of Alexandria, (whose heart inwardly boiling with coffeehouse, for
not obtaining the Bishopric of that place, which he ambitiously affected,)
burst out at the last into open blasphemy and impiety, against the divinity
and omnipotency of the Son of God; which heresy (like a contagious disease,
infecting most parts of the world) invaded also this our Island, the inhabitants
whereof in those days, (as men delighting in novelties) were carried hither
and thither with every blast of vain doctrine, retaining nothing in matters of
religion for certain, but their own uncertain opinions: But the Arrian
heresy being afterward condemned by the general Counsel of Nice, in the
reign of Constantine the Great, the number of the professors and favorers
thereof, as well in Britannie as other places, daily diminished, and the truth
of Christianity was generally embraced by the Britans, whose Bishops conformed
themselves to the doctrine and ceremonies of the Church of Rome, without
difference in any thing specially remembered, save only in celebration of the
feast of Easter, after the ancient manner of the Jews: imitating therein, the
custom of the Greek Churches in Asia, who solemnized that feast upon the
fourteenth day of the Moon of March, on what day of the week soever it fell:
whereas the West Churches did celebrate it upon the first Sunday after the full
Moon of the same month, in regard that Sunday was properly accounted and
called, The Lords day, as being dedicated in the Apostles time, to the eternal
memory of Christ's resurrection. And this custom of celebrating the feast of
Easter, after the manner of the Jews, and of the East Churches, continued in
use among the Britans, even till the coming of Austen the Monk, albeit it had
been condemned by diverse public Decrees and general Counsels. Neither is it
to be forgotten, that in this third Age after Christ, there were among the
Britans, diverse men of special note for piety and learning, as namely, in the
time of Constantine the Great, and Pope Sylvester Restitutus, a Bishop of
London was present, and subscribed to the Synod, held at Arles in France, about
the year of our redemption 325. Likewise, by the testimony of Athanasius,
certain British Bishops appeared at the Counsel of Sardica, which was summoned
in the behalf of that holy Father, against the Arrian heretics, about the
year 350. and also at the Counsel of Ariminum, where Saint Hillarie greatly
commends the Bishops of Britannie, for their zeal and constancy in
maintaining the truth against Arrianisme, which was then dispersed in most
parts of Christendom. And it is not to be doubted, but that there were many
others also worthy of remembrance, if Time had not worn out the knowledge of
their names and doings.

But that which most disturbed the peace of the Church in Britannie, was the
heresy of Pelagius the British Monk, who in the age next ensuing, maintained
the power and free will of man, against the virtue of divine grace, with other
divelish positions, which being plausible to flesh and blood, were easily
admitted, but proved in the end, very pernicious. These occurrents in the
estate Ecclesiastical, (howsoever severed by distance of time) I have thought
good to set down together, rather then to mix them with the relations of
matters civil: and yet not omitting (as occasion shall require) to touch them
again in their proper places.

CHAP. XIIII.
Constantius Chlorus stays the persecution in Britannie. He dies at York.
Helena his wife, (the mother of Constantine the Great) travaileth to Jerusalem
to seek out the Cross whereon our Savior suffered. Her piety and zeal
toward the advancement of Christian Religion. The virtues of Constantius
Caesar her husband.

DIoclesian and Maximianus, having resigned their authority, Constantius
Chlorus stayed the persecution in Britannie, and afterward went thither
himself, renforcing the garrisons, both within the Province, and upon the
borders, and establishing a general peace throughout the Island; which done, he
repaired to Eboracum, and there fell sick of a languishing disease. In the
mean time, Constantinus his son, (being left at Rome as his fathers pledge)
escaped from his keepers, and houghing the post horses, (as he passed the
Countries) that he might not be overtaken by pursuit, came at length into
Britannie, where he was received with great joy by Constantius his father, who
being then past hope of life, signified in the presence of his Counselors and
Captains; That he willingly and gladly embraced his death, since he should
leave a memorable monument of himself in the life of his son, who (he hoped)
should succeed him in the government, to protect the innocent from
oppression, and to wipe away the tears from the Christians eyes: for therein,
above all other things, he accounted himself most happy.

Thus died Constantius Caesar, a wise and virtuous Prince, as being not subject
to those vices which commonly accompany the highest fortunes. He was first
called from the degree of a Senator, to be a Caesar, not affecting the title
for ambition, nor refusing it in respect of the danger. Helena his wife, the
mother of Constantine the Great, was (as some have written) the daughter of
Coil a British King, though by others it be otherwise reported. But of what
Country or kindred soever she was, it appears by consent of all Writers, that
she was a wise and virtuous Lady, worthy to be the Wife of such a Husband, and
the Mother of such a Son. She was an earnest professor of Christianity, and
upon religious zeal, travailed to Jerusalem, where she found out the Manger
wherein Christ was laid at the time of his birth, and the Cross whereon he was
nailed when he suffered. By this Cross many diseases were cured, and strange
miracles wrought, (if credit may be given to such as have written thereof.) Her
constant desire to advance the Christian faith, first moved Constantius her
husband to favor the Christians, who having in times of danger hidden
themselves (for the most part) in deserts and dens, did then come abroad
again into the view of the world, reedified their old Churches, founded new,
instituted holy days to be celebrated in honor of their Martyrs, and
exercised religion freely and peaceably, as being licensed so to do by public
Edicts. In all virtues beseeming a Prince, there were few of his degree, either
before his time, or since, that might worthily be compared with Constantius,
who in the administration of Justice in civil causes, carried so even a hand,
as he never used to make difference of persons, or to be misled by affection.
He was no wastefull spender of his subjects treasure: no greedy horder up of
his own, for he esteemed money only, as a thing to be used, not kept: and he
would often times say, [That it was more behoovefull for the Commonweal, that
the wealth of the land should be dispearsed in subjects hands, then barred up
in Princes coffers.] For glorious apparel and other outward ornaments,
(wherewith Princes use to dazell the eyes of the common people,) he was more
meanly furnished, then beseemed the greatness of his estate. His diet was
neither curious, nor costly: and when he feasted his friends, he borrowed his
silver vessel, supposing it a thing unnecessary, to have any of his own; and
considering perhaps, that the metal whereof they were made, might be
converted to a better use. In times of war, he was diligent and industrious:
yet not using force, where policy might prevail; for he so much esteemed the
life of a man, as he would never hazard it in desperate attempts for his own
glory: which wan him great reputation among his Soldiers, who for the love
they bare him, did presently after his death, elect Constantine his son to
succeed him; (other Nations supposing this our Island most happy, in first
seeing him saluted Emperor.)

CHAP. XV.
Constantine the Great is declared Emperor at York. He subdueth Maxentius and
Licinius, the one usurping the West Empire, and the other the East. He
establishes a new form of government in Britannie, appointing Pacatianus to
rule the Province there, as Deputy to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia. He
translateth the seat of the Empire from Rome to Bizantium. His three sons,
Constantinus, Constans, and Constantius, reign successively after his death.
Gratianus Funarius has the charge of the Army in Britannie, when Constans the
Emperor is stain by Magnentius. Martinus Deputy in Britannie under
Constantius. Paulus Catena a Commissioner, to enquire of Magnentius
confederates.

THen Constantine residing at York, although he seemed at the first unwilling
to accept the Imperial Title, and protested openly against it: yet when the
Senate had confirmed the election, he took upon him the government of those
Provinces, which his father had held in the West parts, and with an Army of
Britans and other Nations, he first settled France and Germany, being then in
Arms against him, and afterward subdued Maxentius, Maximians son that
usurped the Empire in Italy. Then, with like success, he made war upon
Licinius his Associate, who persecuted the professors of Christianity in the
East parts of the world. By which means, Constantine alone enjoyed the Empire,
and for his many and glorious conquests, was worthily surnamed the Great. In
his time the form of government in Britannie, both for Civil and Martial
causes, was altered, and new laws established. The civil government of the
Province there, he committed to Pacatianus, who ordered the same as Deputy to
the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia, (an Officer instituted by him) with a
limitation of place and restriction of that power, which the ancient Praefectus
Praetorio had under the first Emperors.

Then Constantine intending to make war in Persia, either to defend, or enlarge
the limits of the East Empire, removed the Imperial seat from Rome, to the
City Bizantium, (which he reedified, and caused the same to be called of his
own name Constantinopolis:) drawing thither the Legions in Germany, that
guarded the frontires of the Western Empire, which was thereby laid open to the
incursions of those barbarous people, that afterward assailed it, and in the
end, possessed the greatest part thereof. The borders also of the Province in
Britannie were weakened, by removing the Garrisons there into other Cities and
Towns, which being pestered with Soldiers, (for the most part unruly guests)
were abandoned by the ancient inhabitants.

After the death of Constantine the Great, Constantinus his eldest son,
enjoyed Britannie as a portion of his dominion, till making some attempts upon
his brother Constans, for the enlarging of it, he was by him slain. Then was
the Empire divided between Constans and Constantius, the two younger brethren.
Constans seized upon the Provinces which Constantinus his brother had held, and
made a voyage into Britannie, where Gratianus an Hungarian by birth, had then
charge of the Army. This Gratianus was surnamed Funarius, for that, being a
young man, he was able (as it is written of him) to hold a rope in his hand
against the force of five Soldiers, assaying to pull it from him. But Constans
afterwads following ill counsel, (the ready way to Princes ruins) and giving
himself over to all kinds of vice, was slain by Magnentius Taporus, (the
son of a Britan) who then invaded the Empire, usurping the government of
Gallia and Britannie, till (after three years war with Constantius, the
successor of Constans his brother) finding himself unable any longer to
uphold his greatness, he murdered himself.

Then was Martinus (an aged man) made Deputy of Britannie, when Paulus a
Spaniard, surnamed Catena, (a name well sorting with nature) was sent thither
as a commissioner, to inquire of such as had conspired with Magnentius; But
under color of his authority, he called in question such as were not faulty,
either upon false information, or private displeasure, and sometimes, to make a
gain of those that were accused: which course Martinus the Deputy disliking,
entreated him, That such as had been no actors in rebellion, might be no
partners in punishment with offenders. Whereupon Paulus, charging the Deputy
himself as a favourer of Traitors, and privy to the conspiracy, did so far
forth incense Martinus, that (being either impatient of reproaches, or perhaps
not altogether giltlesse) he struck at Paulus with his sword, intending to have
killed him, but failing in the execution, he presently thrust the sword into
his own body. Gratianus Funarius, though he were not specially bound by oath
to the Emperor, as some others had been: yet, for that he had received
Magnentius into his house, was adjudged to forfeit all his goods: the rest of
the accused persons being fettered, and presented to the Emperor, were
condemned, some to death, and some to exile.

CHAP. XVI.
The government of Gallia, and Britannie is assigned to Iulianus. Lupicinus,
and Alipius, are at several times sent into Britannie: Iovinian succeeds
Iulianus in the Empire, which Valentinian the first, jointly with Valens his
brother, does govern after the death of Iovinian. The Picts, and Scottish-men
invade the Province. The original and manners of both Nations. Mutinies in the
Roman army, appeased by Theodosius.

NOw was the government of Gallia and Britannie, assigned to Iulianus
(afterward called the Apostata) whom Constantius had made a Caesar. Then
Lupicinus Master of the Armor to the Emperor, (a good soldier, but
notorious for his pride, covetousness, and cruelty) and after him Alipius,
were sent into Britannie, to repress the barbarous people that had invaded the
Province there, while Iulianus himself remained in Gallia, not daring to pass
into the I Will, both for that he feared the Gauls, who were ready (upon the
least occasion) to revolt, and also doubted the Almains, who were then up in
Arms: But with what success Lupicinus, and Alipius prosecuted the war in
Britannie, I find no certain report.

After the death of Constantius, Iulianus possessing the Empire (which he had
usurped in the life time of Constantius) banished Palladius an honorable
person into Britannie, and sent Alipius to repair the walls of Jerusalem, in
which attempt, God discovering his wrath, by terrifying the builders with
thunder and lightning, and killing many thousand Jews, gave an apparent
testimony, how vain a thing it is for the power of man to oppose it self
against his Imperial decree.

Iovinian succeeded Iulianus in the Empire, which he held but few months.
About this time the Picts, Saxons, Scottishmen, and Attacots invaded the Roman
Province in Britannie (Valentinianus the first of that name then governing the
Empire, together with Valens his brother.) These Picts and Scottish-men (as
some writers report) came first out of Scythia, though it be not improbable
that the Picts were any other, then such Britans, as being either borne in the
Northern Promontorie of the I Will, or flying thither out of the South parts,
entered into confederacy with the Scottish men, and retained for a time their
ancient name of Picts, as being so called by the Romans (in respect of the old
custom of painting their bodies) to distinguish them from the Britans then
dwelling within the Province. Neither is there any mention made in Histories of
their name, before the time of Dioclesian, and Maximian. These Picts,
increasing in number, did afterward inhabit the Isles of the Orcades, and
being, for the most part, rude, and savage (as the Scottishmen also then were)
did oft-times harrow the borders, and grievously annoy their civil Countrymen
(there being commonly no greater hatred, then that which is bred and nourished
among the people of one Nation,) when they are severed each from other by
difference of manners and customs. The name of Picts in process of time (being
changed into that of the Scottishmen, as of the more populous nation) was in a
manner clean forgotten, when by society and aliance they became both one people.

That the Scottish-men had their original from the Scythes, their very name
may seem, in some sort, to discover; howbeit, diverse stories affirm, that
they travailed first into Cantabria in Spain, where (perhaps disliking that
barren soil) they continued not long, but sailed into Ireland, and from thence
a great number of them came over into Britannie, landing in the North part of
the I Will, where afterward they seated themselves. They were people of great
courage, and boldness: of stature, tall: strong of body: their complexions
somewhat ruddie and high colored: their apparel was either very slender, or
none at all, save only to cover their shame. They were, for the most part,
addicted to war, using peace only but as a means to repair their losses.
Neither was their peace altogether idle: for even then they accustomed their
bodies to labors, no less painful then war it self, and oft-times no
less dangerous. To ride with swift pace up a steep hill, to swim over lakes,
and standing meeres; to pass over bogs, and fennie grounds, were things in
ordinary use with them, as being accounted exercises of recreation only. But
above all others, the nobility and better sort were delighted with hunting and
that in such measure, as they could more patiently endure the want of meat,
drink, and sleep, then restraint from that pastime, which they esteemed manly
and generous. In their consultations they were very secret; and sudden in the
execution of whatsoever they had projected, by which means they oftentimes,
struck terror and amazment into the hearts of their enemies, and much annoyed
the Roman Province in Britanny. They were better contented with the necessities
of nature, and more able to endure all extremities of fortune then the Britans
in those times, as being less acquainted with the vain superfluities and
delicacie of the Romans: In behavior the Britans were noted to be more civil,
but the Scottishmen (as a people unconquered, and admitting no customs but
their own) refused to imitate them, who were brought under the subjection of
strangers, or to be reputed like to any other then to themselves. Wrongs and
indignities offered as well to others as themselves, they sharply revenged: the
slaughter, wounding, or disgrace of any of their kindred, alies, or companions,
being commonly the occasion of rooting out the whole family of him that first
gave the offense. Violent pursuits: seasing by strong hand the goods and
possessions of their neighbors: burning of houses, and killing (upon cold
blood) such as they had taken in war (which others termed cruelty) they
accounted manhood, and policy: supposing the assurance of their estate to
consist, rather in diminishing the number of their enemies, by open acts of
hostility, then by pretended reconciliations, and leagues of amity, which are
either kept or broken at the will of him that has the greater power. Their
name is first mentioned in Histories about the reign of Constantine the great:
though the Scottish writers affirm, that they were governed by Kings of their
own Nation, many hundred years before his time. But of things so ancient to
have the certain knowledge, it is no easy matter: neither is Antiquity in it
self very much to be regarded, where true Nobility and virtue is wanting.
For all Nations at the first were of barbarous, and uncivil behavior, till
Time taught them other customs, and emulation kindled the hearts of the better
sort to seek fame by their own valor, rather then the Genealogies of their
Ancesters. These Scottish-men and Picts, being now assisted with foreign power,
presumed more boldly to assail the Britans, both by sea and land, killing
Nectaridius the Admiral of the British fleet, and surprising Bulchobaudes one
of their chief Captains, (the mutiny at that time in the Roman Camp giving
them opportunity, and boldness to do, in a manner, what they listed.) For the
Legionarie Soldiers refused to obey their Leaders, and even the Deputies
themselves, complaining of the partiality of their Generals, who punished the
least offense of the common Soldier, and winked at the great abuses of
Commanders and Officers. Hereupon a warlike troop of Almans was sent over
under the conduct of Fraomarius their King, who exercised there the authority
of a Tribune, Severus, the Emperors steward of household, and Iovinius were
appointed to second him, with certain Auxiliarie forces out of Gallia. By this
means the fury of those warlike Nations was somewhat restrained, til the
coming of Theodosius, who first appeased the mutiny among the Soldiers in
Britannie, and afterward prosecuted the service there with such good success,
as he restored the decayed Towns, strengthened the borders, appointing
night-watches to be kept there, and in the end, recovered the Province, which
was then contented to admit of Governors, (as in former times) and as a new
conquered state, had a new name given it; For in honor of the Emperor
Valentinian, the Province was (for a time) called Valentia. Not long after, one
Valentinian a Pannonian entered into a new conspiracy there, which being
discovered before it was ripe, the peril like to have ensued thereby, was
easily avoided.

CHAP. XVII.
Gratianus the successor of Valentinian the first, electeth Valentinian the
second, and Theodosius the younger, to be his associates in the Empire. Clemens
Maximus commanding the army in Britannie, usurps the soveraigntie. Gratianus
the Emperor murdered. Saint Ambrose is sent from Valentinian to Maximus, to
treat of peace. Theodosius the younger pursues Maximus, who is taken, and put
to death. The Britans that follow Maximus, seat themselves in Amorica (in
France,) which thereupon took the name of Britannie.

THen Gratianus (succeeding Valentinian) elected Valentinian the second, his
brother, and Theodosius (the son of Theodosius aforementioned) to be his
associates in government: But Clemens Maximus then ruling the Army in
Britannie, (upon emulation and envy of Theodosius glory) usurped the Empire
there: and having transported the strength of the Province into Belgia, (the
German Army being also revolted to him) he placed his Imperial seat among
the The ancient people of France inhabiting betwixt Belgia and the river
Mosella.
Treviri, from whence Gratianus intended, by force, to have expulsed him; but
that as he marched through Italy with his army (the most part of his soldiers
forsaking him) he fled to Lions in France.
Lugdunum in Gallia, where he was entrapped by a treacherous devise; for, a
rumor being spread (by direction of Maximus) that the Empress his wife was
coming to visit him, he lightly gave credit thereto; and thereupon attended
with a few persons, went forth in private manner to meet her; but in the
Chariot (where he supposed to have seen his wife) he found Andragathius, one
of Maximus Captains, secretly hidden, who forthwith leaped out, and murdered
the innocent Emperor, while his attendants, being unarmed, and amazed with the
sodainnesse of the fact, made little or no preparation for defense. Maximus
having his mind lifted up with his fortune, created his son Victor a Caesar,
and used great cruelty against those that had served under Gratianus.
Whereupon Valentinian doubting his own estate, sent Saint Ambrose the Bishop
of Millain unto him, as an Ambassador to desire peace, which in the end was
granted upon conditions. But Maximus ambitiously affecting the sole government,
did soon after break the peace, invading Italy, and attempting to have taken
Valentinian himself, who to prevent that danger, fled with his mother unto
Theodosius his associate (then ruling the East Empire) imploring his aid
against Maximus that usurped Italy, and other parts of his government.
Hereupon Theodosius prepared an army to encounter Maximus, who in Pan^onia
being overthrown, fled to Aquileia, where by the treason of his own soldiers
(while he was paying them their wages) he was delivered to Theodosius,
dis-robed of his Imperial ornaments, and speedily put to an ignominious death.
This end had Maximus, after he had usurped the Empire five years.

The like calamities also befell his friends and followers. For Victor his
son was afterward slain in Gallia by Arbogustes. Andragathius the murderer
of Gratian drowned himself, and diverse of Maximus his Captains being taken,
were put to the sword.

Howbeit the Britans, by whose power Maximus had raised himself to that
greatness (as men desiring rather to try new fortunes abroad, then to return
home) resolved to stay in Armorica in France, where some of their Countrymen
had remained (as diverse writers affirm) since the conquest of Gallia by
Constantine the Great. By this means, in process of time (partly by force,
and partly by policy,) they grew so strong, as they left the possession of a
great part of that Country to their posterity, which being rooted therein by
many discents, did afterward enjoy it entirely as their own (the name of
Britannie continuing there among them even to this day.) This victory of
Theodosius was so much esteemed, as the Senate appointed by Decree, that yearly
feasts should be celebrated in remembrance thereof.

CHAP. XVIII.
Stilico is sent into Britannie by Honorius (the successor of Theodosius (his
father) in the Western Empire) to defend the Province against the Picts and
Scottish-men. Emperors elected and deposed by the army in Britannie.
Chrysanthus the Deputy of the Province is made Bishop of Constantinople. The
Romans send over one Legion out of France into Britannie. They grow weary of
the government there. The Britans implore their aid.

NOw the Roman Monarchy was drawing on to her fatal period, when Honorius
(succeeding Theodosius his father in the Western Empire,) sent Stilico into
Britannie, to defend the Britans against the Picts and Scottishmen, who
assailed them in most parts of the I Will, working upon the weakness of the
Province, in which (the most choice and able men having been from time to time
transported and wasted in the Roman wars with other Nations) there remained
not then sufficient to defend it self. The common Soldiers there, seeing the
state in combustion, took upon them to elect and depose Emperors, first
proclaiming Gratian a free Citizen of Rome; but not long contented with his
government, they murdered him, and elected one Constantine (for the name sake
only) supposing the same to be auspitious. Constantine transporting the flower
and strength of all Britannie into Gallia, made many dishonorable leagues (to
the prejudice of the Empire) with the barbarous Nations that then invaded it,
and sent his son Constans (whom of a Monk he had made a Caesar) into Spain,
where Constans (having put to death some principal men, whom he suspected to
favor Honorius) committed the government of the Country to Gerontius his
chief Captain, by whom he was afterward slain at Vienna in Gallia: and
Constantine his father, having run through many fortunes, was in the end
besieged at Arl^s, where he was taken, and slain by the Soldiers of Honorius
the Emperor, who then recovered Britannie.

Chrysanthus, (the son of Martianus a Bishop) a man of consular dignity, was
then Deputy of Britannie, where he wan so great reputation for his virtue and
integrity in the government, both of the Church, (which was then tainted with
the graceless heresy of Pelagius the Britan) and also of the weal public of
the Province, as he was afterward (though against his will) preferred to the
Bishopric of Constantinople.

Now the Romans, about four hundred and seventie years after their first
entrance into the I Will, waxed weary of the government of Britannie, and the
Britans, that had been many times assailed by their uncivil neighbors,
(consorted with strangers of diverse Nations) perceived themselves unable to
make resistance, as in former times; whereupon they sent Ambassadors to Rome,
requiring aid, and promising fealty, if the Romans would reskew them from the
oppression of their enemies. Then was there a Legion sent over into the Island,
to expulse the barbarous people out of the Province: which being with good
success effected, the Romans counseled the Britans, for their better defense,
to make a stone wall between The Firth of Dunbretton in Scotland.
Glota and Edenborough Firth.
Bodatria, (the two Arms of the sea that ran into the Island,) and so departed
thence. But this wall was afterward made only of Turves, and not of Stone, as
they were directed, (the Britans having not then any skill in such kind of
buildings;) by which means it served to little purpose: For the Scottishmen
and Picts, understanding that the Romans were gone, passed over the water in
boats at both ends of the wall, invaded the borders of the Province, and with
maine force, bare down all before them. Whereupon Ambassadors were sent again
out of Britannie, to declare the miserable state of the Province, which without
speedy succor, was likely to be lost.

CHAP. XIX.
A second supply of forces sent by the President of Gallia, into Britannie. The
Romans erect a wall of stone for defense of the Province. The Picts and
Scottishmen break it down. The Pelagian heresy is suppressed in Britannie,
by the means of Germanus and Lupus, two French Bishops. The Scottishmen are
converted to the Christian faith by S. Palladius, the Picts by S. Ninianus, and
the Irishmen by S. Patricius.

Upon the complaint and earnest solicitation of the Britans, there was another
Legion sent overby Aetius the President of Gallia, under the conduct of Gallio
of Ravenna, to aid the distressed Britans; and the Romans having reduced the
Province into her former state, did tell the Britans, that it was not for their
ease, to take any more such long, costly, and painful journeies, considering
that the Empire it self was assailed, and in a manner overrun by strangers:
and therefore, that from thence forth, they should provide for their own
safety, that they should learn to use armor and weapons, and trust to their
own valor. Howbeit the Romans (in regard of the good service done by the
British Nation in former times) began to build a wall of stone from East to
West, in the self same place where Severus the Emperor had cast his Trench,
(the labor and charges of the work being borne, partly by the Romans, and
partly by the Britans themselves.) This wall contained about eight foot in
breadth, and twelve in height, (some relics thereof remaining to be seen at
this day.) Upon the sea coasts toward the South, they raised Bulwarks (one
somewhat distant from another) to empeach the enemies landing in those parts;
and this done, they took their last farewell, transporting their Legions into
Gallia, as men resolved to return hither no more. As Soon as they were gone,
the barbarous people (having intelligence thereof) presumed confidently, that
without any great resistance, they might now enter the Province. And thereupon
accounting as their own, whatsoever was without the wall, they gave an assault
to the wall it self, and with grapples, and such like engines, pulled down to
the ground a great part thereof, while the Britans inhabiting the borders,
being awaked with the suddenness of the enterprise, gave warning to the rest
of their countrymen within the land, to arm themselves with speed, and to
make resistance.

About this time also, (which was the year of our redemption 430.) the state
of the Church in Britannie, was much encumbered with the heresy of Pelagius,
who being by birth a Britan, by profession a Monk, and (as some think)
trained up in the Monastery of Bangor, travailed first into Italy, then into
Sicilia, Egypt, and other East parts of the world, to learn and study, as he
professed; whereby he wownd himself into the good opinion of many men of great
fame in those days, for learning and piety; as namely of Paulinus, Bishop of
Nola, and (by his means) of Saint Augustine, till the heretical assertions
which himself and his disciple Celestius, a Scottishman secretly taught, being
by Saint Hierom discovered, were afterward condemned by the Bishop of Rome,
Innocentius the first: Whereupon they returned again into Britannie, being
obstinately bent to maintain their former heresy: which Agricola, the son
of Severianus, a Bishop of that sect, had (not long before) brought thither,
whereby the same, in short time, was received and approoved among the Chistians
in diverse parts of the I Will: so that betwixt heresy among the Britans
themselves, and paganism professed by their enemies, the light of Christian
religion seemed, for a time, to be eclipsed. Howbeit, some of the Britans
(disliking those heretical opinions, which as yet they were unable by
knowledge in the Scriptures to confute:) and perceiving withal, what dangerous
inconveniences to the State arose often times, by reason of their disagreement
one from another in matters of religion; earnestly required the Bishops of
France, to send over some godly, wise, and learned men, that might defend the
truth of Christianity, which seemed to be borne down by the subtle
allegations of humane reason. Hereupon the Bishops there called a Synod,
wherein Germanus, the Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus, Bishop of Troyes in
Champaigne, were appointed to go into Britannie, and to undertake the cause,
which they afterward prosecuted with so good success, as many heretics
among the Britans, were openly convinced, and Christians confirmed in the
faith. About the same time, Ninianus Bernitius (of the race of the British
Princes) was sent into Pict-land, to convert the inhabitants there to
Christianity: Palladius a Graetian, was likewise appointed by Coelestine,
Bishop of Rome, to preach the Gospel in Scotland, unto such there, as remained
yet in infidelity, and to suppress the Pelagian heresy, newly sprung up in
that Kingdom, to be the first and chief Bishop of the Church there: for which
purpose also Patricius, surnamed Magonius, (borne in Britannie of a Senators
house) was by the same Bishop of Rome, sent to the Irish and Scottishmen, that
then dwelt in the Isles of the Orcades and Hebrides. These three religious
Fathers were much honored in those days for the reverent opinion which most
men had of their learning and integrity of life: and they are accounted the
Apostles and Patrons of the Scottish, Irish, and Pictish Nations, as being the
several instruments of the general conversion of each of them.

CHAP. XX.
The distressed Britans fly into Wales, Cornwall, and Britannie in France.
The end of the Roman government in the Island.

WIthin few years after, the Britans were again hotly pursued by the
Scottishmen and Picts, who swarmed over a great part of the Land, taking from
the Britans for a time, all oportunities of convening and assembling themselves
together, as in former dangers they had been accustomed; whereby no small
number of the Inhabitants of the Province (despairing of better success)
retired themselves, giving way to the present necessity, while each man (as in
common calamities often times it falls out) laying aside the care of the
public, made provision for his own safety: leaving the enemy in the mean
time to take and kill such as resisted.

Some of the Britans being driven out of their own houses and possessions,
fell to robbing one of another, increasing their outward troubles with inward
tumults and civil dissension; by which means, a great number of them had
nothing left to sustain them, but what they got by hunting and killing of
wild beasts. Others burying their treasure under ground, (whereof great store
has been found in this age) did fly (themselves) either into the Countries
of the South Wales.
Silures and North Wales.
Ordovices, or into the West part of the I Will, (where the The ancient
inhabitants of Cornwall and Devonshire.
Danmonians then inhabited) or else to their own Countrymen in Armorica in
France: the rest being hemmed in with the sea on the one side, and their
enemies on the other, sent to the Emperor for aid, which they could not
obtain; for that the Goths and Huns invading Gallia and Italy, the greatest
part of the forces of the Empire was drawn thither for defense of those
places. By reason whereof, (the state of Britannie now declining with the
Empire, and shrinking under the burden of barbarous oppression) the Britans
sent Ambassadors again to Aetius the President in Gallia, desiring him to
releeve their necessities, declaring withal, that themselves were the small
remnant which survived after the slaughter of so many thousands, whom either
the sword, or the sea had consumed; for the barbarous enemy drove them upon
the sea, the sea again upon the enemy; between both which, they suffered two
kinds of death, as being either killed, or drowned: that it imported the
majesty of the Roman Empire to protect them, who had so many hundred years,
lived under their obedience, and were now plunged into the depth of intolerable
miseries: for besides the calamities of war, both civil and foreign at one
instant, they were afflicted with dearth and famine, which forced them
sometimes to yield themselves to the merciless enemy. But their complaints
availed nothing: for the Romans plainly denied to send them any more succor:
whereof the Scottishmen and Picts being certainly advertised, and knowing how
small a number of ablemen remained in the Province, to withstand their
attempts, assailed first such places of strength as guarded the borders, and
afterward entered the Province it self, where, by continual course of
conquests, they found a passage into the heart of the I Will, spoiled the people
of their wealth, burnt their Cities, and brought the inhabitants thereof under
a miserable servitude.

Thus, about five hundred years after the Romans first entrance, and four
hundred forty and six after the birth of our Savior Christ, the I Will of
Britannie, (which had been, not only a principal member of the Empire, but
also the seat of the Empire it self, and the Seminary of Soldiers, sent out
into most parts of the world) was now, in the time of Honorius bereaved of the
greatest part of her ancient inhabitants, and left as a prey to barbarous
Nations.

The end of the first Part of the History of Great Britannie.
The Table of the Contents of the Chapters in the First Part of the History of
Great Britannie.
The first Book.
THe Original of the Britans. C. Julius Caesar making war in Gallia,
intends a voyage into Britannie. C. Volusenus is sent to discover the Sea
Coasts of the I Will. The Nature, and Customs of the Britans. page 1 Caesar
sayleth toward Britannie. The Britans empeach his landing. The great courage
of Cassius Scoeva, one of Caesar's soldiers. 5 Some of the Britans submit
themselves to Caesar. The Romans Ships are scattered by tempest. The Britans
secretly revolt. 9 Caesar repaireth his Na^ie. A skirmish by land between the
Britans and Romans. The Britans retire, and with new forces assail the Romans,
but in the end are put to flight. Caesar returns into France. 12 Caesar's
second expedition into Britannie. The Britans fortify themselves in a wood;
from whence they are chased by the Romans. Caesar's Navy distressed by tempest.
15 Cassibelin is chosen by the Britans to be their Leader. The Britans assail
the Romans, but with ill success. Caesar with his Army w^deth over the river
of Thames. 17 The Britans surprise the Roman horsemen. The treachery of
Mandubratius the Britan, whom Caesar protecteth. Cassibelin wearied with ill
success of the war, submits himself to Caesar. Tribute imposed upon the
Britans. Caesar saileth into France. 21 Augustus succeeds Julius Caesar in
the Empire. The state of the Britans in his time, under Cuno-belin their
Governor. The first British coin. The birth of our Savior Christ. Tiberius
the Emperor forbeareth to attempt any thing in Britannie. 24 The ridiculus
expedition of Caius Caligula the Emperor, intending a voyage into Britannie.
His vaineglorie and cruelty. 26 Claudius succeeding Caius in the Empire,
se^deth Aulus Plautius with an Army out of France into Britannie. The Roman
soldiers are unwilling to be transported thither: and entering into mutiny*
are appeased by Narcissus the Emperors favorite. Plautius charge the Britans,
and takes Cataratacus their Captain prisoner, for which he afterward
triumphs. 28 Plautius the Lieutenant, pursues the service in Britannie.
Vespasian (serving under him) was in danger to have been slain or taken by
the Britans, if he had not been rescued by Titus his son. The Britans, pass
over the river of Thames, and assail the Romans that follow them. Togodumnus a
British Prince, is slain in the fight. Plautius being in distress, desisteth
for a time from further prosecution of the war. 30 The valor and fortune of
Vespasian in the British war. He subdueth the I Will of Wight. The Expedition
of Claudius the Emperor into Britannie. He defeateth the Britans, and planteth
a Colonie of old soldiers at Maldon in Essex. His son is surnamed
Britannicus. At his return to Rome, he is honored with a Triumph. The
Christian faith first received in Britannie, in the reign of Claudius. 32
Ostorius Scapula is sent by Claudius the Emperor, to succeed Plautius in the
office of Lievtenancie. The Britans in diverse parts of the i will take arms, but
are speedily suppressed. The Roman General seeks by lenity to purchase the
good opinion of the Britans. 35 Ostorius the Roman General, makes war upon
the Silures and Ordovices, the ancient inhabitants of South Wales, and
North Wales. Caractacus their Captain, being overthrown in battle fleth for
succor to Cartismandua, the Princess of the Brigantes, who then inhabited
that part of the I Will which now conteyneth the Counties of York, Lancaster,
Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland. He is betrayed and delivered to Ostorius.
38 Caractacus the British Prince is sent to Rome, and presented there before
Claudius the Emperor. His habit, speech, and behavior. He is pardoned, and
dismissed. 40 What opinion the Romans held of Caractacus. Triumphall honors
assigned to Ostorius for taking him. The Britans assail the Roman Campein the
Country of the Silures. The principality of South Wales. The death of
Ostorius the General. 43 Aulus Didius is sent by Claudius the Emperor, to take
charge of the army in Britannie. Venutius the husband of Cartismandua,
Princess of the Brigantes, upon private coffeehouse, takes arms against
the Romans. The death of Claudius the Emperor. 44
The second Book.
NEro succeeds Claudius in the Empire. The Province in Britannie is governed
by Veranius, after whose death, the charge is committed to Suetonius Paulinus.
The I Will of Anglesey is subdued. The doctrine and manners of the religious
Druydes. 49 The Britans oppressed by the cruelty and covetousness of the
Roman officers, discover their greevances one to another. Prodigious signs
foregoing the subversion of the Roman Colonie. The Britans take arms under the
conduct of Voadica. 52 The Britans take arms under the conduct of Voadica. Her
Oration to her Soldiers. The Roman Colonie is surprised. Cerealis coming to
succor it, hardly escapes with life. Catus the Procurator, flies into
France. 56 Suetonius returns with his army out of Anglesey. The Cities of
London and Verlam are taken and spoiled by the Britans. The Romans and Britans
make preparation for a set battle. 60 The Oration of Suetonius the Roman
General unto his soldiers. The fight between the Romans and Britans. The
Britans are overthrown. Voadica poisoneth her self. The death of Poenius
Posthumus. 62 Suetonius renforceth the Roman Garrisons. Variance between him,
and Classicianus the Procurator. Polycletus is sent by Nero the Emperor to
examine their doings. Suetonius is discharged of the army, which he delivers
up to Turpilianus. 64 Trebellius Maximus succeeds Turpilianus in the
government of the Province. Discord in the Army between Trebellius and
Celius. The death of Nero the Emperor, and succession of Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius. The valor and fortune of the Fourteenth Legion. 66 Vectius Bolanus
is sent by Vitellius the Emperor, to take charge of the Army in Britannie.
Vespasian succeeds Vitellius in the Empire. The government of the Province
assigned to Petilius Cerealis, who soon after leaves the same to Julius
Frontinus. 68 Julius Agricola assigned by Vespasian the Emperor to be
Lieutenant of the Army in Britannie, subdueth the Ordovices, [the ancient
inhabitants of North Wales,] and makes a full conquest of the I Will of Anglesey.
The carriage of himself at his first entrance into government. 70 Agricola
reformeth abuses in the Province. His courage, industry, and wisdom set
forth as commendable qualities in a General. The death of Vespasian the
Emperor, whom Titus his son succeeds in the Empire. 72 Agricolaes policy
to plant civilitie among the Britans. He leads his Army without resistance
unto Edenbourgh Firth in Scotland. 74 What opinion the Romans had of the
conquest of Ireland. Agricola sets out a Navy to discover by Sea, the
utmost limits of the Island, and marches himself by land into the Country of
the Caledonians, [the ancient inhabitants of the North part of Scotland.] The
Roman Camp is assailed, and delivered from danger by the coming in of
Agricola. 76 The Northern Britans with common consent, arm themselves to
repulse the Romans. The Oration of Galgacus, the chief of their Leaders. 79
The Romans prepare themselves to fight. The Oration of Agricola the General
unto his soldiers. 83 Agricola marshalleth his forces. The battle between
the Romans and the Northern Britans. Part of the British Army is defeated. 86
The other part of the British Army is overthrown. The Romans pursuing the
Britans through the woods, in danger to have been intrapped. The lamentable
estate of the Britans. 88 The Britans are dispersed, and unable to renew the
war. Agricola commands the Admiral of his Fleet to sail about Britannie.
He planteth Garrisons upon the Northern borders, between the two arms of the
Sea. Domitian the Emperor, being advertised of his fortunate success in the
British war, is tormented with envy and jealousy. Agricola yields up the
Province to Salustius Lucullus. 90 Agricola returns to Rome, and is admitted
to the presence of Domitian the Emperor. He betaketh himself to a retired
life. He is poisoned. Salustius Lucullus his successor in the government of
the Province, protecteth Arviragus the British Prince. He is put to death by
the commandment of Domitian. 93
The third Book.
NErva Cocceius succeeds Domitian in the Empire, leaving the same soon after
to Vlpius Trajanus. Adrianus the successor of Trajan, sends Julius Severus
into Britannie to defend the borders of the Province, against the incursions of
the Northern Britans. The Emperor himself with an Army, enters the Island,
and builds there a wall of Turves, for defense of the Province. Licinius
Priscus is Gevernor of Britannie. 103 Lollius Vrbicus is Lieutenant of
Britannie under Antoninus Pius, (the successor of Adrian the Emperor.) He
erecteth another wall of Turves, for defense of the Province, and appeaseth the
Brigantes. (the ancient inhabitants of the Counties of York, Lancaster,
Durham, Westmerland, and Cumberland,) beginning to revolt. Seius Saturninus
Admiral of the British Fleet, gardeth the Sea Coasts. M: Aurelius Antoninus
surnamed Philosophus, succeeds Antoninus Pius in the Empire: and Calphurnius
Agricola, Lollius Vrbicus (Britannicus) in the Province. 106 E^^therius the
Bishop of Rome, sends Preachers into Britannie to instruct the inhabitants
there in the Christian faith. Lucius, the first Christian Prince in Britannie.
The planting and propagation of religion among the Britans. 107 Lucius send^th
to Rome for the Laws of the Empire. The counsel of Elutherius Bishop of Rome
touching the same. Idolatry suppressed in Lucius his dominions, and
Ecclesiastical (...) established there. The first Archbishop of London. 111
The Northern Britans breaking down Adrians wall upon the borders, enter and
annoy the Province. Vlpius Marcellus being sent by Commodus the Emperor, to
take charge of the Army in Britannie, beats them back. The rare virtues of
Vlpius Marcellus the Governor. He is dismissed of his office. 113 A Mutenie
in the Roman Army. Perennius undertakes to appea^e it. He is accused, and put
to death. Helvius Pertinax being sent by Commodus to pacify the tumults in the
Army, is in danger to be slain. He makes suit to be discharged of the
Lievtenancie. 115 Clodius Albinus succeeds Pertinax in the government of the
Province. He is honored with the title of Caesar. Being suspected of Commodus
the Emperor, he retireth himself from affairs. Helvius Pertinax, and Didius
Iulianus are elected Emperors successively after the death of Commodus.
Severus succeeds Iulianus in the Empire. Heraclianus is Governor of the
Province, which he afterward resigneth to Virius Lupus. War between
Severus the Emperor, and Clodius Albinus. The death of Albinus. 117 Severus
the Emperor, makes preparation for a voyage into Britannie. The civil
government of the Province committed to Geta his younger son, whom Papinianus
the famous Lawyer assisteth in the administration of Justice there. Severus
with Bassianus his elder son, marches toward Caledonia. Mortality in the
Roman Camp. The Caledonians obtain peace upon conditions. Bassianus takes
the charge of the Arm, and Severus his father returns into the Province. 119
The Caledonians invade the Roman Camp, and carrying away the booties which
they had taken, are pursued, and put to the sword by the Romans. Severus the
Emperor repaireth Adrians wall, cutteth a Trench, and carries it thwart the
Island from Sea to Sea. He falls sick at York. His counsel to his sons.
His death. 122 Bassianus practices with an Army to make him sole Emperor, by
excluding Geta his younger brother. The cruelty of Bassianus. The Funerals of
Severus the Emperor. The state of Britannie from Bassianus to Gallienus, not
mentioned in Histories. Some of the Thirty Tyrants usurp the government in
Britannie in the time of Gallienus. Bonosus a Britan, does the like in the
reign of Aurelianus. Victorinus a favorite of Probus the Emperor, murdereth
the Governor of the Province. Vandals and Burgundians, seat themselves in
Britannie. The Britans licensed to plant Vines. Carus succeeding Probus in the
Empire, assigns Britannie to Carinus one of his sons, who possesses it,
till Dioclesian is declared Emperor. C. Carausius Admiral of the British
fleet, is sent to sea to guard the coasts of Gallia and Britannie, against the
Pirates. 125 Carausius usurps the Empire in Britannie, in the joint raigns of
Dioclesian and Maximianus, who assume to them Maximinus, and Constantius
Chlorus for assistants by the name of Caesar's. Carausius is slain by Alectus,
and Alectus by Asclepiodatus. London taken, and sacked by the Franks (the
ancestors of the French) whom the Romans encountering, deprived of their
b^oties. 128 The persecution of Christians in Britannie under Dioclesian the
Emperor. The death of Saint Alban the first British Martyr. 130 A brief
Relation of the state of the British Church, from the reign of Dioclesian,
unto the coming of Austen the Monk, who converted the Saxons and English to
the Christian faith. 132 Constantius Chlorus staieth the persecution in
Britannie. He dies at York. Helena his wife, (the mother of Constantine the
Great) travaileth to Jerusalem, to seek out the Cross whereon our Savior
suffered. Her piety and zeal toward the advancement of Christian Religion.
The virtues of Constantius Caesar her husband. 135 Constantine the Great is
declared Emperor at York. He subdueth Maxentius and Licinius, the one
usurping the West Empire, and the other the East. He establishes a new form
of government in Britannie, appointing Pacatianus to rule the Province there,
as Deputy to the Praefectus Praetorio of Gallia. He translateth the seat of
the Empire from Rome to Bizantium. His three sons, Constantinus, Constans,
and Constantius, reign successively after his death. Gratianus Funarius has
the charge of the Army in Britannie, when Constans the Emperor is slain by
Magnentius. Martinus Deputy in Britannie under Constantius. Paulus Catena a
Commissioner, to enquire of Magnentius confederates. 138 The government of
Gallia and Britannie is assigned to Iulianus. Lupicinus and Alipius, are at
several times sent into Britannie: Iovinian succeeds Iulianus in the Empire,
which Valentinian the first, jointly with Valens his brother, does govern
after the death of Iovinian. The Picts and Scottishmen invade the Province. The
original and manners of both Nations. Mutinies in the Roman Army, appeased by
Theodosius. 141 Gratianus the successor of Valentinian the first, electeth
Valentinian the second, and Theodosius the younger to be his associates in the
Empire. Clemens Maximus commanding the Army in Britannie, usurps the
soveraigntie. Gratianus the Emperor murdered. Saint Ambrose is sent from
Valentinian to Maximus, to treat of peace. Theodosius the younger pursues
Maximus, who is taken, and put to death. The Britans that follow Maximus, seat
themselves in Amorica (in France,) which thereupon took the name of Britannie.
146 Stilico is sent into Britannie by Honorius, (the successor of Theodosius
(his father) in the Western Empire) to defend the Province against the Picts
and Scottishmen. Emperors elected and deposed by the Army in Britannie.
Chrysanthus the Deputy of the Province, is made Bishop of Constantinople. The
Romans send over one Legion out of France into Britannie. They grow weary of
the government there. The Britans implore their aid. 148 A second supply of
forces sent by the President of Gallia, into Britannie. The Romans erect a wall
of stone for defense of the Province. The Picts and Scottishmen break it down.
The Pelagian heresy is suppressed in Britannie, by the means of Germanus and
Lupus, two French Bishops. The Scottishmen are converted to the Christian faith
by S. Palladius, the Picts by S. Ninianus, and the Irishmen by S. Patricius.
150 The distressed Britans fly into Wales, Cornwall, and Britannie in France.
The end of the Roman government in the Island. 154
The Princes that ruled in Britannie, after the Romans had given over the
government there, until the Saxons and English obtained it.
Vortiger deposed. Vortimer. Vortiger restored. Aurelianus Ambrosius. Arthur
the warlike.




Bishops, and other persons of note, for Learning and Piety, either among the
Britans themselves, or sent unto them from foreign parts, after the Romans had
given over the protection of them, until the coming in of Austen the Monk.
FAstidius Priscus, a bishop in Britannie (but of what particular place, it is
uncertain) a man of great knowledge in Divinity, and a diligent preacher. He
lived in the time of Honorius the Emperor, about the year of our redemption.
420.

Ninianus Bernitius (descended from the race of the British Princes) who first
converted the Picts to Christianity.

Palladius (a Grecian) sent from Coelestine Bish. of Rome, to preach the
Christian faith to the Scottishmen, and to suppress the Pelagian heresy
sprung up among them.

Patricius (surnamed Magonius) borne in Britannie, of the family of a Senator
(whence he took the name Patricius) was sent by Coelestine bishop of Rome to
the Irish, and Scottish-men, (inhabiting the Isles of the Orcades, and Hebredes)
to instruct them in the Christian faith, and to confirm them therein against
the Pelagian heresy.

Bacchiarius (the Scholar of Patricius) was brought up in Rome, and lived in
great favor with the Bishop of that place, Leo the first.

Dubrius, who (as some write) was Archbishop of Chester, Leg^^ of the Sea
Apostolic, and Primate of all Britannie. He gave over his Ecclesiastical
dignities, and betook himself to an Eremiticall life.

Congellus, the first Abbot of the Monastery of Bangor, about the year, 530.

David Menevensis, the uncle (as some writers report) of the warre-like Prince
Arthur, translated the Archbishoprike from Chester to Saint David's in Wales,
whereupon that Sea is called to this day (of his name) Menevensis.

Kentegernus, a learned Abbot.

Helmothus.

Gyldas, a Monk of Bangor, and a writer of some part of the British story.

Daniel, the first Bishop of Bangor.

Sampson, the successor of David Menevensis, in the Bishoprike of Saint David's.

Elnodugus.

Assaph, the Scholar of Abbot Kentegerne, who was made Bishop of Elgoa in
Wales, which place was afterward called Assaph, according to his name, which
it continues to this present. He was the first that received his authority,
and consecration from those religious men, that were sent by Gregory the
Great, to preach the Christian faith to the English Nation.

Herlanus.

Elbodus.

Dinothus, Abbot of Bangor, in the time of Austen the Monk.

Samuel

Nivius.

THE SECOND PART of the History of Great Britannie.
The first Book. VORTIGER. VLT: PRINC: BRIT:
portrait of Vortigern
The first CHAPTER.
A repetition of the Contents of the former part. A brief Relation of the
condition of the Britans under the Picts and Scottishmen, from the Romans
departure thence, until the beginning of the reign of Vortiger, the last
British Prince.

THe Conquest of Britannie (as has been before showed) was first attempted by
the Romans in the time of Julius Caesar, whose short abode in the I Will, and
occasions of imploiment elsewhere, would not permit him to go forward
therewith.

After him, Caius the Emperor, upon lightness and ambition, pretended a voyage
thither, which Claudius his successor prosecuted with effect; for he entered the
Island in his own person, and subdued a small part thereof, which he brought
into the form of a Province, placing there Aulus Plautius the first
Lieutenant, under whom Vespasian, and Titus his son (being then but private
men) bare office in the camp. Thence-forth men of special note and regard were
commonly sent thither, namely Ostorius Scapula (that tamed the Silures, and
Ordovices, and took Caractacus their Captain prisoner:) Suetonius Paulinus
(that conquered the I Will of Anglesey, and recovered the Province well near lost
by the general revolt of the Britans:) Petilius Cerealis (that brought the
Brigantes under subjection) and Julius Agricola, (who enlarged the limits of
the Province, and marched with his forces even to Caledonia, making the Romans
Lords (in a manner) of the whole Island, as commanding all, both by sea, and land.

Within few years after, Adrian the Emperor himself, having transported an
army thither, to expel the Picts and north- Britans, (that then invaded the
Province) began first of all to rear a Wall of Turfes to defend it: and this
example Lollius Vrbicus (the Lieutenant under Antoninus Pius) advisedly
following, raised another wall also of like stuff, to strengthen the borders
with a double rampire; which fortresses the Northern Britans boldly assailed,
greatly annoying the Province, till by Vlpius Marcellus they were opposed, and
repulsed. After whose departure there chanced in the Roman Camp diverse
mutinies, which Pertinax (that soon after obtained the Empire) fortunately
appeased. Then lived the Britans in peace for a time, till Clodius Albinus the
Lieutenant (affecting innovation in the state, and presuming upon the strength
and valor of the army in Britannie) assumed there the title of Caesar, and
carried over with him into France, a great number of the most warlike Britans,
to renforce his army, for support of his usurped Soveraigntie: by which means
the Province was much weakened, and the Picts encouraged again to assail it.

Severus the Emperor also, for desire of glory, made a voyage thither with
Caracalla, and Geta (his two sonns, and successors in the Empire) intending the
conquest of the most remote and Northern part of the I Will beyond Adrians wall:
but his ill success in the beginning, and despair of better, made him soon
give over the enterprise, and to retire himself unto the borders of the
Province, where (having repaired the decayed wall, and cut a trench thwart the
I Will from sea to sea) he ended his life at York.

What was done there from the time of Caracalla to Gallienus the Emperor
(whose state as well in Britannie as other places was disturbed, by the Thirty
Tyrants, the hystories now extant make little mention, till Carausius the
Admiral of the British fleet, and after him Alectus, usurped the Empire in
Britannie: at what time Constantius Caesar ruled the Province, and afterward
(dying there) left it, as a member of the Empire to his son Constantine
surnamed the Great, who was first declared Emperor in Britannie, whence he
transported no small number of the Inhabitants that had been trained up under
the Roman Legions there, to make war in France and Germany, which were then
in Arms for Maxentius.

After the death of Constantine, the discord between his three sons gave
advantage also to Magnentius Taporus (whose father was a Britan) to usurp the
Empire in Britannie: and even then was the Province in danger to have been
overrun by the Scottish-men and Picts, if Theodosius had not providently
repressed their fury. Clemens Maximus in like manner, upon emulation of
Theodosius glory, attempted the Empire, and shipped over the flower of all
Britannie into Belgia, and France, where such as escaped the sword of the
enemy, did afterward seat themselves, leaving to their posterity, the
continuance of their name in that place, even to this day.

Then ensued confusion of all things in Britannie, the Soldiers there swaying
them at their own will: now naming Emperors; then deposing them again, and
declaring others in their stead: among whom they proclaimed one Constantine
(for the names sake only) a man fatally ordained to be the instrument of the
subversion of the Province: For by transporting into France the remnant of the
British Soldiers, he utterly dis-furnished it, and laid it open to all
oportunities of annoyance by the Picts and Scottish-men, who, afterward
(waxing insolent with their prosperous success, in subduing a great part of
the Province, and now and then falling at variance and open war among
themselves, about the distribution of such spoils, and booties as they had
taken) did thereby give intermission and time of breathing to the distressed
Britans, that stood (for the most part) upon doubtful terms, as wavering
between hope and despair, and yet sometimes (like men not utterly dejected,
or neglecting occasions of advantage, when they were offered) resuming courage
again, and resolving rather to die with their country, then to abandon it.
Whereupon (as Beda reports) they assembled themselves together from diverse
places, and assailed their enemies, forcing them to retire within their
borders, by which means the Britans (for certain years) lived in peace, and
fell to tillage, and other handy works. After that ensued great plenty of
grain, and other fruits of the earth, which the Britans abused, mis-spending
them riotously in gluttony and drunkenness. Then pride and dissolute living,
(the common causes of the change and ruin of estates) reigned, as well among
the Clergy, as the Laity, both whom the hand of God severely punished, by
afflicting them with a grievous pestilence and mortality, which in short time
wasted so many of them, as the quick were scarce sufficient in number to bury
the dead. Howbeit (the infection once ceasing) the Britans fell to their old
disorders, drawing thereby a greater plague upon them, even the utter
subversion, and (in a manner) rooting out of their name and nation, as by that
which follows may partly appear.

CHAP. II.
The Britans elect Vortiger to be their King. They send for the Saxons to aid
them. The original and manners of the Saxons.

AFter the Romans had given over the government and protection of Britannie,
the inhabitants of the South parts of the I Will, being altogether unable, by
their own strength, any longer to withstand the furious assaults of the
Scottishmen and Picts, (who were already come with their power, as far as
Stamford upon the river Welland:) assembled themselves together in several
companies; and the most ancient and best respected among them, entered into
consultation, what means might then be used for defense, in a case of such
necessity. But first of all, for that they had found by their late experience,
what dangerous effects proceed from civil jarres: they resolved with common
consent, to run all jointly one and the same course: and for the better
strengthening of this their purpose, they elected a King, (whose name was
Vortiger) a man much esteemed, both for the nobility of his birth, (as being
extract from the line of the British Princes) and also, for the general good
opinion conceived of his sufficiency to undergo so weighty a charge, though
the eminency of his degree, did (soon after) lay open those vices and
infirmities, which his private life had concealed. To him did all the petty
Princes in the I Will submit themselves.

Then they entered into consultation together, and called to mind, the
conditions of such Nations as were most known unto them, considering well with
themselves, that from the Romans, there was no more relief to be expected, (
Italy it self, the seat of the Empire, being invaded by strangers:) that
France was assailed as well as Britannie: that Germany (though a mighty and
ample region) was not altogether free from encumbrance. For, this Country had
formerly been the common receptacle of those Northern people, that (dwelling
beyond the rivers of Rhene and Danow, and being very fruitful in generation)
came usually thither to disburden themselves, and to seek new habitations: by
reason whereof, the Germans themselves were much distressed, and now and then
forced to abandon their native soil; being sometimes also (by consent among
themselves) chosen out by lots for that purpose; howbeit those strangers,
(which had there planted themselves) were for the most part, better able to
annoy other countries, then to maintain in peace, what by intrusion and
violence they had gotten. Among all the Germans, there was at that time no one
nation, which for great adventures both by sea and land, was more renowned then
the Saxons. For, touching the qualities of the mind, they were bold, hardy,
and vainglorious, patiently enduring labor, hunger, and cold, whereto by the
very constitution of their bodies, and temperature of the climate, they seemed
to be framed, as being very strong, and yet not vnwealdy, tall of stature, but
not uncomely, or out of due proportion. For the North Region, by reason of the
coldness of the air, (which drives the natural heat inward) brings forth
commonly, men of greater courage and ability of body, then those Countries
that lie nearer the Sun. Their diet was simple and homebred; neither knew
they any other a long time, till by attaching some of the Romans ships,
straggling about the Coasts of France and the Lower Germany, they became first
acquainted with their manner of vittailing. Their habit was neither very
costly, nor cumbersome, but serving indeed, rather for decency and ornament,
then for defense against the sharpness of air, or such like annoyances. For
their garments were commonly of linen or yarne, woven with diverse colors, and
hanging loose about them: the locks of their hair (which in former times they
had been accustomed to shave) being then curled and spread abroad in compass,
so that they covered their shoulders and upper parts of their cassocks. The
weapons which they ordinarily used in fight, were long spears, round targets,
and battle-axes; having also (trussed up behind at their backs) certain short
swords, which they did wear continually for readiness upon all occasions. In
the Art of Navigation they were very expert, and lived at the first by
pilfering, and afterward by open robbery, being trained up therein, even
from their child-hoode, under a kind of discipline. Storms at sea,
unseasonable weather, perils of rocks and sands, loss of goods and
shipwrackes, (which terrify other men) they carelessly contemned, while they
seemed to have, not only a certain knowledge of them, but also a kind of
familiarity with them. The offices of Soldiers and Mariners, they executed
with like skill, and oftentimes with equal advantage. There was no kind of
cruelty in a manner new, or strange unto them: neither were they altogether
void of policy, in watching oportunities of time and place, to further their
desseins, albeit they were (for the most part) more sudden in attempting and
procuring other men's harms, then wary, or well advised in avoiding their
own. Superiority in degrees they hardly admitted, but each man commanded and
obeyed, as the case required, being as ready to learn of his fellows, what
he knew not, as to instruct others in those things wherein he happened to be
more skillful then the rest. Of their own blood they were nothing at all
sparing, but they exercised cruelty, sometimes even upon themselves, as
making less account, to cast away their own lives, then to endure any
public shame, scorn, or disgrace.

When they did set forth to sea upon any voyage, their custom was, to
choose out of the number of their captives, every tenth man to be murdered, and
offered up as a purging sacrifice to their profane gods, esteeming it a work
of religion, and much more behoovefull for them, then to receive any ransom
for redemption of such prisoners as they had taken.

The Ancestors of these Saxons, (as approoved Writers report) did fetch their
original from the Sacae, (a people of Asia) that came first out of Scythia
into Europe with the Goths* Suevians, and Dacians, and (being either by nature
inclined to war, or by necessity constrained thereto, for supplying their
own wants) ranged often times from place to place, as men always ready, upon
hope of spoil, to be drawn into any action, or to encounter any peril
whatsoever. In process of time they seated themselves in Cimbrica Chessonesus,
(now called Denmark:) and in the reign of Dioclesian the Emperor, became
famous for their piracies committed upon the coasts of Britannie, and the Lower
Germany; when Carausius (being sent forth with a Navy to repress them) under
color of that service, attempted and (with some difficulty) attained the
Empire. Afterward, (passing over the river of Elbe) they intruded themselves
by little and little, into the ancient seat of the Suevians, encroching also
upon Friseland and Holland: (then called Batavia) the greatest number of them
planting themselves in that part of Germany, which is now called Saxony.
These were the men, whom the Britans supposed best able, and most likely to
assist them: and thereupon messengers were sent to declare unto them, that the
fame of their valor and experience in warrelike actions, had moved the Britans
to require their aid, against a barbarous and bloody people, which assaied by
force, to subdue the whole Island: that (next the Romans, who had now abandoned
it) they knew no Nation more worthy then theirs: that the very terror of the
Saxons name, (if they should but once set foot in the I Will) was able to daunt
their enemies, who were (for the most part) men unarmed, unskillful in militare
affairs, and many times confounded by their own multitude: finally, that if
they would undertake this war, they should want, neither provision of
victual nor any thing else for their maintenance; the Island being very large
and fruitful, yielding abundance of all things, that might serve, either for
profit, or delight.

The Saxons being very glad of this occasion of employment, (which themselves
would have sought, if it had not been thus offered) promised to satisfy the
Britans request, by sending over (with speed) such able men as they had then
in readiness, till further provision could be made. And so the messengers were
dismissed.

CHAP. III.
The Saxons vanquish the Scottishmen and Picts. Hengist devises how he may get
possession of the East part of the Island.

THe messengers had scarcely made report of their negotiation at their return
into Britannie, when the news came; that certain Saxons, under the conduct of
Hengist and Horsa, (two brethren) were landed upon the coast of Kent: whereupon
the Britans from most parts there about, ran to meet them, receiving them
with salutations, songs, and feastings, after their Country guise. [The time of
the Saxons first arrival, here (by the testimony of their own Writers) was
in the year of our redemption 450.]

But Vortiger the King, and the chief of the British Nobility, entertained
them in other manner: giving them thanks for the great care and diligence,
which they had showed, by their speedy repair into the Island: and acquainting
them furher with the present state of their affairs. Then was there a contract
made between both Nations: namely, that the Saxons should undertake the war
against the Picts and Scottishmen, and that the Britans should provide for them
all things necessary thereto, as vittailes, armor, and soldiers wages: the
charge whereof should be borne by the Britans only, who were to leavie the
same by way of tax, to be imposed upon every inhabitant within the Province,
according to his ability: which contract, with other articles depending
thereupon, being ratified on both parts; Hengist (considering wisely the nature
of the people with whom he was to encounter, and the likely advantage of
sudden attempts) thought it best to take the first opportunity, by leading
the Saxons (who were very desirous to fight) and such of the Britans also as
he supposed fit for service, into those parts where the barbarous enemy was
lodged: and to that end, provision of vittaile and other necessaries was made,
in such measure, as the shortness of the time would permit.

The Scottishmen and Picts, albeit they did not greatly fear the Britans,
(whose courage was much abated by the ill success that accompanied their late
conflicts:) yet, (hearing that new supplies of strangers were arrived to assist
them) they waxed more wary, keeping themselves, for the most part, in their
strength: and now, (upon certain intelligence of the approach of a well
ordered Army) they resolved to try with them the fortune of a set battle:
wherein they found themselves more hardly matched, then in former times, by
reason that the Saxons, (nimbly avoiding the darts and spears wherewith they
were assailed) did fircely rush upon the Picts, and with their keen swords and
weighty axes, made way through their thickest troops: so that (having borne
down the most valiant before them) they enforced the rest to forsake the
field, and save themselves by flight. After this victory, they returned to the
I Will of Tanet, (which at their first arrival, was assigned to them for a place
of residence) and Hengist their Captain, fortified there diverse places for
defense: hoping by that means, both to keep his own Territory in surety,
and also (as occasion might serve) to enlarge it. For he apprehended it as a
matter of no great difficulty, to make a conquest of the East part of the I Will;
considering that the natural inhabitants were already brought upon their
knees, the King himelfe given over to ease and pleasure, and in his own
conceit, the more secure, the less he intermedled with public affairs:) that
the state of the war now in hand, rested merely in his own direction, and
the more freely he was trusted, the more safely he might deceive: that (though
he was sent for to help the Britans,) yet (this fair occasion being offered,
which Fortune seemed to have cast into his lap) he had no reason to neglect it,
by seeking other men's advantage rather then his own. As for the contract made
with them, he was no further bound to it, then the Britans themselves, who had
already failed in performance of some covenants, that the breath of one
dissolveth all the rest: and finally, that in him, who has power, (to prevail
where he attempts) nothing can be adjudged unlawful. With these, or the like
cogitations, he nourished his ambitious humor; howbeit, knowing well, that the
forces which were already brought into the I Will, would not be sufficient to
accomplish the enterprise: he persuaded Vortiger, it was very necessary,
that more aid should be sent for out of Germany: and to that end he named his
brother Octha, and his son Ebusa, (men of approved valor) who might be
directed to land with a power in the Picts own Country, and to assail the
inhabitants there, while himself in the South parts pursued the rest of them,
(with whom he had already encountered:) whose forces being by that means
diverted from the heart of the I Will, to succor their Countrymen at home, or
wanting their wonted supplies, which should then of force be employed
elsewhere for defense, there might be some hope of a speedy and full end of
the war: the event whereof, otherwise was now more to be feared then in
former times, if the North-Britans, (whetted with desire of revenge, and having
space of breathing given them) should make head, and assail them again. This
counsel seeming profitable, (howsoever it prooved pernicious in the end) was
allowed by the King, either for that he foresaw not the peril likely to ensue
thereupon: or else, for that such things as God himself has determined, are
doubtless (though sometimes foreseen) yet never prevented.

CHAP. IIII.
Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, arrive in Britannie. Vortiger marries Hengists
daughter. He is deposed.

IN the mean while, the Germans (inflamed with continual reports of the
wealth and fruitfulness of the I Will) and solicited by Hengist (who discovered
to them the weak estate of the Britans, and the facillitie of supplanting
them,) hired certain small vessels; wherein themselves, their wives, children,
and families were transported into diverse parts of the Land: at which time,
Rowen the daughter of Hengist (a woman of excellent beauty, and not of the
worst behavior) (having been specially sent for by her father) arrived in
Kent, and was forthwith conveyed to the palace, where Vortiger, and Hengist
made their abode.

Of those Germans that then came over, there were three several kinds of
people: namely, Saxons, Iutes, and Angles, though the Saxons seemed to bear
the most sway, by reason both of the general respect of that Nation, for their
many and great exploits, and also for the authority of their Captains,
Hengist, and Horsa, who were of the lineage of Woden, from whom the Saxon
Princes (that afterward reigned in the I Will) used always (for honors sake) to
derive their descent. From these Saxons, the East, West, and South Saxons had
their original. The Iutes (as some writers report, and as the affinity of the
names may seem in some sort to infer) were descended from the Getes, and
Goths, and dwelt in the upper part of Denmark, which is at this day called
Iuitland. From them the Kentishmen, with the Inhabitants of the I Will of Wight,
and of that part of the firm land (which lies over against it) had their
beginning* The name of the Iutes, was of no long continuance in Britannie:
notwithstanding, their posterity was incorporated into the Saxons, and Angles,
who were accounted but one Nation, the name of either of them being
indifferently used, as common to both; till in the end, the Angles possessing
the greatest part of the land, they were all known, and called by that name
alone.

The Angles in those days were a people well esteemed among the Germans, and
in number exceeded both the Saxons, and Iutes. Touching their ancient seat, the
opinions of Writers are differing, though it be most probable, that they did
sometimes inhabit that part of Denmark (yet retaining the name of Angle) which
lies between Iuitland, and Holsatia. From them came the East Angles, the
Mercians, and Northumbers.

But Hengist knowing well, that fraud, and cunning practices ofttimes prevail,
where force it self cannot, resolved (as occasion might serve) to make use of
both; and to that end (observing well the Kings humor) he applied himself in
all things to follow it: specially, by soothing and nourishiug him in those
vices, to which by Nature he was most addicted, supposing thereby to strengthen
his own estate, and with more security, to accomplish his desire: while the
King intended nothing more, then the satisfaction of his immoderate appetite in
sensual pleasures, which had already brought him into contempt and hatred
with his people, and would by all likelihood open the way to his speedy
destruction. Whereupon one day (inviting Vortiger to a feast) he appointed
Rowen his daughter, to attend upon him as his Cup Bearer: at which time (by her
fathers instruction) she behaved herself in such manner, as the King fell in
love with her: and although he had a wife then living, yet was he not ashamed
to tell Hengist in plain terms, that he earnestly desired to become his son
in law, if he might attain his consent for the marriage of his danghter.
Hengist (who had cast out his bait of purpose to catch him) pretended respect
of Vortigers own reputation, which (as he said) should be too much impaired by
matching with a poor Maiden, a stranger by birth, far inferior to him in
degree, and no way worthy of so great fortune; howbeit, in the end he seemed by
entreaty to yield to that, which himself would voluntarily have offered: and
so (making use of the occasion) he was content to take the thanks, which he of
right should have given. Hereupon Vortiger having cast behind him all regard,
both of divine and humane laws, did put away his lawful wife (by whom he had
three children) and (contrary to the advice of his faithful Counselors)
married Hengist the Saxons daughter. Upon the conclusion of this marriage, a
great part of the Country of Kent (which had been many years together
governed by Guorongus, as the Kings deputy there) was assigned to Hengist, who
like a wily Serpent, having now gotten in his head, found means in a short
time to wind in his whole body.

It is reported by some Writers, that Vodin (then Archbishop of London)
reprooving the King for his incontinencie, and other vices (which drew him down
with his Realm to ruin) was by the commandment of Hengist put to death, with
many other Priests, and religious Votaries, as persons too well affected to
their Country, and odious to the Saxons for profession of Christianity.

This inconsiderate match, and immesurable bounty of the King, was much
disliked by the Britans, for that the Saxons, presuming of the Kings favor, by
reason of his new affinity with them, came over daily in great numbers,
pestering the East parts of the I Will, and many times offering abuse to the
natural Inhabitants. Whereupon the British Nobility complained to the King,
that their estate was now much worse then before the Saxons arrival: that
Strangers (under the color of friendship) robbed them of their goods, and
bereaved them of their lands: that secret practices of such as they trusted,
were no less to be feared, then open hostility: and that if speedy order
were not taken to expel them, they would in short time root out the ancient
Britans, and make themselves Lords of the whole Island. But Vortiger (whose
affection to his wife, and her kindred weighed down all other respects
whatsoever) neglected their complaints, till by his own experience he was
taught, what dangerous inconveniences proceed from wilful rashness, and
mis-government. For the Britans (disdaining to be any longer commanded by such
a Prince, as had neither power to command his own affections, nor care to
provide for the safety of his Subjects) declared him incapable, and by
general consent, deprived him of all regal authority.

CHAP. V.
Vortimer succeeds his father in the government. Vortiger is restored. The
most noble of the Britans are trecherously murdered by the Saxons upon
Salisbnrie Plains.

THen Vortimer his son (a man in disposition of his mind much unlike his
father) was declared King, and renewed the war with the Saxons, whom he
encountered in a pitched field near Ailsford in Kent. In that conflict Catigern
his brother, and Horsa the brother of Hengist, fighting hand to hand, were both
slain, whereby though the Saxons perished in greater number then the Britans:
yet by the loss of the Generals on both sides, the fortune of the battle
seemed in a manner to be equal. On the part of the Britans there died no man of
name, save only Catigern, in remembrance of whose death there was afterward a
Sepulcher of stone erected, where the battle was fought. The like Monument
was also built by the Saxons for Horsa, their Captain, though Time has now
defaced it: howbeit the memory of the place it self (if credit may be given
to the Inhabitants there,) is continued among them even to this day, by a small
Village in East Kent, yet bearing his name. After this, the Britans made
diverse attempts upon their enemies, sometimes winning, sometimes loosing; and
then recovering again, that which they had lost, when Vortimer the King ended
his days, either by a natural death, or by the treachery of Rowen his
Stepmother. He was a Prince of great courage adorned with many Moral virtues,
and (as some writers have reported) a favorer and professor of the Christian
religion.

Then was Vortiger the King (either upon hope that adversity had wrought in
him a reformation of mind, or else, for fear lest any civil discord should
arise by the election of any other) revoked with common consent of the Britans,
and restored to his former estate. During his Sons reign (as the British
Story reports) he lived a private life near Radnor in Wales, where he
bestowed much cost in building a Castle for defense (as himself vainly
imagined against any sudden assault.

In the mean time, the strength of the Saxons increased by new supplies, which
came daily out of Germany: and the Britans now doubted their own estates so
much the more, by reason that the Picts and Scottish-men (their ancient
enemies) were dispersed in most parts of the I Will: the Saxons also, for their
own advantage, entering oftentimes into secret confederacy and mutual leagues
with them.

But Hengist (supposing that he could not with safety enjoy the possession of
that territory, which Vortiger had assigned unto him, so long as the chief,
and most valiant of the British Nation remained alive) devised by a cunning
practice (under pretense of hospitality and friendship) to draw them together
into one place, and on the sudden to surprise them. To this end he prepared a
solemn Banquet, at which the King, with diverse Noble personages (as bidden
guests) were present, suspecting nothing less, then what was intended against
them. For the Britans being warm with good cheer, and wine (whereof they had
drunk immeasurably) were scoffed at by the Saxons, the one provoking the other
so far with reproachful terms, that in the end they fell from words to
blows, in such furious manner, as the Britans (being about three hundred in
number, all unarmed, and surcharged with Wine,) were slain in the place, and
Vortiger their King taken prisoner; who (soon after delivering for his
ransom, the whole Country of Kent, with other Provinces thereto adjoining,
into the Saxons hands) fled to his Castle in Wales: where (supposing himself
free from danger) he continued his vicious and profane manner of living, till
in the end, both himself, and his Castle (as some Writers affirm) was by
lightning from heaven consumed to ashes.

Thus Vortiger the last King of the British blood, a Prince in manners
dissolute, and weak in actions, was by Strangers dispossessed of his Kingdom:
living to see the ruin of his Country, whereof himself was the principal
cause, and dying in the end a strange and unnatural death, which is commonly
the issue of a disordered and infamous life.

The report goes, that this fatal meeting was held upon Salisburie Plains,
where (not many years after Aurelianus Ambrosius caused that strange building
of Stone (now called Stone-henge) to be erected, as a perpetual Monument of so
many worthy Britans slain and buried there; concerning which, sundry
conjectures have been made, as being either framed according to men's
particular conceits, or grounded upon common reports received by tradition. But
by what means soever they came thither, they are accounted at this day, one of
the miracles of England, in regard both of the Stones themselves, which are of
a huge bigness: and also of their composition, and order, whereby they seem
(in a manner) to be supported with their own weight, in hanging one by another:
considering withal, that there are no Stones fit for building, to be found
with in many miles of that place.

CHAP. VI.
The calamities of the Britans. The Professors of Christian Religion in
Britannie are persecuted by the Saxons; whose Idolatry and superstitious rites
are described.

NOw were the Britans driven from place to place, some flying to the
Mountains: others hiding themselves in Caves under the ground, where they
either perished for want of food, or (coming abroad to seek relief) were
cruelly murdered: their enemies in the mean time ranging up and down without
resistance, razing their houses, polluting the Altars in their Temples with the
blood of their Priests, burning the Temples themselves, and committing all
manner of Sacrilege and outrage, without regard of place, or person. For the
Saxons, as by little and little they planted themselves in the most wealthy
and fruitful parts of the I Will; so they endeavored to supplant the truth of
Christian religion, whereof they professed themselves open enemies: as men
merely addicted to heathenish superstition, in worshipping diverse gods and
goddesses; among whom, the images of Thor, Woden, Frea, and Eoster, were placed
in their Temples, as their chief Patrons. They painted Thor with a Scepter in
his hand, after the same manner that the Poets used to describe the image of
Jupiter: and him they reverenced as the commander and disposer of Thunder and
Lightning, with all those (...) is that are engendered in the middle Region of
the air, consecrating to him the fifth day of the week, which was afterward
called Tho^sday. The name of Woden they attributed to Mercury, or (as some
write) to Mars, whom they reverenced as a protector in war, and a giver of
strength and courage against their enemies: To him they usually sacrificed with
man's blood, and dedicated the fourth day of the week, (naming it Wodensday) as
yet retaining the first denomination with very little difference. Under the
name of Frea, they sacrificed to Venus, (as the giver of peace and pleasure)
whom they adored sometimes under the figure of Priapus, committing to her the
patronage of the sixth day, called Frea day. Of these three, Thor was placed
upon a three-footed stool in the midst, and Woden and Frea on each side. To
the goddess Eoster, they always offered sacrifice in the month of April,
which thereupon was called Eoster-month. In their consultations of any weighty
matter, they observed sooth-saying and casting of lots. Their custom of
casting of lots was, first to cut a branch from a fruit bearing tree, into many
pieces, which (being distinguished with several marks) they did cast upon a
white garment at a venture: then (if the matter concerned the Common wealth in
general) the Priest; if a private person only, the master of the house
(having prayed the gods, and looking toward heaven,) did take up every of the
said pieces three times, and interpreted the future success according to the
form and similitude of the marks. If the lots fell out contrary to their
minds, they consulted no more that day: if otherwise, yet they would make
further trial, by observing the flying and singing of birds.

They had another practice also, (...) the event of great and weighty
battles with their enemies. For they would get some one of that Nation, with
which the war should be made, and then take another choice man of their own,
arming them both after their country guise, and so make trial of their valor,
conjecturing by the success of that fight, on whose side the victory should
afterward fall. But of all other presages, the neying of horses was of
greatest credit, both with the Priests and people; who fondly supposed, that
those beasts understood, and were privy to their secrets. And hereupon (as
some imagine) the Dukes of Saxony in times past, gave a horse for their
ensign. The names also of Hengist and Hors^, (the first men of note of the
Saxon Nation that arrived in Britannie) do signify in their own language a
Horse: which denominations, whether they were given in respect of their
strength and courage, (qualities by nature proper to that beast) or whether
they received them upon any other occasion or accident, I cannot certainly
affirm.

CHAP. VII.
Germanus the Bishop conducteth the Army of the Christian Britans against
their enemies, (being Pagans) who by his means are defeated. He departs out
of Britannie.

IN the mean time, the Britans (coming together from the places of their
retreat, and combining their dispersed forces, the better to defend themselves
against the power of the enemy) were freshly assailed by the Sco^tishm^n and
P^cts, a great number of the Saxons also, being newly entered into association
with them: whereupon Germanus the Bishop, who came over into Britannie a little
before the Saxons arrival, and had remained there with Lupus, to the end they
might instruct and confirm the Britans in the true ^aith, against the Pel^gian
heresy, (confident in the goodness of the cause, and to give encouragement to
his new converts) offered himself to be the Leader of the British Army,
which consisted (for the most part) of such Christians as himself had lately
baptized. The place wherein he pitched, was a fair valley, enclosed on both
sides with high mountains, over which their enemies were to march. The Bishop
himself, and certain Priests that attended him, standing in the midst of the
Army, exhorted the Britans to fight courageously as the Soldiers of Christ,
under the banner of his Cross, (which badge they had received in their
baptism) and commanding them all, upon the enemies approach, to answer him by
crying alowd with one consent, in such manner as himself began. Hereupon the
Saxons and Scottishmen ascending the further side of the hill, supposed to have
charged the Britans on the sudden: which when Germanus and the Priests that
were about him perceived, they cried out three several times, Alleluia: all
the Britans seconding the cry, and the Echo rebounding from the hills
doubling the sound: by reason whereof, the Pagans (imagining the number of the
Christians to be much greater then it was indeed) cast away their weapons, and
fled; the Britans killing many of them in pursuit; and such as escaped the
sword, being drowned in a river which empeached them in their flying. After
this memorable victory, Germanus persuading the Brit^ns to unity and constancy
in the profession of Christian religion, as a means to make their attempts
(against their enemies) prosperous: departed out of Britannie, whither (as some
Writers report) he soon after returned, and by the assistance of Severus the
Bishop of Trevers, suppressed the Pelagian heresy, which (after his departure)
sprung up again, and increased among the Britans. In remembrance of whose
zeal and travail in that behalf sustained, the Christians of Britannie
afterward dedicated unto him (as a protecting Saint,) certain Churches and
houses of religion, in diverse parts of the land.

CHAP. VIII.
Aurelianus Ambrosius aydeth the Britans against the Saxons. The valiant acts
of Arthur the Warrelike.

THe Saxons (perceiving now that the Britans were scattered in several
troops, dis-armed, and unfurnished of all things necessary for support of the
war) prepared themselves to follow them, and to empeach them from joining
their forces together any more: to which end, they divided themselves into
several companies, with a full resolution, either utterly to destroy, or to
expel them out of the I Will: which they had almost brought to pass, when
Aurelianus Ambrosius, coming out of Britannie in France, brought hither some
of the Britans, (that had feated themselves there) who (pitying their
distressed countrymen in the Island) determined, either to relieve them, or to
perish in the enterprise. This Ambrosius was a Roman by birth, honorably
descended, and (as has been conjectured) of the race of that Constantine who
for the hope of his name only, (which was reputed ominous) had been elected
Emperor by the Roman Army in Britannie. And being now the chief Leader of
the Britans, he often times encountered the Saxons, and by the assistance of
Arthur, (a valiant Captain) gave them many overthrowes; the circumstances and
particularities whereof I find no where remembered, nor of any thing else
concerning him, save only that he unfortunately ended his life, before he
could make an end of the war.

Then Arthur the Warlike, (the Nephew of Ambrosius, according to the opinion of
some Writers) undertook the prosecution of the war, both against the
Scottishmen and Picts, whom he chased into the remote parts of the North; and
also against the Saxons, whom in twelve several battles, (as our British
stories affirm) he valiantly defeated. The most memorable was tha^ which he
fought on Bathon-hill, where he obtained a notable and (if credit in that point
may be given to ancient reports) an admirable victory: and surely, had not the
inevitable power of Fate otherwise determined; doubtless the Britans should
have needed no other help to support and repair their declining and torn
estate. For besides his good inclination to protect the Christian faith, he was
adorned with many heroical virtues, but chiefly renowned for the love of
Chivalrie.

The British Story reports, that he instituted an Order of Knights, who (as
his companions) did sit with him at a round Table, whereupon they were called,
Knights of the Round Table: that form of a Table, seeming perhaps most fit to
avoid contention, which many times arises among great spirits about
superiority of place. These Knights were commonly chosen for their valor and
skill in feats of Arms, wherein they strived (upon emulation) one to excel
another. Into this society were admitted strangers of diverse Nations, who for
desire of glory, came over into the Island, to make proof of their sufficiency
by exercise of arms with the British Knights. For Arthur himself (by
undertaking great and difficult enterprises in foreign Countries, after he
had subdued the Saxons in Britannie) made his name no less famous abroad then
at home.

Touching his birth, some have doubted whether he were a Roman, or a Britan:
though the Britans challenge him for their Countryman, confidently affirming,
that he was borne at Tyndagel in Cornwall; and surely, if the acts of such
worthy men (as at sundry times were transported out of the I Will to aid the
Romans in the wane of the Western Empire) had been faithfully registered, the
glory of the British Nation might well have been preserved from all suspicion
of untruth, without the support of forged and fabulous inventions. As for the
place where he died, or the manner of his death, I find no certain report
concerning the same in any approved Writer: But his body was buried at
Glastenbury, between two Pyramides, where the enscription of his name
(engraven upon a leaden Cross) was discovered many hundred years after his
death; namely, in the reign of King Henry the second; who (having some
intelligence of the place, by the songs of the British Bards) commanded it to
be dug, and the Monument to be sought for.

Diverse strange and incredible things to the prejudice of posterity, have
been written of this Prince, of Queen Guinever his wife, of Gawen his sisters
son, and of Merlin, a fantastical Prophet, with others, commonly called,
Wandering Knights: matters indeed more fit for feined Legends, and poetical
fictions, then for a History, which ought to be a Register of things, either
truly done, or at least, warrantable by probability. And albeit those
ridiculous and absurd reports of idle Writers, do seem to have repaired the
reputation of this Prince, and to have called in question the truth it self,
so far forth, as some have doubted, whether there were ever any such man or
not: yet diverse Authors of good regard, (pitying his misfortune in that
behalf) have both confirmed his being, and commended him as a great soldier
and the chief pillar of the State of Britannie in his time.

CHAP. IX.
The Britans fly into Wales and Cornwall, where they seat themselves. The
Saxons and English possess the greatest part of the I Will, which is afterward
divided into several Principalities.

AFter the death of the noble Prince Arthur, the hope of the Britans was clean
abated, and a great number of them fled secretly into Wales and Cornwall, as
places furthest off from annoyance by the enemy, and naturally defensible, by
reason of the bogges, woods, and high mountains on the one side, and the seas
on the other. Then the Saxons finding little or no resistance, began in
process of time, to erect certain Provincial governments in the South parts
of the I Will, and in the end, divided the whole Land (excepting that portion
which the Scottishmen and Picts inhabited Northward) into seven Principalities,
which were severed by certain limits, and governed (for the most part) by
Princes, according to order of succession, till by making continual war one
upon another, and the Provinces subdued, augmenting the Dominions of the
Conqueror, the whole land was in the end brought into a Monarchy by the West
Saxons. But in what manner these things were done, the Writers of former ages
have much varied, and the actions and events of those times, being set down so
darkely and corruptly, that I purposed to have omitted the relation of them,
(as a hard and unpleasant task for me to undertake, and likely to receive
small approbation of others:) if I had not been thereto induced, partly for
respect of order, which required a continuation, and partly upon desire to
preserve the memory of some men, whose names, (as marks of our Christianity
imposed upon us in our baptism, and registered in our calenders and Churches)
are at this day in some use with us: deserving well (considering the state and
condition of that age) not to be altogether forgotten, howsoever their doings
through the negligence or ignorance of some Writers, have been left to
posterity, as records of Antiquity, farced with absurdities, and composed
merely of fragm^nts peeced together, sometimes without method, and, for the
most part, without due coherence of circumstances and matters. For many of
those Writers, (being Monks and religious persons) unacquainted with matters of
estate, applied themselves, for the most part, to register the charitable deeds
of their Bishops and benefactors, founders and maintainers of Monasteries and
Hospitalls, or such like general observations: and if aught were well written
by any secular man, the same has perished by the many calamities of the
Country, (a thing common to us with other Nations) or Time it self has worn
out, in a manner, the remembrance thereof.

I purpose therefore, to make only a bare and simple narration of the names of
the Princes, and to point out the most memorable things (as I find them
reported) in their several reigns: distinguishing the Principalities
themselves, and relating successively one after another, such actions, as for
the most part, concurred in time: whereby, though I shall be sometimes forced
to report the same matters, yet I shall more easily avoid confusion and
obscurity, which the handling of them all jointly, would bring with it. And so
superficially passing over these imperfect affairs, of the sevenfold regiment
of the Saxons and English, I will hasten to the occurrents of those times,
which afford more certain and plentiful matter of discourse, and may yield
(perhaps) some contentation to the Writer, and more profit and delight to the
Reader.

The end of the First Book of the Second Part of the History of Great
Britannie.
The suceession of the Kentish-Saxon Princes.
1 HEngist ruled 31. years. 2 Vsk 24. years. 3 Otta 20. years. 4 Ermeric 29.
years. 5 Ethelbert, the first Christian Prince, 26. years. 6 Edbald 24.
years. 7 E^combert 24. years. 8 Egbert 9. years. 9 Lothar 12. years. 10
Edrick 2 years. 11 Withred 33. years. 12 Edbert 23. years. 13 Edelbert 11.
years. 14 Alric 34. years.
The Archbishops and Bishops in the Principality of the Kentish-Saxons; the
times of their succession and continuance in their Seas, from the conversion of
the English Nation to Christianity, until the ra^gne of Egbert, the West Saxon
Prince, who first obtained the Monarchy.
Anno Dom. Archbishops of Canterbury. 598 Augustine the Monk, (sent by
Gregory the Great, then Bishop of Rome, to preach the Christian faith to the
English) sat 16. years. 614 Laurentius 5. years. 619 Mellitus (translated
from the Sea of London) 5. years. 624 Iustus (translated from the Sea of
Rochester) 4. yeare^. After whose death, the Sea was void one year. 628
Honorius 26. years. After whose death, the Sea was void three years. 655
Deus-dedit 10. years. After whose death, the Sea was void three years. 668
Theodorus 22. years. 693 Bertualdus 38. years. 731 Tatwinus 4. years. 735
Nothelmus 5. years. After his death, the Sea was void one year. 740
Cuthbertus, translated from the Sea of Hereford, 18. years. 759 Bregwinus 3.
years. 762 Lambrihtus, (who had formerly been Abbot of St. Augustine) 31.
years. 791 Aethelardus, (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince) 13.
years. Anno Dom. Bishops of Rochester. 604 Iustus (ordained the first Bishop
there by Augustine the Archbishop of Canterbury) sat 20. years. 624 Romanus
10 years. 634 Paulinus (translated from the Sea of York) 10. years. 644
Ithamarus 12. years. After whose death, the Sea was void four years. 656
Damianus 9. years. 669 Putta 8. years. 677 Quichelmus 4. years. After whose
death, the Sea was void three years. 681 Gebmundus 9. years. 693 Tobias 34.
years. 727 Aldwulfus 13. years. 740 Dunnus 24. years. 764 Eardulfus 11.
years. 775 Deora 15. years. 790 Weremundus (in the time of Egbert the
West Saxon Prince) 12. years.

THE SECOND PART: Kentish-Saxons.

The second Book. HENGIST: I: PRINC: SAX:
portrait of Hengist
CHAP. I.
The Principality of the Kentish-Saxons established by Hengist, whom Vsk,
Otta, and Ermeric succeed in the government. Austen the Monk is sent from
Rome by Gregory the Great, to preach the Christian faith to the Saxons and
English. He landeth in Kent; where he is curteous^, ^ertained by Ethelbert, the
Prince of that Country.

THE Territory of the Kentish-Saxons, did at the first, include only that
part, which at this day is contained within the county of Kent, being the very
entrance and key of the whole Island. The west and south sides of it butte upon
the firm land: on the East, the British Ocean beats, and upon the North,
runs the famous river Thames, navigable for ships of very great burden, and
ebbing and flowing many miles within the land: whereby commodities are brought
in, and carried forth, to the enriching of it self, and the Countries round
about. This Principality (enlarged by addition of such Provinces as Vortiger,
after the slaughter of the British Nobility delivered to the Saxons for his
ransom) was established by Hengist eight years after his arrival, about the
year of grace 456. Valentinian, the third of that name, then shoring up the
decayed Empire in the West. Although (by consent of diverse Writers) he ruled a
long time; yet little or nothing is left of record, concerning any thing done
by him, after he was settled in the government: either for that perhaps, no
great occasion was ministered to show himself in action, (the Britans being now
seated in the remote parts of the I Will, and his own countrymen making war in
other places of the same) or else, for that (being wearied with the war) he
gave himself to ease and quietness, supposing he had done enough already,
in making the first attempt in an enterprise so difficult, and in getting and
leaving to his posterity, the possession of so fair and fruitful Countries.

After his death, there reigned, either jointly, or successively, Vsk, Otta,
and Ermeric; concerning whom, I find no other mention then of their names
only.

Ethelbert (succeeding Ermeric his father) was in the beginning of his reign,
much encumbred with wars, which he made with very ill success against
Ceaulin, Prince of the West Saxons: but afterward, (his knowledge in militare
affairs increasing with his years) he fortunately repaired those losses:
extending his Dominion, (by reducing the South Provinces to his obedience) even
to the water of Humber. And the better to strengthen his estate by foreign
aliance, he married Bertha the danghter of Ch^rebert, then King of France, a
virtuous Lady, and a professor of Christianity, wherein the King her husband
was not as yet instructed: howbeit he permitted both her self and Luidhard a
French Bishop, (that accompanied her into Britannie) to use the Rites and
Ceremonies of their own Country and religion: either for observance of the
contract which Ethelbert before the marriage had made with the King her Father
to that end, or else, for the hearty and entire affection which he bare unto
her, as his wife, whom God had ordained to be the means of his conversion to
the Christian faith.

For in the year of grace five hundred ninety six, and fourteenth of the
reign of Mauritius the Emperor, Austen a Monk, was sent by Gregory the
first, (surnamed the Great, then Bishop of Rome) to preach the faith to the
Saxons and English, then inhabiting the I Will of Britannie, where (landing in the
I Will of Tanet, upon the coast of Kent) he was entertained in courteous manner by
Ethelbert the Prince, whose heart being somewhat prepared by his wives
persuasion, and by the example of Luidhard, the devout Bishop that lived with
her) was more apt, in time, to take impression of the Truth, whereto (though
himself assented not at the first,) yet he licensed it to be taught
privately, and assigned to Austen a convenient seat at Canterbury, (the chief
City of that Province) giving him an old Church, which in former times had
been erected by certain Romans. (exercising there the Christian religion) and
consecrated to our Savior Christ. This Church was then reedified, and (not
many years after) Austen without the City Eastward, laid the foundation of a
Monastery: for which Ethelbert erected a Church, wherein both Austen himself
with his successors, and also the Christian Princes of Kent, were (for the
most part) interred after their death. This Monastery being finished, long
time after Austens decease, was dedicated to him by the name of Saint Austen,
whose memorial the ruins of that place retain even to this day.

CHAP. II.
Austen converteth diverse of the Saxons and English from Paganism to
Christianity. The cause that first moved Gregory the Great to intend their
conversion. Austen is consecrated chief Bishop of the English Nation by the
Bishop of Arles in France. He advertiseth the Bishop of Rome, of the success
of his voyage into Britannie, and requires directions touching the
Ecclesiastical government to be there established.

IN the mean time, Austen (being now received as the Apostle of the English
Nation) and such Priests as were with him, exercised their Ecclesiastical
functions, without empeachment; and for that they were altogether ignorant of
the British language, they used the help of such Interpreters, as they had
brought with them out of France, in preaching and instructing the people: with
whom, partly by their doctrine, and partly by their example they prevailed so
much, as many of them believed, and were baptized: for their teachers began
then to express in their lives the practice of the Apostles in the Primitive
Church, by continual watching, fasting, and praying, contemning the world, and
contenting themselves with things necessary to sustain Life and Nature: so
strongly were they possessed with the spirit of zeal, in first planting the
Christian religion among Idolatrous Saxons, and English.

It is reported, that Gregory the Great (when he was but Archdeacon of the Sea
of Rome) took notice first of the state of the I Will of Britannie, by seeing
certain young men (borne in a Province of the Northumbers) presented in an open
Market at Rome, to be there sold: For, marking well their fair complexions,
and comeliness of stature, he enquired whence they were: and understanding that
they were Angles, of a Province called Deira, and under the government of Alla,
but as yet heathen (for so the Inhabitants of those parts then were:) he seemed
much to lament, that such excellent outward gifts of Nature, should want the
ornaments of inward grace: and thereupon alluding to the name of their Prince
and Country, (according to their significations in the Latin, and Hebrew
tongue;) he uttered these words, as it were by way of Prophecy: These men are
worthily called Angles, for they have the very faces of Angels: and they shall
be one day fellow heirs with Angels in Heaven. For the people of Deira, must
be delivered De-ira Divina, by their conversion to the Christian faith: and
Alla their King must be taught to sing Alleluia to the praise of the most high
God: which work (being now Bishop of Rome) he was made the Instrument to
effect, by sending Austen at this time to preach the faith of Christ in
Britannie, where (in a short space) the Christian Religion increased, in such
measure, that upon one day (wherein the memorial of the birth of our Savior
was celebrated) there was above ten thousand men, besides women and children,
baptized in a river: the water thereof being hallowed by Austen the Monk, who
commanded the people (by reason of the great multitude, and the small number of
Priests) to go in by couples, and one to baptize another, In the name of the
blessed Trinity.

When these things were done, Austen went into France, where (according to
order given by the Sea of Rome before his departure thence) he was by Etherius
Bishop of Arles consecrated chief Bishop of the English Nation, and at his
return into Britannie, he sent Laurence a Priest, and Peter a Monk, to
advertise the Bishop of Rome of the success of his labors, requiring also
further instructions in some doubtful points, concerning the discipline of the
Church, and other matters of ceremony and observance.

CHAP. III.
Instructions sent to Austen from the bishop of Rome, for the ordering and
government of the new Church in Britannie. The Primacie of the Sea of
Canterbury. The first English bishops of London and York.

HEreupon the Bishop of Rome signified by his Letters to Austen, and the rest
of his Associates, how acceptable a work, to God and his Church, they had
performed: commending their great zeal, and constant minds, which neither the
travail of a long and laborious journey, nor fear of danger by sea or land,
could dismay from persisting in their good intention: giving thanks to God,
that had assisted them with his spirit, and exhorting them to hold on the
course into which they were already entered.

Touching the Ecclesiastical government, if there were any thing, either in
the Church of Rome, France, or any other Church, which Austen thought meet to
be altered, for the better service of God: he willed him therein to use his
pastoral authority, and to select out of every one of them, what himself
thought most requisite for settling an uniformity of government in the Church
of Britannie: affirming, that divine worship was not to be esteemed in regard
of the place, but the place to be honored, in regard of the divine worship.
Further, he put him in mind of the ancient custom of the Sea of Rome, which
had ordained the profits and revenues of Bishoprikes to be divided into four
equal parts: whereof the first was assigned to the Bishop him self, and the
family, for the maintenance of hospitality: the second for the benefit of the
Clergy in general: the third for relief of the poor, and the fourth for
repairing of Churches.

Then he admonished him, to deal gently with the new Converts, and to
tolerate some of their erroneous Traditions for a time, lest by restraining
them at first to the precise observation of Christian discipline in every
point, he might divert them from their good purpose, and hinder the proceeding
in the general cause: For he supposed it a matter of very great difficulty,
to pluck up at once those rank weeds of Superstition, which by long
continuance of time had taken deep ^oote in their affections: considering
well, that he that desires to attain the highest place, must ascend thither
by steps and degrees, and not by leapes (as it were) in an instant.

He answered likewise many other objections, propounded by Austen. concerning
degrees of consanguinitie and aliance, to be observed in cases of Marriage, and
also touching the admission of meet persons to be partakers of the Lords
Supper.

Touching the punishment of Sacrilege, he advised, that offenders therein might
first be charitably corrected and admonished, to the end, that (knowing the
greatness of the crime) they might, by penance, and restitution make amends,
and detest from thence-foorth to commit the like.

With the Bishops of France, he willed him not to intermeddle otherwise then by
counsel, and exhortatation, lest (by interposing himself in matters of
Ecclesiastical government there) he should seem to thrust his Sickle into an
other man's Harvest: but he appointed all the Bishops of Britannie to be under
his jurisdiction, giving him power to nominate, and consecrate Bishops in
several places, where he thought convenient. Howbeit it was then decreed, that
the Bishop of London should (ever after) be consecrated by his own Synod, and
receive his Pall from the Sea of Rome; for he appointed the City of London to
be the Metropolis and chief Sea: though Austen (contrary to the Bishop of
Romes direction in that behalf) transferred it afterward to Canterbury, as a
place unto which he was well affected, for the good entertainment he had there
first received: and also, for that it was more commodious for sending by Sea to
Rome, and more free from danger, then the miner parts about London, whose
inhabitants were less civil, and not so well in inclined to receive the
doctrine of christianity, as the (...) were: For Pope Gregory ordained,
London, and York to be the Seas of two Archbishoprikes, and that each of them
should have under it twelve inferior Bishopriks, but that neither of the
Archbishops should be subject to other, nor take place of precedence otherwise
then according to prioritie of consecration, save only that (for Austens
honor) he appointed all of them to remain under his jurisdiction during his
life.

CHAP. IIII.
Austen receives the Pall from Rome. Gregory the Great sends gratulatorie
Letters to Ethelbert, who is converted to the faith, being the first Christi^n
Prince of the English nation. The Church of Saint Paul in London is founded?
Melitus the first Bishop there in the Saxons time. Iustus the first Bishop of
Rochester C^ntention between the English and British Clergy, about
celebration of the feast of Easter.

WIth these and other such like instructions, the Messengers were dispatched
into Britannie, where, at their return, they presented to Austen, the Pall
(the ornament of a Bishop) which the Bishop of Rome had sent unto him as a
(...) and confirmation of his Ecclesiastical dignity and authority, and also
certain Vessels and Vestments which were thought meet to be used for (...) in
the English Churches. (...), with diverse other godly lea^ned men, were
appointed to accompany the Messengers into the Island, to the end they might
assist Austen, and the Priests there in preaching the Gospel*

At that time the Bishop of Rome sent also certain gifts of great value to
Ethelbert the Prince, and by special Letters commended his favorable usage
and princely bounty showed, in receyving and mainteining such persons, as came
into his Country, to instruct himself and his Subjects in the knowledge of
true Religion (the greatest blessing that ever any Nation could enjoy:)
signifying withal, that by his conformity to those things which they taught,
a happy entrance was already made for reducing the whole Island to
Christianity, and that if he persevered as he had begun, he might undoubtedly
expect an eternal reward in heaven.

For albeit Ethelbert at the first was not very readily induced to abandon the
ancient superstitious customs of his own Nation, partly, for that he had
been trained up therein from his tender years* and partly, for that he was
secretly informed, that some of the Priests (which then preached the faith of
Christ) were seditious persons, exercising witchcraft, and seducing the people,
under pretense of simplicity: yet after his conversion he became a zealous
professor and practise^ of piety: erecting fair Temples for divine Service,
endowing them with large possessions; and earnestly exhorting other Princes
within the I Will to do the like.

He founded a Church in the City of London, which the Kentish Saxons (in right
of superiority over the East Saxons) at that time possessed, and dedicated it
to the Apostle Saint Paul. In more ancient times (as some conjecture by the
bones of such beasts as were usually sacrificed by the Gentiles, and found in
that place) there had been a Temple dedicated to Diana; of that Church Melitus
(being sent by Austen to preach the Christian faith to the East Saxons) was
afterward elected the first Bishop. The City of Rochester also he assigned
to Iustus, who was consecrated the first Bishop of that Sea.

But while these things were a doing, there arose some controversy between
the English Roman Clergy, and certain British Bishops, concerning the
celebration of the feast of Easter, and other Rites and Ceremonies, wherein the
British Church dissented from the Church of Rome: for the Britans then
dwelling in Wales, and the West parts of the I Will) continued there the exercise
of the Christian faith, which had been preserved among them ever since it was
first planted in the Island, though now and then the clear course thereof, was
either by contagious Heresies, or by profane and irreligious Princes,
interrupted for a time: howbeit, when they perceived the Saxons themselves in
some measure to approove it, they began with boldness to make open
profession of it, as seeming therein to agree even with their enemies,
howsoever otherwise in respect of language, situation, or the law of Nations
they were divided.

CHAP. V.
Austen calls a Synod to reconcile the differences between the British and
English Clergy. The British Bishops ask counsel of an Anchorite, whether
they should conform themselves to such things as Austen the Monk should
require of them. They refuse to accept him for their Archbishop. Austen
appoints Laurentius to succeed him in the Sea of Canterbury. He dies.

Austen perceiving that this disagreement was likely to prove prejudicial to
the state of the new Church, thought it the best and safest way, to prevent the
inconvenience in the very beginning, and to that end he summoned a Synod,
which (by the means of Ethelbert the Prince) he procured to be held upon the
borders of the West- Saxons Country.

At that Synod, seven British Bishops, certain Monks of Bangor (the greatest
Monastery in the I Will, whereof Dinothus was then Abbot) and diverse others well
reputed for their learning and knowledge in divinity were present. It is
reported, that the British Bishops (before their coming thither) asked
counsel of an Anchorite (a wise and holy man) living there about, what he
thought meetest for them to do in that great business which they had then in
hand: and whether they should follow the advice and directions of Austen, or
retain still their ancient Traditious: whereto it is said, that the Anchorite
made this answer: If he be of God, follow him, and that shall you best discern
by his humility: For Christ says: Take upon you my yoke, and learn of me,
for I am mild, and humble of heart: If therefore you perceive by his
behavior, that he is proud and high minded, then be ye well assured, that he
is not of God. Hereupon, when they came to the place where the Synod was to be
kept, and saw Austen sitting in a chair, but not saluting them at their first
entrance, nor seeming by his outward gesture to respect them: they supposed the
Anchorists speech to have been in part then verified, and with much
impatiency, heard the Archbishops oration: wherein they were specially
required to preserve the unity of the Christian faith, and (though they did
many things contrary to the usage of the Roman Church,) yet to conform
themselves thereto in three points, namely, in celebrating the feast of Easter
in due-time, in exercising the ministry of Baptism, according to the manner
of the Church of Rome: and in joining with him, and the rest of the English
Bishops, in preaching the Gospel of Christ to the heathen of that Nation; which
if they would faithfully perform, he promised, for avoiding contention, (a
matter very dangerous, considering the present condition of the time) to
tolerate the continuance of any other old rites and traditions, wherein they
should dissent from the Church of Rome. But the Britans (imagining, that he,
who at his first coming, used them in that disdainefull manner, would
afterward, being settled in a superintendency over them, utterly despise them)
discovered plainly their coffeehouse by their countenances, and made a
short answer; that they would neither observe those things which he required at
their hands, nor acknowledge him for their Bishop: Whereto Austen with bitter
words replied; that since they would not receive peace when it was offered, they
should ere long, feel the heavy hand of war and vengeance upon themselves and
their posterity: and so the assembly was dissolved.

Not long after, Austen the Archbishop (wearied with care and travail of
mind) fell sick of a languishing disease: and doubting lest the state of the
Church (being as yet green, and shaken with the blasts of schism and
division) might easily miscarry for want of a Pastor: he thought good, while he
lived, to provide for it, by appointing Laurence, a grave and learned Priest,
to succeed him in the Sea of Canterbury: and having to that end elected him,
and caused the election to be published, he departed this life. His body was
buried in his own Monastery, within the Church, which Ethelbert had there
erected, and an inscription in Latin, was set over the place of his burial,
declaring his name, and quality, and the time, occasion, and success of his
coming into the I Will of Britannie.

CHAP. VI.
Ethelbert the Prince, provideth for the maintenance of religious persons. He
ordains laws for civil government, publishing the same in the English
tongue. Edbald his son succeeds him in the Principality of the
Kentish-Saxons. His Apostacy. Repentance. Death.

IN the mean while, Ethelbert the Prince, (persisting with great devotion in
the profession of the Christian faith) did move very many of his subjects to
follow his example therein: and such persons (as professors of one faith with
him) he used with special favor: the rest that refused to do the like, he
would not compel, saying; that he had been taught, that The service of Christ
must be voluntary, and not forced.

And as he was very forward in advancing and supporting the State
ecclesiastical, so he was not altogether careless of the civil government.
For by advice of the wisest and best learned men of his Province, he made
certain constitutions (after the manner of the Romans) and published them in
the English tongue, to the end his people might understand them, and (by
knowing the penalties imposed upon offenses) more readily avoid the offenses
themselves. By these laws he provided first for the weal and safeguard of
religious persons, ordaining restitution and severe punishment for such as by
theft or violence, took away anything from Churches, Bishops, or Priests. For
he thought it very meet, that he should, by all means, protect and prefer
from worldly annoyance, such men as watched and prayed for the health and
salvation of souls. And thus spending the rest of his time in the exercise of
piety and all princely virtues, after he had prosperously reigned many years,
he ended his days in peace. He had issue Edbald, who succeeded him in the
government: and Ethelburga, married to Edwin, Prince of Northumbers.

Edbald was (by his fathers direction) trained up in the knowledge of the
Christian faith, which (after he had obtained the Principality) he utterly
renounced: being otherwise also defamed for diverse notorious and detestable
vices, whereby the greater number of his subjects (following his example)
returned again to idolatry, and ran headlong into all kinds of enormity: from
which, (in his fathers time) rather fear of temporal punishment, then love of
virtue and religion, restrained them. Hereupon Iustus the Bishop of Rochester,
and Melitus the Bishop of London, (perceiving this general defection in the
Provinces, both of the Kentish and East Saxons, by reason of Edbalds Apostacy,
and being unable, either to direct, or to oppose themselves against the stream
of superstition, which suddenly brake in upon them) gave way to the time, and
secretly fled into France, where they remained till Edbalds conversion:
Laurence the Archbishop also intended to have followed them, but that he was
admonished by a vision, (as it is reported) that he should not forsake his
flock. In the mean time, Edbald continuing his profane and vicious manner of
living, fell at the last (through distemperature of mind) into a frenzy,
being also possessed with an unclean spirit: When the Archbishop of
Canterbury taking courage, (as in a good cause) repaired boldly unto him, and
partly by admonition, partly by exhortation, prevailed so far with the
Prince, as in the end he wan him to approve and profess the truth of
Christianity, from which by infidelity he had fallen: whereupon soon after
ensued the recoverie of his bodily health, which by many grievous infirmities,
had been a long time much empaired. The remnant of his life, (after he was
rebaptized) he spent in devotion and deeds of charity, to expiate and make
satisfaction for his former impiety and Apostacy.

CHAP. VII.
Ercombert succeeds Edbald in the Principality. The institution of Lent.
Honorius the Archbishop of Canterbury divides his Province into Parishes.
Deusdedit succeeds Honorius in the Sea of Canterbury. Egbert rules the
Kentish-Saxons after the death of Ercombert. Theodorus the Archbishop of
Canterbury expels Wilfrid out of the Sea of York. His learning in Divinity
and Philosophy. His estimation in the Court of Rome.

THen Ercombert his son, (by Emma the daughter of the King of France) a
temperate and religious Prince, prosecuted the work which his father had
begun, in reestablishing the Christian faith within his Dominions The
idolatrous Priests he banished, razing their Temples to the ground, and
erecting others for the service of the true God. The subjects of his Realm
(being much inclined to excess in eating and drinking) he restrained, by
commanding a public fast, during the space of forty days, to be yearly
kept, for the better exercise of devotion; which custom continues among the
English even to this day. The Church of Canterbury was governed in his time by
Honorius, who first (as it is reported) divided his Province into Parishes, and
left his Sea to Deus-dedit, the first Saxon Arch Bishop, (the former being
strangers of other nations;) his own name was Frithona, which for his zealous
inclination toward the advancement of the Church and Commonweal, was
changed into Deus-dedit, as the man whom God himself had specially given.
After him, Wighard was elected, but died at Rome before his consecration.

Ercombert the Prince, having peaceably ruled the Kentish Saxons about four
and twenty years, ended his life when the continuance thereof was most
desired. He had by Sexourga, (one of the daughters of Anna, Prince of the
East Angles) a son named Egbert, that succeeded him in the government.

Egbert ruled the Kentish-Saxons with great moderation, and had not his hands
been defiled with the innocent blood of Elbert and Egelbright, his cousin
germans, he might worthily have been registered in the number of their best
princes.

In his time there lived Adrianus the Abbot, and Theodorus, (a Grecian borne)
then Archbishop of Canterbury, and the last of those that came out of Italy.
They were men of special regard for their learning and holiness of life. This
Theodorus began first of all others, to exercise his Pontifical authority
over all Britannie, placing and displacing Bishops at his pleasure,
consecrating (contrary to ordinances of the church of Rome) Bishops of other
Seas in the City of York, and either by force or show of right, removing
first Cedda, and afterward Wilfrid, (who had bin Bishops of that place)
pretending, that the wealth and possessions of that Bishopric alone, were
sufficient to maintain three Bishops, and that it was meet they should be
divided accordingly: but whether he did it for the self same end that was
pretended, or for envy at the glory and greatness of that Sea, I will not
take upon me to censure. Howbeit, Wilfrid (being thus expelled, and his Sea
dismembered) exhibited his complaint to Agatho, then Bishop of Rome;
notwithstanding he sought thereby, rather to manifest his own innocence, then
to accuse Theodorus. Whereupon, being in the end acquitted by judgment of the
Court of Rome, he was remanded into his former seat, which yet he could not
obtain, by reason that Egfrid, the Prince of Northumberland, refused to
receive him, while Theodorus either openly opposed against his readmission, or
cunningly underhand, labored to empeach it: the reputation of this
Archbishop, (as of a stowt Prelate, and very well learned both in Philosophy
and Divinity) being so great with the Church of Rome in those days, as she
would not alter or make frustrate, what he indirectly had established; for
further proof whereof, also may serve the very testimony of Agatho, the
Bishop of Rome, who deferred the Session of the sixth Synod at Constantinople,
(where the Bishops of all other Nations were assembled) upon expectation only
of Theodorus his coming thither out of Britannie.

CHAP. VIII.
Lothar (by intrusion) succeeds Egbert his brother in the government. The
West Saxons invade the Province of Kent. Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury,
calls a Synod for reformation of abuses in the Cl^rgy. The succession of the
Kentish Princes, from Lothar to Alrich. Kent is subdued, and annexed to the
Principality of the West Saxons.

AFter Egbert, Lothar his brother usurped the government, which by right
appertained to Edrick his Nephew, and (seeking by force, to keep and maintain
what by wrongful intrusion he had gotten) was in the end (after many
conflicts) wounded with a dart, whereof he died. Then Edrick, the son of
Egbert recovered the Principality, which he possessed with little quiet,
partly by reason of civil dissension among some of his own subjects, that
aspired to the government, and partly, for that the Kentish Territory was
then invaded by Moll, (the brother of Ceadwall, Prince of the West Saxons) and
diverse valiant Captains his associates, whom the Kentishmen, by casting fire
upon their Tents, destroyed and consumed to ashes. Whereupon Ceadwall, to
revenge his brothers death, hotly pursued the war in Kent, and expulsed Edrick
the Prince, spoiling and burning Towns as he marched, and chasing the
inhabitants from place to place, with little or no resistance. By reason of
these troubles, the Province remained certain years without a Governor, till
Withred (the son of Egbert) purchasing peace with money, obtained the
Regiment, although Swebherd at that time held part of the Province, either by
usurpation, or composition. About this time Berctualdus governed the Sea of
Canterbury, unto which Tatwinus succeeded: and after him Nothelmus, who was a
special helper of venerable Bede, in furnishing him with notes and
instructions for composing his story of the Church of England. After the death
of Withred, his three sons, Edbert, Edelbert, and Alrich, ruled successively.
During the reign of Edbert the Prince, Cuthbert was translated from the Sea of
Hereford, to the Archbishopricke of Canterbury, where he sat about eighteen
years. He was had in great reverence both of religious and secular men, in
regard of his holiness of life, and zealous care for reforming abuses in the
Clergy: For to that end he summoned a counsel of the Bishops and Prelates of
the land, at which Ethelbert the Prince of the Mercians, with the most part of
his Nobility were present.

Alrich reigned many years, and fortunately defended his Dominions against the
Mercians, till at the last, he was overthrown in battle by Offa their
Prince, who in his own person invaded the Province of Kent. He died without
issue, being the last Prince of the Kentish line, which was cut in sunder with
the thread of his life.

Then Edelbert, (surnamed Pren) usurping the State, made war upon the
Mercians, by whom he was taken prisoner, and afterward escaped, though
(recovering his liberty) he could not recover his former dignity.

Cuthred likewise assumed, for a time, the title of Prince, which he left to
Balbred his son. But now the Provincial government of the Kentish-Saxons,
(which had continued about 380. years) drawing on to his fatal period: Egbert
the West Saxon Prince, strongly assailed the chief places of defense, driving
the Mercians out of the Province, and forcing Balbred also to abandon it; by
which means, in the end, making a conquest of the whole Country, he united it
to the Principality of the West Saxons.

The succession of the South-Saxon Princes.
1 ALla ruled about 24. years, Simen the two elder sons of Alla. Plening 2
Cissa the youngest son of Alla. 3 Edilwalch the first Christian Prince. 4
Aldin the last Prince of the South Saxons.
It is very likely that there were more Princes of the South Saxons, though I
find no certain report of any other then those above mentioned.

The succession of Bishops in the Principality of the South Saxons.
Bishops of Selesey.
681 Wilfrid ( expulsed from his Sea in Northumberland) sat 5. years. 686
Hedda (who was also at the same time Bishop of Winton) sat 19. years. 705
Daniel (who likewise held the Sea of Winton) sat 6. years. 711 Eadbertus 8.
years. 719 Eolla 9. years. After the death of Eolla, the Sea was void about
5. years. 733 Sigga 28. years. 761 Alubertus 29. years. 790 Osa alias Bosa (
who was Bishop of Selesey, in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince) sat
27. years.
The first CHAPTER. South Saxons.

The principality of the South Saxons established by Ella. Cissa his youngest
son succeeds him therein. Edilwalch the first Christian Prince of the
South Saxons.

ELLA the Saxon, was one of those Captains, which Hengist (upon pretense of
ayding the Britans against the Picts) had sent for out of Germany, while
himself was making war in Kent. About the year of Grace 478. being well
appointed for men, shipping, and other warlike provisions, he arrived on the
coast of Sussex (with his three sons, Cimen, Plening, and Cissa:) and after
many sharp encounters with the Britans inhabiting those parts* was constrained
(by reason of his ill success in the beginning) to send into Germany for new
supplies, wherewith he besieged An ancient City seated in that place, where
Newenden in Kent now stands.
Andred-Cester (a place situated near a very great Forest) the chief and
most defensible fortress in all the Southern parts, and (having by policy
intercepted the British forces that came to relieve it) entered the City by
assault, and put to the sword, all those that were within: the soldiers
ransacking the houses for booty, murdering the inhabitants, and defacing the
City it self, whereof Time has left no other remembrance to this day, then
only the name, and calamity of the place.

After this great loss, the Britans sought rather to provide for their own
saftie, by flying into the woods, (whence they might sallie forth upon
advantage, and retire themselves again) then by making open resistance, which
oft-times procured apparent and irrecoverable danger.

In the mean time, Ella began to erect a Provincial government over that part
of the I Will (lying upon the sea Southward (which at this day contains the
Counties of Surrey, and Sussex: though his successors by encroching upon their
neighbor Princes, extended it afterward even to the Firth of Humber.

After his death, his two elder sons Cimen, and Plening (being either slain
in the field, or dead by course of nature) Cissa his youngest son was by
general consent of the people of his own nation, received as Governor. The
chief seat of his principality, was the City of Chichester, which he
reedified, and called by his own name. He also fortified the place now called
Cissburie in Sussex by casting a trench about it for defense of the Province.

What other things were done by him, as also by the rest of the South-Saxon
Princes, the Writers of the occurrents of that age, have (for the most part)
omitted, or Time it self has unhappily bereaved us of the knowledge of them.
He ruled the South Saxons very many years, and died naturally: leaving the
government in peaceable estate to Edilwalch, who succeeded him therein.

Edilwalch, by the earnest persuasion of Wulfhere (the religious Prince of the
Mercians) was first moved to embrace the Christian faith: and Wulfhere
himself) being his Godfather) did at the time of his baptism, give unto him
the I Will of Wight, and another small Province in the West part of Britannie.

CHAP. II.
Variance between the Archbishops of Canterbury, and York. Wilfrid chief
Bishop of the Northumbers, (expulsed from his own sea at York) flies into
Sussex, where he converteth the inhabitants to the Christian faith. He is
courteously entertained by Edelwalch the Prince, who assigns to him the I Will of
Selesey for an Episcopal sea. The South Saxons are brought under the obedience
of the West Saxon Princes.

IN the mean time Wilfrid, chief Bishop of the Northhumbers (being expulsed
from his sea at York, by Theodorus the Archbi. of Canterbury, and openly
disgraced by Egfrid, then Prince of Northumberland) appealed to the Court of
Rome, from which he obtained a definitive sentence, for his justification,
touching those matters wherewith he was charged, and also for his restitution
and reestablishment in his Sea. But Egfrid the Prince refused to receive him,
protesting against the sentence, as unduly procured: whereupon Wilfrid the
Bishop fled secretly into Sussex, and preached the Christian faith to the
South Saxons, whose Prince named Edelwalch received him with great joy,
assigning unto him for his Sea, the I Will of Selesey, where afterward the
foundation of a Monastery was laid. After the death of Egfrid Prince of the
Northumbers, he was revoked, and restored to his former dignity, which yet he
enjoyed not long without interruption. He was a man of great courage, as having
been continually exercised with troubles, and worldly encumbrances, which do
commonly deject and oppress such as yield thereunto, but do engender
constancy or obduracie in such as encounter and oppose them. The authority of
the Sea of Rome he was ever stiffely bent to maintain. The custom of
celebrating the feast of Easter after the Roman manner he diligently taught and
defended in public disputation against the Bishops of Scotland, who observed
the usage of the East Churches, according to the tradition of the Jews.

It is reported of him, that while he remained in the Province of the
South Saxons, he instructed the rude poor people, (dwelling upon the Sea
coasts) in the art of fishing with Nets, and Ginnes, by which means they were
relieved in the time of famine, wherewith the Country was then much afflicted.

The province enjoyed a long time of prosperity under this Christian Prince,
till in the end it was assailed by Ceadwall, a man of great power and courage
(descended from the race of the West Saxon Princes) who being banished from his
own Country, attempted by force to have expulsed Edelwalch: and finally (after
many conflicts) slew him in battle. Howbeit (the greatest number of his own
forces being spent in that war) he was afterward constrained to abandon the
Province (which Aldin then governed) till afterward obteyning the West Saxon
Principality, he assaied the recoverie of it again, and in the end, by
conquest, annexed it to that government, when it had remained (about three
hundred years) under the obedience of the South-Saxon Princes.

The succession of the Mercian Princes.
1 Creda, the first Prince of the Mercians, ruled about ten years. 2 Wibba
(the son of Creda,) twenty years. 3 Ceorla (the son of Wibba) ten years.
4 Penda (surnamed the Stowt) the son of Wibba, thirty years. 5 Peda, the
son of Penda, the first christian Prince. 6 Oswin. 7 Wulfere, the brother of
Peda. 8 Ethelred, the brother of Wulfhere. 9 Kindred, the son of Wulfhere. 10
Celred, the son of Ethelred. 11 Ethelbald. 12 Bartred. 13 Offa, the nephew of
Ethelbald. 14 Ecfrid, the son of Offa. 15 Kenulph, nephew to Penda in the
fifth degree. 16 Kenelm, a child of seven years (the son of Ecfrid) murdered
by his own sister, and reputed a Martyr. 17 Ceolwulph, brother to Kenulph. 18
Bernulph, defeated by Egbert Prince of the West Saxons.
The succession of Bishops in the Principality of the Mercians, till the
reign of Egbert the first English Monarch.
Bishops of Lichfield, and Chester.
656 Diuma, (the first Bishop of the Mercians) sat two years. 658 Cella, two
years. 660 Trumherus, five years. 665 Iarumannus, four years. 669 Cedda,
(removed from the Sea of York) three years. 672 Winfridus, four years. 676
Sexulphus, sixteen years. 692 Hedda, twentie-foure years. 716 Aldwinus,
twenty one years. 737 Witta, fourteen years. 751 Hemetus, thirteen years.
764 Cuthfridus, nine years. 773 Bertunus, seven years. 780 Higbertus, ten
years. 790 Aldulfus, (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince) twenty
four years.
Bishops of Lindisferne, now called Holy-Iland.
678 Edhedus, sat one year. 679 Aethelwinus, twenty two years. 701 Edgarus,
nineteen years. 720 Kenebertus, thirteen years. 733 Alwich, eighteen
years. 751 Aldulphus, sixteen years. 767 Ceolwulfus, seventeene years. 784
Vnwona, two years. 786 Ealdulphus, (after whose death the Sea was void
certain years) lived about the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince.
Bishops of Hereford,
680 Putta sat eleven years. 691 Tirthelus, twelve years. 703 Tortherus,
fifteen years. 718 Walstodus, eighteen years. 736 Cuthbertus, five years.
741 Podda, five years. 746 Ecca, six years. 752 Cedda, six years. 758
Aldbertus, eleven years. 769 Esna six years. 775 Ceolmundus, eight years.
783 Vtellus, five years. 788 Wulfhardus (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon
Prince) twenty one years.
Bishops of Worcester.
688 Boselus, sat twelve years. 692 Ostforus, one year. 693 Egwinus, twenty
four years. 717 Wilfridus, twenty seven years. 744 Mildredus, thirty two
years. 776 Weremundus, three years. 779 Wolberus, two years. 782 Eathoredus,
seven years. 789 Denebertus, (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince)
thirty three years.
Bishops of the Middle-English, whose Sea was at Leycester.
692 Wilfrid, (expulsed from his province of Northumberland) sat ten years;
after whose departure the Sea of Leycester was governed by the Bishops of
Lichfield, until the time of Totta. 737 Totta, twenty seven years. 764
Edbertus, (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince) forty three years.
CHAP. I. The Mercians.

The principality of the Mercians, erected by Creda the Saxon. Penda
persecuteth the Christians in his Province. Peda succeeds Penda his father in
the government. He marries the daughter of Oswin Prince of the Northumbers,
and receives the Christian faith.

THe middle part of the I Will of Britannie (containing at this day the Counties
of Gloucester, Hereford, Worcester, Salop, Chester, Stafford, Bathe, Warwick,
Leycester, Rutland, Nottingham, Northampton, Lincoln, Huntington, Bedford,
Buckingham, Oxenford, and part of the County of Hertford) was in ancient time
possessed by the Angles, whom the inhabitants of the bordering Provinces round
about did then call Mercians. It was in circuit of ground much larger then
either of the other principalities, being at the first divided into three
parts, according to the several situations, namely the East, West, and Middle
Mercia.

The first Prince of the Mercians was Creda, who about the year of Grace 586.
(either by his own force, or by the assistance of such Princes of his own
nation, as were already established in government) expelling the Britans,
obtained the principality.

After him Wibba his son: then Ceorla, and Penda, the sons of Wibba, ruled
successively.

Penda was a Prince of a hautie spirit, and a great persecuter of the
Christians: he made continual incursions upon the borders of his neighbor
Princes, exercising all kind of cruelty where he vanquished. Sebert, Egricke,
and Ana, three Religious Princes of the East Angles, were by him overthrown.
The Princes of Northumberland, Edwin, and Oswold, he slew in several battles.
Oswin the successor of Oswald, after many assaults, offering his richest
Jewels, and a great sum of money, to redeem his peace, could not procure it.
For Penda* had made a solemn vow, that he would never give over the war,
till he had rooted out the whole Nation of the Northumbers. Heruepon Oswin
perceiving himself unable to make resistance against so power-full an enemy,
prayed to God for help, protesting, that, if he obtained the victory against
the Mercians, his daughter Alfrid, should be consecrated to serve him in
perpetual virginity: and a great quantity of land should be assigned for the
erection and maintenance of Monasteries: both which (the success answering his
desire) he afterward performed.

Peda the eldest son of Penda (in the life of his father) possessed that part
of the Province, which was called Middle-Mercia. He married the daughter of
Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers, upon condition that he should receive the
christian faith:) whereupon he was baptized by Finan the Bishop of Holy-Iland
Lindisfarn in the Province of the Northumbers: and at his return into Mercia,
brought with him certain Priests to instruct; and baptize his people, which
Penda himself was contented to tolerate, either for the affection which he
bare unto Peda his son, or else for that he could not but approve the
conversation of such as taught Subjects to be humble, charitable, and obedient
to their superiors: by reason whereof, he exercised less cruelty against the
professors of Christianity, then in former times he had accustomed: pursuing
only such persons, as bearing the name of Christians, lived dishonestly, and
irreligiously, alleging that they, who neglected the service of that God, in
whom alone they professed themselves to believe, were very wretches, and
worthy of all kinds of punishment.

CHAP. II.
Oswin Prince of the Northumbers rules the Mercians, after the death of Peda,
till he is deposed by Wulfere, the brother of Peda. Lichfield is made a Bishops
Sea, for the Province of the Mercians. Chadde is Bishop of that place. Wulfere
is christened. Ethelred his brother succeeds him in the Principality. He
foundeth a Bishops Sea at Worcester. He resigneth his government, and goes to
Rome, where both himself, and Kindred his nephew, take upon them the habit of
religion. Celred his son succeeds him.

PEnda being slain in battle, and Peda his son made away by the treachery of
his wife, Oswin alone possessed the government, having at that time also the
sovereignty over the South Saxons. The Picts, that forreyed the borders of his
Province, he in short time reduced to obedience. Then he provided for
establishment both of the Civil and Ecclesiastical state, advancing the one
by execution of Justice, and augmenting the other by large Donations to
Religious houses. He founded the church of Lichfield, which he made the Bishops
Sea for the province of Mercia. Dwina a Scottish man, Bishop of Holy-Iland, was
made Bishop also of that Province (the number of Priests being then so small,
that one man had the charge of two Bishoprikes.) The fifth Bishop in succession
from Dwina was Cedda; a man much reverenced for his holiness of life, and
after his death, commonly called Saint Chadde.

But the Mercians desirous to advance Wulfere the brother of Peda to the
government, conspired against Oswin, and expulsed him by force out of the
Province, which afterward Wulfere peaceably enjoyed.

Wulfere in the beginning of his reign, was a persecuter of the Christian
faith. His two sons (that went to Bishop Chadde, to be instructed therein) he
unnaturally slew with his own hands: their dead bodies were by Ermenheld the
Queen their mother, buried in a Sepulcher of stone, where afterward a Church
was erected; the place, by reason of the multitude of stones that were brought
thither upon devotion by the common people, gave the name unto the town, which
is at this day called Stone (in the County of Stafford.) But Wulfere after his
conversion to the Christian faith, endeavored (as he thought) to wipe away the
guilt of that bloody offense, with the tears of repentance and satisfactorie
works of charity, in erecting Churches, and devoting the rest of his life to
the service of God: whose example therein, Ermenheld his wife did follow after
his death, sequestring her self from the world, and taking upon her the veil
in the Nunrie at Ely, where Sexburga her mother was Abbess.

Ethelred succeeding Wulfere his brother procured a Bishops Sea to be
established at Worcester: Of that place Bosellus was the first Bishop. In his
time diverse religious houses were erected, as the Monastery of Euesham, (then
called Hothe-Holme) founded by Egwinus the second Bishop of Worcester: the
priorie of Teuksburie by Odo and Dodo: the Monastery of Gloucester by Osreck
Bishop of Gloucester, and diverse others. The King himself having reigned about
thirty years, became a Monk at Bardony, in the County of Lincoln: and
Kindred the son of Wulfere, (his Nephew) having enjoyed the government five
years, went to Rome, where he took upon him the habit of religion.

Celred, the son of Ethelred, (succeeding him) showed great courage in his
wars against Ina the West Saxon Prince, but died before he could finish it.

CHAP. III.
Ethelbald succeeds Celred in the government. He is reprooved by Bonifacius
an Englishman, (Bishop of Vtricht in Holland) for his lascivious life. His
Repentance. He erecteth the Monastery of Crowland. He is slain in battle.

EThelbald, the successor of Celred, was a professor of Christian religion,
though much addicted to wantonness and sensual pleasures, for which he was
sharply reprooved by Bonifacius an Englishman, (then Bishop of Vtricht in
Holland, and afterward Archbishop of Mentz.
Mogunce in Germany) who wrote unto him, how foul and dishonorable a thing
it was, that he, which reigned over so many Nations, should himself be the
bondslave of fleshly lust: signifying withal, that those offenses of impuritie
which he committed, were punished even among the heathen with death and cruel
torments: that by his ill example, he corrupted his subjects: that God himself
for those vices, had plagued many Princes, both in their own persons, and in
their posterity: and finally, that the pleasures of this life, are but short
and vain, and the pains ordained for sin, intolerable and eternal.

He likewise admonished Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, that he should
cause the light habites of Priests and Nuns, (who fashioned themselves too
much after the secular guise) to be reformed.

But Ethelbald being stricken with compunction of heart, for the lascivious
follies of his youth, sought by all good means to prevent those dangers; into
which, through security and continuance in sin, he doubted that he might
irrecoverably have fallen: and first, by the advice of his Clergy and
temporal Nobility, he ordained; that all the Churches within his Dominions,
should be discharged of tribute, and freed from all burdens and labors,
excepting only such as were to be undertaken for the necessary building of
Towers, Castles, and Bridges, for the defense and general good of the
Province; in which case, none were to be exempted: and that persons professed
in religion, should enjoy the profits of their lands entirely, and not be
constrained to make any other payments out of the same unto the Prince.

About that time also, Cuthbert Archbishop of Canterbury, by the advice of
Bonifacius, the Archbishop of Mogunce, made certain constitutions for the
government of the Clergy, under his jurisdiction: by which (amongst other
things) it was ordered, that the holy Scriptures should be usually read in
Monasteries: that Priests should be no buiers nor sellers of worldly
commodities: that they should receive no rewards for administering the
Sacraments: that there should be an uniformity among them in the observation
of Ecclesiastical ceremonies: that they should both learn themselves, and
teach others the Lords prayer, and the articles of the Christian faith in the
English tongue, and that none should be admitted to holy Orders, but such
persons, whose conversation and manner of living was first examined and
approoved.

In the mean time, Ethelbald the Prince (partly of his own religious
inclination, and being partly moved by the examples of his predecessors) caused
a great and goodly Monastery to be erected at Crowland in the County of
Lincoln, where, for that the ground was fennie, and unable to support the
weight of a stone building, many huge piles of Oak were driven into the Marish,
and hard earth (brought thither about nine miles by water) was rammed in with
the piles, whereupon the foundation of the Church was laid: such was the zeal
of Princes in those days, as they could level Mountains, convert fennie bogs
into firm land, and alter, in a manner, the very course of nature: no cost
seeming too much, no labor too great, nor any thing impossible that they had a
will to effect.

When he had reigned above forty years, Cuthred the West Saxon Prince,
invaded the territory of the Mercians: during the continuance of which wars,
Ethelbald was slain by Bartred (a person notorions for his cruelty) and was
afterward buried in the famous Monastery of Rippon: howbeit Bartred soon
lost that which he had ill gotten: for he was also slain by Offa the Nephew of
Ethelbald, who succeeded him in the government.

CHAP. IIII. The Mercians.

Offa rules the Mercians. He foundeth the Monastery of Saint Albans. He
makes a ditch to divide the Territories of the English and Walshmen. Kenelmus
the Martyr. The Catalogue of the Mercian Princes, from Offa, until the
West Saxons obtained their Principality.

OFfa was a warlike Prince, and for the most part fortunate. Kineulph the
West Saxon Prince he overthrew in a setbattaile: and Ethelbert Prince of the
East Angles, he surprised under color of friendship, and after his death,
usurped that Province. Howsoever ambition and desire of glory, transported him
beyond the limits of his own Principality: yet was he a great benefactor to
the Church: for he erected a fair Monastery in the honor of Saint Alban,
near the Town that now bears the Martyrs name, and richly endowed it by his
Charter; He founded also the Abbey of Bathe: the Archi-Episcopall Sea, he
translated from Canterbury to Lichfield, (the chief seat of the Mercian
government,) where it continued but a short time. Between Wales and the
borders of his Province he caused a ditch to be made for defense against the
incursions of the Britans, whom the Saxons then called Walsh, which in their
language signifies (stranger.)

Elfrid his son succeeding him, reigned but one year.

Then Kenulph (descended from Penda the Tyrant) obtained the regiment. He
assailed the territory of the Kentish-Saxons, and took prisoner Egbert their
Prince, whom afterward he freely delivered, upon the self same day that he
dedicated the Church at VVinchelcombe, whereof he was the founder: adding that
special Act of clemency to the other exercises of prayer and fasting, then
ordinarily used at such dedications. In the City of Hereford also, he founded
a Church which he consecrated to Saint Ethelbert.

Kenelm, son of Ecfrid, being about the age of seven years was slain by
Quinda his own sister, that aspired to the government, and dying innocently,
was afterward reputed a Martyr.

Then Ceolworth the brother of Kenulph, having reigned but one year, was
expulsed the Principality, by Bernulph: and Bernulph himself, (after three
years) defeated by Egbert the VVest-Saxon Prince. Then Lucan defending
himself against the West Saxons, was assailed, and overthrown by the
East Angles.

VVithlasm for a time withstood the West Saxons, but in the end submitted
himself to their subjection, which he acknowledged by the payment of a yearly
Tribute.

After his death, Berthulf possessed the principality, with like conditions,
till being assailed by the Pirates of Denmark, he was constrained for safeguard
of his life, to abandon the Country.

Burdred succeeded Berthulf, both in estate and fortunes: for being chased out
of Mercia by the Danes, he fled to Rome, where he died. Then was some part of
the principality assigned by the Danes to Ceolwolph, who held it of them by
homage: till Alfred the nephew of Egbert the West Saxon Prince, entered the
Province with an army, and expulsing both Ceolwolph and the Danes, reduced it
under the obedience of the West Saxons.

The succession of the East-Saxon Princes.
1 Erchenwin held the province of the East Saxons, as feodatarie to the Princes
of Kent. 2 Sledda, the son of Erchenwin. 3 Sebert, the son of Sledda, the
first Christian Prince. the sons of Sebert ruled jointly.
Serred, Seward, Sigbert,
4 Sigebert, (surnamed the Little) the son of Seward. 5 Sigbert, the son of
Sigebald, (brother of Sebert.) 6 Sigher. 7 Sebbi. 8 Sigeherd, the son of
Sebbi. 9 Seofride, the brother of Sigeherd. 10 Offa, the son of Sigeherd. 11
Celred. 12 Suthred, defeated by Egbert, Prince of the West Saxons.
The succession of the Bishops of London in the Province of the East Saxons.
604 Melitus, the first Bishop (sent from Rome) sat thirteen years, after
whose translation, the Sea was void about forty years. 658 Cedda, eight
years. 666 Wina, (translated from the Sea of Winton) 9. years. 675
Erkenwaldus, twenty two years. 697 Waldherus, eighteen years. 715 Ingualdus,
thirty one years. 746 Egwulfus, eight years. 754 Wighedus, seven years. 761
Eadbrichtus, eleven years. 775 Deora, nine years. 784 Eadbaldus, eleven
years. 795 Heathobertus, (in the time of Egbert the West Saxon Prince)
eighteen years.
The first CHAPTER. East Saxons.

The principality of the East Saxons, erected by Erchenwin. Sebert the first
Christian Prince. Miletus the first Bishop of the East Saxons, has his Sea at
London. Saint Paul's church there founded by Ethelbert (the first Christian
Prince of the Kentish-Saxons.) The Church at Westminster founded by Sebert.
Cedda (afterward called St. Chadde) preaches the Gospel to the East Saxons.
Sigher and Sebbi, jointly rule the Province.

ERchenwin was the first of all the Saxons, that erected a Provincial
government among the East Saxons, who then inhabited those parts, which now
contain the Counties of Essex, Middlesex, and part of the County of Hartford:
all which, both himself and his successors many years together held by homage
of the Kentish Princes, as of their superior Lords. This Prince having reigned
a long time (with what success, I find no certain report,) left the
government to Sledda his son, who, to strengthen his estate by affinity,
married Ricula, the daughter of Ermerick the Prince of Kent, by whom he had
issue Sebert that succeeded him.

Sebert governed peaceably the Province of the East Saxons, which in his time
was converted to Christianity: for in the year of Grace 604. Miletus was sent
by Augustine the Archbish. to preach the faith of Christ to that people, and had
the City of London assigned to him for his Episcopal Sea, where Ethelbert
the Kentish Prince erected a Church, which he dedicated to Saint Paul, endowing
it with large possessions: and Sebert (following his example therein) founded
an other at the West end of the city, where afterward, a Monastery was
builded: The place at that time (being environed with water, and overgrowen
with thorns) was called Thorney, and afterward (by reason of the situation
thereof) the West-Minster.

It is reported that in more ancient times there had been a Temple of Apollo,
which being overthrowen by an Earthquake, Lucius the first Christian Prince of
the Britans, reedified and converted to a Church for the exercise of the
Christian Religion.

Sebert (having spent the most part of his time after his conversion) in deeds
of Charity and Devotion, ended his life, and was buried in that Church,
together with his wife Ethelgoda.

Serred, Seward, and Sigbert his sons, ruled jointly the province of the
East Saxons. They were all men of disordered conversation, and open despisers
of religious rites: for, being not yet baptized, they would have receyved the
Sacrament of Christ's body: wherein, for that Miletus the Bishop had opposed
himself against them, they expelled him from his Sea at London, and themselves
soon after were by Kinegles the West Saxon Prince, deprived both of
government, and life.

Sigebert, surnamed the Little, the son of Seward, succeeded in the
principality, which in short time he left to Sigbert, (the nephew of Sebert
(the first Christian Prince of the East Saxons:) Sigbert was by persuasion of
Oswin chief governor of the Northumbers, converted from Paganism to
Christianity, wherein he was confirmed, by Cedda, a devout learned man, that
then preached to the East Saxons, and recovered many of them, which (after the
expulsion of Miletus) had fallen from the faith. He was afterward by Finan
(the Bishop of Holy-Iland) consecrated bishop of the East Saxons: amongst whom,
he preached the Gospel of Christ without interruption, till such time as
Sigbert the Prince, (procoring the dislike of his Subjects, for that he showed
too much clemency to the Mercians his enemies) was trecherously murdered by one
of his own kindred.

After his death, Swidhelin, the son of Sexbald, obtained the regement, and
was baptized by Cedda the Bishop.

Then Sigher and Sebbi ruled together, but not with absolute authority, for at
that time they acknowledged allegiance to Wulfere Prince of the Mercians. In
those days great plague and mortality fell upon the Inhabitants of the
Province, and Sigher (renouncing the faith) fell to Idolatry, which in a short
time greatly increased, till Iarumanus the Bishop of Lichfield, and certain
priests (being sent thither by VVulfere to that end) labored with all
diligence to stop the course thereof, and in the end suppressed it.

CHAP. II.
The Devotion, Chastity, and Chiritie, of Sebbi the Prince. The manner of his
death. Offa resigneth the government, and goes to Rome, where he enters into
Religion. Egbert the West Saxon Prince, obtains the principality of the
East Saxons.

IN the mean time Sebbi, and the people under his obedience, (notwithstanding
the relapse of their Countrymen) persisted constantly in the faith of Christ:
and Sebbi himself by praying, fasting, and Alms ceeds, East Saxons.
manifested his own earnest desire to maintain the same: being so strongly
possessed with the spirit of zeal, and love of Chastity, as he persuaded his
wife to a separation, whereby they might serve God with more purity of heart:
and his piety and humility was had in such estimation, even among the
religious persons, as they reputed him more meet to have been a Priest, then
a Prince. After he had (with much difficulty obtained his wives consent for a
separation) he bestowed the greatest part of his worldly wealth upon the poor:
reserving nothing for himself (besides his necessary maintenance) but only
the expectation of a future recompense. In his time lived Erkenwald a godly
Priest, who was afterward Bishop of London. He founded two Monasteries, the one
for himself, at Chartsey in Surrey, and the other for Ethelburga his sister at
Barking in Essex. Sebbi having ruled about thirty years, fell sick of a
grievous and very painful disease; by reason whereof, doubting lest through
frailty of the flesh, he might burst out into any intemperate speeches, or do
any other thing unseemly for his person and profession, he desired Waldher the
successor of Erkenwald, (then Bishop of London) by prayers and ghostly
counsel to assist him in his agonies, and that no more then himself, and two
of his Chaplains only might be present at the time of his departure: so great
a care had this religious Prince in well finishing that race, which he had
prosperously continued the most part of his life: and in preventing all
occasions of scandal to the faith which he professed. His body was buried in
the church of Saint Paul in London, and then Sigeherd, and Seofrid his two
sons, successively ruled the Province of the East Saxons. After them it was
governed by Offa, the son of Sigeherd, who married Geneswede the daughter of
Penda Prince of the Mercians. The possessions belonging to the Church of
Westminster, he greatly augmented, and (resigning the government to Celred)
went to Rome, where he ended his life in a Religious house. Celred succeeded
Offa, maintaining the state of the Province in peace, till in the end he was
slain: but in what manner, or by whom, I find no mention. Then Suthred (either
by right of succession, or by election) obtained the government, which he
enjoyed but a short time; for Egbert the VVest-Saxon Prince, invaded at one
time the Provinces both of the East and Kentish Saxons, and in the end brought
them under his subjection: albeit the City of London remained under obedience
of the Princes of Mercia, so long as that principality continued.

The succession of the Princes of the East Angles.
1 Vffa. 2 Titill. 3 Redwald, an Apostatae. 4 Carpenwald, the son of Redwald.
5 Sebert, the brother of Carpenwald. 6 Egrick the kinsman of Sebert. 7 Ana. 8
Athelhere, the brother of Ana. 9 Adelwald. the sons of Athelhere, ruled
jointly.
Aldulph, Elohwold, Hisberna,
10 Ethelbert. 1. 11 Ethelbert 2. 12 Offa. 13 S. Edmund.
The succession of Bishops in the Principality of the East Angles.
636 Faelix a Burgundian Bishop of Dunwich, sat twelve years. 648 Thomas (his
Deacon) five years. 653 Bonifacius, alias Birtgilsus, seventeene years. 670
Bisi.
After Bisi, the bishopric was divided into two Seas.
Dunwich. North-Elmeham. 671 Aecca, twenty three years. Beadwinus. 696
Aesculfus, twenty four years. Northbertus. 720 Eadberctus, sixteen years.
Heatholacus. 736 Cuthwinus, eleven years. Eahelfridus. 747 Aldbertus, four
years. Lamfertus. 771 Eglafus, eight years. Athelwulfus. 779 Eadredus, six
years. Hunfertus. 785 Althunus, three years. Sibba. 788 Titfridus, twenty
years. Alherdus.

CHAP. I. East Angles.

The Principality of the East Angles erected by Vffa. Faelix a Burgundian,
preaches the faith to the East Angles. His Episcopal sea at Dunwich in
Suffolk. Sebert the first Christian Prince, resigneth his government to
Egrick, and entreth-into a Monastery, from whence he is drawn forth by his
subjects, when the Mercians invade his Province. He is slain in battle with
Egrick, whom Ana succeeds in the government.

THe Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge, with the I Will of Ely, were
the ancient habitations of the East Angles; among whom, Vffa (about the year
of Grace 492.) established a principality, which he left unto Ti^il, of whom
little or nothing is recorded, save only the name and title.

Then Redwald succeeding him, entered into league with Edwin, advauncing him to
the government of the Northumbers, after the death of Edelfrid their Prince,
whom Redwald had slain in battle. He was afterward (by the exhortation of
Edwin the Prince,) converted to Christianity, from which he was within a short
time withdrawn by his wi^es persuasion, though Dorwald one of his sons
persevering therein, was cruelly murdered by Rochbert a Pagan: and Carpenwald
his other son (succeeding his father in the government) participated with his
brother in his fortune; for he was slain by the same man, and in the same
manner.

Then Sebert his brother obtained the government. During the reign of
Carpenwald, he lived as a banished man in France, where he was first instructed
in the Christian Religion. In his time, Foelix the Burgundian came into
Britannie, and made suite to Honorius the Archbishop of Canterbury, that he
might be licensed to preach the Gospel to the East Angles: whereto the
Archbishop (approving his zealous intention) willingly assented; and so the
Christian faith within few years was dispersed throughout the Province, by the
diligence and labor of Foelix, whom the inhabitants reverenced as a man, that
(being himself happy both in name and condition) had power also to make
others happy. He was made Bishop of Dunwich in Suffolk, which being then but
a small town, became afterward very rich and populous, and was governed
according to the manner of the ancient and best Cities. Many religious houses
(the fruits of devotion in that age) were at sundry times erected in the place.
There was also a Mint wherein a certain coin (with the inscription of the
name of the City) was stamped. But time has worn out in a manner the
remembrance of these things at this day, and the sea has devoured the greatest
part of the building. It continued an entire Bishops Sea, but a while; for Bisi
(the fourth Bishop in succession from Foelix) divided it into two Bishoprics:
the one of Dunwich, the other of Holinham.

In the mean time Sebert, (imitating the example of the Kentish Saxons)
provided means, that the children born within his Dominions, might be trained
up in learning, and religion, erecting Schools, and allowing stipends for the
maintenance of Teachers. He was also a great benefactor to Hospitals, and
Religious houses, and in the end (resigning the government to Egrick his
kinsman) he entered into a Monastery, (whereof himself had been the founder)
and there remained peaceably, till (by the treacherous practice of Athelhere,
one of his nobility) Penda the Mercian Prince, with an army of Pagans,
invaded his Province; for then was he forcibly drawn thence by his own
subjects, who (finding themselves too weak to resist their enemies) brought
Sebert himself into the field: supposing, perhaps, that his personal presence
would encourage his people to fight with more resolution: but in that battle,
the East Angles were overthrown, and both Sebert and Egrick his cousin slain.

The like success in the self same manner befell Ana, who succeeded Egrick in
the Principality.

CHAP. II.
Athelhere the brother of Ana, rules the East Angles. He is slain by Oswin,
Prince of the Northumbers. S. Ethelbert is murdered by Offa, Prince of the
Mercians. Offa having made a voyage into the Holy-Iland, dies in his return
homewards. Edmund succeeds Offa in the government. The Martyrdom of S.
Edmund by the Pagan Danes. The Monastery of S. Edmunds. bury in Suffolk
erected. The Principality of the East Angles annexed to that of the
West Saxons.

THen Athelhere the brother to Ana, assumed the government, but preventing his
time in the getting of it, he lost it again ere he was fully s^led: for, as by
combining with Penda the Pagan (...) had been a means to hasten the death of
his (...), he and kinsman: East Angles.
so his own blood (together with Pendaes) was soon after shed by Oswin,
Prince of the Northumbers.

Adelwald his brother with little better fortune succeeded him, leaving the
Principality to Aldulf, Elohwold and Hisberna, (the sons of his brother
Athelhere,) who by civil discention, (supplanting one another) made way for
Ethelbert to attain the government.

Ethelbert by his wife Laonorine, had a son of his own name that succeeded
him. Ethelbert the second, was a Prince much renowned for learning and piety.
He governed the Province with great wisdom and prosperous success, till by
the perfidious dealing of Offa, the Mercian Prince, he was shamefully murdered.
For being betrothed to Alfride, the daughter of Offa, (who ambitiously affected
the Principality of the East Angles) he was under color of friendship, invited
to a feast, where Offa (by the persuasion of his wife) commanded his head to be
cut off, and his body to be buried in the bank of a river. By this
dishonorable act, the Mercians obtained the Province. But Offa, being
afterward touched with sorrow and compunction of heart for committing it,
caused Ethelberts body to be taken up, and to be conveied to the City of
Hereford, (not far from the place where he was slain) and there to be very
solemnly enterred: supposing thereby to expiate in part, the guilt of his
former offense: Afterward a Church was there built, and dedicated to Ethelbert
by the name of a Saint. Then Offa undertook a voyage to the Holy Land, and
passing through Saxony, was there received with great joy by Alkemond the King
his kinsman, and Syware his wife: at that time he adopted Edmund, the son of
Alkemond, to be his heir, and to succeed him in the Principality of the
East Angles, which did soon after fall unto him; for Offa in his return from
the Holy Land, ended his life at Port St. George: whereupon Edmund speedily
repaired into Britannie, where he was received by the East Angles, as their
Prince. In his time Hinguar and Hubba, the two Danish Pirates, invaded
Northumberland; and Hinguar having enriched himself with the spoils of that
Country, sailed toward the coast of the East Angles, where (afterward
landing) he surprised their chief City, consuming it by fire. The Citizens
also, without respect of age or sect, he cruelly murdered, and in the end,
took Edmund the Prince, whom first the Pagan Danes persuaded to renounce the
profession of Christianity. But when they could neither by promises of
assurance of life and safety, nor by threats and terror of death, prevail
with him therein, they beat him with staves, scourged him with whips, and used
him with all kinds of barbarous in civilitie and cruelty, which the religious
Prince with great meekness and patience, endured cheerfully, calling upon
the name of Jesus, as rejoicing for his sake, to suffer those torments and
indignities. The Pagans seeing his great constancy and courage, were
transported with fury, and at the last, wounded him with their shafts, which
they shot at him, till his body was covered over with them. The^ they cut off
his head and cast it into a bush. His body (being afterward found) was
enterred at Bury in folk, where a goodly Monastery was erected and ^^^dicated
to him, (the ruins thereof remaining yet to this day.) After his death, the
Principality of the East Angles was possessed by the Danes about 50. years,
till Edward (the son of Etheldred) the West Saxon Prince expulsing them,
annexed both that Province and the country of the East Saxons, (adjoining to
it) unto his own government.

The succession of the Princes of the Northumbers.
1 Ida. 2 Alla. 3 Ethelrick the younger son of Ida. 4 Ethelfrid the brother
of Ethelrick. 5 Edwin the first Christian Prince. 6 Osric. 7 Eanfrid. 8 Oswald
(the Martyr) brother of Eanfrid. 9 Oswin the brother of Oswald the Martyr. 10
Adilwald the son of Oswald the Martyr. 11 Egfrid the son of Adilwald. 12
Alfred the bastard son of Oswin. 13 Osred the son of Alfred. 14 Osric. 15
Kenred. 16 Ceolnulph. 17 Egbert. 18 Oswolf. 19 Moll. 20 Alered. 21 Etheldred.
22 Aelfwold. 23 Osred.
The succession of Bishops in the Principality of the Northumbers.
Archbishops of York.
625 Paulinus sat nine years. 666 Cedda three years. 669 Wilfrid nine
years. 678 Bosa nine years. 687 Wilfrid (restored) four years. 691 Bosa
fourteen years. 705 Ioannes sixteen years. 721 Wilfridus two years. 738
Egbertus nine and twenty years. 767 Ethelbertus thirteen years. 780
Eanbaldus 1. sixteen years. 796 Eanbaldus 2. sixteen years.
Bishops of Lindisfarn (Holy-Iland.)
635 Aidanus sat seventeene years. 652 Finanus nine years. 661 Colmannus
three years. 664 Tuda two years. 666 Cedda three years. 669 Wilfridus nine
years. 678 Eata five years. 685 Cuthbertus two years. 687 Wilfridus
(restored) one year. 688 Eadbertus ten years. 698 Eadfridus twenty three
years. 721 Aethelwoldus nineteen years. 740 Kinewulfus thirty nine years. 779
Higbaldus twenty four years.
Bishops of Haugustald (Hexham.)
678 Eata sat two years. 680 Tumbertus five years. 686 Ioannes one year.
687 Wilfridus four years. 691 Ioannes (after Wilfrids expulsion.) 705 Wilfrid
(restored) four years. 709 Acca thirty years. 739 Frithebertus twenty seven
years. 766 Alhmundus fourteen years. 780 Tilherus nine years. 789
Aethelbertus eight years. 797 Heardredus three years. 800 Heanbertus ten
years.
Bishops of Whit-hern in Scotland.
723 Pethelmus sat thirteen years. 736 Frithewaldus twenty seven years. 763
Pechtwinus fourteen years. 777 Aethelbertus thirteen years. 790 Beadwulfus.
CHAP. I. The Northumbers.

The Principality of the Northumbers divided into two Provinces, namely Deira
and Bernitia, which are united by Ethelrick. Ethelfrid defeateth the Britans,
and kills the Monks of Bangor. Edwin the first Christian Prince. Paulinus
preaches the faith to the Northumbers, and has a Sea assigned him at York.
The death of Edwin.

THe Principality of the Northumbers, extended northward, over all that part
of the land, which at this day contains the Counties of Lancaster, York,
Durham, Cumberland, Westmerland and Northumberland: all which were possessed by
the Angles, and divided into two Regiments, whereof the one was called Deira,
and the other Bernitia. Bernitia was bounded with the river Tyne and
Edenborough Firth: and Deira with the Tyne and Humber.

When Hengist was settled in the possession of the Kentish government, he sent
Octa his brother, and Ebusa his son, to undertake the conquest of those
parts, which with very much difficulty they obtained. The Province
afterward, (during the space of ninety and nine years) was governed by
certain Dukes or Captains, who held the same by homage of the Kentish-Saxons.

About the year of grace 547. Ida erected a Principality in Deira, and Alla
his kinsman succeeded him therein: for at that time, Adda the eldest son of
Ida, ruled the Bernicians.

Alla governed Deira many years: but little mention is made of him, save only
that in his time, the English Nation was first made known to Gregory, then
Archdeacon of the Sea Apostolic, who (being afterward Bishop of Rome) sent
Augustine the Monk into Britannie, to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the
inhabitants there.

Ethelrick, the younger son of Ida, succeeded Alla in the government of
Deira: and in short time adjoined thereto, the Province of Bernicia: making of
them both, one entire Principality, which he left to Ethelfrid his brother.

Ethelfrid was a valiant and victorious Prince. He made continual war upon
the Britans that inhabited the borders of his Province, and (chasing them from
their habitations) planted his own subjects therein. But Aidan the King of
Scots, suspecting the neighborhood of so mighty an enemy, assayed by force,
to empeach his further passage Northward, till by the Northumbers, (being fewer
in number then the Scotts) he was in battle overthrown.

Then Ethelfrid, encouraged with this good success, remooved the war to
Chester, where the Britans in great number had assembled themselves to make
resistance: but, while the Monks and other religious persons were praying
there, that the Britans their countrymen might speed and prosper well in that
enterprise, Ethelfrid with his forces furiously assailed them, putting to the
sword about one thousand and two hundred religious persons of the Monastery of
Bangor, and driving the rest of the Britans into the woods and marshes: (many
of them perishing by the hand of the enemy, before they could recover those
places.)

When Ethelfrid had reigned about twenty seven years, he was slain in a
battle by Redwald, Prince of the East Angles: and left behind him seven
sons, whom Edwin (that succeeded in the government) dispossessed, and
banished out of the Province.

Edwin was by Boniface the Bishop of Rome exhorted to embrace the Christian
faith, and in the year of Grace 6^6. Paulinus (the third Bishop of Rochester
in succession) was appointed by Iustus the Archbishop of Canterbury to preach
the Gospel unto the Northumbers, and to be their Bishop: to which end also,
Edbald the Prince of the Kentish-Saxons, had by letters recommended him to
Edwin his brother in law.

In the mean time, Evichelm the West Saxon Prince, (ambitiously affecting the
soveraigntie of the Northumbers) practiced with Eumer (a man easily corrupted
for desire of gain) to murder Edwin the Prince: for the execution of which
detestable purpose, Eumer with a poisoned weapon hidden under his garment,
assailed the Prince, and had slain him in the place, if Lilla had not thrust
himself between his person, and the danger; and, (by making himself the
memorable example of a faithful servant) preserved his masters life with the
loss of his own.

In revenge of this treacherous act, Edwin invaded the territory of the
West Saxons, and (after a great slaughter of the Inhabitants of that Province)
reduced the most part of it under his obedience. Then, to show the fruits of
his conversion to Christianity, he gave unto Paulinus the City of York, to
be a Bishops Sea, for him and his successors: laying the foundation of the
Cathedral Church of Saint Peter, which was afterward finished by Oswald.

About the same time also, Paulinus himself erected the great Church at
Lincoln.

This prince in felicity of government, excelled all his predecessors: he was
greatly beloved and honored of his people, and no less feared of his neighbor
Princes, who (for the most part) held their Provinces of him by homage. The
Roman Banner Tufa was carried before him in token of triumph, as well in times
of peace, as war.

It is not to be forgotten, that he caused certain cups of Iron, and Brass, to
be set by clear Wels and fountains, running by high ways, for the use of
Pilgrims, and Travailers: which Cups remained long after in those places, no
man attempting to convey them away, either for the reverence they bare unto the
Prince, (by whose appointment they were set there) or else that they made a
conscience to convert to their private commodity, such things as were ordained
for a public good.

But Edwin having reigned about seventeene years, was in the end assailed at
one time, both by Penda the Prince of the Mercians, and Ceadwall the British
Prince, till, with the loss of his life, he made an end of the war.

CHAP. II.
Oswald rules the Northumbers. He is slain in battle against Penda the
Mercian Prince. He is honored with the title of a Martyr. Oswin his brother
succeeds him. A Bishops Sea at Lichfield. Egfrid the Prince, removes Bishop
Wilfrid from his Sea at York. Ceolnulph and Egbert, successively ruling, give
over the government to enter into Religion. Venerable Bede lives in the time
of Ceolnulph. The Northumbers are brought under the subjection of the
West Saxons.

AFter his death, the Principality of the Northumbers was dismembered again:
For Osrick the son of Elfrick. (Prince Edwins uncle) held only the
government of Deira, and Eanfrid the son of Ethelfrid, commanded the
Bernicians. Both these Princes forsaking the Christian faith, fell to
Idolatry, and were slain in battle by Ceadwall the British Prince, that
spoiled and wasted the country of Northumberland, til Oswald (the brother of
Eanfrid) opposed himself against the power of the Britans, whose Captain
Ceadwall, with the greatest number of his forces, perished in the field.

After this victory, Oswald possessed the Province in peace, and then sent for
Aidan a Scottish-man, to preach the Christian faith unto his people, assigning
to him Holy-Iland for his Sea. The Inhabitants of Deira and Bernicia (who for
the hatred which they bare one to another, had submitted themselves to several
heads) he wisely reconciled, and uniting them in affection, brought them under
the obedience of one governor.

He was a zealous professor of the Catholic Religion, which he endeavored to
establish throughout all his Dominions.

When he had reigned about eight years, he was killed in a conflict with Penda
the Mercian Prince, a cruel Pagan, who commanded his head and arms to be cut
from the rest of his body, and in reproachful manner, to be hanged up upon high
polles: by reason whereof, and for his holy conversation while he lived, he was
after his death honored with the title of a Martyr.

Then Oswin the brother of Oswald succeeding him, was much encumbered, partly by
the invasion of the Mercians, and partly by the rebellion of his own son
Elfrid. Adilwald (the son of Oswald the Martyr) attempted by force to have
recovered the Province: and Oswy the son of Osrick (sometime governor of
Deira) being trecherously delivered into his hands, he caused to be murdered.

He fought often times with fortunate success against the Mercians, whom (after
he had vanquished Penda) he procured to be instructed in the christian faith:
and the better to strengthen his purpose therein, he erected the Church at
Lichfield to be the Bishops Sea for that Province. After he had reigned about
thirty two years, he ended his life in peace.

Then Egfrid his son ruled the Northumbers. He married Mildred, one of the
daughters of Ana Prince of the East Angles. It is reported of her, that (living
with her husband about twelve years) she continued all that time, both a wife,
and a virgin; and in the end took upon her the veil of a Nun at Ely, where
she erected a Monastery, and was her self the first Abbess.

In the mean while Egfrid removed Wilfrid from his Bishopric at York,
appointing two other Bishops over the Northumbers for their better instruction
in the knowledge of Religion. In his time diverse Synods were called by
Theodorus, then Archbishop of Canterbury, for reformation of abuses in the
Church, for approbation of the five first general Councels, and for the
condemnation of the heresy of Eutyches, who denied the humanity of Christ.
Not long before his death, he made war upon Edelfrid Prince of the Mercians,
with whom he was afterward reconciled, by mediation of Theodorus the
Archbishop: and then he converted his forces against the Irish and
Scottish-men, (inhabiting the Northern Isles) of whom he made a great slaughter:
and the year following (making war upon the Picts, contrary to the advice
of Cuthbert the Bishop) he was slain by some of his enemies that lay in ambush
to surprise him.

Then Alfrid (the Bastard son of Oswin) succeeded him, repairing the decayed
state of the Northumbers, though he could not recover all that the Picts,
Scottishmen, and Britans, had gotten from them in his brothers time.

Osred his son (of the age of eight years) possessed the government, till he
was murdered by his kinsmen, Kenred and Osrick, who divided the Principality
between them; till falling at civil discord among themselves, the one
supplanted the other: by which means, Kenred alone ruled the Northumbers, about
two years.

Then Osrick (obtaining the government) elected Ceolnulph the brother of Kenred
to be his successor: Ceolnulph after he had ruled the Province eight years,
and obtained many victories against his enemies, gave over the regiment, and
became a Monk in Holy-Iland.

About this time lived Benedict the Priest, who first taught the Saxons the art
of painting, glasing, and Masonrie. In the reign of Ceolnulph, Venerable Bede,
(the ornament of that age for learning and piety) flourished in Britannie. He
writ the history of the English church, and dedicated it unto Ceolnulph the
Prince.

Then Egbert the cosin-german of Ceolnulph (imitating the example of his
predecessor) forsook the world, and entered into Religion. His brother (bearing
the same name) was then Archbishop of York, where he founded a famous Library.

Oswolf, Moll, Alered, Etheldred, Aelfwold, and Osred, reigned successively
with like fortune, for the most part; for they were all either slain, or
deposed by their own subjects, except Etheldred, who was afterward restored to
the government, which yet he enjoyed not long: For (within four years after)
he was miserably slain.

After his death the Province was wasted, either by cruel dissension, or
foreign invasion by the space of thirty years; during which time, Eardulph,
Alfwold, Eandred, Ethelred, Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, usurped the title of
Princes. Readulph, Osbert, and Elle, were slain at York by the Danish
Pirates, Hinguar and Hubba, whom Benbokard (in revenge of the indignity offered
to him by Osbert, that had ravished his wife) had stirred up to undertake that
enterprise. But about the year of grace 800. the Danes were expelled, and the
Northumbers brought under the subjection of Egbert the West Saxon Prince.

The succession of the West Saxon Princes.
1 Cerdic. 2 Kenric his son. 3 Ceaulin, the son of Kenric. 4 Cearlick, the
nephew of Ceaulin. 5 Ceolnulph. 6 Kinegles, the first Christian Prince. 7
Guichelin, the son of Kinegles. 8 Cuthred, the son of Guichelin. 9
Kennewalch, the younger son of Kinegles. 10 Sexburga, the widow of
Kennewalch. 11 Eascwin, the nephew of Kinegles. 12 Kenewin, the youngest son
of Kinegles. 13 Ceadwall. 14 Ina. 15 Ethelard. 16 Cuthred. 17 Sigebert. 18
Kenulph. 19 Britric. 20 Egbert.
The succession of Bishops in the Principality of the West Saxons.
Bishops of Dorchester.
635 Birinus sat fifteen years. 650 Agilbertus, ten years. 660 Wina, sat
at Winton ten years. 670 Leutherius, seven years. 686 Hedda, twenty eight
years. 705 Daniel, (who was also Bishop of Selesey) sat forty years. 745
Humfertus, ten years. 755 Kinewardus, twenty five years. 780 Aethel^ardus,
eleven years. 791 Egbaldus, four years. 795 Dudda, two years. 797
Kinebertus, eleven years.
Bishops of Shireburn.
705 Aldelmus, sat five years. 710 Fortherus, twenty seven years. 736
Herewaldus, nineteen years. 756 Aethelmodus, twenty two years, 788
Denefrithus, twenty one years. 798 Wibertus, twenty years.
CHAP. I. West Saxons.

The Principality of the West Saxons, established by Cerdic. Berinus preaches
the Christian faith to the West Saxons. The town of Dorchester assigned to him
for a Bishops Sea. Kinegles the first Christian Prince. Winchester is made a
Bishops Sea by Kennewalch the West Saxon Prince. Ceadwall (resigning the
government to Ina) goes to Rome, where he dies.

THe West Saxons took the addition of their name from the situation of place,
as inhabiting the Western part of the I Will; wherein at this day, are contained
the Counties of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Wilton, Southampton, and Berk.

About the year of grace 509. Cerdic (with Kenric his son, and a warlike
company of Saxons) arrived in Britannie, where they were encountered by
Natanleod a British Prince, near a shallow brook, (afterward called
Cerdics-foord) and now by contraction of speech, Chardfoord. The fortune of
that bataile, determined the hope of the Britans, and established the Saxons in
possession of the greatest part o^ those Countries: over which, Cerdic and
Kenric ruled with equal authority, enlarging their dominions by the conquest
of the I Will of Wight: the government whereof, was assigned by Cerdic, to Stuffa
and Withgar his nephews.

After the father and son had ruled jointly about seventeene years, Cerdic
(ending his life by course of nature) left the entire Principality to Kenric
his son.

Kenric was often times assailed by the Britans, who attempted the recoverie of
their ancient possessions, but could not prevail: and the Province being
otherwise free from annoyance, was peaceably governed during his time.

Then Ceaulin his son succeeding him, made war upon Ethelbert the Kentish
Prince: in the prosecution whereof, Oslave and Cnebban (two valiant Captains
of the Kentish Saxons) were slain, and Cutholp his brother, made head against
the Britans; from whom, he recovered diverse Forts and Cities, which they had
gotten in the Territory of the Mercians. But while Ceaulin was making war
abroad, Cearlic (his brother G^tholps son) kindled a rebellion within the
Province, and by force, usurped the government about five years.

After the death of Cealric, Ceolnulph the son of Cutha, (the son of
Ceaulin) recovered the Principality. In the beginning of his reign, the
Province of the West Saxons was invaded, both by the Britans, and also by the
Scottishmen and Picts. The East Angles likewise at the same time assailed it:
but Ceolnulph, having appeased these troubles, and (beginning a new war
against the South Saxons) died before he could fully finish it, leaving the
prosecution thereof to Kinegles his son: who with good success undertook
the war, and (having overthrown the Britans) converted his forces against
Penda the Mercian Prince; with whom (after each had tried the others strength
in battle) he concluded a peace.

In the year of grace 635. he embraced the Christian faith, and was baptized
by Berinus, who first preached the Gospel to the West Saxons: ( Oswald Prince
of the Northumbers, being his godfather at his baptism.) The City of
Dorchester was by Kinegles and Oswald, assigned to Berinus, for the Bishops Sea
of that Province.

Then Guichelin, the son of Kinegles, and Cuthred, the son of Guichelin,
ruled successively, and were both baptized by Berinus the Bishop.

After them, Kennewalch (the younger son of Kinegles) obtained the
government. He married the sister of Penda the Mercian Prince, and afterward
put her away: whereupon Penda, (to revenge the indignity offered to his
sister) made war upon him, and drove him out of the Province, which he
afterward recovered by the assistance of Ana, Prince of the East Angles: for
Kennewalch, during the troubles in his own dominions, had fled thither, and
was there baptized by Faelix the Bishop.

He founded the Cathedral Church at Winchester, to be the Bishops Sea for the
Province of the West Saxons, and appointed Wi^a to be the first Bishop of that
place. He gave also to the Abbot Aldelmus, the town of Mal^esbury, where (by
the help of Elutherius, that succeeded Wi^^ in the Bishopric of the
West Saxons) he erected a fair Monastery, of which, William of Malmesbury,
(who wrote in Latin part of the English History) was sometimes a Monk.

After his death, Sexburga his wife held the Principality: but (finding that
by reason of the weakness of her sex, she was unable to support so weighty
a burden) she soon gave it over, and went into a Nunnery in the I Will of
Shepey, which her self had founded.

Then Eascwin (the nephew of Kinegles) succeeded. He began a war against
Wolpher the Mercian Prince, with whom he fought a set battle. What other
things were done by him worthy remembrance, I find little reported.

Then Kenewin (the youngest son of Kinegles) ruled the West Saxons. He was
often times annoyed by the Britans, whom in the end he chased into the utmost
parts of the Province Westward.

Ceadwall the nephew of Ceaulin, possessing the government, subdued the
Province of the South Saxons, and wasted the Kentish Territories: in the
pursuit of which war, he gave unto the Church (even before he was baptized)
the tenths of all those spoils which he took. Wherein, howsoever his
intention may be censured, yet the example is no way, justifiable, considering
it is written; That he which offers unto God the goods of the innocent, does
as it were sacrifice the Son in the ^ight of the Father. After he had subdued
the I Will of Wight, he sent thither Wilfrid the Bishop, to instruct the
inhabitants in the knowledge of Christian religion: and being wearied with
worldly affairs, resigned the government to Ina, and went to Rome; where he
was baptized by the name of Peter, and soon after ended his life. His body was
buried in the Church of Saint Peter, and (over the place where he was (...))
the inscription of his name and condition was engraven.

CHAP. II.
Ina succeeds Ceadwall in the government of the West Saxons. Peter Pence
first paid to Rome. The Bishopric of the West Saxons divided into two Seas.
Laws made by Ina the Prince. The Church at Wells made a Bishops Sea. The first
arrival of the Danes in Britannie, in the time of Britric* Egbert the
West Saxon Prince, subdueth diverse provinces, which he annexeth to his (...)
Principality.

INa was lineally descended from the West Saxon Princes. He was a Prince of
great courage and wisdom, and for the most part fortunate in his attempts:
For (...) Prince, he withstood by open forc^ the Kentish-Saxons (being weakened
by many forme^ assaults) he constrained with great sums of money, to purchase
peace at his hands: and the Province of the (...), after the death of Anth^^
their Prince, (...) in battle) he reduced wholly under his obedience.

Then he manifested his good inclination, to support and advance the state of
the Church: to which end, he (...) at W^ll^, that was afterward (...) to a
Bishops Sea. He builded also anew, the Abbey of (...), bestowing great cost
upon the Church there, which he caused to be very ^ichly garnished with gold
and (...) for the religious persons.

He instituted a certain yearly payment to the Sea of (...), ^^ipyning every
(...) of his Read me* (that (...) This payment was first called the Kings
Alms, and afterward the Peter pence.

In his time the Bishopric of the West Saxons, becoming void, was divided
into two Seas, whereof the one remained at Winchester, and the other was
established at Shirborn.

He made many good laws both for the administration of justice in civil
causes, and also for the government of the Church: some of which (even in
these our days) are extant in the Saxon tongue.

After he had reigned a long time in great prosperity, he was persuaded by
Ethelburga his wife, to resign the Principality to Ethelard his kinsman, and
to go to Rome; where afterward, professing voluntary poverty, he ended his
latter days in as lowly and mean estate, (...) he had formerly spent the
greatest number of (...) pomp and glory.

Ethelard at his first entrance, was much troubled with civil discention,
which Oswald (one of the princely blood aspiring to the government) had raised
(...) the West Saxons* but (that rebellion being app^^^ed) he reigned the rest
of his life in peace.

Then Cut^red, the kinsman of Ethelard succeeded. The borders of his Province
b^ing strongly assailed by the (...), he fortunately defended: In his time
there appeared two blazing Stars, which were afterward noted to be ominous
predictions of those calamities which befell the Province under the tyranny of
the Danes.

Then (...) obtained the Principality of the West Saxons. He was a Prince much
de^ained for (...) and oppression of his subjects, the ancient laws and
customs of the Province, (...) in such like outrageous practices, he was at
the last by his own people deprived of all authority, and enforced for
safeguard of his life, to hide himself in woods and forests, where he lived
in great misery, secluded from the society of men, (whereof by his inhumanitie
he had made himself unworthy) till at the last, he was slain in Andreds-wald
by a Swineheard, whose Master in former times, Sigebert had injuriously put to
death.

Kenulph (descended from the line of Cerdic, the first Prince of the
West Saxons) was partly for the honor of his blood, and partly for the
general opinion of his sufficiency, advanced to the government. Such factions
and popular tumults, as had risen by the deposing of his predecessor, he
pacified with great wisdom and moderation. He was the first founder of the
church at Wells, where a Bishops Sea was afterward placed. Howbeit he was
much inclined to the wanton pleasures of the flesh, which were the occasion of
his destruction in the end: for, going in private manner to visit a strumpet,
(whom he kept) he was entrapped by one of Sigeberts kinsmen, and murdered in
the way.

Then Britric (being also of the race of Cerdic) governed the West Saxons. He
was a Prince by nature more addicted to peace then war: He married Eadburga,
the daughter of Offa, Prince of the Mercians, by whose aid he expelled Egbert,
the West Saxon that invaded his Province, forcing him to fly into France,
where afterward he lived (like a banished man.) In his time about the year of
grace 800. the Danes first attempted to land in Britannie, whereat their
arrival, they took the I Will of Portland; but Britric (combining with some
other of the Saxon Princes) jointly assailed them, and in short time chased
them out of the land: and Britric himself, having reigned about seventeene
years, was poisoned by Eadburga his wife, who fled into France, transporting
thither great store of treasure. West Saxons.
But (not finding that good entertainment which she expected at the French
Kings hands) she became a Nun, and afterward Abbess of a religious house;
from whence a^ the last, she was expulsed for committing adultery with a lay
person and ended her vicious and dishonorable life in extreme poverty.

After the death of Britric, the West Saxons were governed by Egbert, who
enlarged his dominions by many and great conquests: for first, he brought under
obedience the Walshmen, (who had been always accustomed upon advantage, to
make incursions into the Province:) then with like success, he assailed and
subdued the Mercians, the Northumbers, the Kentish and the East Saxons, whose
Provinces he annexed to the Principality of the West Saxons, as by relation of
that which follows, more plainly shall appear.

The end of the Second Book of the Second Part of the History of Great
Britannie.
The Table of the Contents of the Chapters in the Second Part of the History
of Great Britannie.
The first Book.
A Repetition of the Contents of the former part. A brief relation of the
condition of the Britans under the Picts and Scottishmen, from the Romans
departure thence, until the beginning of the reign of Vortiger, the last
British Prince. page 173 The Britans elect Vortiger to be their King. They
send for the Saxons to aid them. The original and manners of the Saxons. 177
The Saxons vanquish the Scottishmen and Picts. Hengist devises how he may get
possession of the East part of the Island. 182 Saxons, Iutes and Angles, arrive
in Britannie. Vortiger marries Hengists daughter. He is deposed. 186 Vortimer
succeeds his father in the government. Vortiger is restored. The most noble
of the Britans, are trecherously murdered by the Saxons upon Salisburie
Plains. 190 The calamities of the Britans. The professors of Christian
religion in Britannie, are persecuted by the Saxons; whose idolatry and
superstitious rites are described. 193 Germanus the Bishop, conducteth the
Army of the Christian Britans against their enemies, (being Pagans) who by his
means are defeated. He departs out of Britannie. 196 Aurelianus Ambrosius,
aydeth the Britans against the Saxons. The valiant acts of Arthur the Warlike.
198 The Britans fly into Wales and Cornwall, where they seat themselves. The
Saxons and English possess the greatest part of the I Will, which is afterward
divided into several Principalities. 201
The second Book.
THe Principality of the Kentish-Saxons established by Hengist, whom Vsk, Otta,
and Ermeric succeed in the government. Austen the Monk is sent from Rome by
Gregory the Great, to preach the Christian faith to the Saxons and English. He
landeth in Kent, where he is courteously entertained by Ethelbert the Prince of
that Country. 209 Austen converteth diverse of the Saxon and English from
Paganism to Christianity. The cause that first moved Gregory the Great to
intend their conversion. Austen is consecrated chief Bishop of the English
Nation, by the Bishop of Arles in France. He advertiseth the Bishop of Rome, of
the success of his voyage into Britannie, and requires directions touching
the Ecclesiastical government to be there established. 212 Instructions sent
to Austen from the Bishop of Rome, for the ordering and government of the new
Church in Britannie. The primacie of the Sea of Canterbury. The first English
Bishops of London and York. 214 Austen receives the Pall from Rome. Gregory
the Great, sends gratulatorie letters to Ethelbert, who is converted to the
faith, being the first Christian Prince of the English Nation. The Church of
Saint Paul in London is founded. Melitus, the first Bishop there in the Saxons
time. Iustus the first Bishop of Rochester. Contention between the English and
British Clergy, about the celebration of the feast of Easter. 217 Austen
calls a Synod to reconcile the differences between the British and English
Clergy. The British Bishops ask counsel of an Anchorite, whether they
should conform themselves to such things as Austen the Monks should require of
them. They refuse to accept him for their Archbishop. Austen appoints
Laurentius to succeed him in the Sea of Canterbury. He dies. 220 Ethelbert
the Prince, provideth for the maintenance of religious persons. He ordains
laws for civil government, publishing the same in the English tongue. Edbald
his son succeeds him in the Principality of the Kentish-Saxons. His
Apostacy, Repentance. Death. 222 Ercombert succeeds Edbald in the
Principality. The institution of Lent. Honorius the Archbishop of Canterbury,
divides his Province into Parishes. Deus-Dedit succeeds Honorius in the Sea
of Canterbury. Egbert rules the Kentish-Saxons after the death of Ercombert.
Theodorus the Archbishop of Canterbury, expels Wilfrid out of the Sea of
York. His learning in Divinity and Philosophy. His estimation in the Court
of Rome. 225 Lothar (by intrusion) succeeds Egbert his brother in the
government. The West Saxons invade the Province of Kent. Cuthbert Archbishop
of Canterbury, calls a Synod for reformation of abuses in the Clergy. The
succession of the Kentish Princes, from Lothar to Alrich. Kent is subdued, and
annexed to the Principality of the West Saxons. 227 The Principality of the
South Saxons established by Ella. Cissa his youngest son, succeeds him
therein. Edilwalch the first Christian Prince of the South Saxons. 233 Variance
between the Archbishops of Canterbury and York. Wilfrid chief Bishop of the
Northumbers, (expulsed from his own Sea at York) flies into Sussex, where he
converteth the inhabitants to the Christian faith. He is courteously
entertained by Edelwalch the Prince, who assigns to him the I Will of Selesey,
for an Episcopal Sea. The South Saxons are brought under the obedience of the
West Saxon Princes. 235 The Principality of the Mercians, erected by Creda the
Saxon. Penda persecuteth the Christians in his Province. Peda succeeds Penda
his father in the government. He marries the daughter of Oswin, Prince of the
Northumbers, and receives the Christian faith. 241 Oswin Prince of the
Northumbers, rules the Mercians after the death of Peda, till he is deposed by
Wulfere, the brother of Peda. Lichfield is made a Bishops Sea for the Province
of the Mercians. Chadde is Bishop of that place. Wulfere is christened. Ethelred
his brother succeeds him in the Principality. He foundeth a Bishops Sea at
Worcester. He resigneth his government, and goes to Rome, where both himself
and Kindred his nephew, take upon them the habit of religion. Celred his son
succeeds him. 243 Ethelbald succeeds Celred in the government. He is
reproved by Bonifacius an Englishman, (Bishop of Vtricht in Holland) for his
lascivious life. His repentance. He erecteth the Monastery of Crowland. He is
slain in battle. 245 Offa rules the Mercians. He foundeth the Monastery of
Saint Albans. He makes a ditch to divide the Territories of the English and
Walshmen. Kenelmus the Martyr. The Catalogue of the Mercian Princes, from Offa,
until the West Saxons obtained their Principality. 248 ^ The Principality of
the East Saxons, erected by Erchenwin. Sebert the first Christian Prince.
Melitus the first Bishop of the East Saxons, has his Sea at London. Saint
Paul's Church there founded by Ethelbert (the first Christian Prince of the
Kentish-Saxons.) The Church at Westminster founded by Sebert. Cedda (afterward
called St. Chadde) preaches the Gospel to the East Saxons. Sigher and Sebbi,
jointly rule the Province. 252. The Devotion, Chastity, and Charity of Sebbi
the Prince. The manner of his death. Offa resigneth the government, and goes
to Rome, where he enters into religion. Egbert the West Saxon Prince,
obtains the Principality of the East Saxons. 254 The Principality of the
East Angles erected by Vffa. Faelix a Burgundian, preaches the faith to the
East Angles. His Episcopal Sea at Dunwich in Suffolk. Sebert the first
Christian Prince, resigneth his government to Egrick, and enters into a
Monastery, from whence he is drawn forth by his subjects, when the Mercians
invade his Province. He is slain in battle with Egrick, whom Ana succeeds
in the government. 259 Athelhere the brother of Ana, rules the East Angles. He
is slain by Oswin, Prince of the Northumbers. S. Ethelbert is murdered by
Offa, Prince of the Mercians. Offa having made a voyage into the Holy-Iland,
dies in his return homewards. Edmund succeeds Offa in the government. The
Martyrdom of S. Edmund by the pagan Danes. The Monastery of S. Edmunds-bury in
Suffolk erected. The principality of the East Angles annexed to that of the
West Saxons. 261 The Principality of the Northumbers divided into two
Provinces, namly Deira and Bernitia, which are united by Ethelrick. Ethelfrid
defeateth the Britans, and kills the Monks of Bangor. Edwin the first
Christian Prince. Paulinus preaches the faith to the Northumbers, and has a
Sea a signed to him at York. The death of Edwin. 267 Oswald rules the
Northumbers. He is slain in battle against Penda the Mercian Prince. He is
honored with the title of a Martyr. Oswin his brother succeeds him. A
Bishops Sea at Lichfield. Egfrid the Prince, removes Bishop Wilfrid from his
Sea at York. Ceolnulph and Egbert, successively ruling, give over the
government to enter into religion. Venerable Bede lives in the time of
Ceolnulph. The Northumbers are brought under the subjection of the West Saxons.
271 The principality of the West Saxons, established by Cerdic. Berinus
preaches the Christian faith to the West Saxons. The town of Dorchester
assigned to him for a Bishops Sea. Kinegles the first Christian Prince.
Winchester is made a Bishops Sea by Kennewalch the West Saxon Prince. Ceadwall
(resigning the government to Ina) goes to Rome, where he dies. 277 Ina
succeeds Ceadwall in the government of the West Saxons. Peterpence first
paid to Rome. The Bishopric of the West Saxons divided into two Seas. Laws
made by Ina the Prince. The Church at Wells made a Bishops Sea. The first
arrival of the Danes in Britannie, in the time of Britric. Egbert the
West Saxon Prince, subdueth diverse Provinces, which he annexeth to his own
Principality. 281
The succession of the Kings of England from Egbert the first English Monarch,
until the Norman Conquest.
1 Egbert reigned thitie seven years. 2 Ethelwulfe (the son of Egbert)
twenty years. 3 Ethelbald, (the eldest son of Ethelwulfe) five years. 4
Ethelbert, (the second son of Ethelwulfe) five years. 5 Ethelred (the third
son of Ethelwulfe) five years. 6 Alfred, (the youngest son of Ethelwulfe,
29. years. 7 Edward (surnamed the Elder) twenty three years. 8 Athelstane,
(the eldest son of Edward) sixteen years. 9 Edmund (the second son of
Edward) six years. 10 Edred (the youngest son of Edward) nine years: 11
Edwin (the elder son of Edmond) four years. 12 Edgar, surnamed the
Peaceable (the younger son of Edmond) sixteen years. 13 Edward, surnamed the
Martyr (the elder son of Edgar) four years. 14 Ethelred, surnamed the
Unready, (the younger son of Edgar,) thirty seven years. 15 Edmund,
surnamed Ironside (the son of Ethelred) in whose time the Danes possessed the
greatest part of England.
The succession of the Princes of Denmark in the Kingdom of England.
1 Cnute reigned nineteen years. 2 Harold the first, surnamed Hare-foote (the
Bastard of Cnute) four years. 3 Hardy-Cnute, (the son of Cnute) two years.
16 Edward the Confessor, reigned twenty four years. 17 Harold the second,
the usurper. 18 William Duke of Normandy, surnamed the Conqueror.
The beginning of the reign of Egbert the first English Monarch.
EGBERT. I: SAX: MONARCH:
portrait of Egbert

Upon report of the death of Britric, Egbert with great speed returned out of
France, where (during the time of his abode) he had served with good
commendation in the wars, under Charles the Great, by means whereof (his
reputation increasing among his own Country men) he was thought worthy of the
government, before he obtained it: Besides, the Nobility of his blood, and the
pusillanimitie of the late Prince his predecessor, seemed to add more
sufficiency to his own merit.

At his first entrance he assailed the Cornish and Walsh-men, who commonly upon
the change of Governors, used to make incursions into the Provinces next
adjoining to them, continuing their claim (as it were) to those countries,
from which the Britans (their ancestors) had been expelled; and though
formerly they had thereby sustained many, and great losses: yet it well
appeared, that they had not altogether lost their wonted courage, hereditarie
to that warlike Nation. The Cornish-men being first subdued, he employed his
whole forces against the Walsh, whom he earnestly pursued, never desisting,
until he had pierced into the very utmost limits of Wales, upon the Western
Sea. This fortunate proceeding, bred both envy and jealousy in diverse Princes
of the land, specially in Bernulph the governor of the English-Mercians, who
thought it a necessary point of policy to make opposition betimes, lest the
West Saxons growing too great, the Principality of Mercia might be endangered:
considering withal, that it would be more advantageable to make an offensive
war, then to rest merely upon defense, wherein the peril and hazard was
likely to be as great, as in the other: the gain and glory much less.
Hereupon he entered the Province of the West Saxons, with a huge army,
consisting of men (for the most part,) unmeet for military service, as being
by long ease and idleness corrupted, and become faint hearted, and vnwealdie,
so that at the first assault (made by their enemies) they turned their backs,
and being confounded by their own numbers, were over whelmed one upon an other
in their flight.

The fortune of this battle did cut in sunder the very sinews of the
Mercian government, which soon after (as unable to support it self any longer)
fell to the principality of the West Saxons. And now Egbert conceaving hope of
like success, in attempting the Conquest of the other provinces, and knowing
well, that the Kentish Prince was then scarce settled in his government, and
hated of his subjects, he supposed, a fit opportunity was offered, to bring
that part of the I Will also under subjection; and thereupon, sent his son with
an army to invade it, appointing Alstan the warlike Bishop of Shirburne, and
VValhard (a man of good reputation for arms in those times) to assist him,
with direction and advice in the prosecution of the war, which was begun and
ended prosperously both in one year.

In the mean while, the East Saxons being taught by their neighbors example,
how much better and more safe it is to prevent the calamities of an invasion by
yielding obedience, then by standing upon terms of defiance (where there is no
hope to preuail) voluntarily submitted themselves. But the Northumbers held out
yet longer: making open resistance against the West Saxons, till partly by
their own civil discord, and partly by the irruption of the Danes (that
annoyed their coasts) they were glad to seek the aid and protection of the
West Saxons, as holding it a better course in that case of necessity, to
become subject to a nation that they knew, then to be made slaves to strangers.

Thus were the Principalities of the Kentish* and East Saxons (with the
English-Mercians and Northumbers) brought under Egberts obedience, (...)
greatest part of the I Will made, in a manner, one Monarchy, which form of
government it seemed in some sort to retain, even during the continuance of
the sevenfold regiment of the English-Saxons, amongst whom some one Prince was
always of greater power then other, and had a right of superiority above the
rest. Neither was there any thing now wanting, for the establishment of an
absolute governmnt; for the VValsh-men (the posterity of the ancient Britans)
were for the most part slain in battle, and those that survived were utterly
disarmed, and thrust into a corner of the I Will. The city of Chester (their
strongest hold) was possessed by the English, with out al hope to be recovered.
As for the South Saxons, and East-English, (whose Provinces remained as yet
unconquered) they were but a handful in comparison of the rest, and more
likely to seek the assurance of their estates by a reasonable composition,
then by standing any long time upon defense, if they should be assailed.

But Egbert (knowing well that there was as much wisdom requisite in the
keeping and well ordering, as there had been valor showed in the getting of
those Provinces) held a general assembly at Winchester, (the chief City of
the VVest-Saxon Princes) where he was with great and unusual ceremonies of
state, declared King.

Then for the uniting and settling of the Soveraigntie in himself and his
successors, he ordained that the Inhabitants (who had been a long time
distinguished by diverse names,) should now be made an entire nation, and being
governed by one Prince, should bear jointly one name: and to that end he
commanded by public Edict, that the several Provinces (so united) should for
ever after he called Angles-land, which by a contraction of the word, or
corruption of the time was afterward (as at this day it is) called England.
For, the memory of the Iutes being long since worn out, and the name of the
Saxons now suppressed by edict, the Angles only remained, who in respect of
their number might seem to challenge by right the denomination: and it is
certain, that the Inhabitants of the greatest part of the I Will, were (many
years before) commonly called Angles, or English.

Certain short Notes touching the Roman state militare, for the better
understanding of the first Part of this History: namely, for the help of such
as are ignorant in the ancient Roman Stories,
THe forces which the Romans used in their foreine wars, The Legionary forces.
consisted of Legions and Aids.

The Legions were generally divided into Footmen, and Horsemen, whose number
was often times changed, according to the difference of times, and alteration of
the state; the City of Rome being first governed by Kings: afterward by the
Senate, and people under the Consuls, and Tribunes (which was commonly called
The free State, and, Time of Liberty:) and lastly, by the Emperors.

The Legion under the first Emperors (for to speak of former times is not so
proper to this purpose) consisted of 6000. Foot, and 600 Horse, or there-abouts.

The chief Officer of the Legion, was called Legatus Legionis, (Lieutenant of
the Legion,) who had the principal charge as well of Horse as Foot, under the
Lieutenant general of the Army, or Governor of the Province for the Emperor;
which Lieutenant, and Governor is commonly called in the Roman story Legatus,
or Propretor, as the Governor for the Senate and people, was called Proconsull;
[for some Provinces were at the disposition of the Emperors only, and others
were assigned by the Senate and People.]

The inferior Officers of the Legion, were the Centurion, Ensign-bearers, etc.

The Footmen in the Legion, were equally divided into ten Cohorts, or
Companies, whereof each one had a Superintendent Officer.

The 600. Horse in the Legion, were divided into ten Troops, called Turma^:
every Troop containing three Decuries, or Thirty Horse, over whom were placed
Officers called Decuriones, that had every one the particular charge of ten
Horse.

The chief Officer of the Troop, was called Praefectus Turmae.

In the Legion none were to be enrolled for Soldiers, but Citizens of Rome, and
men of ingenious professions.

The additions of number, as namely, the First, Second, Third Legion, etc were
given to the Legions at first, in regard of the time and order of mustering,
and became afterward Surnames, together with other additions of place, person,
and quality, imposed either upon accident, or for distinctions sake.

The Aids, or Auxiliarie forces, Auxiliarie forces.
sent from foreign Countries (being by league and contract bound to assist the
Romans in their wars) were divided into companies of Foot, called Cohortes,
and wings of Horse, which they termed Alae.

Every Cohort contained six hundred Foot, whose chief Officer was called
Praefectus.

There were eight Cohortes commonly assigned for the Aids of one Legion.

Every Ala, or wing of Horse, contained about three hundred, whose chief
Officer was also called Praefectus, and the inferior Officers [ Decuri^nes.]

There were commonly two of these wings assigned (together with the eight
Cohorts of Foot above named) for the Aids of one Legion.

Who so desires to be more particularly instructed herein: let them read the
learned; and judicial Annotations upon Tacitus, translated by Sir Henry
Savile Knight; whence I have extracted these notes, as also borrowed a great
part of the Translation it self, as may appear in the second Book of the
first Part of this work.

The names of certain Writers of the Roman, and English Story, out of whose
works, the matter of the precedent History has been) for the most part)
collected.
Writers of the Roman Story.
IVlius Caesar, his Commentaries, de bello Gallico. Cor. Tacitus.
Dio: Cassius, his Books of History. His Annals, translated into English by
Richard Grenoway. His first four Books of History, and the life of Julius
Agricola translated into English by sir Henry Savile knight.
Ammianus Marcellinus, his 18. Books of History. Master Camden, his
Britannia. The Writer of the Book entitled, The three Conversions of England
from Paganism to Christian religion.
Writers of the English Story.
Venerable Bede, his History of the Church of England. William the Monk of
Malmesburie, his Books of the deeds of the English Kings and Bishops. Master
Camden, his Book (Britannia.) John Stow, his Annals. The above named Writer of
the Book entitled, The three Conversions of England from Paganism to
Christian Religion.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 9. line 5. recovered Caesar's Tent, where read he came to Casars
presence, of whom 11. 13 out of the Roman Camp out of the view of the Roman
Camp 13. 4. charged with the Britans charged by the Britans 23. 3. Gassibelin
Cassibelin 27. 10. clyffes of the I Will possessed cliffes of the I Will, which were
possessed 54. 22. at other times) and more at other times) to attempt, and more
57. 7 sweat sweet 73. 25. to ^ortefie a work to fortefie; a work 79. 12.
armed at the Mount arrived at the Mount 97 figure 2^. Pessenius Niger Pescenius
Niger 98. fig. 30. Vibius Pallus Vibius Gallus 99. fig. 47. Costantius
Constantius 109. 17. assention ascension 113. 7. soldiers, then ranging the
Countries: they wasted soldiers; Then ranging the Countries, they wasted 126.
24. Collianus Lollianus 142. 2. Imperial decree immutable decree 150. 8.
Bodatria Bodotria 162. 26. Roman Artaie Roman Army 163. 15. practices with an
Army practices with the Army 163. 21. Aurelianus Victorinus Aurelianus.
Victori^us 165. 2. Amorica Armorica 181. 9. Chessonesus Chersonesus 184. 24.
breath breach 188. 4. attain obtain 192. 15. in actions in action 199. 25.
nIto Into 200. 28. repaired empayred 215. 19. and the family and his family
223. 17. prefer preserve 223. 23. of Northumbers of the Northumbers 224. 4.
direct divert 231. fig. 1. Simen Cimen 241. 12. either of them any of them 260.
27. Holo^ham Hol^^cham

There be diverse other errors, which the understanding Reader may easily
reform.


