A DECLARATION of the Christian SABBATH. Wherein the sanctifying of the
LORD'S DAY, is proved to be agreeable to the Commandment of GOD, and to the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST. By ROBERT CLEAVER.

AT LONDON Printed by A. M. and I. N. for Robert Milbourne, and are to be sold
at his Shop at the great South Door of Paul's. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Mr. JOHN CREW, Mr. EDWARD STEPHENS, and Mr. John
Curson, Esquires; together with their faithful Yoke-fellowes, grace, mercy,
and peace be multiplied.
IT has pleased the Almighty, by the goodness of his providence to conioyne you
together in one earthly family, that by relation, and bond of kindred, and
affinity, you should all call the same man, your father: and according to the
riches of his grace, to unite you together in one heavenly family that by
virtue of Adoption, and spiritual childhood, you should all call the same God,
your father, and so more truly become brethren or sisters, each one of you to
others in the Lord. For this cause, and diverse other reasons, I am encouraged
to make choice of you for my special, and selected Readers, (so far I
presume of your favor, and kindness) and jointly to salure you, in public, as
professed friends to the cause wherein I deal, and Religious obseruers of that
sacred Ordinance of God, for which I contend: for that, I confess is a great
part of my business in this brief discourse ensuing, against the adversaries
of the Sabbath. And yet I humbly entreat both you, and all other good Readers,
not to regard the Sabbath the less, because there is contention about it, nor
suddenly to censure the act of contending, until you be acquainted with the
causes, and circumstances of it. There are diverse Texts of Scripture, indeed,
which in show, and appearance do seem to condemn it, as that to Timothy. The
seavant of the Lord must not strive, but must be gentle toward all men. 2. Tim.
2. 24. And that to the Corinthians, I beseech you brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye al speak one thing, and that there be no
dissensions among you. 1 Cor. 1. 10 And that to the Romans If it be possible,
as much as in you is, have peace With all men, Romans 12. 18. but none of these,
nor any other that can be produced, do absolutely prohibit al manner of
striving. To strive for error, and sin is unlawful: to strive about things
that be doubtful, and uncertain, is unlawful: to strive about curious, and
needles questions or matters tending to no edification, or profit, is
unlawful. And so is striving unlawful when carnal corruptions, as make-bates
be the mouers of it, or stirrers in it; as when through pride, we seek our
own vaineglory; or through malice, and envy we deprave our brethren. In these,
and such like cases, is contending forbidden, but not simply: for then would
not the Apostle Jude Jude 3.
have exhorted the godly with earnestnes to contend for the faith: neither Isa.
59. 4.
would the Prophet Isaiah so sharply have taxed the people of his time, for not
contending for the truth. Paul was a peaceable man, and yet he strove against
the false Apostles and Seducers: and Christ is the perfect peacemaker, and
author of peace, and yet he mightily opposed the rabble of Scribes, and
Pharisees. And now to plead for my self, and my brethren, which either by
writing, or preaching, have traveled in the same subject, have as I done, we
are not mere voluntaries in this controversy, but necessarily urged thereto,
as prested soldiers: we begin not the quarrel, as Assailants, but only
justify the truth of our doctrine, and cause, as Defendants; our Books, and
Sermons, being particularly oppugned, although (I trust) more sound, and
Orthodoxe, then can be confuted. We are far from Innovations, and Novelties, in
our positions, and tenants: we wish all good to our Opposites, with a desire,
rather to inform them, by arguments and reasons, then to disgrace, or provoke
them, by taunts or invectives. The experience of your wisdoms, loves, and
generous dispositions assure me, that you will be easily persuaded of the
verity of mine Appologie, and therefore I shall not need with multiplicity of
words, to enlarge it, neither do I think it decent to task you with reading
of other impertinent matters, which neither necessity requires, nor
conveniencie approoueth of; especially, seeing there is as little Decorum kept
in prefixinge a long Preface before a short Treatise, as in making a wide door
for a narrow building. And therefore to spare both you, and my self from
further labor, I briefly conclude, and with due respect, recommend you to the
protection, grace, guidance, and blessing of the most High, and remain

Your worships for all Christian services. Robert Cleaver.

A Table of most of the principal matters contained in this ensuing Treatise
A
IT is dangerous to question the Authority of Gods laws. page 1. 2. How the
Law retains it is authority and yet Gods people freede from it. 24.
C
The Ceremonial Law, not so much dignified as the Moral. 32. The Ceremonial
Law, by relation, and in some respects was contained under the Moral. 35. 36.
Significant Ceremonies alter not the nature of unchangeable precepts. 44. The
moral Law not made Ceremonial by significations. 33. We are not tied to the
Jews seventh day by the fourth Commandment. 99. Moral Commandments
perpetual. 4. 5. The fourth Commandment is Moral. 50. The Moral Law not made
Ceremonial by significations. 33. Nothing is ascribed to Christ in the word
but that which is in a special manner to be sacred and holy 103. 104
D
THe Dignity of the Law in regard of Continuance. 30. In what sense a day is
said to be the Lord's Day. 104.
F
AL Solemn Feasts in the law, did by relation, and in some respects, issue
from the same fountain that the seuenth-day did 93 Whether faith be commanded
in the Law? and how. 42
G
THe Law abolished to the Godly, only in respect of the rigorous severity
thereof 22.
K
Men are made able by grace to do that which is termed Keeping the law. 40
L
THe Law has a place in man's heart by nature. 11 The writing of the law in
man's heart by nature, being blotted and defaced by his fall; is renewed in the
regenerat. 12 13. By Law is sometimes, meant the irritation and provocation to
sin which it accidentally occasioneth (but causes not) in the unregenerate.
18. 19. The Law belongs to the regenerate. 27. There is no alteration or
change of nature in the duties of the Law. 29 Five Arguments proouing the
Morality of the Lords day. 52 to 65 Five Objections against the Morality of the
Lord's Day answered 66 to 89. The Lord's Day proved to be of divine institution.
103 and seq. The Lord's Day is immutable. 111. The first day of the week,
proved to be the Lord's Day that is to be observed. 114 Because a Christian
should be every Day holy; it will not follow, that the Lord's Day is not to be
observed. 119 and seqq Christians in the Primitive Church choosing the first
day of the week, for the Lord's Day; does not prove that it is not of divine
Institution. 137. 138. and seqq.
M
THe Morality of the Lord's Day, proved by Testimonies of the ancient fathers.
131. and seqq. The Morality of the Lord's Day, proved by Testimonies of the
worthy Modern writers. 106. and seqq The Morality of the Lord's Day proved by
the doctrine of the Church of England. 140. 141. and scqq.
O
Objections pretended out of the Fathers against the morality of the Lord's Day
answered. 129 and scqq.
S
SCriptures answered and cleared which the Adversares produce to prove that the
Law is abolished. 15. 16. and seqq. Mutation of services alter not the nature
of the law. 47. There grievous sin that shall enterprise to alter the
Lord's Day. 112.
The Contents of this Treatise.
ALl the Moral Commandments are perpetual. Cap. 1. Page 1. No
significations, expirations, or change of duties and services, have made any of
the Moral Commandments, Ceremonial. Cap. 2. Page 29. The Fourth Commandment
is a Moral Precept. Cap. 3. page 50. All consecrated time, is the observation
of the Fourth. Commandment. Cap. 4. Page 90. The Lord's Day is a consecrated
time, and of divine Institution, and immutable. Cap. 5. Page 102.
THE MORALITY OF THE LAW.
Chap. 1. All the Moral Commandments are perpetual.
THere is nothing It is dangerous to make question of the authority of Gods
Laws.
so absolutely complete and entire, as that Satan will not impute unto it
defect and want; nor any thing so clear and manifest, as that by infidelity
and carnal reason it cannot be called into question, and made liable unto
doubts: otherwise no mortal creature would have attempted to impeach the
sacred authority of Gods own most holy Laws, which have retained their force,
and exercised their power so many thousand years, as have been since the
beginning of the World. If the exquisite righteousness of God thereby
declared, were subject to diminution, as that it might be worn out by time;
or if his Sovereignty were terminable, and to continue but for a certain
number of years; or if the love thereby required of men toward their Maker,
or of each one to another were now become needless, and of no necessity, they
would be the more excusable, who seek the subversion of these heavenly
Statutes: otherwise, they commit spiritual treason against the Divine
Majesty. It is not safe to deprave the Acts, which he has done, and to
debase the works of his hands; much less will he put up the reproach of that
which by his Holy Spirit he speaks, and the indignity offered to the
gracious word; of his mouth; he cannot endure the glory of his Laws, Psalm. 19.
of his Statutes, of his Testimonies and Oracles to be defaced. Let no man
think, that we begin our Discourse with Fictions, by faining of faulty and
erroneous persons, who, with little difficulty, may be refuted: we fight not
with our own shadow, we complain not without grieuance, and just cause of
grief: For, there are real Adversaries, and not imaginary, lately risen up,
who renounce both the Ten Commandments, and all other the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, as abrogated and abolished by the death of Christ, together with
the Leuiticall Ceremonies.

It will not then be superfluous, (as a work undertaken without due cause, or
hope of good effect) as briefly as may be, to make it appear, that neither the
Ten Commandments, nor any parts of the Moral Doctrine of GODS most holy Word,
in force before the coming of Christ, are antiquated, and made forcelesse, by
his birth, preaching, practice, death, resurrection, or ascension.

intent, on his part: for it seems that some licenciously hoped for such a
carnal liberty, and some maliciously vpbrayded him with purpose of such an
impious innovation: and therefore, that none might take occasion to conceive any
such thoughts of him, he directly makes his mind known Mat. 5. 17.
to the contrary. * Think not (says he) that I am come to destroy the Law or
the Prophets: I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfill them.

Testament, do often produce them as authenticke witnesses of GODS solid
Truth, and the Sacred Doctrine of his holy Spirit: yea, and have founded
thereon maine substantial Points of Faith: which they would not have done, if
such Books and sayings had then stood cancelled, or been grown out of date.

Objection.
But they hope to avoid this by interpreting themselves, and expounding their
own meaning; which is, That they deny not any Commandment, or words, or
sentences of the Old Testament cited in the new, to be the Scripture: For so
much as is repeated by the Evangelists, or in the writings of the Apostles,
they acknowledge to be GODS own words: But no more then are there expressly
specified: and not them to be such now, by virtue of that voice, which GOD
uttered once in Mount Sinai; or of that hand, which wrote them in the Tables;
or of that spirit, whereby Moses recorded them in Exodus, or Deuteronomy or
other places; or, whereby the Prophets either spoke or writ: But by virtue of
an Apostolical Spirit, whereby they are translated into the Gospel, and
become merely Evangelical.

Answer.
This they say, and if it prove true in the particulars, they say well:
Otherwise we must think, they care not what they say, so that they may die
their foul cause with a fair color. Let the point therefore come to
scanning. Saint James says, Iam. 2. 10. 11.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty
of all; for he, that said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, said also, Thou
shall not kill.

Three things are here inquirable, and duly to be considered of: One, what
this Law is: The next, who be Delinquents in the transgression thereof: The
third, who is the Author that gives authority unto it.

Ten Commandments, as the instances in the Seventh and Sixth, being parts of
the whole, do testify: And to these, we see, he yields both the ancient
title, and power; they are authenticke Edicts, and require an entire obedience.
Take them as repealed in the Old Testament, and reuined in the new, and you
cannot call them the whole Law: For all of them are not there in express
terms, and particularly recorded: neither will our Opposites grant that the
Fourth Commandment has any confirmation therein, although it be indeed by
Christ ratified with the rest: but yet only in general words, and by firm
consequents.

(...).
and unchaste persons, and every one, in any place of the World, which gives
himself over to any iniquity, and these are obnoxious, that is, guilty of
transgression, and subject to that penalty which the Law does denounce. Now in
James his time, the Gospel was not so universally spread, as that all men
every where should either yield obedience to it, or be convicted of the
violation of it.

Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not kill. It must needs be he,
that said ( I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
etc,) and delivered all the other Commandments to his people in the
Wilderness: For he is that * One Law giver, which is able to save and to
destroy. Cap. 4 12.

One other place also shall be produced, to make it appear, that the
Apostles, in their Allegations of Texts out of the Law, and other parts of the
Old Testament, respected the authority of those Scriptures, out of which they
have deduced them; and that is the Sixth to the Ephesians, verse 1. where he
gives this exhortation: Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children obey your Parents in the Lord. Secondly, he yields a reason
thereof, for this is right: Thirdly, he confirms the same by the words of
the Fifth Commandment; Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Fourthly, he
amplifieth that Precept, and shows two causes why it ought very much to be
regarded: One is from the site and place, which it has in the Decalogue: It is
the first Commandment; namely, of righteousness; and that which stands
before all the rest in the Second Table. The other is from a forcible Adiunct:
It has a Promise annexed unto it, which is peculiar to it alone, in that
Table. Now why should the Apostle urge these Arguments so earnestly, if that
Scripture had lost all its wonted virtue.

Thirdly, no temporary constitution, 3. The Law has a place in Man's heart by
nature.
nor that which was expirable, can be found to have by nature a place in man's
heart, or a continuance therein by grace, after the conscience and practice of
it is dissolved in the Church. But these Commandments were written in Adams
heart, at his creation: (otherwise he had not been fashioned, after the image
of GOD) and after his fall, both himself and all his posterity show the effect
of Romans 2. 19.
the Law written in their hearts: Their conscience bearing witness thereunto,
as the Apostle testifies. The unregenerate, the unbelievers, the very Heathen,
by light of reason and natural conscience, can discern of equity, and
iniquity; of honesty, and dishonesty; of laudable virtues, and damnable crimes;
as what reward liberal and merciful men deserve, and how severely Atheists,
Murderers, Adulterers, and such like malefactors, ought to be punished.

But these goodly Writings being blotted, and much defaced, in our first
Parents, and their posterity, by sin, and corruption, they are copied out
fair in the regenerate, by the Spirit of grace, through Christ, as David, made
conformable to his Image, and a figure of him, professes of Psalm. 40. 8.
himself, saying; I desired to do thy will, O my GOD: yea, thy Law is within
my heart. Which, in like manner he testifies of all other, that be truly
godly, with a declaration of the blessed effects thereof; when he thus
describes Psalm. 37. 30. 31.
them. The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will
talk of judgment: For the Law of GOD is in his heart, and his steps shall not
slide. Thus GOD wrought in his people, in those former ages, before Christ, and
promised a continuance of the same grace, with a large addition thereto, in the
time of the Gospel; as the Heb. 8. 10.
Apostle to the Hebrews proves out of the Prophecy Ier. 31. 31.
of Jeremy. This is the Testament, that I will make with the house of Israel;
after those days, says the LORD, I will put my laws in their mind; and in
their heart I will write them, and I will be their GOD, and they shall be my
people. He. 8. 10.

Lastly, if the authority of the Law, and all the Old Testament had been
abolished by the death and resurrection of Christ, and none else to remain in
force, but only those particular words, and sentences, which are repeated in
the new: It must needs follow that all the time between his resurrection, and
the writing of the New Testament, (which was of diverse years continuance) men
lined without any divine Law, or Scriptures; the former were all void, and no
man's conscience subject unto them: and none other as then enacted, and
published in their places.

Now we are to inquire into the grounds of their opinions, that it may be seen
by trial. What validity, for their purpose, may be found in their allegations.

Their First place is out of Scriptures cleared, which the Adversaries produce
to prove the Law abolished.
Luke 16. 16. The Law and the Prophets were until John: since that time the
Kingdom of GOD is preached, and every one presses into it.

Their Second, is out of the seventh to the Romans, ver. 6. Now we are
delivered from the Law, being dead unto it, wherein we were holden; that we
should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the oldnesse of the letter.

Their Third is out of the third Chapter of the second Epistle to the
Corinthians, verse. 11. If that which should be abolished was glorious, much
more shall that which remains be glorious. To every one of these an Answer
shall be made in order.

Answer to the first place.
The meaning of Christ, in 2 Luke 16. 16. proves not Christ's abrogating of the
Law or Prophets.
that of Luke is, that the Law and the Prophets until John his time, continued
their praedictions, adumbrations, and significations of the future happy estate
of the Church which now by his Ministry was declared to be at hand; for that
he was the immediate foregoer of Christ his own person, and the Messenger
sent to proclaim his presence, who was now in a readiness to publish his own
Gospel, and to enter upon the work of Man's redemption. This interpretation is
warranted by that, which in Matthew 11. 13. is delivered: All the Prophets, and
the Law prophesied until John. But what is here for exclusion or repeal,
either of the Law or the Prophets? not so much as the Leuiticall rites or
ordinances, were then abrogated: for so should they be abolished by John his
coming, rather then by Christ his resurrection; yea and that before they were
fulfilled, or that which was typified by them, accomplished.

Answer to the second place.
Now come we to that, in the Seventh to the Romans, Now we are delivered from
the Law: etc. It is apparent by the purpose, and all the passages of that
Chapter, that by [ Law] is understood that irritation to evil, and provocation
to sin, which the Law of GOD accidentally occasioneth, (but properly does not
cause,) in unregenerate persons. The vicious disposition, and corruption, which
is in men, before Grace; that flesh which is naturally in all the Sons of
Adam, restrains them with the greater irksomeness, from the performance of
ought, that is required, (especially to do it well, and in a due manner,) and
inciteth them with a more greedy appetite (as I may so call it) to effect,
think, speak, and do those things, which by the Lord are prohibited. It is
like to a swift and violent stream of water, which will endure no resistance,
but bears down Dammes and flood-yates, and all other stops, that stand in
the way, to hinder his passage. This is the Law, and this is the Husband,
spoken of in the beginning of the Chapter; and every man is a Wife subject to
the same, so long as he remains merely carnal, and such a one, as he was by
generation: But, when he by Grace and regeneration is once truly mortified,
this party is dead, and so is that Husband, reigning sin; the bond of marriage
is dissolved, and the same person united unto Christ, by his Spirit, and so
obtains deliverance from the Law, which in this place is spoken of; and that
indeed, is a restitution to the true use of the Moral Law, rather then a
divorce, or separation from it.

This exposition is not of Master Beza.
our own coining; it has not only the consent of most judicious interpreters
but a sound confirmation from the premises, and subsequents of this Text here
alleged by our opposits; as Ver. 5.
thus. When we were in the flesh, the motions of sin, which were by the Law,
had force in our members, to bring forth fruit unto death. Sin took an
occasion Ver. 8.
by the commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence: for
without the Law sin is dead. Sin took an occasion Ver. 11.
by the commandment, and deceived me, and thereby slew me. Wherefore the Law
is holy, and the commandment is Ver. 12.
holy, and just, and good. Now Ver. 13.
is that, which is good, made death to me? God forbid! But sin, that it might
appear sin, wrought death in me, by that which is good: that sin might be
out of measure sinful, by the commandment.

The venomous operation of carnal corruption, and how mischeevously, by
occasion of Gods Law, it inciteth unsanctified men to rebellion, may evidently
be discerned in every one of these sentences. And that it is called by the name
of a Law is plain in these words. I see another Ver. 23.
Law in my members rebelling against the Law of my mind. In Ver. 25.
my mind I serve the Law of the Lord, and in my flesh the Law of sin.

Answer to the third Place.
Lastly, The meaning of that, 1 Cor. 3. 11. Considered and cleared
in the third to the Corinths is to be expended; where it is willingly granted
that the Moral Law is spoken of, as that, which was to be abolished: yet not
simply, but in some respect only: not as it is the rule of Obedience to Gods
holy will; not as it gives directions for the due ordering of every man's
ways; not as it prescribes the duties of holiness, and righteousness. But
as it is A Killing letter, and The Ministration of death, and condemnation,
formerly mentioned, and as it concludes all under the Gal. 3. 10.
Curse, who continue not in all things, which are written in the book of the
Law, to do them. So that the rigorous severity thereof is that only, whereof
Paul there speaks: And neither of that also, without limitation. For it is
not intended that al men promiscuously are exempted from the strict sentence of
it; but those Romans 8. 1.
alone. Who are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. The dominion and power of it, ouer-contumatious and wicked persons, was
as ample in Paul's time and is in these days, as ever it had bin in Moses his
government, and before Christ his coming.

There are besides these Scriptures by our Adversaries urged, some other Texts
seeming to contradict our Position touching the perpetuity of the Moral Law.
And therefore it is requisite that, as well as we can, we clear the point, by
giving resolution to all such doubts, as may arise thereout. One is in the sixth
to the Romans, ver. 14. Romans 6. 14


Objection 1.
Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. Which might give occasion of
demand, how the Law does retain its authority, and yet the people of God to
enjoy their immunity from it?

Answer.
The purpose of the Apostle How Gods law retains authority and yet Gods
people freed from it.
is to be searched out, and pondred, both for the better understanding of the
words, and also for the avoiding the inconsequence, that otherwise would ensue
thereupon. His drift therefore is to excite the servants of God manfully to
stand out against sin, for the perfecting of their mortification. The
argument of his Exhortation is, from the undoubted hope of their success and
victory. But whereupon is that grounded? Upon the happy alteration of their
estate, and condition. Once they were under the Law that peremptorily exacted
obedience, and yielded no assistance for the performance of it: nay, rather
that, which was the 1 Cor. 15. 56.
strength of sin, and ministered occasion (although faultlessly) to corrupt,
and victious flesh, of mutiny, and rebellion against Gods command. But now
they are under Grace; that is, the Spirit of Christ communicated unto them; by
virtue whereof that which is required of them, they shall have power to do:
and that, which is done by them, (though not exquisitly, and in full measure,)
shall be accepted, and their souls daily strengthened against all the remnants
of corruption. It is true therefore that Christians are not in Bondage to the
Law, nor under it, as holding the chief and principal place, so as Grace
could not have the predominancy; but joined with the Gospel, and being
subordinate thereunto; continues to the end of the world a powerful, and
effectual ordinance of the Almighty.

Objection. 2.
Another Text, that may occasion Gal. 3. 24. 25 makes nothing for the matter
in question.
matter to an obiector, is in the third to the Galatians ver. 24. 25. The Law
was made our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith.
But, after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmasters.

Answer.
He speaks of that Legal administration, and government, which the Lord
exercised over his people, in the old Testament; (both the Ceremonial, and
Moral Law being jointly in force;) when they were as children at school, and
in their minority, and consequently now determined, and come to an end the
Christian Church being (as it were) men of riper years and therefore this
concerns not the matter in question.

There is, (by report) another The law belongs to the regenerate.
erroneous opinion now latelyer hatched, of those, which confess that the Ten
Commandments are not totally abrogated: but yet deny that they belong at all
to them, that are in the state of Grace, and converted to the faith: but to
those alone which are as yet unsanctified. The unsoundness whereof, I hope
has appeared, and been refelled by that, which has been hitherto spoken.
For did ( Paul persuade unbelieving Ephesians. 6. 2.
Christians to honor their Parents, and apply unto them the promise? Or did
James give testimony of profane persons for well doing, in keeping the Royal
Law, (that is) the Commandments of God, which are as the Kings highway, for
all degrees to walk in? If they take that to Timothy or their 1 Timothy 1. 9.
ground, The Law is not given to a righteous man, they much mistake their
mark: For there he speaks of punishments to be inflicted, and not of duties
to be performed.

CHAP. 2. No significations, expirations, or change of duties, and services
have made any of the moral Commandments Ceremonial
FOr the proof No alteration, or change of nature, of the duties of the law
of this point, we will lay down a few positions, as our groundwork, such,
as I hope, will be found infallible, and undeniably true pregnant also, for the
manifest confirmation of that, which is to be declared.

The first is; That the Decalogue, 1 The dignity of the law in regard, of
continuance.
with the precepts of it, both before Christ his incarnation, and since, has
been in high honor, and estimation (and that by the warrant of the Holy.
Ghost) for the author, equity, and efficacy; as also for the antiquity,
constancy, and continuance of the same. They were meant, when Moses said. What
Nation is there Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 8.
so great, who has God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is, in all
things, that we call unto him for? And what nation is there so great, that has
statutes, and judgments so righteous, as all this Law, which I set before you
this day? And they were included, when David says.

The Law of the LORD is perfect, Psalm. 19. 7.
converting the soul.

8.
The testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple.

9.
The statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the heart.

The Commandment of the Lord is pure, inlightning the eyes.

The fear of the Lord is clean enduring for ever, etc.

And when he said. All his Psalm. 111. 7. 8.
Statutes are true; they are stablished for ever, and ever. Psalm. 111. 7. 8.

This was the glory, and dignity, that those Commandments had, in ancient
times whiles the old Testament yet continued. Then, when Christ was come, he
both confirmed, and commended them to posterity; that, yielding the place of
superiority to the Gospel, they should (with it, and for it, and by it)
retain their honor, by giving direction for Christian behavior, and receiving
due obedience, in an holy manner, from the faithful servants of God, in the
Church, throughout all ages, whiles the world stands.

Our Second Position is, That 2. Ceremonial law not so much dignified as the
Moral.
the Ceremonial Law, with the Leviticall ordinances, have never been so much
graced, no not then, when it most flourished, and was with great solemnity
observed: for it was always, from the first institution, to the final
abolishment, but a shadow of the body to come, although made Col. 2. 17.
useful, by Gods grace, to those, that rightly used it. To the Galaetians it
is compared to a Schoolmasters, which uses, with rod and discipline to
nurture those, whom he is set over. Yea, to a prison, or house of restraint,
wherein Captives, or bondmen are wont to be tasked with work for thereto
seems to be the allusion, when it is said. Before faith came, we were kept
Gal. 3. 23.
under the Law, and shut up unto the faith, that should be afterward revealed.

Our third Position is, That 3 The Moral law, not made Ceremonial, by
significations etc.
in case significations, and expirable types could have made any Moral
Commandment to become Ceremonial, the whole moral Law should have been much
debased by a privation of their first excelency, and brought into the condition
of these Leviticall constitutions, as having diverse precepts of it, once
comprehending under them sundry significant, and rituall observations.

This would be the more perspicuous, and with less difficulty apprehended if
it were contrived, into an Hypotheticall, or Connexiue Syllogism, as.

Proposition. If ever significations, in the services of God, could have made a
moral commandment ceremonial: then a great part of the perpetual moral law
should have grown to be Ceremonial, and temporary. Assumption. But no part of
the moral law is grown to be Ceremonial and temporary. Conclusion.
Therefore, significations, in the services of God could never make a moral
Commandment ceremonial and temporary.
The Assumption is beyond all exception: For to affirm the same thing to be
both perpetual, and temporary, tends very near to a contradiction. And the
Sequel of the proposition is as evident, because the whole ceremonial law was
contained under the moral; although not directly, and in express terms, yet
with a reference thereunto, and by implication; especially in some respects,
though not in all.

For, consider it according to the motive and occasion thereof, which was man's
miserable condition by his fall, and sinfulness; and so it was accusatory, and
for conviction. Consider it according to the end of it, which was to direct men
unto Christ, in hope of expiation of sin, through his blood, and of pacifying
Gods wrath, through his mediation; and so it was Evangelical. But consider it
according to the practice in joined, as a service to be done to the Lord; and
so it was a duty of loyalty, and a work of obedience.

For, First, the love of the godly, was much declared in the exercise of them,
as David professes of himself in the Psalm. 84 2.
Psalm, when he says. That his Soul longed, yea fainted for the courts of
the Lord, (where his ceremonial worship was celebrated) and there his heart,
and flesh rejoiced in the living GOD. Now whither love is to be reduced, Paul
teaches, Romans 13. 8. 9
when he says. That love is the fulfilling of the Law; of that Law, which
says. Thou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not kill; thou shall not
steal, etc. So much as any man loves, so near he approaches toward the
fulfilling of the law, though none but Christ could ever attain to the full
perfection of it.

Zachary, and Elizabeth, that They Luke 1. 6.
were both just before God, and Luc. 1. 6.
walked in all the Commandments, and Ordinances of God, without reproof. It
is agreed upon, among the Expositors, that by Ordinances are meant the
Ceremonies of the old Law, being then in force. And it is manifest that Gods
will declared in his Ten Precepts, has ever been the rule of Righteousness;
as Moses instructs parents to teach their children, saying, This shall be our
righteousness Dent. 6. 25.
before the Lord our God, if we take heed to keep all these Commandments,
as he has commanded us.

Eli his sons did 1 Samuel 2. 13 14. 15.
and caused the people to do also. Now it is well known, and that by the
Apostles testimony, that. Whosoever sins, 1 Ioh. 3. 4.
transgresses the Law: for sin is the transgression of the Law: Even of that
Law, which stood in force, when John writ his Epistle, which could not then be
the abrogated Ceremonial Law. Then that same Commandment, which is broken by
transgression, is contrarily kept by the practice of obedience.

This reason was alleged of late, at a Conference; and had by the adverse
part, a threefold exception taken against it.

1. One, for the term of keeping the Law, that it is in no man's power to do
it.

2. Another, against the Argument, from Opposition: That, of what commandment
the breach is a sin, the contrary keeping thereof is a duty and a virtue.
Adultery (says he) is a sin, and a breach of the seventh Commandment: and
yet every one is a virtuous keeper of it which is no Adulterer.

3. A third was against that Assertion; that Sin is the transgression of the
Law: sithence Infidelity, in not believing in Christ, is a Sin, and yet the Law
commands not faith in him.

Whereunto the same Reply, Men made able by grace to do that which is termed:
keeping the the law.
that then was made, shall now be repeated.

and this the scripture terms Keeping; as Behold I have Deuteronomy. 4. 5. 6.
taught you Ordinances and Laws, as the LORD GOD commanded me, etc Keep them
therefore, and do them: for that is your wisdom, and understanding, in the
sight of the people, etc. So in another place; Blessed Psalm. 119. 2.
are they that keep his testimonies, and seek him with their whole heart. So
in the Gospel, Blessed are they that hear the Luc. 11. 28. 1 Ioh. 3. 22.
word of GOD, and keep it And yet in another place: and whatsoever we ask, we
receive of him, because we keep his Commandments.

Chastity, the hatred and shunning of filthiness, and the love and
preservation of purity, stands in opposition to Adultery; and not the mere
forbearance of the gross practice of it; so that every one does not obey that
Precept, which has not fallen into the foul fact of incontinencie.

3. The third has the most show of truth and appearance Whether faith be
commanded in the law? and how.
of force: but upon sifting it, it will prove fallacious, and to be of no
validity: For, in some respect (without all question) faith cannot be
contained in the Law; but has its place properly and solely, in the Gospel:
But in another respect it is that, which GOD by his Commandment requires, and
we cannot but violate his Law, in not yielding the same unto him. As GOD in
his goodness does freely pardon the sins of his people, by the death and
merits of his Son apprehended by faith, being as it were the eye, unto which
this wonderful happiness appears; so this cannot come within the compass
of the Law, nor to be expected from it: That, contained a covenant of life to
such as obeyed it; but no promise of remission to them that transgressed it.
Salvation proceeds from Grace alone, through Christ, revealed in the Gospel,
and confirmed to his people in the new Testament. But being so offered, and
tendered unto us; no man can reject the same without violation of the first
Commandment, in not giving to God the honor of his Attributes; as of
Kindness, Truth, Power, and the like. For he does not choose, and acknowledge
the Lord to be his God, as by it we are required.

Who can deny, that whosoever rightly acknowledges the Lord to be such a
one, as in his nature he is, does yield due obedience unto his Commandment?
And John the Baptist taught this publicly, that, He which has Ioh. 3. 33.
received Christ his testimony, (and accordingly believes in him,) has
sealed that God is true, and is as ready to testify it, with the profession of
his lips, as they, that confirm their deed, by putting their hand, and seal
unto it.

But now, that we may desist Significant ceremoines cannot alter the nature of
unchangeable Commandments.
from digressions, and proceed in the prosecution of our point; it will be
needful to exemplify the matter with some particular instances, that in case
a signification could turn a moral commandment into a ceremonial diverse of
the ten Commandments should be such.

There were two pillars set 1 King. 7. 22.
in the porch of the Temple; the one was called Lachin, that is, He will
establish: and the other Boaz; which signifies, In him is strength. Are not
these representations of Gods all sufficiency, which is commended unto us, and
we ought to entertain a persuasion of, by the first Commandment? Beside a
great multitude of other Ceremonies contained under the 2. Commandment, there
were diverse sorts of Sacrifices; whereof some were offered for actual
confessions some for actual supplicatio^s, some for actual deprecations, some
for actual thanksgiuings: and many such moral uses they were destinated to,
and that by Gods own appointment. In the fourth Commandment we have our
adversaries on our side in this behalf, who grant, and prove that a Ceremony
was thereby prescribed, seeing the Seventh day had in it a signification of the
everlasting rest to come.

That the restraint of blood belonged to the sixth Commandment, we need not
produce any other testimony, then the reason, which the Lawmakers himself
assigned Genesis 9. 4 5. 6.
for it, when he said; Flesh with the life thereof, that is, with the blood
thereof, you shall not eat: for surely I will require your blood, wherein your
lives are: at the hand of every beast will I require it. And at the hand of a
man, even of a man's brother will I require it. Who so sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed: for in the Image of God made he man.

And can it be truly gainsaied, that the Law of Jealousy Levit. 5. 12 13.
so largely set down in one place of Leviticus, for the conviction, or
clearing of a woman suspected of whoredom, is an appurtenance of the seventh
Commandment? Thither also (as it seems) are to be referred those unclean
issues of man's flesh, the flux of natural seed, whereby they were legally
polluted, and the Levit. 15. 2. 3.
offerings appointed for their clensing.

Now seeing significant Ceremonies could not alter the nature of these
unchangeable Commandments; it is no more probable, that the mutation Mutations
of services alter not the nature of the law.
of services, which is made by the Holy Ghost, should do it. For the practice
and usage of some is ceased, and the exercise of others is established, in the
new testament, by institution; and yet the Law it self is not varied. If I
should bring in, for example, the First day of the week, now called the
Lord's Day succeeding the former seventh day, in the honor, and dignity of it, I
should seem to beg the question: I will rather therefore declare it in such
ordinances, as are subject, to less opposition.

There was a time, when men obeyed the Second commandment, by hearkening to
the ministry of the Prophets, and embracing the doctrine of the Priests, who
had not only a legal function, but a moral. To teach Jacob GODS Deuteronomy 33. 10
judgments, and Israel his law. And the Priests lips should preserve Mal. 2.
7.
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth: for he was the
messenger of the Lord-of-hostes. But Christ put an end to that calling, and
Ascending upon high, led captivity Ephesians. 4. 11. 12.
captive, and gave gifts unto men. (He gave some to be Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and teachers etc. And now,
ever since that time, his worship has been celebrated, and his people
instructed according to their doctrine, and ministry.

There was a time, when Circumcision, and the Passover were the Sacraments of
the visible Church, wherewith it was expedient, that all the people of God, who
professed their hope in him, should then be signed: But now is Baptism come
into the place of the one; and the Lord-Supper into the place of the other: all
these being the observations of one, and the same Commandment.

CHAP. 3. The fourth Commandment is a Moral Precept.
SO many learned men have written so well on this argument, that it may seem
altogether superfluons, and needless, to make any further addition. And so
many brains have been strained, in devising of evasions, and plotting of
shifts, to obscure the clearenesse of the cause, that it may seem merely
bootelesse, and to no purpose, to bestow any more travel in the matter. Yet
experience of the former good success of their labors, who have dealt for the
Service of God, in this kind, (that many eyes have been illightened thereby,
although some others would see nothing,) has encouraged us once again to
justify this Truth so much oppugned; having (as we think) a due calling to
the work, with hope of Gods wonted favor and blessing, for the event of the
same.

And, for proof, we will content our selves with few reasons, and spare the
multiplicity thereof; not urging so many as we could, nor dissallowing of
those, as slight, and forcelesse, which we forbear to repeat.

Argument. 1. (...) therefore shall be the First.
ALl the Ceremonial Law, Argument 1 proving the morality of the 4 precept.
Gal. 3. 19.
and every part thereof, had the original, and took beginning, after man had
sinned, and was added because of transgression; by way of conviction of
guiltiness, both to justify Gods righteousness, and to drive men to
repentance, and for a representation of expiation offered by the blood of
Christ, to lead men unto faith in him, and so to magnify Gods mercy. And this
was the occasion of all the Types whatsoever which the Church of God retained,
and used, from the fall of our first parents, to the resurrection of our
Blessed Savior. Now the obedience due to the Fourth Commandment has another
manner of foundation: it was not so occasioned, but grounded on the example of
God the Creator, practiced, and proposed, before any mention of man's
disobedience, and misery.

Argument. 2.
THis fourth Commandment Argument 2. proving the morality of the fourth
precept.
participateth with the three other before, and the six next following, in all
the prerogatives, and honors, wherein they go before all the Leviticall
constitutions for more glorious promulgation, and establishment. They were
pronounced by the voice of God himself, unto the people immediately: so was
this. For it is said, that God spoke all these words. They were Exodus 20. 10
written in tables of stone, by the finger of God, as it were, even by the Lord
himself: So was this. For it is said. He wrote Deuteronomy. 10. 4.
upon the tables, according, to the first writing, the Ten Commandments, which
the LORD spoke unto you, in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, in the day
of the assembly: and the Lord gave them unto me. Deuteronomy. 10. 4. They thus
written, were put into the Arc. 1 King. 8. 1 King 8. 9.
9. So was it also with them. For the two Tables being there placed, and it in
one of them, must needs have place in the same, among the rest.

They were written by the Holy Ghost, in the book of Exodus, jointly together,
without mixture of any other with them: So was this also, and set in an high
place, before all those of the Second Table.

Nothing of this is affirmed of the Law consisting of Ceremonies: God uttered
not that, with his own voice, neither was it written at all, in the Two Tables
of stone: or put into the Arc. For nothing 1 King. 8. 9.
was in it save the Two Tables of stone, which Moses had put there, at Horeb.
Neither was it joined in place, with the Moral precepts in Exodus 20.

Argument 3.
THe most near union, Argument 3 proving the morality of the 4 precept.
that is between this Commandment, and the other nine, will strongly prove it
to be of their number, and one of the same nature with them. How often does the
Scripture inculcate this word [ All], when it speaks of them? as in
Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
What nation is there so great, that has ordinances, and Laws so righteous,
as All this Law, which I set before you this day? The Lord has commanded us to
do All these ordinances. This shall be our righteousness, before the Lord, our
God, if we take heed to keep All these Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6. 24. 25.
which he has commanded us. When Moses calls them [ Ten words] shall we
think that he meant more or less, then the just number of the Moral
precepts? Especially, when in Exodus he says; God spoke All these words. And
in Deuteronomy, that He added no more thereto. If any Deuteronomy. 5. 22.
other had been put to them, they had exceeded that number: if this be none of
them, there would be but nine. It is observable, that in sundry places, they
are called A Law; The Law; and The whole Law Iam. 2. 10.
as in the Epistle of James. Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fail
in one point, is guilty of al. Reason teaches that all the integrall parts of
any thing must be suitable to the whole, as the whole consists of them all. As
in a natural body having diverse members, they are all genuine (as I may so
say) and of the same nature, and not foreign and of another kind. The hands,
the feet, the legs, and arms, the back, the loins, and other joints of a
man are all of one kind of flesh and bones. And, as this holds firm in
singular, and individual persons: so the same proportion may be observed in
the several species of Creatures. The beasts have no beakes, or bills, the
birds have no sins, the fishes have no hoofes, men have no wings, etc.

And the more yet, to manifest this union of the Commandments, that it may be
evident, how that they are all of one sort, Moses his testimony is to be
noted, who joins them all together equally, without disparadgement, or
exception of any one, and acknowledges them to be, as it were, so many
articles of one maine Covenant in these words. Then he declared unto you his
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 4. 13.
which he commanded you to do, even the Ten Commandments; and wrote them upon
two Tables of stone.

Argument. 4.
Argument 4. proving, the morality of the 4. precept.
THe maine ends of this Commandment, and the religious duties, with warrant
and approbation to be exercised on the Sabbath days, serve not only for
inducements, to bring men to a persuasion of the moralty thereof but may well
be taken for solid grounds, and evicting arguments of the certainety of the
same. That the Sabbath was instituted for a memorial of the work of Creation
finished, and not alone for a signification of Redemption hoped for; it may
easily be collected out of the hystory recorded in Gonesis, and GODS own
profession, by way of a reason, at the publishing of that precept in Exodus.
For why does he so solemnly mention, and reckon up the making of those eminent
creatures. The Heaven, The Earth, and The Sea, etc; but that his will was, in
the celebration of that day, to have them meditated on, for his praise, and
honor?

And the accustomed use of public meetings, and therein of reading the
Scriptures together with preaching, and hearing of Sermons, James declares in
the Acts of the Apostles, saying, Moses of old Act. 15. 21.
time, has in every City them that preach him, seeing he is read in the
Synagogue every Sabbath day.

And Christ, in the Gospel, much graced that practice, with his own example.
For (as Luke testifies) He went, as his custom was, into the Synagogue, upon
the Sabbath day and stood up to read, and preached Luke 4 15. 13. and. seqq.
unto them, out of the Prophet Esaias: as is more at large to be seen in the
story. Now the Synagogues were not the places, wherein they met together for
the solemnizing of the Leviticall feasts; but the Temple. For all the males,
that could, were enjoined there to appear before the LORD, on those days.

Moreover, the internal services of the mind and heart, Isay 58. 13.
as holy meditations, and desires, which Esaias teaches to be meet, and
necessary for the sanctifying of the Sabbath; were ever to be performed in
truth, and verity: and not symbollically, for signification only.

This time was likewise appointed, as GOD expressly Deuteronomy. 5. 14. 15.
professes, in one place; for the exercising of mercy, in granting rest, and
refreshing to the bodies of servants, and inferiors, whether they were
natives, or aliens, Jews, or Gentiles; of whom many might have no admission to
the Tabernacle, Temple, Sacraments, or Sacrifices, or to any such like
Ordinances.

Argument. 5.
LAstly, the stability, and Argument 5 proving the morality of the forth
Precept.
durablenesse of it does firmly argue the morality, that is in it. For,
notwithstanding that the significations of the legal shadows are still to be
remembered, and the body represented by them, is eternal: yet the practice, and
usage of them was to give place, and to surcease, after their accomplishment,
and fulfilling. But the practical keeping of the Ten Commandments, (whereof
the fourth is one) is not determined, but real obedience is evermore due to
each of them, as well now, as before Christ his coming, and that according to
his own testimony, and iniunction, with a threatening and a promise annexed
thereunto; as the Evangelist thus Matthew. 5. 19.
records the matter. Whosoever shall break one of these least Commandments,
and teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: But
whosoever shall observe and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Where Three things, Mat. 5. 19. Expounded
touching our point in hand, are considerable.

1. One, What is meant by These Commandments.

2. Another, What is meant by These least Commandments.

3. And the Third; How long this sentence of our Savior does stand in force.

1. The First, Master Calvin (an impartial interpretter,) shall inform us of,
in his explication of this Text, on this wise. Here Christ speaks, by name,
of the precepts for welliving, even of the Ten Commandments; according to the
prescript whereof all the children of GOD ought to lead their lives. And this
sense is made very manifest, by the verses following; wherein the LORD JESUS
himself, against the false, and fantastical glosses of the Pharisees, does
give a sound exposition of certain particular Commandments, as of the Sixth,
the Seventh, and the Third.

The Least is understood any one of the Ten, that should be slighted, by
dis-esteeme, or presumptuous transgression; as if it had not joint holiness,
and authority with all the rest, when no conscience is made of faithful
obedience to it.

Christ was not confined to his own days during the time of his natural life
and corporal abode here upon earth, until his death and resurrection: but to
be extended to all succeeding ages, and future times. For otherwise Saint James
would not so long afterward have said; Whosoever shall keep the whole Law,
and yet fail in Iam. 2. 20.
one point is guilty of all.

And now we are come to the sifting of those objections, which Master Broad,
and other our adversaries in this cause, do urge against us that a due and
just answer may accordingly be made thereunto.

Objection 1.
The first is from Texts of Scripture. GOD calls the Objection 1 against the
morality of the fourth Precept answered.
Sabbath a Sign, Exodus 31. 17. It is a Sign between me, and the children of
Israel for ever. Christ likeneth the Sabbath to Sacrifices. Mat. 12. 7. Paul
terms it a Shadow. Col. 2. 17.

Answer.
As good a show as the allegation of these places does make, yet if they be
reduced into the form of an argument a fallacy will be discovered therein, and
the point in question found vnconcluded. The most, that can be enforced out of
them, is this

Whatsoever was a Sign, a Sacrifice, and a Shadow, was not moral.

But the former Sabbath was a Sign, a Sacrifice, and a shadow.

Therefore the former Sabbath was not moral.

But does the controversy between us consist in this? Should not we look for
this conclusion: Therefore the fourth Commandment is not moral? But we will
give a more particular resolution to the Texts objected. As for that Twelfth of
Matthew. It concerns not the weekly Sabbath, as we shall show in the next
Chapter. Touching the other Two. First we deny the Sabbath to have been
originally a Sign, and a Shadow. It might be merely moral, at the beginning,
and yet afterward have a signification put into it. For at the first
institution, there were no Isralites, whom it should distinguish as the people
of GOD, from all other nations, neither was it simply a Sign at any time, but
in some respect: neither was it totally a Sign, but in part only: for there
were many other uses of it.

Sum thereof is, That GODS chosen and selected time be conscionably kept, and
religiously bestowed in his worship. That there should be some legal use of
one day, as there was of the former Seventh: And some Evangilicall respect in
another as there is in the now established Lord's Day. It is rather a quality in
the services commanded, then of the substance and essence of the Commandment
it self.

Objection 2.
Objection 2. against the morality of fourth precept answered.
Were the fourth Commandment Moral, it were greater then any Commandment, in
the Second Table: being greater, it should be preferred before it. Whereas
indeed it ought to give place to a branch only of a Commandment, in the
second Table. For a few ought to save his neighbors Goods from burning; though
he spent the whole day therein; and neither rested, nor went to the
assemblies; and were it moral to sanctify the Sabbath, and a City on fire;
And a Jew could not both save his neighbors goods, and sanctify the Sabbath:
He ought to have sanctified the Sabbath; and to have suffered his neighbors
goods to perish: which seeing he might not do, it is manifest, that to
sanctify the Sabbath was not moral.

Answer.
Just exceptions may, and must be taken against this reason: for it is more
then one way faulty; as in this; That the fourth Commandment is made inferior
to the eight because in a case of necessity some works of the fourth are to
be omitted in the instant, for the prevention of an extremity in our brothers
estate. Now in this case, there is no comparison between the two
Commandments, which of them should be the greater, or the less. But of
actions, which should be first, or last; or which should be performed, or
necessarily forborne, at that season. Some especial, and important duties of
the Second Table may be more acceptable, and precious, then those of an
inferior nature, of the first. When Obadiah preserved the lives of an hundred
Prophets, he performed a better service to GOD, then he could have done by
reading a Chapter, or two, in the Law, or by making an ordinary prayer to him.
Our Adversaries will confess, that all external actions of religion, as
singing of Psalms, making of prayers hearing of sermons, and the like (though
Moral) give place to works of mercy, in such cases. But (say they) because I
may first do the work of mercy, and afterward worship GOD. And so (say I) I
may show that mercy, and afterward finish the remnant of the Sabbath, in
sacred exercises; or else some others afterward: for that my work tends not
to the abolishing of the day, or of my due regard of it. And this is also
worthily to be taxed, that they set the works of mercy, and the sanctifying of
the Sabbath, as opposits: whereas they are subordinate, and one of them a
means of the other, and a commendable practice thereof, as Christ witnesses
Mat. 12. 12.

Objection 3.
The Priests in the Temple Objection 3. against the moralily of the 4 precept
answered. Thomas Broad, his manuscript part. 1. cap. 1 and cap. 2. arg 3.
(Mat. 12. 5.) preferred a Ceremonial, before the Fourth Commandment: for
they offered Sacrifices, as was enjoined. Thus they labored in killing beasts:
whereby they profaned the Sabbath, and were blameless. And the Disciples
pulling ears of corn, and rubbing them in their hands, on the Sabbath day,
profaned it. And so did the man, that took up his bed, on that day. Whereas,
in the judgment of the learned, the breach of the moral law is sin. And
therefore the moral law may not be broken, to save the lives of all mankind.
Evil must not be done, that good may come thereof. Yea GOD himself cannot
give a man leave to break a moral Commandment; as to steal, murder, or lie.

Answer.
This kind of reasoning seems very unsavory, as wanting both good smell, and
relish: by making one of GODS services to be a proper, and direct violation of
another: as though GODS spirit prescribed contrarieties in the same Subject.
For, by taking the word ( Profaning) of the Sabbath literally, as here our
adversary does: it will follow that those sacred ministers of God, in the
Temple, who should have been most holily employed, did exercise as little
holiness in their callings, on that day, and as much infringe that precept of
the LORD, Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day: as they, that were
most devoyd of religion. But Master Beza deals more kindly with them, in his
Annotations, saying. The Priests, doing the work of GOD, on the Sabbath day,
did not yet violate the Law. And therefore, by the Law of the Sabbath, all
works, without any exception, are not forbidden.

The latter part of the Objection, (which, he says, is grounded on the
judgment of the learned) is true. i. That a moral Commandment cannot be
broken, without sin, but not well applied. Dispose it into form, and let the
Minor Proposition speak out, and it will tell a flat untruth: For so it must
be.

No moral law may be broken without sin.

But the fourth Commandment may be broken, without sin.

Therefore the fourth Commandment is no moral law.

This [ Broken, Breach, and Breaking] sounds harshly, as arguing contempt;
or, at the least, a neglect of due care to perform that, which is enjoined.
Now this cannot be offered to the fourth Commandment; neither could it to any
of the Ceremonial constitutions, without disloyalty to the Lawgiver, whose
will is thereby dissobeyed. Omissions there may be of that, which seems to be
required, and practice of that, which, in strictness, has an appearance of a
prohibition: and yet, by the true meaning of the law, or with alowance from
him, which made the Law: he, which does so omit, or practice, may therein be
faultlesse and praise worthy. But this is not proper to the Fourth
Commandment; but falls out as well, in other moral Precepts. If any man now
should marry his own sister; it could not be but a grievous and incestuous
transgression of the Seventh Commandment: and yet it was not so in Adams
immediate children. Stealing is a violation of the Eight Commandment: and yet
the Isralits spoiling of the Egyptians of their jewels, and other ornaments,
were not in the state of Exodus 12. 36
thieves. Murder is an heinous breach of the Sixth Commandment, and all
violence forbidden by it: and yet Moses did not fault in killing Exodus 2. 12
the Egyptian: Nor Phinehas in slaying the Midianite, Number. 25. 8.
and Israelitish woman. Nor he, that in the book of Kings, wounded the
Prophet 1 King. 20. 37.
of GOD, being a righteous man. For all these had their warrant and direction
from the LORD.

Objection. 4.
All the moral precepts are Objection 4 against the morality of the fourth
precept answered.
written in the heart of man; and the observation of them is according to the
law of nature. But so is not that of the Fourth Commandment: for nature does
not teach men weekly to keep day of seven.

Answer.
To this we say, that therefore it is confirmed to be Moral, because it is
agreeable to the law, and light of nature; as may be seen in the customs of
Idolaters, both in the Scriptures, and by Exodus 16.
common experience, among the heathen, who used to celebrate feasts, and
solemn times, to their GODS, with a religious devotion. But it is said;

Objection.
That so Churches should be also, by the law of nature; because they built
Temples likewise to their Idols.

Answer.
That does not necessarily follow; forasmuch as the solemnites of their feasts
were the occasion of their Temples and so the one was, as it were a consectary
of the other. As it was by the law of nature, to solemnize festiuites to their
GODS: so by the same they were moved to assemble together, and jointly to do
their service: hereupon they stood in need of fit places; those places then
they made decent and comely, and afterward very beautiful, and pompous
whereby, being led by sense, and such goodly sights, they waxed superstitious
of them; especially by the Statues, and images of their Gods, being therein
placed. So that external motives induced them so highly to esteem of, and as
it were, to adore their Temples; whereunto they grew more, and more, by
Custom, examples, and delusions. But the doubt yet remains unresolved, how
nature should direct us to the sanctifying of one day in seven, or in any set
number, and that to be constantly this, or that day of the the week;
especially varied, and not at the last the same, which was observed at the
first. For resolution whereof we will build on Zanchius his foundation,
(although he be produced as a witness against our cause, by our adversaries)
which he does lay before us. It is the will of GOD (and according to the rule of
nature, and reason,) to sanctify some time to GOD.

And then will this follow, that he is, by institution, to choose, or change the
time, at his own pleasure: and that the time so set, chosen by him be duly set
apart, for the exercise of his worship. For he commended the seventh day to the
Israelits, not only by edict, but by reason, also and the force of equity,
saying, it was The Sabbath of the LORD their GOD, and that Which he had
blessed, and given them an example of by practice. Now whatsoever reason does
apprehend as equal, must needs be agreeable to the light of nature: as the
LORD testifies of the Gentiles, that they, Would not spoil their GODS: that
Mal. 3. 8.
is, take, or detain any thing from them: and this they learned only from
nature.

Objection. 5.
Objection 5. against the morality of the fourth precept answered.
The observation, and keeping of this Commandment is of no antiquity: Adam
being thrust out of Paradise, neither he, nor his posterity sanctified any day,
in an holy rest, for ought that we do certainly find, or may probably
conjecture. The Jews acknowledge that they do not read, of Abraham's keeping
the Sabbath. And I may add, neither of any others keeping, or breaking it,
both before, and a good while since Abraham's time It is not likely that Jacob
whiles he served his uncle Laban, an Idolater; or any of the Isralites all the
while, they were so cruelly oppressed: rested from work every Seventh day. The
Patriarchs were not commanded to sanctify any day. And had the godly
Israelites under Pharo, or the Jews under the King of Babylon, and Christians
under the Heathen governors, refused to work, one day in seven, it would have
bred great stirs, cost many men their lives; and no doubt, hystories would
have been full of it.

Answer.
Here is great strength of immagination, but small force of reason. For all the
examples urged, are at the most, but coniecturall, and the grounds thereof very
weak. If Abraham's and Jacobs and the other Patriarchs, keeping of all the
other Commandments, had been particularly recorded, and this alone by name
unspoken of, there had been some probability in the matter: But no mention is
made of many services; which nevertheless they undoubtedly performed.

And for the Israelites in Egypt, if they did not rest on the Sabbath, the
question is, whether it were not a fault in them; at the least of infirmity and
weakness. And that failing in Babylon, which is alleged, if there were any
such, must needs be acknowledged unlawful: for that was after the law was
established. And that the observation of the Sabbath was not confined within
the bounds of Judah, and Israel; it is manifest in the 16. Chap. of the Acts
of the Apostles, ver. 13. and in diverse other places. But we have Scriptures,
which will yield stronger probability, for the antiquity of it, that it was
observed before Israel came into the Wilderness. Sure it is, that it was
kept, before it was proclaimed on Mount Sinai: for they were enjoined in
conscience of it, to forbear the gathering of Manna on the Seventh day; as it
appears in the 16. of Exodus. And it is not likely that then was the first
institution of it: for Moses speaks, as of a thing known to them before: and
in rebuking of the transgressors he says; How long refuse Exodus 16. 23. 29.
you to keep my commandments, and my Laws? But that we may not be
singularly conceited in making such a Collection out of this place; we have
Doctor Willet of the same mind with us.

Some (says he) are of Willet on Exodus 16. 20 Quest. 34.
opinion, that the Israelites began first now to keep the Sabbath; and that
this Precept was to continue until the coming of the Messiah: But this
opinion has no ground, or good warrant: for, Moses speaks of the Sabbath, as
of a thing well known: Tomorrow is the rest of the Sabbath. And to what end
else should the people be so ready to gather a double portion, for the sixth
day, but to prepare them for the Sabbath, before Moses had yet spoken any thing
of the rest thereof. Therefore it is more then probable, that the Sabbath was
kept of ancient time, among the people of GOD, grounded upon the example of GOD
himself, that rested, after the Creation finished in six days, upon the
Seventh: which observation was delivered by godly tradition, from Adam to his
posterity: for seeing that the Church had from the beginning, a public, and
external worship of God, it could not otherwise be, but that they had also a
certain time prefixed, wherein to celebrate the public worship and service of
GOD: And then what time was more fit, then that which GOD had sanctified by his
own example.

And we are not to seek of a strong probability, that may be gathered out of
the New Testament, that the Sabbath has been in use among the godly, from the
beginning; or has not been always out of use, until Moses his government,
although it be not directly so affirmed. For the Apostle does intimate so Heb
^^
(...) in the Fourth to the Hebrews: where he proves, that the rest spoken
of by David, in the Ninety and Fifth Psalm (which the unbelievers are
threatened to be debarred of) must needs be meant of that which is to be
found in heaven; as being not by them, as yet entered into. For thus he
reasons by way of distribution: Either he spoke of the rest of the Land of
Canaan, or the Rest of the Seuenth-Day, or of the Rest of the life to come.

But he did not speak of either of the two former Therefore he spoke of
that, which is in the life to come.

Now for proof of the Assumption. Why may it not be understood of the Land of
Canaan? Because Iosuah had given them entrance into that, before David's days.
And why not of the Rest of the Seuenth-Day? Because an entrance was made into
that; shortly after the foundation of the world, when GOD had once finished his
works, and rested. Now if the Sabbath had taken its beginning in the
wilderness, how could the Apostles tenent be justified?

CAP. 4. All consecrated time, is the observation of the Fourth Commandment?
THis Position may seem peradventure to be of so great a latitude, as that it
would require a large Induction of particulars, for the confirmation of it, and
be very difficult therefore to be made good. But the verity that is in it,
will be easily apprehended of them, that shall assent to certain truths,
which, without obstinate perverseness, cannot be gainsaid.

Feasts of the LORD, in Leuiticus, and other places of Leuit. 23. 2.
Scripture.

Fourth Commandment, these days so singled out and separated from common use,
by the LORD, should be set apart to his services, and acknowledged thereby to
be his peculiar right; according to that of the Prophet; If thou turn away
thy Isay. 58. 13.
foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on my holi-day; and call the
Sabbath a delight, to consecrate it as glorious to the LORD, nor doing thy own
ways, nor seeking thy own will, nor speaking a vain word: then shall thou
delight in the Lord.

3. The third is, That, if it be found, that any days besides the Seventh, in
regard of such hallowing, be appendent, and belonging to that commandment: it
will well follow, that all of the same sort, and which are destinated to the
same use, are also, in the same respect, and by the same proportion, so to be
reputed and thought of.

Now, that we may further insist upon this last, let us considerately look into
that 23. of All the solemn feasts in the law issued from the same fountain
that the seventh day did. Levit. 23.
Lev: and there we may see, that the other sacred Festiuities in time issued
out of the same fountain that the Seuenth-Day did; although it was by far,
the fairest stream, and they, in comparison of it, like unto small Brooks, or
little Rillets. Both it, and all the rest are termed the [ Feasts of the LORD:]
The name of [ Sabbath] is common with it to all the solemn days, as it were
to be celebrated with holy assemblies. And who of judgment does not perceive,
that these titles, terms, names, and forms of celebration are comprehended
within the compass of the Fourth Commandment? Neither have we the Law alone,
and Moses to minister unto us matter, for the proof of this point: but in the
Gospel also, and from Christ his own words, we shall find plain evidence
for it That in the Twelfth of Matthew, touching the Apostl^s plucking Mat. 12. 1.
of ears of corn on the Sabbath Day, reprehended by the Pharisees, does so
apparently concern the breach, or keeping of the Fourth Commandment, that I
know not any one, that is contrarilyminded. Yea, our Adversaries do not only
confess it, but urge and enforce it, against the Morality of the Sabbath. Mr.
Broad himself, In his three questions. Page 5.
our professed Opposite, shall be the man, whom we will call to witness, in
this case; whose testimony is thus.

There are pregnant texts enough to prove, that the Sabbath was a shadow or
Ceremony; and consequently, that the Fourth Commandment is more ceremonial
then therest: as that Text, Mat. 12. ^. [But if you had known, what this
means, I I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the guiltless.] Here he likeneth the observation of the Sabbath to the
offering of Sacrifices.

Answer.
But how if it appear, that this corn was not plucked on the Seuenth-Day, nor
that, here pleaded for by the Pharisees? How if it fall out, that this act was
done at one of their solemnities, on the last day of a solemn feast? will not
this be inferred upon it, that the Ceremonial Sabbaths came under the Fourth
Commandment, and not that the Moral Sabbath was convicted to be in the
nature of a Sacrifice, by this place? Now for the auerring of what I have said,
it will be sufficient to bring Luke as an Expositor of Matthew, touching the
Circumstance of the time; who, in this manner, does declare it: And it came to
pass, Luc 6. 1.
on the second Sabbath after the first, that he went through the corne-fields;
and his Disciples plucked the ears of corn.

And here do I appeal to the judgment of all learned Divines: Whether [ The
second (...).
Sabbath after the first] can be otherwise understood, then of one of the
Leuiticall Holi-dayes, which (by the circumstance of the season, in that corn
was then ripe upon the ground) seems to be the Seuenth-Day of the feast of
Vnleuened-Bread, and the two and twentieth of the first Month.

Objection.
But this point as well as the former, is excepted against, and that by color
of reason: for those that are against us, strive to make the Sabbath, and the
Seuenth-Day, and all that is intended in the Fourth Commandment, to be
reciprocal, and conuertible: as that the Sabbath should be none, but that
Seuenth-Day, and that Seuenth-Day should only be the Sabbath. So that no other
time, either then present, or which in future ages should be; could have any
place, in that precept.

For, This Question (say they) Broad, in his three questions. page 10.
may well be demanded: How shall the Fourth Commandment, being delivered in
form of words, bind us to sanctify any day, but only the Seventh? Suppose
that Christ had said to his Disciples; Remember the day of Resurrection, to
sanctify it. Six days of the week you shall labor, and do all that you
have to do: but the first day is the day of Resurrection: in it you shall do,
etc. How should this Commandment bind us to sanctify any day, but only the
first, the day of Resurrection. So GOD saying; Remember the Sabbath (or day of
rest) to sanctify it. Six days shall thou labor and do all thou have to
do: but the Seventh is the Sabbath, etc. How should this Commandment bind us
to sanctify any day, but only the Seuenth-Day, wherein GOD rested, and which
the Jews sanctified?

Answer.
For resolution hereof, I refer them to the general rule of direction, that
* Master We are not tied to the Jews Seventh day, by the 4. Commandment.
Calvin gives, for the better understanding of all the Commandments; which is
this.

There is always more Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 8.
meant in the Precepts and prohibitions, then in words is expressed. And
commonly there are manifest Tropes (whereby one part is put for the rest) in all
the Commandments: that he shall make himself worthy to be laughed at, who
confineth the sense to the strictness of the words.

By such curiosity and niceness, all superstitious traditions and fancies
might be freed from the censure of the Second Commandment: seeing it
forbids nothing expressly but the making and worshipping of Images. Neither
would the worshipping of all Images be there forbidden, but of those only,
which men have made to themselves: So that the least part of Idolatry would be
thereby restrained. And might not a wrangling Atheist pick a quarrel against
the First Commandment, to cavil at it, thus? How shall we Gentiles be
persuaded, that the Lord is our GOD, or be induced to deuote our selves to him
alone, or to think that his Commandments are directed to us; since he spoke
to them whom he brought out of the Land of Egypt, where we never were, nor
our Progenitors before us? And yet we know, that the Second Commandment does
condemn all humane inventions, and willworship: And the First is spoken to all
his people, of what Nation, Kindred, or Country soever. And why then should the
Fourth be girded in so narrowly?

CHAP. 5. The Lord's Day, is a consecrated time of Divine Institution, and
immutable.
SOund Wisdom, and good discretion does teach men, in matters of question and
difference, not to deliver all that may be spoken: but so much as will prove
substantial and solid: and therefore, although many probable reasons might be
produced, to give some light to the cause we have in hand; yet it being of
such weight and importance as it is, will safeliest be settled The Lords day
proved to be of divine institution.
on such a sure, and firm foundation, as may secure the builders from dread of
any demolition or downfall: And such an one it has in the Revelation of Saint
John, where the Scripture honors this day with the glorious Title, and that
possessiuely uttered, of the Lord's Day, which Revel. 1. 10. (...).
publishes to the world, even to the end of the world, that it is not of an
ordinary or common rank, with all the other days of the Week; but appointed
for some more excellent employment. There is Note this.
nothing to be found (for ought I remember) in all the New Testament, that by
the Spirit of GOD is ascribed to Christ, and he thereinto entitled, in regard
of his dominion over the Church but it is sacred and holy, and set apart for
holy uses; as His Word, Col. 3. 16. His Gospel, Mar. 1. 1. His ministry and
service, 1 Timothy 1. 12. His Grace, Romans 16. 24. His Spirit, Gal. 4. 6. His
Supper, 1 Cor. 18. 20 His Bread and Cup, 1 Cor. 11. 27. His Table, 1 Cor. 10.
21. His Church, Ephesians. 5. 23. And why then should His Day alone be defrauded of
the honor of In what respects a day is said to be the Lords day.
holiness? Let us proceed a little farther, and inquire why, and for what
cause it is in this place called by the name of the Lord's Day. Either it is
because it belongs unto him by right of Creation: Or for that some notable
work is appointed to be wrought in it, by way of destination, (as in that
sense, or the like, where it is said; The day of the Lord 1 These. 5. 2.
shall come even as a thief in the night:) Or by virtue of his setting it
apart through Consecration.

But it is not termed here, in respect of the first cause: For so all times are
alike his; as the Psalmist testifies, Psalm. 74. 16. 17.
saying; The day is thine, the night also is thine; thou have prepared the
light, and the sun. Thou have made Summer, and winter.

And what certain intelligence should the Churches have received from the
Apostle, touching the time, when those great things were revealed unto him; if
he had told them, that it was in a day of GODS making?

And in respect of the Second it could not be. For that intends a time yet to
come. And therefore it must be meant of the Last; That it is so denominated, by
reason of that choice, which Christ has made of it by Consecration,

We have many learned writers, of principal note, consenting with us, in the
application of this place to this point. Some by way of Exposition and
declaration; as Master Beza: Some by way of Proof, and Confirmation; as Peter
Martyr: Some by way of Disputation; as Doctor Whitakers.

Master Beza does, in this Beza Annot in Apoc. 1. 10.
manner, deliver his judgment.

John terms that the Lord's Day, which Paul calls the first day of the
week; 1. Cor. 16. 2. Act. 20. 7. Upon which day it appears, that the
Christians were wont to assemble together, As the Jews met on the Sabbath in
the Synagogue. So that it may appear, that the Fourth Commandment, for the
sanctifying of every Seventh day, so far as touched the old Sabbath; and the
Legal rites, was Ceremonial: But remains, for the worship of GOD, a precept
of the unchangeable Moral Law, and such a one, as is perpetual, during this
life. And that Sabbath stood from the Creation of the world, to the
Resurrection of Christ: which, seeing it is another Creation of another world;
(as the Prophets speak) then out of doubt, by the appointment of the
Holy Ghost to the Apostles, in stead of the Sabbath, which was for the former
age, or that seventh day was chosen the first day of the new world, wherein,
not that corporal, or corruptible light, which was created the first day of
the old world: but that which is heavenly and eternal, has shined upon us. And
therefore the assemblies of the Lord's Day, (which Iustine Martyr also
expressly mentions, in Apolog. 2.) are of Apostolical, and truly Divine
tradition.

Peter Martyr has this In 1 Cor. 16. 2.
saying.

As by the appointment of the Law, the Sabbath was celebrated to keep fresh in
memory the making of the world: So now is the Lord's Day for use, to keep fresh
the memorial of Christ his resurrection; and therefore also to confirm the
hope of our own resurrection. But, when this change was made, we have it not
expressly set down in the holy Scriptures: Notwithstanding in the Revelation
of S. John there is express mention made of the Lord's Day. Cap. 1. 10.

Doctor Whitakers, maintaining Tertia traditio de Die Dominico non est (...)
nam in scripturae habetur nempe Apoc. 1. 10.
the perfection of the Scripture against humane traditions, affirms; that,

The Lord's Day is no unwritten tradition: for that it is found in the
Scripture, even in the first of the Revelation.

Sithence then that this holy The Lord's Day is immutable.
day is founded on the Law and ratified by the Gospel, it will consequently
follow that that will hold its stability, whiles they retain their authority;
and that will be as long, as the Sun is in the firmament, and the heavens
above the earth. For The 1 Pet. 1. 28.
word of the LORD endures for ever. And cursed be that Gal. 1. 8.
person, whether man, or Angel, that shall attempt any innovation against it.
We must not imagine, that an ordinace, so well, and authentically warranted,
may be subject to abrogation, or change. And therefore whosoever goes about to
repress the observation of it, does attempt an execrable sacrilege, by
robbing GOD, and his Church of so glorious an ornament. And, if any man would
take upon him, to make an alteration, by transferring it to another day, he
should play Ieroboams part, who neglected the time and place prescribed by the
LORD, for his worship, and service, and Offered upon the 1 King. 12. 33.
Altar, which he had made in Bethell, the fifteenth day of the Eight Month,
(even in the month, which he had forged of his own heart,) and made a solemn
feast unto the Children of Israel.

So then it is not in man's power, to abolish, or remove the Lord's Day: and it
is as certain, that the LORD, will not do it. For it is one of the
immoveables spoken of by the Apostle to the Hebrews; Heb. 12. 27.
which remains after that once Shaking of the heaven, and earth.

And the motive of it is durable, and everlasting, even the Resurrection of our
Blessed Savior, who can never possibly fall back again into his grave:
Neither can any thing surmount it in glory, and excellency, as that the
remembrance thereof should put out or darken the honorable memorial of it.

And now an Answer is to be made to that, which is excepted against this
Position, and whatsoever has been spoken in the defense thereof, and the
contrary reasons on the other side come to be examined.

Objection 1.
How shall we know, that the Lord's Day is the Sabbath which we keep?

Answer.
By knowing that the Sabbath, The first day of the week proved to be the
Lords day that is to be observed.
which we keep, is that which was then the first day of the week; and by
knowing that the first day of the week was the day of Christ his Resurrection;
and by knowing that the day of Christ his resurrection gave denominatio^ to
that, which is our Sabbath, and caused it to be called the Lord's Day,

It is to be intended, that these Seven Churches knew what day it was, and
likewise all others of that time. For shall we think that John would so
slighty describe so glorions a vision, (of such moment for the Christian
Church, until the second coming of Christ) in that ambiguous manner, and by
such a dark circumstance, as they were altogether unacquainted with? The
matter concerned them then, and other the Churches, that then were, and those,
that were next to succeed: and all, that have been ever since: and these of
our days: and those which shall come after, as long as the world stands.

The joint, and uniform practice of so many Churches, in solemnizing the same
time constantly with public assemblies, administration of the Sacrament, and
distribution to the poor, does sufficiently testify, that they were not
ignorant of the day, which Christ had consecrated. At Troas they came together,
the first day of the week, to Act. 20. 7.
break bread: that is, to celebrate the Lord's Supper and then and there Paul
preached unto them till midnight. The Corinthians, using every first day of the
week to come together, were directed by the Apostle, by way of alms, as GOD
had blessed them, to lay aside somewhat for the poor Saints. And the same
precept had he also given to the Churches of Galatia: whereof S. Jerome thus
writes against Vigilantius.

On the first day of the week, (that is, on the Lord's Day) Paul commanded that
all should bestow that, which should be carried for relief to Jerusalem The
like order was kept in the ages following, by the testimony of Justin Martyr,
and in all places, ever since there has been the observation of that day,
wheresoever the Gospel of Christ has been embraced.

Objection. 2.
The Apostle sharply taxes the Galatians, for preferring one time before
another, saying. Ye observe days, and months, and years: I am in fear of
you, lest I have bestowed on you Laebour in vain. Gal. 4. 10.

Answer.
The same Apostle is most competent for the explication of his own meaning:
which being rightly understood, yields no advantage to them, that urge it;
nor any way diminishes the estimation, and account, which the Lord's Day, by
right, ought of all Christians, to be had in. For, in the Epistle to the
Colossians, he declares what those days were, which were kept with such
offense, and danger; Col. 2. 16. 17.
namely, the Legal Holy Days and new moons and Sabbath-dayes, being but
shadows of things to come. Whereas that, which we celebrate, is for the
joyful, and thankful memorial of the perfect accomplishment of work of
Redemption, by them prefigured.

Objection 3.
The whole life of a Christian is a continual Sabbath, in resting from sin;
as the Apostle says. He, that is entered into his rest, has ceased from his
own work as GOD did from his; Heb. 4. 10.

Answer.
It is doubtful what these Obiectors intend, by the term of Sabbath: Whether
they would have it properly taken, so as it is the observation of the Fourth
Commandment. Or by way of resemblance, as only alluding unto it, that
Christians ought to be holy all the days of their life, and abstain from
illdoing, as the Jews were enjoined to sanctify the Seventh day in a special
manner, and to forbear all labor, and travel. Let it be understood of whether
they please, and it will stand them in little stead for this purpose. If they
mean it in the former sense, they must needs make a strange alteration, in the
state of GODS Commandments, to bring the obedience due to them all within the
compass of one, and so make it a Transcendent, as though the doing of every
duty of religion, and righteousness; and the shunning of every vice of
impiety, impuritie, and iniquity, were the keeping of that one Commandment;
and so love to GOD, and Man should be enclosed in a narrower room, then
formerly it has been. GOD is not the author of confusion; 1 Cor. 14. 33.
as by this he should be made; if they plead alowance from him, for their
uncouth Paradoxe.

Shall we think, that at the Law-giuing, he minded this, by saying; ( Thou
shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor) Thou ought to Remember
the Sabbath day, to keep it holy? Or, when he said; In it thou shall do no
manner of work: that is, Thou shall make no graven image: or, Thou shall not
commit adultery? Did the LORD, in the Law or Prophets, any where so interpret
himself?

Or did Christ, in the ratification of the Law, put any such new meaning into
it? And in confounding the sanctifying of the Sabbath Day, with holy behavior
euery-day; one of two extermities will hardly, with any possibility be avoided:
That either no ordinary work may be done at any time, but Christians must live
always as the Isralites were Commanded to do, on the Seuenth-day. Or else
that no certain season is to be exempted from common affairs, and set apart
for the worship and service of GOD, in public assemblies more then all others.

Neither have servants, and such as are under the yoke, any time of rest and
refreshing assigned unto them, by divine ordinance. Now the former of these is
palpable, and damnable superstition: and the latter intolerable, and cruel
profaneness. Now, if they will say, that their words are stretched beyond their
meanings, (they only proposing the Sabbath Day for a model and rule of
Christian men's lives; that they should not only for the seventh part thereof
declare their piety, and devotion; but in all the rest demean themselves in an
holy manner:) we reply, that their pretense, in obiecting against us this
perpetual Sabbath is wholly impertinent, and frivolous.

For upon that ground, the Fourth Commandment might have been spared
altogether, as never needing to be either spoken, or written; sithence Israel
was an holy people also, before there were any professed Christians. And it
concerned them, in case they would be Blessed, that they Psalm. 106. 3.
Should keep judgment, and do righteousness at altimes. And yet they were
bound to Sanctify the Sabbath, that Seuenth-day that the LORD Commended unto
them, without which they could not have bin holy: as Christians cannot now be
any day, that shall contemptiously, or carelessly neglect the Lord's Day.

In regard of their holiness they are by GOD himself, Exodus 19. 6.
called by the name of Priests, a Kingdom of Priests, Priests unto him, or his
Priests. And yet Aarons Priesthood, and that of the House of Levi was not
dissolved, by this allusion to their function, and service.

We Christians, in the New Testament, are titled by the name of Kings: and shall
therefore no subjection be yielded to the Princes, and Sovereigns, who are set
over us, in authority, and government? Beside this, many have not yet attained
unto any sound sanctification: they must be brought thereunto, by the help of
the ministry, on the Lord's Day. And some are soundly sanctified, but not
greatly. And some are sanctified greatly, but none perfectly. This Sabbath,
with the exercise of the holy ordinances therein, is as needful, and
commodious to all these, as watring, or rain is, for the rooting, grows, and
fruitfulness of plants, in gardens and orchards.

As for the Rest, spoken of in the Hebrews, by them produced. It is not the
present Condition of any mortal Creature, in this world, but that eternal
felicity in heaven, whereunto faith leads the believers, and gives them as
certain assurance of, as if they were now presently putting their foot into
it: and there is a cessation indeed, not only from sin, but from all manner
calamities; as the Spirit informed John in his Revelation. Rev. 14. 13
And thereout the hard-hearted, and unbelieving Isralites were excluded,
according to the oath, which GOD swear in his wrath upon due cause kindled
against Iun. Paral. in Heb. 4. 5.
them. And Learned Iunius his judgment is, That Christ is he principally, that
in the behalf of his Church, as well as for himself, has entered into the
possession of that Rest, first spoken of by Moses, and then by David, and here
more largely discoursed of, and amplified by this Apostle. For so, by a kind of
Paraphrase, he makes plain, and perspicuously unfolds the sense of this
place.

Whither the head of the Church, and Prince of GODS people is entered, thither
shall the Church, and people of GOD likewise enter. But he is entered into his
Rest, and gloriously cease from his works wherein he was exercised, during
the time of his humiliation, whiles he was in the form of a servant; as GOD
once rested from the works of his Creation, after they were accomplished.
Thither therefore shall the People of GOD enter and the body shall be united to
the head, etc.
This interpretation has in it very great probability of the true meaning of
the Text, especially seeing there is another place also, in the same Epistle,
in some sort agreeing with it; as where it is said, that the Hope, which is
set before us, we have as an ancre of the soul, both sure, and steadfast, and
it enters into that, which is within the veil; whither the fore runner is for
us entered in, etc.

And here may be discerned a fit proportion between the work of the Creator,
and the work of the Redeemer: And between the Resting of the Creator, and the
Resting of the Redeemer. And where as it is said to the Colossians, that the
Holy Days, and Newmoones, and Sabbaths were a shadow of things to come. But
the Body is in Christ. We may understand by this how the Types, and the thing
represented by them accord together. His heavenly Rest for us was lively
thereby prefigured; and that being obtained, their term is expired, and come
to a period.

Objection 4.
The judgment of the ancients, and of sundry Fathers are against the
observation of any

Sabbath, especially of the LORD S-day, more then of any other time. For they
would have the Sabbath to be spiritually kept continually.

TERTVLLIAN against the Jews.

We keep the Sabbath, not every Seventh-day: but every day.

CHRYSOSTOM in a Sermon against the Newmoones.

A Christian ought not to celebrate Months, or New Mons, or LORDS days: But
to keep a decent Holy Day, during his life.

AUGUSTINE says; Quisquis illum diem observat, vt litera s^^at, carnaliter
sapit. Spir. et Lit. cap. 14.


Whosoever keeps the day, as the Letter foundeth, savoureth of the flesh.

Answer.
The names of these, and other ancients are brought against the keeping of the
Sabbath; and so are their words: but not their judgments, and meaning. For we
may easily gather, that some of them reproved such, as made semblance of
holiness on the Lord's Day, and lived licenciously at all other times: and
therefore opposes unto them the contrary practice of sound, and true-hearted
Christians.

Some of them dealt against the Sabbatarians, and such (...) Iewishly observed
still (...) ^brogated Seventh day. The^^fore S. Augustine says, Wh^soever
shall keep [That Day) savoureth of the flesh. But not Illum Diem
whosoever observes any day, For his own words testify the contrary; which
are these.

The Lord's Day the Sermon de tempo 251.
Apostles, and Apostolical men, have ordained with religious holiness to be
kept; because in the same, our Redeemer rose from the dead, and therefore is
called the Do^inical or Lord's Day: that in it, we may only attend on the
Divine service. This is the first day of the world: in it were created the
Elements, and the Angels: upon this day Christ rose, and the Holy Ghost was
given, and Manna descended first from heaven, upon this day.

And in another place;

As Mary the Mother of our LORD is the chief among women. So among other
days, this is the mother of the rest. The whole grace of the Sabbath, and the
ancient festivitie of the people of the Jews, is changed into the solemnity
of this day.

In both these sayings, who does not see that Saint Augnstine is much wronged
by them, that pervert and strain his writings to so bitter a censure of them,
that sanctify the Lord's Day, as to favor of the flesh, and so to incur
destruction, as Mr. Broad inforceth the matter, Page 7. 8.

But Austine of the old Writers is not singular, and the only man that
speaks in the commendation of the Lord's Day: but many other both before him,
and after him have been of the same mind with him, as may appear in their
works.

Athanasius entreating of In Mat ^. 11.
these words of our Savior Christ, ( All things are given me of my Father,)
says

As long as the old World did last, so long continued the observation of the
Sabbath: But, when another generation did succeed, it was not needful that
this new people should any longer keep the day of the former Nation: but rather
the beginning of the second creation and Age: and when is that beginning, but
at the time, when our LORD did rise again?

Chrysostom, among the sundry names, which he reckons up, that this day had,
in the Primitive Church, says,

It was therefore called Sermon. 5. de Resur.
the Lord's Day, because it was solemnly appointed for the memory of Christ his
Resurrection.

Justine Martyr, speaking of the day which Christians kept in his time, which
is the Lord's Day, that we now keep, gives this reason of it.

Because upon that Apog. 2.
Day Christ did rise from the dead.

ORIGIN says; Upon Hom. 7. in Exodus
the Lord's Day, the LORD always raineth Manna from Heaven.

HIEROME says; Upon Ad Eustich.
the Lord's Day, they give themselves only to Prayer and Reading.

And AMBROSE says; Sermon. 33.
Let all the Day be spent in Prayer and Reading: let no Secular Acts hinder
Divine Acts.

By these Testimonies, singled out from many others that might be alleged,
it may appear which way the current and stream of Antiquity was wont to
run: That the Day which we keep was derived from the Apostles, and Primitive
Church, to those ages; and from them to all that have followed, until these
our days, wherein it has found the greatest interruption.

Objection. 5.
Christian people chose the first day, and made it their Sabbath; says the
Book of Homilies. By the Doctrine then Broad. Page 2.
of our Church, the observation of the Lord's Day, is an Ecclesiastical
Ordinance, and not an Apostolical Precept.

Answer.
Sundry attempts have been hitherto made, to impair and diminish the
estimation and account, which the Lord's Day formerly has been, and still
ought to be had in, of all GODS people: Some from pretense of Scripture; some
from show of Reason; Some from the opinions of learned men; and now the
Doctrine of our own Church is urged, that which is by public authority
established, (as we confess the Homilies are) as though this Sabbath could
not be justified to be of Divine Institution, without derogation from our
Church and state: But let the Homily be duly perused, and well considered of,
and it will more strongly confirm, then disharten us, from the defense of it.
Is this good reasoning. Christian People chose the day: Therefore GOD did not
appoint it? Why? GOD appointed David to be King over Israel; and yet the
people chose him. And 1 Chronicles. 29. 22.
Solomon was set up by the LORD; and yet the people declared their choice by
making him King the second time, and anointing of him. Josh. 24. 22
Joshua called the people to witness, That they had chosen the LORD to serve
him: and yet the Lord first offered himself unto them. Mary Luke 10. 42.
chose the good part, but it was that holy Doctrine, which Christ delivered to
her, and no invention of her own head.

Their choosing then may well be taken for their embracing of that fit time,
which GOD, by his Apostles then had assigned unto them, for their meetings, to
do him service, and the relinquishing of the Idolatrous times, wherein they
were wont to assemble for the worshipping of the Heathen Gods. And it is very
likely, that the Antiquated Sabbath was tendered unto them, with the other
legal rites, by those of the sect of the Pharisees, by whom many Churches were
grievously troubled; whereof those in Galatia may serve for a president. Gal. 3.
But the best way to show, how these words are here wrested, is to recite the
whole Discourse, both in the sentence going before, and also in those, that
follow after; and that will clearly declare the sacred authority of our
Sabbath, and the Orthodoxall judgment of our Church; in the acknowledgement of
the same. These are the words thereof. Homil. Of the time and place of Prayer.
Part. 1. Page 124. 125.


Concerning the time which Almighty GOD has appointed his people to assemble
together solemnly, it does appear by the Fourth Commandment of GOD: Remember,
(says GOD) that thou keep holy the Sabbath Day. Upon which day, (as it is
plain in the Acts of the Apostles) Act. 13.
the people accustomably resorted together, and heard diligently the Law and
the Prophets read among them. And albeit this Law does not so straightly bind
Christian people to observe the utter Ceremonies thereof, as it was given to
the Jews, touching the forbearing work and labor on that day, in the time of
great necessity; and as touching the precise keeping the ^^uenth-Day, after the
manner of the Jews, (for we keep their First Day now, which is our Sunday
and make that our Sabbath, which is our day of rest, in the honor of our
Savior Christ, who upon that day rose from the dead, conquering it most
triumphantly.) Yet notwithstanding, what ever was found in the Commandment
appertaining to the Law of nature, as a thing most godly, most just, and
needful for the setting forth of GODS glory; it ought to be retained, and
kept of all Christian people. And therefore, by this Commandment, we ought to
have a time, as one day in a Week, wherein we ought to rest, yea, from our
necessary and needful labor: for like as it appears by this Commandment,
we ought not to be slothful or idle, but diligently to labor in that state
wherein GOD has set us: Even so GOD has given express commandment, that
upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday) we should cease from all
workeday and Weekly Workeday and weekly labor to be forborne.
labor: Even so GODS obedient people should use the Sunday holily, and rest
from their common and daily business; and also to give themselves wholly to
heavenly exercises of GODS true Religion and Service. So that GOD does not
only command the observation of this holy day: but also by his own example
does stir us up to the diligent keeping of the same. Good natural Children
will not only become obedient to the Commandment of their Parents; but also
have a diligent eye to their doings, and gladly follow the same. So, if we
will be the Children of our heavenly Father, we must be careful to keep
the Christian Sabbath day, which is the Sunday: Not only that it is GODS
express Commandment: but that we may declare our selves to be loving
Children, in following the example of our gracious LORD, and Father. This
plainly it may appear, that GODS will and commandment is, to have a solemn
time and standing Day in the Week, wherein the people should come together,
and have in remembrance his holy Acts and wonderful benefits and to render him
thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind, and obedient people. This
example and commandment of GOD, the holy Christian people began to follow
immediately after the ascension of Christ, and began to choose them a standing
Day in the Week, to come together in. Yet not the Seventh day which the
Israelites kept, but the LORDS day, the day of the Scriptures alleged to
warrant the Lords Day.
LORDS Resurrection, the day after the Seventh day, the first day of the Week;
whereof there is mention by St. Paul made on this wise.

In the first day of the 1 Cor. 16.
Week, let every man lay up what he thinks good, (meaning for the poor.)
By the first day of the Week is meant our Sunday, which is the first day after
the Jews seventh day. And in the Apocalypse it is Apoc 1.
more plain; where S. John says; He was in the Spirit upon the Sunday. Since
which time GODS people have always in all Ages, without any gainsaying used to
come together upon the Sunday, to celebrate and honor the LORDS blessed name,
and carefully to keep that day in holy rest and quietness, both Holy rest.
men and women, children, servants and strangers. For the transgression and
breach of which day, GOD has declared himself much to be grieved; as it may
appear by him, who, for gathering sticks on the Sabbath Numb. 15.
day, was stoned to death. But (alas;) all these notwithstanding, it is
lamentable to see the wicked boldness of those who would be accounted GODS
children; yet pass nothing at all for the keeping and hallowing the Sunday.
And these people are of two sorts: the one sort, if they have ought to do,
though there be no extreme necessity of doing it, yet they must not spare for
the Sunday; they must ride and journey on the Sunday; they must drive and carry
on the Sunday; they must row and ferry on the Sunday; they must buy and sell on
the Sunday; they must keep Markets and Faires on the Sunday; finally, they
keep all days alike; holy days and workedaies are all one. The other sort
are yet worse: for, though they will not travel or labor on the Sunday, as
they do on the Weeke-day; yet will they not rest in holiness, as GOD
commands: but they rest in ungodliness and filthiness; presuming in their
pride, pranking and pricking, pointing and painting themselves, to be gorgeous
and gay: they rest in excess, and superfluity in gluttony and drunkenness,
like Rats and Swine; they rest in brawling and swearing, in railing,
quarrelling and fighting; they rest in wantonness, toyish talking, and
filthiness; so that it does appear too evidently, the LORD is more
dishonored, the Devil better served on that day then on all the days of the
week besides.

Conclusion.
ANd now for a summary Recapitulation of the maine heads and points entreated
of: If all the moral Precepts be perpetual: If the fourth Commandment be a
moral Precept: If all consecrated time be the observation of the fourth
Commandment, during the time of the Consecration of it: And, If the Lord's Day,
by the testimony of GODS Word, and of learned Writers, both modern and
ancient, and of the Doctrine of this our Christian English Church, or nation:
Then let them that be adversaries to it, remember themselves timely, and cease
to contend against the Law, and Ordinance of the LORD. The truth of the cause
is bright and shining, and very clear to those that seriously desire to be
informed in it; howeuer it dazzle the eyes of such as resolve with wilfulness,
to persist in their own opinions. They may (no doubt) and daily do, draw
others to their part; but so they do also to their peril. It is an unhappy
success to prosper in perverting of men's souls, and making a side against
their Maker: For they must think and know, that the blood of the seduced, will
in time be required at their hands. And on the contrary side, they are all in
comfortable and blessed estate, who (together with faith in the Gospel, and
performance of other duties of holiness and righteousness) do in the
faithfulness of their hearts, and ways, sanctify this day in obedience to
the Commandment of GOD their Creator, and for a joyful memorial of the work
of Salvation finished by Christ their Redeemer.

FINIS.

