THE LIFE OF THE GLORIOUS VIRGIN S. CLARE. Together with the Conversion, and
life of S. Agnes her sister. And of another S. Agnes, Daughter to the King of
Bohemia. Also the Rule of S. Clare. And the life of S. Catharine of Bologna.

Translated into English.



Permissis Superiorum, M. DC. XXII.

TO THE MOST GLORIOUS Virgin S. Clare.
Most Glorious Saint,
BEING to publish thy Blessed Life, traslated into English for the publik
benefit of our Country; I found no creature here on Earth, seeming worthy
enough, to be presented therewith, by way of Dedication: And therefore, were my
Thoughts presently, transported hence to the glorious Citizens of Heaven;
whither ariuing, they forthwith made choice of thy Blessed Self, as best (and
in particular) deserving so true an Honor.

Accept then (B. Saint) this my small labor which in all Humility and
Reverence I here offer unto thy Holy NAME, together with my unworthy Self;
that by thy Intercession, and Piety, I may be made partaker of some little
glimpse of that spiritual Influence, which out of the huge Mass of thy
Glorious merits, thou vouchsafest to impart unto thy devout Suppliants; amongst
whom I humbly beg (O Glorious Virgin) to be accepted for one.

I. W.

THE TABLE.
OF S. Clare her Country, Family and Birth. Chap 1. Of her Education, Charity,
Prayer, mortification and Virginity. Chap. 2. Of her knowledge, and
acquaintance with S. Francis. Chap. 3. Of her forsaking the world, and entering
into Religion. Chap. 4. How her friends labored to reclayme her from Religion.
Chap. 5. Of the conversion of her sister Agens by her prayers. Chap. 6. Of her
Humily. Chap. 7. Of her voluntary Poverty Chap. 8. Of the miracles wrought by
her Poverty. Chap. 9. Of her great mortifications and abstinence. Chap. 10. Of
the spiritual profit procured over the whole world, by the fame of S. Clare.
Chap. 11. Of her fervent Prayer. Chap. 12. How the Mores were expelled the
Monastery, by S. Clare. Chap. 13. How the City of Assisium, was delivered by
her prayers. Chap. 14. Of her Reverence and devotion to the most B. Sacrament.
Chap. 15. Of a marvelous consolation she received upon a Christmas day. Chapter
16. Of the spiritual doctrine with which she noursed her daughters. Chap. 17.
Of the devotion which Pope Gregory the IX. had to S. Clare. Chap. 18. Of her
fervent love to Jesus Christ: and of an ecstasy wherein she was. Chapter 19. Of the
many Miracles she wrought by the sign of the Cross. Chap. 20. Of the sign of
the Cross remaining upon Bread blessed by her. Chap. 21. Of her Infirmity and
sickness. Chapter 22. How she was visited by Pope Innocent the fourth. Chap. 23. How
she comforted her sister Saint Agnes. Chap. 24. Of her Death, and Obsequies.
Chap. 25. and 26. Of the miracles wrought by her Intercession. Chap. 27. 28.
29. 30. 31. Of her Canonization by Pope Alexander the fourth. Chap. 32.
The life of S. Agnes.
HOW S. Agnes was sent to Florence to build there a monastery. Chap. I. Of a
Letter she wrote to her sister S. Clare, and the rest of the monastery of S.
Damian. Chap. II. Of an ecstasy of S. Agnes, and of her thrice crowning by an
Angel. Chap. III. How she sent S. Clares veyle to the Monastery of Florence,
and of her death. Chap. IIII. Of the many Miracles wrought by the merits of S.
Agnes. Chapter V. and VI. Of the Life of another S. Agnes who was daughter to the
King of Bohemia, and Religious of the same Order. Page 207.
Of the intention of our Lord in the vocation of S. Clare. Of her Country and
Family: and of a Revelation to her mother touching her birth, and sanctity.

CHAP. I.
SIx years after the conversion of the holy Father S. Francis, and the fourth
year, after the confirmation of his Rule by Pope Innocent the third, the year
of grace 1212. the omnipotent Father of light, having framed, and sent into the
world a new man, his servant S. Francis, by him to repair, and reform his
faithful people in that age; would also, that a valourous woman should by his
work appear in the world, to accompany that his great, and faithful servant,
to the end, that of those two, should be newborn a perfect regeneration of the
children of God. And as the first natural generation came of man and woman, as
of an united beginning: so this spiritual generation of the imitatours of the
life and counsels of Jesus Christ proceeded in all the Church, and in all the
estates, and qualityes of persons, of the one and same spirit of zeal, of
perfection, of humility, and of poverty, from one man, and one woman. And to
the end it might not be unlike the creation, almighty God having first
perfected his servant S. Francis, would frame of the ribb, or side of his life,
doctrine and Santy, the glorious Virgin S. Clare, his true, and legitimate
daughter in Jesus Christ for his companion, as zealous also of perfection, and
angelical reformation. With great reason therefore has she her place in the
Chronicles of the Friars Minors; for she being a ribbe, and party of the same
order, it is very requisite a special mention should be made of her sanctity
of life, as we shall here perform: and if it be not according to her merit,
shall at least be done, with the least defect we can possible; being resolved
to employ therein, that little force of spirit, which God has given us, both
to the honor of his divine majesty, and his holy servant, and to the
edification of souls.

The glorious S. Clare was borne in the City of Assisiu^ in Italy, situate in
the province of the valley of Spoletum, which is a territory apperteyning to
the Pope, and Roman Church. Her Father and Mother were noble, of a famous and
very welthy family: her Mother was called Hortulana, which in our tongue may be
termed Gardener, and not without mystery, considering she was to produce so
noble, and virtuous a plant, in the garden of the holy Church. This woman was
exceeding devout, and complete in the fruits of good works: and albeit she
were married, and consequently obliged to the care, and government of her
house, and family, yet did she not omit with all her power to be exercised in
the service of God, and employed in the works of mercy.

She was so fervent in the love of Jesus Christ, that with great devotion she
passed the sea with many other pilgrims, and visited those holy places, which
our Redeemer Jesus Christ God and man, consecrated with his holy presence, and
returned exceedingly comforted, and enriched with many meritts. She also
visited the Church of the Archangell Saint Michael, on the mount Gargan, and
with a pious, and fervent desire, visited the Apostles S. Peter and S. Paul in
Rome: in such sort did that virtue and fervor shine in those days in many
holy persons, but now so weakened is the fervor of Christians touching the
visiting of holy places, and the Relics of our Lord, and his Saints, that it
is almost lost by the continual wars of heretics, and punishment for our
sins.

Now our Lord began to power out the abundance of his celestial graces upon
the root, that afterward the sproutes of far greater sanctity might
follow, and disperse into the boughs. Neither would he, that this devout woman
Hortulana, should be deprived of the co^solations, and knowledge of this grace:
for being near her childbirth, she one day with great fervor prayed in a
Church, before a Crucifix, where she besought Almighty God to deliver her from
the danger of death in her child birth, which she much apprehended; and she
heard a voice that said: Woman, fear not for thou shall safely, and without
danger, bring forth a light, that shall illuminate, and lighten all the world.

Being thus comforted, and admonished by this divine answer; so soon as she
was delivered of a daughter, she caused her to be called in Baptism Clare,
firmly believing that in her should be accomplished the splendor of the light
promised, according to the providence, and the ordinance of the divine bounty.

Of the Education, Charity, Prayer, Mortification, and Virginity of S. Clare.

CHAP. II.
SAINT Clare being borne into the world, she began incontinently to appear,
and shine as a morning star in the obscure night of that age, for in the most
tender years of her first infancy, she already discovered evident signs of
notable and pious works, wherein she made to appear her natural worth, and the
graces which God had communicated unto her: for being naturally of a very
delicate constitution, she received of her Mother the first foundations of
faith: afterward being inspired of God, to apply herself to virtuous, and
pious works, she showed herself to be a vessel aptly prepared for divine
grace; and as she abounded in interior piety, as well by nature as by grace
toward poor beggars; so according to the small means which then she had,
she supplied their necessities. And to the end her Sacrifice might be more
pleasing unto God, the most delicate meats that were given her, for the
nourishment of her little body, she hid, and gave it secretly to the poor.
Thus did piety augment and increase in her, and nourished charity in her soul,
preparing her to receive the grace and mercy of Almighty God. Her greatest
contentment was in prayer, whereby she was often sustained, made joyful, and
comforted as by an Angelical milk, and in a most delicious manner elevated to
the divine pleasures of the conversation of our Lord Jesus Christ. In these
beginninges, having no beads, she used instead thereof certain little stones,
some to serve for the Pater nosters, and others for the Aues, and so offered
her prayers to God. Whereupon beginning to feel the first feruours of divine
love, she judged that the must contemn all transitory appearance, and painted
flowers of this world: and being by prayer well instructed of the holy Ghost,
she resolved, as a wise spiritual Merchant, to have no more regard of
terrestrial affayrs acknowledging them unworthy to be esteemed: and with this
spirit she did wear, as another S. Cecily, under her gay apparel, a
haire-cloth; so exteriourly satisfying the world, and interiourly her Lord
Jesus Christ.

But having attained the age of marriage, she was importuned by her Father, and
other kindred, to choose a husband; whereto she would never consent, but used
lingrings, and delays, putting off, and differring what she could all humane
marriage, and ever recommended to our Lord Jesus Christ her Virginity, with
other virtues wherewith she was endued; by such exercises indeauouring to please
almighty God, that he might bestow on her his only Son for her spouse. Such
were the first fruits of her spirt, and such the exercises of her piety: so
that being anointed with such a sweet, and pretiousoyntment, she yielded a most
pleasant savor, as a closet replenished with most delightful liquors, whose
perfumes, though they be shut up, discover, and manifest themselves; and in
such sort this holy virgin began without her knowledge to be commended by her
neighbors; the true fame of her secret pious works so publishing themselves,
that in an instant they were exceedingly spread abroad, and every where
diuulged.

How the virgin S. Clare had knowledge of the Virtues of the holy Father S.
Francis.

CHAP. III.
THIS virtuous Virgin Clare, hearing the great fame of the admirable life of
Saint Francis, who then renewed unto the world the way of perfection in the
same City, with a marvelous example of piety and virtue; and considering that
many gentlemen did follow him, and that his life was already approved by our
holy mother the Church, she exceedingly desired to see, and hear this servant
of God, most worthy, and eminent in all virtues; thereunto inspired by the
sovereign Father of spirits, to whom had already been presented the first
fruits of their devotions, though differently. S. Francis having been
advertised of this her desire, and having heard the bruit of her virtues, and
holy affections, desired also exceedingly to see her, and to confer with her,
with intention to frustrate the world of so noble, and precious a prey, to
present her to our sovereign redeemer, to serve him in some notable
enterprise, as preordayned of God to despoyle the great prince of the world.
Neither did his divine majesty fail, to open unto them both the means, to
attain thereunto: he inspired this virtuous woman to rely upon a very
honorable and grave matron, that governed her in her house, as her Mother. And
to the end that this holy purpose might not be sinisterly interpreted of men,
and to hinder public murmr, she went out of her Fathers house with this good
woman, and found out the holy Father; by the seruour of whose pious discourses,
she was presently inflamed with divine love, and moved by his holy actions
which she admired, as seeming unto her to be more then humane; and therefore she
began very exquisitely to dispose herself to the effecting of the words of
the holy servant of God; who having very lovingly entertained her, began to
preach unto her the contempt of the world, and by evident reason to demonstrate
unto her, that all the beauty of things present is but a vanity, filled with
false, and deceitful hopes. Then he persuaded unto her pure ears, the
honorable and amiable Espousall of Jesus Christ, and counseled her to
co^serue those most precious pearls of virginal purity, for that glorious
Spouse, who out of the love he bare to the world, being God became man, and
would be borne of a virgin.

This holy Father solicited this affayre, and played the part of a true
Paranymph, and Ambassador of the heavenly King. The holy virgin on her side
beginning already to taste the sweetness of contemplation, and the proof of the
eternallioyes; the world beginning to seem unto her vile, and contemptible, as
indeed it is, she as it were melted for the love of her celestial spouse,
whom she already desired with all her heart. Thence forth therefore she despised
precious stons Jewels, gold, sumptuous apparel, all other worldly trash as
filth, and dunge, and abhorring the detestable delights of the flesh, she
resolved intierly to dedicate herself a lively temple to Jesus Christ, and to
take him for the only spouse of her body and soul, and so submitting herself
wholly, and totally to the counsayles of the glorious father S. Francis, him,
next after our Lord, she took for guide, and director of her life.

How S. Francis drew the virgin S. Clare out of the world, and made her
Religious.

CHAP. IIII.
AND to the end the most clear mirror of her soul might not be stained, and
blemished with the dust of this world, and that the contagious seculer life
did not corrupt her innocence, the holy Father prudently indeauoured to
sequester this virgin from worldly people. And the solemnity of palme-sonday
approaching, the holy Espouse of Jesus Christ, with a great fervor of spirit,
repaired to this man of God, and most instantly demanded of him, when, and how
she should make her retire from the world* whereupon the holy Father ordained,
that on the day of the said feast she should go to the procession of Palms
with the people, decked, and adorned the most richly, and gorgiously that she
could procure, and the night following going out of the City, and withal, out
of al conversation of the world, she should change secular pleasurs into
lamentations of the passion of our Lord.

Palme-sonday being come, the glorious S. Clare went in the company of her
mother, and other Ladies to the great Church, where there happened a matter
worthy to be recorded, as not done without the providence of the divine
goodness, which was, that all the other Ladies going, as is the custom of
Italy, to take holy Palm, and S. Clare, out of a virginal bashfulnes,
remaining alone without moving out ofher place, the Bishop descended from the
steps of his seat, and put into her hand a branch of Palm.

The night approaching she began to prepare herself for effecting the
commaundment of the holy Father, and to make a glorious flight, and honorable
retire from the world, in honest company. But it seeming to her impossible to
go forth at the ordinary, and chiefest door of the house, she bethought
herself to take the benefit of a back door, which (though it were dammed,
and closed up with gross stones, and mighty blocks) she with an admirable
courage, and force rather of a strong man, then of a tender young woman,
herself broke open. Thus then leaving her Fathers house, her City, kindred,
and friends, she with extraordinary speed arrived at the Church of our Lady of
Angels, where the Religious, that in the house of God were employed in pious
watchings, received, with burning wax lights in their hands, this holy virgin,
that sought her spouse, and redeemer Jesus Christ with a lamp not extinct, and
empty, but filled with divine love: and incontinently in the selfsame hour
and place, having left, and abandoned the impurityes of Babylon, she gave the
world the ticket of defiance, and utter adieu before the Altar of the
sovereign Queen of Angels; where the glorious Father S. Francis, inspired of
God, and neglecting all other worldly respects, cut off her hair: then he
clothed her with a poor habit of the order, commanding the Jewels, and
gorgeous attire which she brought, to be given to the poor of Jesus Christ. It
had not been indeed convenient, that the new Order of flourishing virginity
toward the end of the world, should otherwise begin, then in the Angelical
palace of that most Immaculate Queen, who before had alone been a mother, and
a virgin, and consequently more worthy then all others whatsoever.

In the very same place had the noble Chiualry of the poor of Jesus Christ,
the Friars Minors, their beginning, under the valourous Captain S. Francis,
to the end it might evidently appear, that the Mother of God in this her
habitation engendered, and produced the one and the other Religion. And so soon
as this new Espouse had received the habit, and ensigns of holy pe^nance,
before the Altar of the most sacred virgin Mary, the humble servant was
accepted by Jesus Christ for his Espouse, and the glorious Father S. Francis
conducted her to the monastery of S. Paul in Assisium, where were Religious
women of the order of S. Bennet; there to remain till almighty God had
provided another monastery.

How much the kindred of S. Clare labored to rerire her from Religion: and how
she was conducted to S. Damian.

CHAP. V.
THE kindred of this holy virgin understanding what she had done, and the bruit
of her resolution being diuulged over all the City, many of the friends of
her Father and Mother assembled, and consulted to prevent this virtuous virgin
of her holy resolution; and coming to the monastery of the Religious of Saint
Bennet, whither she was retired, they purposed to execute by violence, what
they could not compass by humane policy, trying their forces against the meek
lamb of Jesus Christ, and by their malice and perverse counsel seeking to
delude that simple dove; the did they make her deceiptful promises, exhorting
her to retire herself from such base condition, and abiection, demonstrating
unto her, that it was a matter unworthy her noble descent, and that the like
never happened in the City. But the virgin firm and stable in Jesus Christ,
approaching to the Altar, discovered her hairelesse head, alleging, that she
could no more be separated from the service of Jesus Christ, for whose love she
had already forsaken all the world, and themselves also; and the more they
tormented her, the more was her heart inflamed in the love of God, and of her
sweet spouse Jesus Christ, who supplied her with new forces to resist. Thus for
many days together disturbed with many injuries, she endured great
contradictions in the way of God: and albeit her kindred perseuered in their
attempts to withdraw her from her pious design, her fervor yet did never wax
cold, nor her heart feeble: but on the contrary, so many injurious words, and
violent threats did so much confirm her confidence in God, that her kindred
were constrained to forbear any more to vex, and disquiet her, retyring
themselves as all ashamed, and confounded. Thus did almighty God make appear,
how much the power of those that are his, though of themselves feeble, did
exceed the strong, and puissant of the world.

But in regard that her soul had not perfect repose in that place, she was by
the holy Father S. Francis placed in the church of S. Damian, and there, as in
a secret harbor and secure, she cast the anchor of her soul never changing
place, nether in respect of the great restraint thereof, nor for fear of
solitude, this Church being without the City. This was the Church in
reparatio^ whereof the Glorious S. Francis labored in the beginning of his
conversion: and where he did also offer money to the Chaplain to repair it:
this holy Father being once also in this Church, and praying with abundance of
tears, merited to hear the voice of the crucifix, before which he was, that
thrice reiterated unto him: Go Francis, and repair my house, which, as thou
see, is ready to fall. The glorious virgin Clare, for the love of her
heavenly spouse, shut herself up in that little place, and there imprisoned
herself during her life, sequestring her body (...) the turbulent tempest of
the world. This siluered Dove there building her nest in the concauities of
that Church, engendered the college of virgins of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
there instituting a holy convent, gave a beginning to the order of poor
Religious women. And thus being settled in the way of penance, she bruized the
hard turfes of her members, with the coulter of the Cross, and perfectly sowed
the seed of sanctity and justice, making with her very soul stepps and traces
of virtuous progress, for them that were to follovv her.

How the virgin Agnes, sister to S. Clare, was by her fervent prayers
converted: and of the persecutions she endured by her kindred; and how she was
miraculously freed of them.

CHAP. VI.
SAINT Clare had a younger sister, who both in regard of blood and of poverty,
was really her sister; and she exceedingly desiring the conversion of this
young virgin, never failed in her most fervent devotions, which in her first
days she offered to almighty God, as fervently and devoutly as she possibly
could, with a perfect zeal, to beseech him, that as she had lived with her
sister in the world, there might be also between them an holy union of body,
and will, in his feruice; most instantly importuning him to make it appear to
her sister, whom she had left in her mothers house, what a notorious delunder
the world is, and how full of discontenment* and on the contrary how sweet, and
pleasant is Jesus Christ; and that consequently he would please to change her
desired resolution of carnal marriage, and cause her to embrace the union of
divine love, and to take for her spouse the King of glory. Now in regard that
our Lord had already settled such an amity between these two sisters, that
their separation was afflictiue and troublesome unto them, (though then their
desires and wills were far different) he made no delay to favor this his
poor suppliant, and devout servant, even in this her first petition, which she
so instantly required of him, and which his divine majesty so readily granted.

Sixteen days then after her conversion, her sister Agnes inspired of God,
with a strong and prompt resolution gave a slip, and farewell to the world, and
came to her sister Clare, to who^ discovering the secrets of her heart, she said
she was resolved to serve God in her company: which the glorious Clare
understanding, she most amiably embraced her, and with a very joyful and
contented countenance said: my most dear Sister, I give infinite thanks to our
Lord Jesus Christ, that it has pleased him to hear me, and deliver me from
the afflion I endured for your sake. This noble conversion of Agnes, by the
prayers of her sister Clare, was seconded by as many contradictions of her
kindred, as that of S. Clare: but these blessed sisters serving our Lord Jesus
Christ, and imitating his stepps, she that had most taste of God, and was in
higher progress, instructed her sister Nouice. Their kindred knowing that
Agnes was with her sister Clare, twelve men of their nearest blood, as
Brothers, uncles, and cosen germans assembled to assault them, and to combat
the Espouses of Jesus Christ. The day following then, with an extreme rage and
fury they came to those holy virgins, yet at their first coming dissembling
their lewd intention, they showed them some favorable countenance: then
addressing themselves to the virgin Agnes, despayring of all hope to withdraw
S. Clare from her holy purpose, they demanded of her, wherefore she was retired
into that place? the^ willed her to deliberate, and resolve to return with
them to her Fathers house: whereto she answered, that she was resolved, (the
grace of God assisting her) to remain with her sister: which answer one of
them disdayning, full of passion, and transported with choler, took her by the
hair, and gave her many blows with his feet and fistes; then used all his
force to pull her out of the place, which at length by the help of others he
performed: for taking her in their arms, they forcibly trayled her out.

But this little daughter of Jesus Christ, seeing herself violently wrested by
those furious lions out the arms of her God, she began to cry to her sister,
Help me sister, and permit me not to be separated from our Lord Jesus Christ,
and your loving company. Her carnal kindred trayled a long the valley this
virgin of Jesus Christ against her will, and in despite of her feeble, though
courageous resistance, renting her clothes from her tender body. In the mean
while S. Clare, unable by other means to relieve her sister, had recourse to
prayer, with abundance of tears, beseeching God to vouchsafe to give a
courageous confidence, to her sister, that his divine favor defending his
faithful servant, humane forces might be overcome: and our Lord heard her. For
at the instant of her prayer, the body of the virgin Agnes miraculously became
so weighty, that her kindred were at length enforced to leave her on the
ground: and albeit so many men, and their servants, put all their forces to
lift her up, yet could they never do it, but called laborers, and workmen of
the vineyards that wrought therabouts to assist them, yet their great number no
more auayled then the less.

Finally the forces failing of her kindred, and those that attempted to assist
them, they acknowledged the miracle, though scornefully, saying: it is no
maruayle though she be so weighty, having layne all night as lead. Whereupon
Signor Monaldo her uncle in extreme passion lifting up his arms to strike her,
he presently felt an extreme pain therein, which did not only torment him for
the present, but a long time after. Then S. Clare after her prayer, ariuing,
besought her kindred to forbear in vain to contend with God, and to leave her
the care of her sister, who lay as half dead. They perceiving their labor
lost to hinder their pious resolution, being exceedingly vvearyed, left the two
sisters together. The troup then being departed, the tormented Agnes arose
from the ground, full of joy in Jesus Christ, for whose love she had fought,
and overcome in this her first conflict against the world, and his prince the
Devil, by favor and assistance of divine grace; and her sister asking her how
she felt herself, she answered, that notwithstanding all the affliction they
had procured her by buffets, beatings, spurns with their feet and fistes,
tearing her by the hair, trayling her through stony ways, she had felt in a
manner nothing, especially by the virtue, and force of divine grace, and next
by the merits of her good prayers. Shortly after the holy Father S. Francis cut
of her hair, she retayning still her proper name of Agnes, in memory of the
innocent lamb Jesus Christ, who offering himself in sacrifice to his Father,
gave resistance to the world, fought valerously, and overcame: and so the holy
Father instructed her with her sister, and taught her the way of God in such
sort, that she so increased, and profited in Religion, and all virtue, and
sanctity, that she was an admiration to all the world.

Of the humility of the Virgin Saint Clare.

CHAP. VII.
PROFOVND humility was the first assured stone, and foundation, which the holy
virgin laid in the beginning of her Relion, after she had begun to labor in
the way of God, so to advance, and set forward the building of all other
virtues. She vowed Obedience unto S. Francis, which vow in all her life, she
never transgressed, and for three years after her conversion, she desired
rather with great humility to be subject, then a Superior, shu^ning the title,
and office of Abbess, taking more content to serve among the servants of Jesus
Christ, then to be served. But being at length by the holy Father S. Francis
thereunto constrained, she undertook the government of the Religious, which
bred in her heart more fear, then presumption: so what she rather continued,
and became a servant, then free from subjection. For the more she seemed to be
raised to the office, and title of dignity, the more did she repute herself
vile, and the more showed herself ready to serve, and made herself more
contemptible then all her religious, both in habit and base service. She
disdayned not to do the office of servants, giving water to the Religious to
wash, whom she made often to sit, herself standing, and serving them at table.

When she commanded any thing, it was unwillingly, rather desiring to do, then
to command others. She performed to the sick all kind of services, were they
never so loathsome, as to make clean any thing that was defiled or foul,
shunning with so worthy a spirit al pleasant, and delightful actions, never
abhorring, or desdayning the most offensive smells. She often washed the feet
of the lay sisters, when they came from abroad, made them clean, and with
great humility kissed them. It one time chanced, that washing the feet of a
servant, and offering to kiss them, the servant unwilling to permit such
humility, pulled away her foot to avoid it, but she did it so rudely, that she
gave the holy virgin a dash on the face: yet so far was this Saint from being
offended therewith, that on the contrary she mildly took the foot of the
servant again, and kissed the sole thereof. Thus did this true espouse of God
accomplish the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and the example which he left, when he
washed the feet of his Apostles.

Of the voluntary poverty of the Virgin S. Clare, and of her zeal to that holy
virtue.

CHAP. VIII.
THIS holy virgin made an union and correspondence between her poverty in all
external things, and her holy poverty of spirit; and first at the beginning
of her conversion she made sale of her patrimony, and birthright, all which
distributing unto the poor of Jesus Christ, she reserved nothing to herself.
Having so abandoned all the world exteriourly, and enriched her soul
interiourly, freed from the burden of worldly affairs, she ran far more
lightly after Jesus Christ, and thereby contracted such an inviolable amity
with holy poverty, that she would have possession of no other thing then her
glorious spouse Jesus Christ, nor would she permit her spiritual daughters to
possess any thing else. And with this Eua^gelical traffic, she purchased the
most precious pearl of celestial desire, in place of all the other things,
which she had sold, acknowledging, that the same could in no sort be inioyed
together with the distraction, and occupation of temporal things.

Giving instructions to her Religious, she would sometimes say unto them, that
this their company should be then grateful to God, and become very rich in
poverty, and should by such means conserve it self firm and stable, if it
were always fortifyed, and environed with the rampires and strong bulwarks of
poverty. She also admonished her beloved daughters in our Lord Jesus Christ, to
conform themselves to him, lying poor in the bed of poverty, who was no
sooner borne, but was by the most sacred virgin his Mother laid in a strait
Cribbe.

Now desiring to call her Rule by the title of Poverty, she demanded of Pope
Innocent the fourth the privilege of Poverty, who as a magnanimous Prelate
rejoicing at the great fervor of this holy virgin, exceedingly commended this
her devotion, assuring himself that the like privilege had never been
demanded of the Apostolic sea. And to the end a new and extraordinary favor
might answer this new and unaccustomed demand, the holy Pope with an exceeding
contentment vvrote with his own hand the first Pa^tent of the privilege;
which Pope Gregory the ninth his predecessor of holy memory had also done, who
with a Fatherly affection loving this Espouse of Jesus Christ, once gave her
counsel, in consideration of diverse alterations of matters, and the strange
events of rymes, yea and in regard of the perils of future ages, to be content
that her Order might have some possessions, himself offering to bestow it upon
them: but she courageously withstood it, and as a true, poor, and legitimate
daughter of the holy Patriarch poor S. Francis, would never accord thereunto.

The Pope alleging, that if she feared the breach of her vow, he would
absolve her theerof: but this virgin answered very humbly in this manner. Holy
Father I shall be very joyful, if it please your Holiness to absolve me of all
my sins, but to free me from performing the Counsayles of God, I will accept
no absolution. This holy virgin with an exceeding joy received the morsels of
bread which the Religious brought from begging, and had gotten for the love of
God: but she was much troubled, when she saw whole loaves; laboring much to
conform herself in all things to perfect poverty with him, who was poorly and
nakedly Crucified: and in such sort, that no transitory thing might at any time
separate the most poor virgin from her beloved, nor hinder her from her most
ardent fervor to follow our Lord Jesus Christ.

Of the miracles of the poverty of the glorious S. Clare.

CHAP. IX.
IT happened one day that the glorious virgin S. Clare knew, that there was but
one loaf of bread in her Covent, and so the hour of dinner being come, she
called the sister that was the Despensier, and willed her to cut the loaf she
had in her custody in two, and to send the one half to the Religious that were
without, and to keep the other for themselves, whereof she should make fifty
portions, there being so many Religious, and then should set it upon the table
of poverty: whereunto the Despensier answered, that the miracles of Jesus
Christ were needful to make so many portions of so small quantity of bread:
but S. Clare replied* saying, Daughter do only what I do comaund thee.

The sister went presently to effect the commaundme^t of her Abbess, who in
the mean while together with all the other Religious applied themselves to
prayer, presenting their devotions, and tears to their spouse Jesus Christ, and
instantly by his infinite bounty the little morsells of bread so augmented in
the hands of the Despensier that they sufficed to feed all the Religious.

It happened another time that the servants of Jesus Christ wanted oil, so that
they had not sufficient to dress meat for the sick. S. Clare being
advertised of this necessity took a pot, which (as mistress of humility) she
washed with her own hands, then sent it to the turn wheel, that a Religious
man there might take it, to go, and demand oil for the love of God. Having to
this effect caused a Religious man to be called to send him, (as matters do
not succeed as men propose, but according to the pleasure of the divine, and
merciful providence) S. Clare having recommended this necessity to Almighty
God, the said Religious found the pot full of pure oil; which perceiving he
thought the Religious within had required it without need; and with a kind of
murmr he said: I know not why the sisters have called me, their pot being full
of oil* so that the miracle was discovered. Almighty God did often also by
extraordinary means supply the necessityes of his poor servants by the
meritorious prayers of S. Clare.

Of the austere mortifications, abstinences, and fasts of S. Clare.

CHAP. X.
I Doubt whether it be not more expedient to conceal, then to diuulge the
admirable affliction, and rude penance of S. Clare, because this holy virgin
has performed such extreme mortifications, that many, who shall read them,
acknowledging themselves cowardes, and overcome in this conflict, (as we are
all) and put into admiration of these marvelous acts, will perhapps call in
question her prowess, which is to oppugn the very truth. Is it not a great
matter, that using one only habit, all patched, and a poor cloak of the
grossest cloth, she rather covered her body, then defended it from the
importunityes of the seasons? But it is more admirable, that she never wore
stockings, shoes, nor any other things on her feet after she became
Religious. It was also a strange matter that she fasted daily, and never failed
for whatsoever occasion that happened. She never lay upon mattresse, though that
were no singular praise unto her, all her Religious doing the like.

This espouse of Jesus Christ wore more then the rest, a hayre-cloath as great
as half a tunicke, made of hogs hair, the hair being half shorn, next
her flesh. She also wore a hayre-cloath, which a Religious very importunatly
once borrowed of her, but proving it to be so rude, and sharp, she restored it
three days after to S. Clare more readily, then she had joyfully borrowed it.
Her ordinary bed was the bare ground, except somtymes she slept upon dry
branches or twigges, using for a pillow a block of wood. But in regard that
the rigorous life, wherewith she afflicted her body, brought her to sickness, the
holy Father S. Prancis commanded her to lie upon chafe. The rigor of her
abstinence in her fastes was such, that she could not maintain her body in
life, so little did she eat; whereby it is easy to judge that she was sustained
by divine virtue.

When she had her health, she fasted all the Aduent, and Lent, and from all
Saints to Christmas with bread and water, the sondayes excepted: and which is
more admirable, three days of the week, monday, wednesday, and friday in the
Lent, she did eat nothing at all: so that the commaundment of fast, and the
rigor of her voluntary mortification, seemed to have a contrariety each with
other, because upon the eve of a commanded feast, she used but bread and
water: neither must it be admired, if such a rigor of so long continuance bred
many infirmityes in this holy virgin, which waste her forces, and overthrew
all the natural strength and health of her body.

The devout Religious daughters of this holy mother had exceeding compassion of
her, and they bitterly lamented the voluntary procuring of her own death: for
remedy whereof, S. Francis, and the Bishop of Assisiu^ forbad her those three
days of fast, which every week she usually inflicted upon herself, and
commanded her not to pass one day without taking at least an once and a half
of bread, to conserve her life. And albeit such grievous afflictions of the
body do accustom to breed also some affliction to the heart, yet did the
contrary succeed in her; for she carried a countenance so gracious and joyful
in all her austerities, that she seemed either to have no feeling of them, or
not to fear any inconvenience thereof: yea she in a sort made light of
corporal afflictions: which sufficiently demo^strated, that the spiritual
joy, wherewith she was interiouly nourished, appeared exteriourly in her holy
face, because the true love of the heart makes always corporal afflictions
easy and light.

Of the devotion, and spiritual prosit, which the fame of the Glorious S.
Clare procured over all the world.

CHAP. XI.
THE fame of S. Clare began within little time to spread over all Italy, which
caused women from all parts to begin to run after the odor of the precious
liquour of her Sanctity. The Virgins after her example approached unto Jesus
Christ, and made him presents of their virginity: married women endeavored to
live more chaste and virtuously: gentlewomen and Ladies, contemning their fair
houses, and sumptuous tables, shut themselves into monasteries, esteeming it a
great glory to live in strict penance for the love of Jesus Christ. This Saint
was also a spur unto men to excite in them a violent fervent, and principally
to youth, that began to take courage in the contempt of the world, and by
example of the frayler sex, to fight against the temptations, and deceiptfull
pleasures of the flesh. Many married persons with mutual consent obliged
themselves to continency, the men entering into couents of men, and the women
into monasteries of Religious women. The mother induced the daughter to serve
Jesus Christ, the daughter the mother, one sister another, and briefly each one
by a holy envy desired to serve Jesus Christ, all of them seeking to
participate of the evangelical life, which by this Espouse of Jesus Christ
was demonstrated unto them.

An infinite number of virgins, that by her fame were induced to piety, unable
to become Religious, or to leave their fathers houses, indeauored yet to live
there more religiously, leading a regular life without rule. S. Clare by her
example produced such and so many branches of salvation, that it seemed the
saying of the Prophet was to be accomplished in her: The fruits of the
desolate, and barren are far greater, then of the married. Whiles these
matters thus proceeded in Italy, the descent of this benediction, which
distilled down in the valley of Spoletum, grew by divine providence to so
spacious and large a flood, that the violent current thereof over flowed all the
Cittyes of the holy Church, so that the nouelty of such admirable things, was
speedily diulged over all the world, and with such praise, and admiration gave
such splendor, that the nature of her virtues filled the chambers of great
Ladies with beams of unspeakable charity, and penetrated even into the
chambers of great Dutchesses; yea those most pure beams of her brightness
pierced into the very cabinetts of Queens, and Princesses; and that in such
sort, that eminency of blood, and height of nobility submitted, and debased it
self to follow the stepps of this glorious virgin, many rejecting the greatness
of their honor, and the sublimity of their estates; so that some Ladies, who
could have been married to Kings and Dukes, induced by the fame of S. Clare,
took upon them the practice of strict penance, and many already married to
men of great nobility, desired in their estate to imitate this servant of Jesus
Christ.

An infinite number also of Cities were by this example adorned with
monasteries of young women: the fields, and mountains were enriched and
inobled with the structures of these celestial buildings: The exercise and
honor of chastity did multiply in the world, S. Clare carrying the sta^dard of
the order of virgins, which being then almost extinguished, she restored to
perfection, renewing it by the blessed flowers of her example and conversation.
But returning to the history, let us speak of the perfection of the prayer of
this glorious virgin, by means whereof she obtained of God so great graces for
her self, and her daughters.

Of the fervent and perfect prayer of the virgin S. Clare.

CHAP. XII.
AS Saint Clare was mortifyed in her flesh, and far more from all corporal
recreations, so did she continually busy herself in devotions, and divine
praises. This virgin had fixed, and imprinted the subtility of her fervent
desire in the eternal light, and as she was remote from earthly occupations,
and rumors, so did she the more largely dilate the bosom of her soul to the
influence of divine grace. She continued in long prayer together with her
religious after Complin, the rivers of tears that flowed from her eyes awaking
and bathing the hearts of her companions: when the sleep of others gave her
opportunity to be solitary, being often in prayer, she would lay her face
against the earth bathed with tears, kissing it sweetly, and with such
contentment, that she seemed always to hold in her arms her spouse Jesus
Christ, at whose feet her tears trickled down, and her kisses left their
impressions.

It happened one time, that as this holy virgin powered out her tears in the
silence of the night, the Angel of darkness appeared unto her in figure of a
black young man, saying, If thou continuest this extreme weeping thou will
become blind, whereto she answered, he that is to see God, cannot be blind:
wherewith the devil being confounded vanished and fled. The same night this
Saint being in prayer after Mattines, all bathed in tears, the Te^pter
appeared again unto her, and said, Weep not so much, unless thou will have thy
brains to melt, and distill in such sort, that thou shall avoid them at thy
eyes and nostrels, and therewith shall thy nose be crooked. S. Clare with great
fervor answered him, saying, He that serves Jesus Christ can have no
crookednes, and presently the wicked spirit disappeared.

Many signs did discover, and make known the great alteration she received in
herself, in fervor of her prayer, and how sweet and delectable the divine
bounty was unto her in this joy and holy conversation: for when she returned
from prayer, she with admirable contentme^t brought words inflamed with she
fire of the altar of God, which kindled the hearts of her Religious, and
procured in them a great admiration at this extreme sweetness that appeared from
of her face. It is without doubt, that Almighty God had coupled, and conjoined
his sweetness with her poverty, and did manifest exteriorly in her soul what
was interiourly replenished with divine light. In this manner did she
ordinarily live full of supreme delights, passing over this deceiptfull world
with her noble spouse Jesus Christ, and being placed upon this wheel of
motion, she was thereon sustained with an assurance, and firmity of virtue, very
stable; and preserved with the celestial elevation of her soul in the height
of heaven, keeping the treasure of glory securely shut up within a vessel of
flesh here below upon earth.

This holy virgin accustomed to call up the younger Religious a little before
Mattines, and to awaken them with the ordinary sign, to excite them very often
to praise God. All her Religious sleeping, she did watch, lighted the lamp,
and rung at mattins, so that negligence found no entrance into her monastery:
nor sloth had there any place. She also by the sting of sharp reprehension,
and of her lively and effectual examples, expelled tepidity, and irkesomnes in
prayer, and the service of God.

How the Mores were expelled the Monastery by the prayers of Saint Clare.

CHAP. XIII.
THIS being the place, where we should record the miracles of this holy virgin,
it is not conueuient that we pretermit them in silence; for as the marvelous
effects of her prayers were veritable, so also are they worthy of honor and
reverence. In the time of the Emperor Federike the second, the holy Church in
diverse places endured great persecutions, but particulerly in the valley of
Spoletu^, which being subject to the Roman Church, drank of the vessel of
wrath by this mischeuous tyrant, his Captains and soldiers being scattered
over the feildes as grass hoppers with sword to murder people, and with fire
to burn their houses. The impiety of this Emperor did so augment, that he had
assembled all the Mores that dwelt upon the mountains, and amongst the
deserts, to make himself the more fearful to his vassells: and after he had
by large promises gained these Mores, and disposed of them in diverse places, he
gave them at length for retire a very ancient, but ruinated City, which yet
to this present is called Mourades Mores, which they fortified, and then
thither retired about twenty thousand fighting me^, who did much mischief over
all Apulia, and in other Christian places.

These enemies of the faith of Jesus Christ came one day unexpectedly toward
the City of Assisium, who being already close at the gates* a great number of
them came to the monastery of S. Damian, as a lewd and disloy all nation, that
continually thirsts after the blood of Christians, and dares to commit
villanously all kind of execrable acts, without either shame of men, or fear
of God. These Mores then brake even into the monastery of S* Clare, where she
was with her Religious daughters, who had their hearts surprised with an extreme
terror; but much more, when they heard the barking and cry of those dogs so
near them, so that they were even dying with the apprehension, not knowing
where to seek relief, nor of whom to hope for deliverance from so eminent
peril, but only by the merits of their holy Mother, whom with infinite sighs
and tears they advertised of what they heard and saw.

This holy virgin (though sick) encouraged her Religious, and caused herself
with incredible constancy to be carried to the gate of her monastery, at the
entry whereof, in sight of all her enemies, she with great reverence placed the
most blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist in the Pix, before which falling
prostrate upon the earth, she with abundance of tears thus spoke to her
beloved spouse Jesus Christ* Is it possible (my God,) thy will should be, that
these thy servants, who cannot use material weapons to defend themselves, and
whom I have here brought up, and noursed in thy holy love, should now be
delivered into the power of the infidel Mores? O my God preserve them if thou
please, and me likewise; for albeit thy divine majesty has committed them to
my government, yet it is not in my power to defend them from so great a
peril, since this protection cannot be, but by a work of thine omnipotency:
therefore do I recommend them to thy divine majesty with all the affection that
I am able.

As soon as this holy virgin had sent these prayers unto heaven, she heard a
voice so delicate, as if it had bin of a sucking child that said, I will protect
you for ever. The holy mother did not yet give over to preset her prayers
saying: my God I humbly beseech thee, if so it be thy holy will, to preserve,
and defend this thy City of Assisium which does nourish us for the love it
bears to thy divine majesty. Whereto God answered, this City shall suffer
much, but in the end I will by my favor defend it. Saint Clare having heard so
gracious news, lifted up her face bathed with tears and comforted her beloved
daughters, saying: Dear sisters, I assure you that no evil shall befall you,
only be careful to have a firm faith, and confidence in Jesus Christ. The
divine assistance making no long delay, for the presumption and rage of the
Mores was in continently cooled, so that a sudden unknown terror having
surprised them, they speedily retired over the walls, which they had scaled,
to enter. They being thus by the virtue of the prayers of Saint Clare expelled,
she privately called the Religious, that had heard the said voice of God, and
commanded them, that howsoever it were, they should not diuulge what they had
heard during her life.

How the City of Assisiu^ was at another time delivered by the prayers of this
holy virgin.

CHAP. XIIII.
UPON another time, one of the principal Captains of the Emperor Frederike
called Vitalis Auersa, a man very ambitious of glory, full of courage, and a
notable Captain, conducted his troops to besiege Assisium, and having
environed it, he proposed to wast, and spoil the plain Country thereabout,
making a total ruin to the very trees which were hewed down; and then laying
his seige, he uttered menacing and vaunting oaths, that he would not stir
thence, till he had given the City a victorious assault: and this siege so
long continued, that the beseiged began to loose courage, as wanting many
things extremely needful unto the^? wheros the servant of Jesus Christ being
advertised, sighing in her heart, she called all her Religious, to whom she thus
discoursed: My dear sisters, know that all our necessities have ever bin
supplied by the charity of this City, so that we should be very ungrateful,
if we should not according to our ability assist them in this extreme
necessity: then she commanded to be brought her ashes, and all her Religious to
discoife their heads* and to give them example, she began to cover her bare
head with ashes, wherein all the other Religious following her, she said: go
ye to our Lord Jesus Christ, and with the greatest humility, and most fervent
prayers that you can possible, demand of him the deliverance of your City.

It cannot be expressed, with what fervor and tears these devout Virgins
incessantly offered their prayers, unto God the space of one entiere day and
night, demanding mercy in behalf of the said City beseiged by their enemies.
These prayers and tears were of such force and virtue, that the omnipotent
bounty and mercy had compassion of them, and from the day following sent them
his puissant hand, and assistance in such sort, that the enemies camp was
defeated, and the Captain constrained shamfully, and in despite of his
forces, without sound trompet to raise his seige: for he fled without ever
troubling the Assisians, being shortly after slain.

Of the Reverence and devotion which S. Clare had to the most blessed
Sacrament: and of the virtue of her prayers against the Devils.

CHAP. XV.
THE devotion of Saint Clare toward the most Holy Sacrament of the Altar was
such, that she made it apparent in many of her actions: for though she were
most grievously sick in her bed, yet would she so dispose herself therein, and
be so propped, and stayed up, that she might conveniently spinne, an exercise
which she exceedingly affected, and wherein she wholly employed herself; doing
it so delicately, that with the thread of her labor she caused to be wouen
very curious, and fine cloth, which she employed in furniture for the Altar.
She one time got made 50. Corporalls, which she sent in cases of silk to many
Churches of the valley of Spoletum. When she was to receive the most Blessed
Sacrament, before she presented herself thereunto, she was always bathed in
tears, and so with exceeding fear approaching, she did reverence him that was
present in the Sacrament, as acknowledging him to be the same that governs
heaven and earth; therefore did the Devils so much fear the prayers of the
Espouse of Jesus Christ, S. Clare, as they have suudry times declared.

A very devout woman of the Bishopric of Pisa came to the monastery of S.
Damian, to thank God and his servant S. Clare, for having bin by her merits
delivered of five devils that possessed her, which in going out of her body,
confessed that the prayers of S. Clare did burn them, and to their great
confusion expelled them out of the humane bodies which they possessed.

Of a meruaylous consolation which S. Clare received upon the feast of the most
holy Nativity.

CHAP. XVI.
AS the glorious S. Clare was always in her sickness with a lively memory
myndfull of her beloved Jesus; so was she correspondently visited by him in all
her necessities. Once in the night of the Nativity, when all the world and
Angels did so solemnly feast for the birth of our Redeemer, all the Religious
went to the quier to Mattines, and left their mother accompanied only with her
grievous infirmity: wherefore having begun to meditate upon the great mystery of
that night, and lamenting exceedingly, that she could not assist at the divine
service, she sighing said: O my God, thou see how I remain here alone; and
ending this, she began to hear the Mattines that were sung in the Church of
Saint Francis in Assisium, very distinctly understanding the voice of the
Religious; and the very sound of the Organs: yet was she not so near the said
Church, as she might humanly hear what was sung there; but it must necessarily
be concluded, that this was miraculously done in one of these two sorts,
either that the singing of the said Religious was by the will of God carried to
S. Clare, or her hearing was extended extraordinarily, and by the special
grace of God, even to our Lady of Angels near unto Assisium.

But this Saint was further favored by a divine revelation which exceedingly
comforted and rejoiced her, for she was by almighty God esteemed worthy to see
in spirit his holy Cribbe. The morning following, her Religious coming to see
her, she said; Dear sisters, blessed for ever be our Lord Jesus Christ, that
it has pleased him not to leave me alone, as you have done; but know that by
the grace of his divine majesty, I have heard all the service that this night
has been performed in the Church of our holy Father S. Francis.

Of the spiritual doctrine, wherewith S. Clare noursed her daughters.

CHAP. XVII.
THE virgin S. Clare acknowledged, that she was committed to the palace of the
great King, for gouernesse and mistres of his dear espouses, therefore did she
teach them a sublime doctrine, comforting, and assisting them with such love
and pity, as with words cannot be expressed. First she taught them to clear
their souls of all rumors of the world, that they might the more freely
attain to the high secrets of God. She also taught them to have no affection
to their carnal kindred, and intierely to forget their ownehouse, the better
to please Jesus Christ. She admonished them also to surmount and misprise the
necessities of their bodies, and to get a habit of repressing the deceiptes,
and appetites of the flesh, by the bridle of reason. She likewise taught them
that the subtle enemy armed with malice, continually addresseth his hidden
snares to surprise the pure souls, and that he tempts the pious in another
sort then worldlings.

Finally she would have them so employed in handy labor for certain hours,
that they might afterward be more prompt, and better prepared to the desire of
their Creator by the exercise of prayer, which after their labor they should
undertake, not leaving for such pain the fire of holy love, but rather
expelling by it the tepidity of devotion already purchased. There was never
seen a stricter observation of silence then amongst them, nor a greater form,
and example of virtue. There was never seen done in this holy house one act of
vanity, neither by words, nor signs; nor was there discovered by any vain
discourse any desire of lightness, so much were they mortifyed, their holy
Mistres giving good example by words, and pious, and brief documents;
likewise teaching her disciples fervent desires, and admonishing them to
possess, and conserve them under the key and custody of strict silence. By
means of devout preachers she procured to her daughters the holy word of God,
whereof her own was not the least part, she being filled with contentment and
joy, when she heard the word of God preached, and would with such devotion, and
consolation, rejoice in the memory of her sweetest spouse Jesus Christ; that
one time hearing the sermon of brother Philip de Adria, a most famous preacher,
there was seen before this holy virgin a most beautiful child, which there
remained during almost all the sermon, comforting her with his ioifull
delectations, of which apparition she received such a sweetness and delight, as
she could no way explicate.

Albeit this most prudent virgin had never studied, yet did she much delight to
hear a learned man preach, understanding very well that under the words of
science lay hidden the sweetness of spirit, which herself subtily obtained, and
tasted with much more gust. She accustomed to say, that the Sermon of
whosoever preaching the word of God was exceeding profitable to souls,
considering that it is no less prudence to know how sometimes to gather
beautiful, and sweet flowers from amongst gross, and rude thorns, then to
eat the wholesome fruits of a good plant.

Pope Gregory the ninth one time at the instance of diverse Prelates commanded,
that no Religious man should preach at the monastery of poor Religious women,
without his express permission: whereat the pitiful mother complaining, in
regard that thence forward her devout and Religious daughters should seldom be
spiritually fed with holy doctrine, with tears she said: let then all my
Religious be taken hence, since they are taken away, who gave us the food of
spiritual life; withal sending away the Religious, that appertained to her
monastery to serve them in getting alms abroad, refusing to have Religious,
that should provide them bread to relieve the body, since they were deprived by
this means of all spiritual teachers that gave the^ bread to nourish their
souls; whereof his Holiness being advertised, he presently revoked his former
prohibition, referring all to the disposition of the general of the Friars
Minors.

S. Clare had not only a provident care of her Religious daughters souls, but
of their bodies also that were feeble and tender, for whose necessary wantes
she daly provided with exceeding fervor and charity; she oftentimes in the
night, when it was cold, going to visit and cover them whiles they slept; and
if she found any one over much benumbed with cold, or otherwise in il
disposition through strict observation of the common rigor, she instantly
commanded her to take some recreation, till her necessities were satisfied.

If any of her Religious daughters were any time afflicted, or much grieved in
mind through temptations, or were sorrowful and melancholy, she would call her
apart, and most lovingly comfort her. She would sometimes fall prostrate
herself at the feet of those that were heavy and afflicted, thereby to put
away the force of their grief by her motherly cherishings, for which they in
all submission yealding themselves to this their holy Mother, did not prove
ungrateful. They likewise reverenced the office of Prelature in their Mistres,
following all their life time the conduct of so diligent and secure a guide,
directing their actions by the espouse of Jesus Christ, admiring with all the
excellency of such sanctity and charity.

Of the devotion which Pope Gregory the ninth had to the holy virgin S. Clare:
and of a letter which he wrote unto her whiles he was yet Cardinal.

CHAP. XVIII.
POPE Gregory the ninth had a marvelous confidence in the prayers of S. Clare,
having experienced their great virtue and efficacy: and oftentimes when he was
in any difficulty, both whiles he was Cardinal and Bishop of Hostia, and
afterward when he was Pope, he would by letters recommend himself to this
glorious virgin, demanding help of her, knowing assuredly of what importance
her assistance was; this being in him not only a great humility, but also
worthy to be diligently imitated, to see the vicar of Jesus Christ upon earth
to beg help of a servant of God, in recommending himself to her prayers.

This great Pastor knew very well what divine love could do, and how freely
pure virgins do find the port of the consistory of the divine majesty open.
There is exstant a very devout letter of this Pope written to S. Clare, whiles
he was Cardinal, which is here inserted, to make it appear that the spirit of
God made his residence in this Prelate, and what devotion he carried to the
sanctity the glorious virgin Saint Clare.

To the most dear sister in Jesus Christ, and mother of his holiness, Sister
Clare, the servant of Jesus Christ; Vgolin miserable sinner, and Bishop of
Hostia recommendeth himself, whatsoever he is, and what he may be. Well
beloved sister in Christ Jesus, since the hour, that the necessity of my
return separated me from your holy speeches, and deprived me of that pleasure
to confer with you of celestial treasures, I have had much sorrow of heart,
abundance of tears in mine eyes, and have felt an extreme grief; and that in
such sort, that if I had not found at the feet of our Lord Jesus Christ the
consolation of his ordinary piety, I fear I had fallen into such anguishes, as
my spirit would have forsaken me, and my soul utterly melted away; and not
without reason, because that joy failed me, with which I discoursed with your
good company of the sacred body of our svveet Redeemer Jesus Christ, and of his
presence upon earth, celebrating the feast of Easter with you, and the other
servants of our Lord.

And as whiles our blessed Savior by his dolorous passion and death was absent
from the presence of his dilciples, they were possessed with an extreme grief
and affliction; so does your absence procure my desolation. And though I
acknouvledge my self a grievous sinner, considering the prerogative of your
meritts, and the rigor of your most holy Religion; yet without doubt, the
multitude of my sins is such, and so much have I offended God the universal
Lord, that I am not worthy to be united to the glory of the elect, nor to be
sequestered from vvorldly occupations, if your tears and prayers do not obtain
me pardon of my sins; and therefore to you I commit my soul, to you I commend
my spirit, as Jesus Christ upon the Cross recommended his spirit to his
heavenly Father, to the end that in the terrible day of the universal
judgment you give an account for me, if you be not diligent and careful of my
salvation: for I confidently believe, that you may obtain of the sovereign
judge whatsoever by your devotion and tears you shall at any time ask or
demand of him. The Pope speaks not of coming to Assisium, as I desire, but I
purpose to visit you and your sisters at my first commodity. Recommend me I
pray you to Agnes your sister and mine, and to all your other sisters in Jesus
Christ.

Of the most fervent love of Jesus Christ which inflamed the hard of Saint
Clare: and how the Devil tormented her: of an ecstasy wherein she continued a
night and two days together.

CHAP. XIX.
WHEN S. Clare heard any speak of the passion of our Redeemer Jesus Christ,
she oftentimes was accustomed to weep in compassion, in such sort, that out of
the sacred wounds she would sometimes draw dolorous feelings and affections, and
at other times unspeakable joys and consolations of admirable sweetness; and
the cross of Jesus Christ, which with her dearest spouse she carried in her
soul, the weight thereof gave her so much more taste of contentment as she felt
more grief. The great abundance of tears, which she powered out for the most
bitter passion of Jesus Christ, kept her sometimes out of herself; and the
internal love, which she had imprinted in her heart, in manner continually
represented unto her Jesus Christ crucified.

She ordinarily gave example by works, of what she taught her Religious by
words: for admonishing them often, and instructing them likewise secretly
touching some exercise, before she had ended her discourse, she was seen to
power out of her eyes abundance of tears. Among the hours of the divine
office that are sung in the Church, she was present with greatest devotion at
the sixth and ninth, by reason that at such hours she was crucified with her
Redeemer Jesus Christ.

The holy virgin retyring one time to her private devotion after the ninth
hour, the devil came to her, and did beat her outragiously, hurting her
withal so much in the face, that her eye was all bloudshoot, the sign
remaining upon her cheek: but S. Clare omitted not for that to persevere in her
prayer. And to the end she might with the more devotion apply herself to the
sweet contentments which she conceived in the often meditating of Jesus Christ
crucified, she ordinarily contemplated the sacred mystery of the five wounds:
and therefore she learned by heart the office of the holy Cross, as the true
lover of the holy Cross of Saint Francis had taught her. She accustomed to
wear next her naked flesh a girdle of thirteen knottes, whereunto also were
little stones fastened in form of knottes: which she did in memory of the
sacred wounds and dolours of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.

One Lent upon Maunday Thursday, whereupon our Lord Jesus Christ showed a
particular love to his disciples, at the hour of the agony, that our Redeemer
did sweet blood and water in the garden, this holy Virgin retired into her
Oratory full of deep sorrow, joining herself with Almighty God in prayer, as
if she had seen him praying, and as if by contemplation of the soul of Jesus
Christ sorrowful even to death, she herself had felt and suffered his prison,
his derisions, his injuries, reproaches, affrontes, beatings, sentence, Cross,
and most ignominious death, carrying in her memory a like sorrow: wherefore as
wholly transported she sat upon a straw bed, and all that night, and the day
following, she was so absorpt and rapt out of herself, that her eyes being
open and without motion, she seemed to hold them fixed in one place, and
remained so insensible, being conioyntly crucified with Jesus Christ, that a
Religious, familiar unto her, coming often to see if the wanted any thing, she
found her always in one manner.

But upon the night of holy Saturday, this devout Religious came to her dear
mother with a candle, partly by signs, and partly by words, making her the
best she could to understand the commaundment that the holy Father S. Francis
gave her, that she should not let pass one day without taking and eating
something, so that in the presence of this Religious, Saint Clare, as if she
came out of another place said unto her, what need have you to light this
candle, is it not day? whereto the Religious answered: Mother the night of holy
Thursday is past, as also good Friday, and we are now in the night of Easter
eve; the Saint replied, my daughter blessed be this sleep, which Almighty God
at length after my long desire has granted me, but I admonish and commau^d
you, not to speak hereof to any creature living, whiles I shall live in this
world.

Of many miracles wrought by S. Clare, by the sign and virtue of the holy
Cross.

CHAP. XX.
OUR Redeemer Jesus Christ recompensed well the pious desires, and good works
of his beloved virgin S. Clare: for as she was inflamed with an infinite love
of the mystery of the holy Cross, so by the virtue and power of the same
Cross, she became noble in the signs and miracles of Jesus Christ, that
oftentimes in making the sign of the holy Cross upon the sick, they were
miraculuosly cured, and instantly healed of sorts of diseases.

A Religious man called Stephen, having a hot fever that exceedingly vexed
him, the holy Father S. Francis sent hin to S. Clare, to make the sign of the
Cross upon him, as one that well knew her perfection and verue, which he
exceedingly honored. Now the virtuous Lady Hortulana Mother to Saint Clare, was
then in the covent of S. Damian, for a little before, considering that her
daughters had espoused Jesus Christ, she came to them to Religion, where this
happy Lady served as a true gardener in the garden enclosed with those Virgins,
our Redeemer Jesus Christ, with the glorious virgin Agnes sister to Saint
Clare, and the other Religious, all replenished with the holy Ghost, to whom
the holy Father Saint Francis sent many diseased, whom they cured, after
having made upon them the sign of the holy Cross, which they most heartily
honored. The said Religious then being sent to S. Clare, she as the daughter of
obedience thereto commanded by the holy Father S. Francis, presently made upon
him the sign of the Cross; then left him a little to sleep in the Church, in
the place where she was accustomed to pray, and the Religious having a little
reposed arose sound, secure, and freed of his infirmity: then he returned to
Saint Francis, by whom he had been sent to S. Damian, and consequently was
cured.

A child of three years old of the City of Spoletum called Matthew, had by
chance a stone thurst into his nose, whence it could not be gotten out, so
that the child was in extreme peril, whereupon he was brought to Saint Clare
who having made the sign of the Cross upon him, the stone incontinently fell
out of his nose, and he was perfectly well.

Another child likewise of Perusia having a filme upon his eyes was brought to
S. Clare, who touching the eye of the child, and making the sign of the Cross
thereupon, willed the^ that had presented the child unto her to carry it unto
her Mother Hortulana, that she might also make the sign of the Cross upon it,
which having done the eye became clear, and being purged of the filme that
obscured it, he was presently cured: whereupon S. Clare affirmed, that this
miracle was wrought by the merits of her mother, who finding such glory to be
attributed unto her, reputed herself unworthy thereof.

One of her Religious called Beneuenta, having had for 12. years together an
impostume under her arm, which did purge by five several issues, S. Clare had
compassion thereof, and made upon her the sign of the holy Cross, then with
her own hands taking away the plaster, she was cured of her long continued
soars. Another of her Religious called Amia, being for more then a years
space afflicted with the dropsy, together with an extreme pain in her sides,
and a burning fever, S. Clare conceived a very strong compassion of her, and
therefore having recourse to her noble and infallible medicine, she made upon
her body the sign of the holy Cross in the name of her beloved Jesus Christ,
and the Religious was perfectly cured. Another servant of God borne at Perusia
had for two years together so lost her voice, that one could scarsely hear
her speak; but having understood by a vision which she had the night of the
assumption of our blessed Lady, that S. Clare should cure her, the poor
afflicted creature having very patiently expected the break of day, repaired
with a strong confidence unto that holy virgin, and by signs craved her
benediction, which favor having obtained, her voice, which so long time she
had wanted, became as clear and shrill as ever it had been.

Another Religious called Christina, that had bin long time deaf in one of her
ears, and having in vain tried many remedies, Saint Clare making the sign of
the cross upon her head, and with her hand touching her care, she recovered
her hearing as perfectly and clearly as before. Another Religious call Andrea
had a disease in her throat, the grief whereof procured her much impatience: it
being admirable, that among so many prayers inflamed with divine love, their
should be a soul so could, and among such prudent virgins one so indiscret and
moderate.

This Religious feeling herself one night more tormented with her infirmity
then ordinarily, afflicted and impatient, that her pain did rather increase
then diminish, she so crushed and pressed her throat, making thereby appear
her intention to choke herself, thinking by violence to expel that swelling,
so to avoid longer torment, and through ignorance attempting to do more then
was the will of God. But whiles that poor Religious busied herself in this
folly, Saint Clare by divine inspiration had knowledge thereof, wherefore
calling one of her Religious, she willed her to hasten down, boil an egg in
the shell, and cause sister Andrea to swallow it, which done to bring her to
her presence. The Religious instantly dressed the egg, and forth with brought
it to the sick party, whom she found little better then dead, having so
crushed her throat, that her speech was utterly gone, yet she made her swallow
the egg so well as she could, then raising her from her straw bed, she with
much labor led her to Saint Clare, who thus spoke unto her; Wretched sister
confess thee to God, and have contrition, for what thou intendest to do, and
acknovvledge that Jesus Christ will give thee health far better, then thou with
thine own hands had purposed to do: change this evil life into a better,
for thou shall never recover another sickness that shall succeed this, but shall
dye thereof. These words procured in this Religious a spirit of compunction and
contrition, so that she being intierly cured of this grievous infirmity,
amended her life, falling a little after into another sickness, which Saint
Clare had foretold, whereof she ended her life piously.

It does manifestly appear by these examples, and by many other marvelous
things, that the tree of the Cross of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ was
deeply planted in her heart, and that in a marvelous manner the fruits thereof
did interiourly recreate her soul, since the leaves did work exteriourly such
remedies by the hands and merits of his glorious Saint.

How Saint Clare blessed bread, upon which the sign of the Cross miraculously
remained.

CHAP. XXI.
SAINT Clare was a disciple of the Cross, and of so notable same and sanctity,
that not only great Prelates and Cardinals much desired to see her, to hear
and discourse with her, for which cause they often visited her; but the Pope
himself bare her also this affection, in so much that Pope Innocent the fourth
repaired to her monastery, to hear of her, as a secretary of the holy Ghost,
celestial and divine discourses. And having a long time conferred with her of
matters of salvation, and of the praises of God, whiles they intertayned
themselves in so pious a discourse, S. Clare caused dinner to be prepared, and
the tables for the Religious to be covered, causing bread to be brought
thither, with intention to procure the vicar of Jesus Christ to bless it, to
be afterward kept of devotion. Their discourse then being ended, S. Clare fell
upon her knees before the Pope, beseeching him to bless the bread. vvhereto
his holiness ansvvered: daughter Clare, I will that you bless it your self
making thereupon the sign of the Cross: the Saint thereto answered, most holy
Father, pardon me if you please, for if I should do it, I should deserve
sharp reprehension, in presuming to give my benedictio^ in presence of your
holiness. The Pope again replied: well, that no presumption be imputed unto
you, and that you may merit thereby, I command you by holy Obedience to bless
these loves, making upon them the sign of the Cross. This daughter of
obedience lifted up her hand, making the sign of the Cross upon the bread;
whence insued an admirable accident, for the Cross remained upon the bread,
whereof part was eaten of devotion, and the rest reserved as a holy Relic,
which event filled the Pope with admiration, for which he gave thanks to God;
then gave his benediction to S. Clare, who received it with great humility, and
was much comforted withal.

Of many infirmityes of the glorious virgin S. Clare: of her weakness; and how
she was visited by the Protector.

CHAP. XXII.
THE Glorious virgin S. Clare had now forty years run the race of the most
eminent virtue and practice of poverty, having broken the alabaster of her body
in the most strict prison by fasting and rigorous disciplines, and by this
means filled the house of the holy Church with the most precious ointment of
her virtues, wherewith she drew after her an infinite number of souls to the
service of Jesus Christ. And as she already approached to the recompense of
eternal glory, having supported diverse infirmities, and consumed the forces of
her body in her first years by the rigor of penance, she was also in her
latter days oppressed, and afflicted with diverse grievous sicknesses. And
because in the time of her health she was also enriched in such sort with the
merit of good works, that being sick she gained the true riches of the merits
of patience, she yet inioyed the fruits of her virtues, that were ripened in
afflictions and molestations, occasioned by diversity of diseases. But the
virtue of her patience does evidently appear, in that having been twenty eight
years together afflicted with diverse diseases, she was never heard to utter
the least murmr or complaint: but continually were heard to proceed out of
her mouth pious words, and thanksgiving to Almighty God.

Now being exceedingly weakened with infirmity, and every moment seeming to her
the drawing on of her life toward an end, it pleased our Lord Jesus Christ to
prolonge it, till she might be visited by the eminent Prelates of the Roman
Church, whereof she was a servant, and a special child; for the Pope being yet
at Lions, and this Saint beginning to be more tormented with her infirmities,
then she was accustomed to be, a sword of sorrow pierced through the soul of
her beloved daughters. But a virgin, servant of Jesus Christ, a very devout
Religious of the monastery of S. Paul, and order of S. Benedict, had at that
time this vision following. It seemed to her that she did visit S. Clare with
all her sisters at Saint Damian, whom she saw in a sorrowful, yet precious
bed, about which they all lamented expecting her death, and withal she saw
come to the bolster of the said bed a very beautiful woman, who said to them
that wept* my daughters weep not for her that is yet to live, for she cannot
dye, till our Lord and all his disciples do come. A little after the Roman
Court came to Perusia, where the increase of S. Clares sickness being diuulged,
the Cardinal of Hostia hastened with great diligence to visit the Espouse of
Jesus Christ, whose Father he was by office, governor by special solicitude,
fosterer and friend in most pure and chaste amity; and he comforted her, and
with his own hands administering unto her the most blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist; and then made a very devout sermon to the Religious, S. Clare with
great humility, and in the name of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, beseeching him to
accept into his Protection that her family, and all her other poor sisters of
other monasteries; but above all she most instantly besought him, obtain of
the Pope, and the College of Cardinals, a privilege and confirmation of holy
poverty, Whereto the Cardinal gave his word, and as a faithful Father of her
Religion, and one most devout and affectionate to S. Clare, did afterward
effect it: for Pope Innocent the fourth at her most instant request, confirmed
the Rule, which the holy Father S. Francis had instituted for her, as is
formerly recorded, whereof S. Clare had never until then other confirmation
written but that of the said Cardinal, because the Popes supposing to induce
S. Clare, not to bynd her Religious to such an extreme poverty, did still
defer to confirm her Rule by writing. But Innocent the fourth seeing the
perseverance, and last will of Saint Clare, granted the same unto her by a
Bull, the eleventh, and last year of his reign, as we have before recorded.
And the year being almost expired, the Pope came with his Cardinals from
Perusia to Assisium; whereby the first vision touching the death of the holy
virgin was accomplished. For the Pope being in his office more then a man, by
the authority which he has of Jesus Christ upon earth, whose person he
represents in the temple of the Church militant, the Cardinals accompanying
his Holiness, represented the disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ.

How Pope Innocent the fourth visited Saint Clare in her last sickness, and gave
her absolution.

CHAP. XXIII.
THE divine providence would no longer defer the accomplishment of the will of
Saint Clare, but her Spouse Jesus Christ came to eleuate into his celestial
palace his poor Espouse and Pilgrim upon earth, who desired nothing more*
that being delivered of this mortal body, she might have the sight, and full
fruition of her most glorious spouse Jesus Christ in his celestial Kingdom.
Now then the members of this sacred virgin being by continuance of her sickness
wholly decayed, there befell her a new weakness, which being an evident token
that she should in short time be called of God, which she used as a ladder to
mount up to eternal salvation: whereupon Pope Innocent the forth came to the
monastery of S. Damian, accompanied with many Cardinals, to visit the servant
of God, not doubting but she, whose life he had already approved, was the most
perfect in sanctity of all women of his time; and therefore worthy to have her
death honored by his presence. His holiness then being entered, he went directly
to the glorious Virgin, and coming near to her bed, he gave her his hand to
kiss, which favor Saint Clare with exceeding joy received.

But besides that, she with great humility besought him to affoard her his
feet to kiss: the Pope to content her sat down upon a little bench, and
devoutly presented unto her his Apostolical feet, upon which this glorious
Saint reverently laid her face and mouth, most affectionatly kissing them: then
with the serenity of an Angelical countenance, she demanded of him remission
of all her sins; whereto the Pope answered: would to God my dear sister, I
had no more need of such a pardon: but finally he gave her the benefit of
absolution, and the gift of his benediction, and then left her in peace.

She having that morning received the most sacred communion at the hands of the
Provincial of the Friars Minors of that Province, with her hands joined
together, and her eyes elevated toward heaven, she weeping said to her
Religious: My daughters, praise Almighty God for the benefit it has pleased
him to bestow upon me this day, which is such, that the heavens and the earth
are not sufficient to recompense it, since this day I have both received my Lord
God, and am made worthy to see his Vicar upon earth.

How S. Clare comforted her sister S. Agnes.

CHAP. XXIIII.
THE daughters were all about their mother, without whom they were in a short
time to remain as orphans; the consideration whereof deeply pierced their
souls with a most bitter grief, that neither heaviness of sleep, nor hunger
could withdraw the^ from the presence of their mother; the present contentment,
which they received in beholding her, making them forget to eat and sleep,
because al their exercise was to weep, and particulerly her most devout sister
Agnes, who was expressly come from the monasterv, which she had newly erected at
Florence to be present at her death.

Being then in this anguish, she turned to wards her sister, and most
instantly prayed her, not to deprive her of her presence: whereto Saint Clare
answered, Dear sister, whom I cordially love, since it has pleased God that I
depart, be you joyful, and weep no more, for I answer you, our Lord will
shortly come to you, to visit you with an exceeding consolation before your
death.

Of the death of the blessed Virgin S. Clare: and of a vision, which one of her
Religious saw.

CHAP. XXV.
THE holy virgin, and servant of Jesus Christ, was many days to wards the end
of her life afflicted with diverse diseases, the faith and devotion, which at
that time each one bare her, exceedingly increasing, yea so far forth, that
she was honored as a Saint, being ordinarily visited by Cardinals, and other
Prelates: but which is more admirable to hear, having been seaue^teene days
without force to receive any sustenance that was presented unto her, she was
nevertheless so fortified of God, and encouraged of his divine majesty, that she
exhorted all those that would comfort her, to be prompt in the service of God.

A Religious man intending to comfort her, and to persuade her to have patience
in so grievous a sickness, that procured her so much torment, she with a smiling
countenance, and clear voice answered him: brother, since the time that I knew
the grace of my God, by the means of his most humble servant Saint Francis, no
pain has been troublesome unto me, no pe^nance has seemed difficult, nor any
sickness irksome.

And as almighty God approached near unto her, and her soul being as it were
at the door to go forth, the blessed virgin would have the most pious and
spiritual Friars Minors to be present, to discourse unto her of the dolorous
and bitter passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by their pious words to
inflame her heart more in the love of God: wherefore some of them, who were unto
her true brethren in our Redeemer Jesus Christ were present, and among other
brother Iuniperus, the familiar of our Lord Jesus Christ, who often uttered
unto her such fiery and inflamed words of the omnipotent God, that she by his
presence being filled with an extreme joy, one day demanded of him, if he
then, knevv nothing new from almighty God: whereupon brother Iuniperus opening
his mouth to answer her, there issued out of the furnace of his inflamed heart,
infinite sparks of such sublime words, that this holy virgin received thereof
much consolation. Finally turning her Angelical face toward her dear and
beloved daughters and sisters there present, all of them bitterly weeping, she
recommended unto them the poverty of our Redeemer Jesus Christ in this her last
passage, praising and thanking God for the infinite benefitts, which they had
received of his divine majesty, which she particulerly recounted unto them;
then she gave them all her benediction, and also to all the Religious of her
monastery present and absent, and likewise to all those, who should hereafter
enter into her order.

There were present two companions of S. Francis, to wit brother Angelus, who
though much afflicted, did yet comfort the others, and the right simple brother
Leo, who ceased not to kiss the bed of the holy virgin who was leaving the
world, and was much lamented of her daughters, because they were left orphans,
and were no more in this life to see their most holy mother, and therefore they
accompanied her soul to heaven with abundance of tears, without power to
admit any other consolation, then to desire to go with her: where with being so
afflicted, they could not without difficulty forbear with their nails to rent
their faces, but not being permitted them to discharge themselves of such
grief exteriourly, it did inflame in them a more burning fire within: for
those Espouses of Jesus Christ were sufficiently mortifyed by rigor of
Religion, albeit the force of grief did constreine them to cast forth loud
cries and sighs, and to power out rivers of tears. The holy virgin at length
being turned toward them, began very sweetly to say unto her soul, Go my
soul, go out securely, thou have an assured guide to perform this voyage* for
he who is thy Creator has sanctified thee, and has always co^serued thee,
affecting thee with a tender love, equal with that of a mother toward her
child: and thou my God be praised for having created me.

A Religious sister asking her what she meant thereby, she answered; I speak to
my blessed soul; her most glorious spouse Jesus Christ not being far from her,
attending for her: then turning to one of her Religious she said: do you not
see my daughter the King of glory whom I see? Almighty God also laid his hand
upon another Religious, who saw with her corporal eyes through the tears that
distilled from them a glorious vision; she being pierced through with the dart
of sorrow, cast her eyes toward the gate of the house, and saw to enter a
great processio^ of sacred virgins richly clothed in white, having each one a
crown of gold upon their head: but one of them appeared more beautiful,
sumptuous, and glittering then the rest, having upon her head an imperial
Crown garnished with precious stones, from whose countenance proceeded a light
so shining, that it converted the obscurity of the night into clear and bright
day, it being without doubt the most glorious virgin Mary, Queen of virgins,
who came to the bed of the Espouse of her Son, to whom inclyning she most
graciously embraced her, and incontinently she was covered and the bed also by
the other virgins with an extreme sumptuous mantle: so the day following,
which was the eleventh of August, her holy soul ascended to heaven, there to
be crowned with perpetual glory.

Happy was her departure out of this miserable life, since it was the entry into
that of eternal felicity: for the fastes, which this Saint performed in this
exile, she is now ioiful, having her fill at the magnificall table of the
Citizens of heaven; and for the humility and baseness of her habit, she is now
gloriously attired with the glory of paradise. The continual sighs and
desires, which she had for the presence and love of her deerly beloved spouse,
are accomplished by the blessed vision of God face to face, and by the assured
fruition of the sovereign good: leaving the way open to the example of
sanctity, that we blind and miserable mortal Creatures, rejecting these short,
false, and deceiptfull pleasures of this world, may purchase the permanent,
true, and assured delights that endure eternally.

Of the honorable obsequies that were performed for Saint Clare.

CHAP. XXVI.
VVHILES the soul of S. Clare departed this life, the report of her decease
was incontinently diuulged through Assisium, from whence both men and women in
such abundance speedily flocked to the monastery, that none seemed to be left
in the City, each one presently esteeming her a Saint, calling her the Espouse
of Jesus Christ, and acco^panying their discourses with great a boundance of
tears of devotion. The officers of justice repaired thither accompanied with
many warlike Champions, and a great number of armed men, which that night
guarded the monastery, for fear that precious treasure might be bereaved the^.
The night following, the Pope with all his court came thither, accompanied
withal the neighbor people.

The Religious men of S. Damian being ready to begin the office of the dead,
the Pope would have had said the office of the holy virgins, wherein he would
have canonized her before her burial: but the Cardinal of Hostia having
demonstrated unto him, that it was fitting in this affayre to proceed with more
humane prudence, the Pope permitted the said Religious solemnly to proceed in
the office of the dead, according to their ordinary and accustomed manner.

The said Cardinal having taken for his text, vanitas vanitatum, and omnia
vanitas, made a very worthy and devout Sermon, to manifest the vanity of
things appertayning only to this world, where he exceedingly exalted that most
eminent contemner of vanities which ended, all the Cardinals and other
Prelates accompanied her holy body with an exemplar devotion. All the funerals
being very solemnly ended, then Citizens of Assisiu^ thinking it not secure,
that this precious treasure should remain so far out of their City, they
caused her holy body with exceeding great pomp to be transported, singing
psalms and Hymns with the sound and melody of diverse musical instruments, in
a very solemn procession, carrying it into the Chuch of Saint George within
their City, where the body of S. Francis had formerly been reposed. And it was
very reasonable, that he, who in his life had given a pattern of the way of
life unto this holy virgin, should as it were prophetically preparre her a
place of sepulture.

There was then a great repair and confidence of people from diverse Cittyes,
towns, and villages unto Assisium, to thank Jesus Christ, and to pray unto
this blessed creature, proclayming this holy virgin to be really a Saint and
glorious, who now lives in paradise with the Angels, having bin already so
much honored of men upon earth. O blessed virgin pray now to God for us, and
gain our souls to Jesus Christ in heaven, as thou have converted and gained
so mamany living upon earth. The holy virgin passed this transitory life to the
other of rest, the year of grace 1253. the tweluth of August, forty years
after her perfect vocation to God, and the 60. year of her age. She was
interred the 12. of August, upon which day her feast is solemnized at Assisium,
and over all the holy Roman Church.

Of the miracles wrought by the merits of S. Clare: and first of possessed
persons that have been delivered.

CHAP. XXVII.
THE chiefest marks that saints can have, and the worthyest testimonies of
faith and reverence, are sanctity of life, and the perfection of good works:
for S. John Baptist wrought no miracles during his life, and yet they who have
wrought many, shall not be esteemed more holy then he: and therefore the notable
renown of the Religious life of Saint Clare, might suffice to make her appear
such as she is, if the tepidity, coldness, and remissnes of the world, etc
partly also devotion did not otherwise require. But since this holy virgin was
not only in her lifetime by her merits swallowed up in the depth of divine
illuminations, but was also after her death a meruaylous splendor over all the
world by the light of her miracles: and as the most pure Verity has caused the
recording of many of her miracles, that they remain as testimonies, memory,
and denuntiation of her Sanctity: therefore also the multitude of them enforce
me to recount some, that they may be generally diuulged and known.

A Child called James, seeming not so sick as possessed, in regard that
sometimes he cast himself into the fire, or into the river, fell rudely upon
the ground, and with such fury did bite the stones, that he brake his teeth
withal, forced blood out of his head, and wrested his mouth most strangely,
yea sometimes would seem a monster, so doubling and foulding his members, that
his feet would be upon his neck. He was ordinarily twice in the day afflicted
with the like torments in such sort, that two persons sufficed not to restrain
him from tearing of his clothes, yea there was great difficulty to keep him
from murdering of himself* Physicians having in vain labored to cure him, at
length his Father named Guidalote had recourse to the merits of S* Clare,
affectionatly saying: O holy Virgin honored of the world, to thee I address my
self, beseeching thee to obtain of God my Sons health: then full of
confidence he conducted him to the sepulcher of this Saint, and laid him
thereupon, and he presently miraculously obtained the favor he desired, his
Son being perfectly cured of all his infirmities, and was never troubled
after.

Alexandrina a woman of the town of Frata, near to Perusia, was possessed and
tormented with an abominable devil, to whose power she was so left, that he
made her to fly as a bird to the top of a rock near to the river of Tibur,
then made her descend to a branch of a tree that did hang over the said river,
the^ to hang upon that branch, there playing her idle prankes. This woman had
half her body utterly benumbed, for which the Physicians could find no remedy:
at length she came with great devotion to the shrine of Saint Clare, and
inuocating her merits she was cured of all her afflictions; having also the
gout in her left hand, her body half paraliticall was cured, and withal she
was intierly freed from the oppression and servitude of the devil.

Another woman of the same place was cured before the said sepulcher, who was
in like sort possessed with the devil, and had withal many other grievous
infirmityes.

Of many that were miraculously cured of diverse diseases.

CHAP. XXVIII.
A French Youth, going to Rome in company of other his Countrymen, fell sick
and lay by the way, loosing through the force of his infirmity his sense and
speech, and his body became deformed as it were a monster, then became he so
furious, that he could not be held, so that he seemed ready to dye* which
spectacle did not only move his companions to compassion, but did also
exceedingly terrify them: and therefore they bound him to a beer, and carried
him to the Church of S. Clare; where having placed him before her sepulcher,
they applied themselves all to prayer, inuocating the help of God and of the
Saint, who made such intercession for the young man, that he was in an instant
intierly cured.

A man of the City of Spoletuns called Valentine, was exceedingly afflicted
with the falling sickness, in which he fell six times a day in whatsoever place
he was, and besides he had one foot so wrested awry, that he was utterly
latned: he was brought upon an ass to the sepulcher of S. Clare, where having
remained two days and three nights, the third day attempting to move his lame
foot, and none being near him, he made such a noise, that being heard by some
a far off, they seemed to hear the breaking of a piece of dry wood; and the
man was instantly cured of both the one and the other his said diseases.

The Son of a woman of Spoletum called lames of twelve years old being
blind, could not go without a guide: and being once forsaken of him who
conducted him, he fell into a pit, brake one of his arms, and hurt his head.
The night following sleeping by the bridge of Varue, a woman appeared unto him,
and said: James, if thou will come to me to Assisium I will cure thee. Arising
early in the morning, he much admired at the vision, which he recounted to two
other blind men, who answered him: Brother we have heard of a Lady lately dead
in the City of Assisium, at whose sepulcher God works by her merits many
miracles: which the blind youth having heard, he left the two other blind men,
and with a strong confidence hastened to Assisium, and in the way he lodged at
Spoletum, where in the night he had the same vision, which increased the hope
of the recovering his sight, and made him hasten in time to arrive at the
Church of S. Clare, where finding it so filled with people that he could not
enter, was greatly troubled.

But seeing no remedy, he rested at the door, and there remained till the
evening, where this poor blind youth being weary with his journey, and
afflicted that he could not enter into the Church, settled himself the best he
could to rest upon the ground, laying his head against a great stone, and so
slept, and presently the third time he heard the said voice, speaking: lames,
God will do thee good, if thou can enter, and incontinently a waking out of
that sleep, he began to cry, and beg of the people with abundance of tears
to permit him to enter, which having a long time continued, they gave him
place, and having discloathed himself, putting his girdle about his neck, he
went to the sepulcher of the Saint, before which with great reverence and
humility her fell upon his knees, and having persisted sometime in prayer,
beseeching S. Clare to intercede for him, he fell into a gentle slumber, wherein
S. Clare appeared unto him, and said, Arise lames, for thou art already cured,
and being awaked, and raised upon his feet, the defect of his sight left him,
and by the virtues and meritts of this Saint he clearly saw; for which he
glorified God, and gave him thanks for so admirable a work, exhorting all
people present to do the like, and to praise our Redemer Jesus Christ in this
his holy servant.

Of the lame and paralitiqes cured by Saint Clare.

CHAP. XXIX.
A Citizen of Perusia called Iohn-Martin de Buoni, went one time with many
other Citizens out of the City to fight against their enemies of Fullinium:
the skirmish being ended, John found his hand exceedingly hurt with the blow of
a flint stone* and the bone being broken he was thereby maimed: and having been
at extreme cost for the cure thereof, yet without any remedy, but still enforced
to carry his arm in a skarfe, he always complained thereof as of a desperate
may me, and asked Counsel about cutting off his hand; but having one day heard
speech of marvelous things wrought by almighty God at the intercession of S.
Clare, he with a strong faith vowed to go to her sepulcher, whither arriving
he very devoutly presented her a hand of wax, then fell upon his knees, and
made his fervent prayor to God, that it would please his divine majesty, by the
merits and intercession of that most holy virgin to cure him; the success was
admirable, for before this gentleman arose, he felt his hand intierly cured,
for which he gave thanks to God and to the Saint.

A young man likewise of Castrouitoli called Petronius, was so consumed with a
disease which had for three years continually afflicted him, that he seemed to
be already withered, and corrupted, yea he was thereby brought to such weakness,
that in going he stouped with his face as it were upon the ground, and found
great difficulty to walk, though with a staff in his hand to support him.

His Father having already bin exceedingly charged about his cure, continued yet
in resolution to employ the residue of his substance out of his vehement desire
to see his son cured. But the Physicians having assured him that there was no
hope of cure by humane art, he had recourse to the new Saint, of whose virtue
having heard much report, he caused his son to be carried thither where the
Relics of Saint Clare reposed. And having made his prayers by her sepulcher,
he recovered his former health, and miraculously arose sound and straight, as
if he had never endured infirmity, yea he ran, leapt, and praised God, and S.
Clare, inducing all present to have greater faith and devotion toward her.

In the town of Saint Quirice, within the Diocese of Assisium, a child of ten
years old, having been borne lame, went so pitifully and painfully, that if he
chanced to fall to the ground, he could not rise again, but with extreme
difficulty.

His mother had many times recommended him to S. Francis, yet found he no
redress: but understanding afterward, that the virgin Saint Clare was very
famous for infinite miracles, which by her meritts were wrought at her
sepulcher, she caused her Son to be carried thither; and incontinently after
that he had bin there, his bones were settled in their places, and his members
were cured: that which Saint Francis entreated by devout prayers would not
grant, he referred to be obtained and impetrated by the meritts of his
disciple S. Clare.

A Citizen of Eugubium called James le France, had a Son of five years old
so lame, that he could not go, which he very impatiently supported, seeming to
him that the torment of his child was a reproach unto his honor and family.

When this child was upon the ground, he would wallow and creep in the dust in
that sort to go, and if he would stay himself against any thing to arise, he
could not, for uature had given him only a desire, but no force or ability
thereunto. But his Father and Mother consulted to make a vow for him, and to
offer him to the merits of Saint Clare, to whom they promised, that being
cured he should be called hers. The vow being made, the espouse of Jesus Christ
cured this child, who began so well to go, that without any help he went to the
sepulcher of the said Saint.

A woman of Castle- Menarie, called Plenaria, had bin long time benumbed, in
such sort as she could not go without a staff, but causing herself to be
carried to the sepulcher of Saint Clare, and having there devoutly offered her
prayers, the day following obtained, what she with faith demanded, so that
he returned home upon her own feet, who came thither supported by the feet of
others.

A woman of Perusia had a swelling upon her cheek, which tormented her a long
time, and besides had all over her body many ring-wormes and tettars; she had
also her neck greater (...) her head and often thinking on S. Clare, she one
day went to her Church, where with great devotion and a true faith she made her
prayers: and continuing by her sepulcher till even within night, she fell into
a great sweet, whereby the swelling began to wax dry and to shrink, and so by
little and little she was so perfectly cured, that there remained no show of
any skarre.

How two children were by Saint Clare rescued, and preserved from the rage of
wolves.

CHAP. XXX.
THE valley of Spoletum was accustomed to be much afflicted with wolves, which
did often prey there upon man's flesh. There dwelt a woman called Bonna, upon
the mount Galion, within the diocese of Assisiu^, who having two children, had
scarce ended her lame^tations for the one which the wolves had devoured, but
whiles she was busied in her house they carried away the other.

The wolf carried the child to the top of a mountain and grapled it by the
throat, whilst a labourer in the vineyardes hearing the pitiful cry of the
child called the mother, and admonished her to have care of her Son, in
regard he heard a crying voice like to his: the woman not finding her Son,
presently believed that the wolves had seysed upon him, and therefore began to
raise her lamentations toward heaven, devoutly inuocating the help of Saint
Clare in these terms: O blessed S. Clare have compassion upon me miserable
woman, and restore me my child. Hear if thou please the prayers of an
unfortunate mother, and permit me not to continue in this rigorous desolation.
Whiles this poor woman so recommended her distress to S. Clare, her neighbors
furnished with weapons, hastened after the ravening wolf, and coming to the
top of the said mountain, they found that he had left the child wounded in the
throat, whose wounds a dog was licking, and so the child was safely
recovered by the merits of S. Clare, who was inuocated by his mother, to whom
he was brought, and was incontinently restored to perfect health.

A little girl of the town of Canary, being about noone abroad in the field,
where she did some service to another woman, there came a wolf, which being
taken by the girl but for a dog, he leapt upon her neck, and took hold off
her head. The other woman, and the mother of the girl there present ran after,
and cried for help, inuocating Saint Clare: and it was admirable to hear that
the child being in the teeth of the wolf reprehended him, saying, Thou thief,
how can thou carry me further I being recommended to that holy virgin? The
wolf as dau^ted with those words, gently set the girl upon the ground, and as
a thief found and taken in the fact, he fled: and the girl returned without
any hurt unto her mother.

How diverse were delivered from drowning and danger of sea, having inuocated S.
Clare.

CHAP. XXXI.
A Ship fraught with many persons departing out of the port of Pisa, for the
i will of Sardinta, the first night, there arose such a terrible tempest, that the
force thereof leaked the bottom of the vessel, which made apparent to all
therein, that they were in most evident danger of shipwrake: wherefore they
began to invoke the Queen of heaven, and many other Saints to assist them.
At length perceiving no appearance of their lives safety, they addressed
themselves to S. Clare, and vowed to her, that if by her intercession they were
delivered, they would go all naked to their very shirtes, with their girdles
about their neck, to visit her sacred Relics at Assisium, each of them
carrying a wax light of two pound in their hands. This vow being made, they
savv three great lights descend from heaven, the one whereof settled upon the
forepart of the ship, another upon the poupe, and the third upon the pumpe, by
the virtue whereof the leakes where the water did enter was closed up, and the
sea became so quiet and calm, that with a gracious wind the vessel was
accompanied and safely conducted by the said lights to the port of Arestan,
where being arrived and landed, and the merchandise all safely put upon shore,
the said lights vanished, and (which was admirable) the ship presently sunk,
and was cast away: they which went out of her, acknowledging the miracle, and
at their return to Pisa devoutly accomshed their vow, yielding infinite shankes
to almighty God, and to the virgin S. Clare for the great benefit received by
her intercession.

How Saint Clare was canonized by the Pope Alexander the fourth.

CHAP. XXXII.
POPE Innocent the fourth lived so little time after the death of S. Clare,
that he could not Canonize her. The holy Sea having bin two years vacant,
Alexander the fourth was chosen Pope, who being exceedingly devoted, and a
friend to piety, protector of Religious, having heard true relation both of
the miracles, which our Lord Jesus Christ wrought for the glory of his holy
servant, and of the renown of her virtues, which daily more and more diuulged
themselves in the Church, knovving also that her Canonization was generally
desired, his Holiness being also induced by the assurance of so many miracles,
began therefore to treat in the Consistory of her Canonization.

Wherein to proceed more maturely, there were elected prudent and virtuous men
to examine the said miracles, and the irreprehensible life of the Saint: which
being done, and this holy virgin being found, and proved to have bin in her
life an unspotted mirror of all virtues, and to have been ennobled of Almighty
God after her death by true and approved miracles, the day of her Canonization
was appointed, when were present with his Holiness many Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, other Prelates, and a great number of Priests and Religious with
infinite noble men, Gentlemen and others, each in their degree and quality,
before whom the Pope proposed this sacred affayre, demanding the opinion of
the Prelates* who with one accord gave consent, and affectionatly besought that
the said Saint might be canonized in the Church, as Jesus Christ had glorified
her in heaven. In this sort then, three years after her happy decease, Pope
Alexander caused her solemnly to be enrolled in the Catalogue of Saints,
ordayning her feast to be celebrated with solemnity in the Church the 12. of
August. This Canonization was performed the year of grace 1255. and the first
of the reign of the Pope, to the praise and glory of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.

Here ends the life, and miracles of the glorious virgin S. Clare.
THE LIFE OF S. AGNES SISTER TO S. CLARE
How S. Agnes was by the holy F. S. Francis sent to Florence, there to build a
monastery.

CHAP. I.
THE virgin and espouse of our Redeemer Jesus Christ, Agnes, and true companion
of Saint Clare, as well in blood, as in virtue and Religion, perseuered and
persisted in notable sanctity of life in the monastery of S. Damian: and from
the time of her entrance into Religion, even to her death, she always wore a
very rough hairecloath next her tender skin. Her ordinary refection was almost
always bread and water, being naturally very pitiful to every one. S.
Francis finding this virgin to have obtained of God, by means and assistance
of her sister, a worthy perfection, he sent her to Florence, there to found a
new Monastery of poor Sisters called mount Caeli, whereof Saint Francis made
her Abbess.

This holy virgin induced many souls to abandon the world, and to serve Jesus
Christ, which she did by means of her pious conversation, and sanctity of
life, by holy discourses, and words of God, that sweeetly flowed out of her
mouth: and as a perfect contemner of transitory things, and follower of Jesus
Christ, she planted in this monastery (conformably to the desire of the holy
Father Saint Francis, and of S* Clare) the observance, and profession of
Evangelical poverty: but being exceedingly grieved with the absence of her
sister, she wrote this letter following unto her, and to all the Religious of
the monastery of S. Damian, wherein she had received her education, and
spiritual nourture.

A copy of the Letter, which S. Agnes wrote to her sister S. Clare, and to all
the other sisters of the monastery of S. Damian.

CHAP. II.
TO the venerable and beloved Mother in our Lord Christ Jesus, Clare, and to
all her Covent, humble sister Agnes, the least of the disciples of Jesus Christ
and of yours, commends herself unto you all, and prostrate at your feet,
does yield you al submission and devotion, wishing unto you what is most
precious from the most high King of Kings. To the end that all nature, which
has bin created of God, do acknowledge it self to be such, as it cannot
persist of it self in it own essence, the divine providence most prudently
permits, that when any one esteems himself to be in prosperity, then is
he drowned and plunged in adversities. This I tell you my most dear mother,
that you may know, what affliction and extreme heaviness possesses my spirit,
being so tormented, that hardly can I speak: and this because I am corporally
separated from you and my holy sisters, with whom I hoped to have happily
lived, and dyed in this world. So far is this my grief from slacking, that it
continually increases, which as it had a beginning, so do I believe it will
find no end in this world, for it is so continual, and familiar unto me, that
I greatly fear it will never forsake me.

I was persuaded that life and death should be a like, without power of any
separation upon earth, amongst them, who have one same conversation and life in
heaven, and must have one same sepulture: them I say, whom one same, equal
natural profession, and one same love has made sisters. But so far as I can
see, being abandoned and afflicted on each side, I am much mistaken. O my holy
sisters, I beseech you to be reciprocally grieved with me, and let us weep
together, being assured, that you shall never experience any dolor comparable
to that which I now feel, in being separated from them, with whom Jesus
Christ had conioined me. This grief tormenteth me incessantly, this fire
burns my heart continually, so that being on each side afflicted, I know not
what to think, neither does any hope remain, but to be assisted by your
prayers, that Almighty God easing this affliction, may make it tolerable unto
me.

O my most gracious Mother, what shall I do, and what shall I say, since I
know not that ever I shall see you more, or likewise my sisters? O that it were
lawful for me to utter unto you the conceits of my soul, as I would desire,
or that I could open my heart unto you upon this paper: then should you see the
lively and continual dolours that torment me: my soul burns interiourly,
being afflicted with an incessant fire of love; and my heart groaneth, sigheth,
and lamenteth with desire of your presence: mine eyes cannot have their fill of
weeping; and albeit I seek for some consolation against this bitterness, yet
can I find none* but every thing turns into grief, and much more, when I
consider the means to see you. I am intierly steeped in these anguishes,
having none that can comfort me in this life, but that I receive a little
consolation from the liberal hand of our Savior Jesus Christ, which causes
me to beseech you all to give thanks unto his divine majesty, for this favor
and mercy extended, toward me, and for that through his grace, I find such
concord peace, and charity in this Covent, as by words cannot be expressed;
these sisters having received me with exceeding love and devotion, yielding me
Obedience, with extraordinary promptitude and reverence.

They all with one accord recommend themselves to our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
you my Sister, and to all the sisters of the monastery: and I recommend my
self and them to your holy prayers, beseeching you as a mother to be mindful
of them, and of me, as of your daughters: and know you that they and I, will
all the days of our life, observe and keep your holy precepts and
aduertisements. Besides I desire you should know, that the Pope has accorded
to whatsoever I demanded of him, conformably to your intention and mine, and
particulerly in the matter you know; to wit, that we may not possess any thing
proper. I beseech you my most dear mother, to procure of the Reverent Father
General, that he often visit us, to comfort us in God, whose grace be with
your spirit. Amen.

Of an ecstasy of S. Agnes; and how S. Clare saw her thrice crowned by an Angel.

CHAP. III.
SAINT Clare in her last sickness obtained, that her sister Saint Agnes might
come to see her in the monastery of S. Damian, to keep her company during the
few days she had to live: and so S. Agnes bauing left her Covent, well
grounded in Religion and sanctity, she came to Assisium, where Saint Clare
being one night in prayer apart from her sister, she nevertheless saw her, being
also in prayer, lifted from the earth, and an Angel to crown her thrice with
so many several crowns. The day following she demanded of her sister, what
prayer or conte^platio^ she had made the night past: but she of humility
unwilling to manifest her prayer, being at length enforced by Obedience, made
her this relation: I considered the great goodness, and patience of Almighty
God, whereby he supporteth such enormous offenses of sinners; which I considered
with a deep sorrow and compassion: then I thought, and yet do think of the
love, which almighty God bears to sinners, and how he endured death to save
them thirdly I considered, and do consider, and am with compassion exceedingly
afflicted for the souls in purgatory, and their great torments, and because
they cannot help themselves, I asked mercy for them of the most sacred wounds
of our Redeemer Jesus Christ.

How S. Agnes sent S. Clares veyle to the monastery of Florence, and of her
death and translation to Saint George in Assisium, with all her Religious into
a new Covent.

CHAP. IIII.
AFTER the death of S Clare, Saint Agnes sent her black veyle, which she did
ordinarilv wear, to the poor Religious of Mount Cae^i, which she had founded
at Florence, which she did, in regard of her great amity toward them, and
that they might inherit some Relics of S. Clare for their comfort and
devotion, That veyle is yet in the said monastery, where it is so carefully
preserved, that in substance and color it seems still new. There is likewise
to be seen in the same monastery a cloak of S. Francis, by which Relics our
Lord works many miracles. A little after the death of S. Clare, S. Agnes also
desired to be present at the marriage of the lamb, whither she was invited:
but she first received the consolation, which S. Clare had promised her, that
before she departed out of this life, she should see her Spouse Jesus Christ,
as a taste of the eternal felicityes, whereto she was to be elevated, and
conducted by her sweet spouse Christ Jesus. She dyed the 56, year of her age,
replenished with perfect sanctity; and being delivered out of this prison, she
went to possess the Kingdom with Angels, and the holy virgins, that had bin
consecrated to Jesus Christ, in which glory these two sisters, and daughters of
Sion, companions in heaven by nature and grace, do praise God without end.

There assembled a great multitude of people upon the death of S. Agnes, and
they with great devotion ascended with a ladder the monastery of Saint Damian,
hoping thereby to receive some spiritual consolation of sanctity, but it
happened that the chain which held the ladder did slip, so that all those, who
were upon it, fell down one upon another, which made a great noise and clamor
by those who were hurt; and having with a strong faith inuocated S. Agnes, were
all cured. The said holy virgin was interred at S. Damian, but afterward was
transported into the Church of S George, where she still remains together
with her sister in Assisium, by the which Church the Citizens have builta
fair monastery entitled Saint Clare, whither were afterward removed the
Religious sisters of S. Damian: which was done to prevent many inconveniences,
that might arrive unto the being without the City. The said Religious brought
from S Damian many Relics, and perticularly the Crucifix, which spoke to S.
Francis, at the beginning of his conversion, which is extant in the said
monastery of S. Clare: and the Friars Minors are at S. Damian.

Of many miracles wrought by Almighty God, through the merits of S. Agnes.

CHAP. V.
A Girl of Perusia had a cancred fistula in her throat, who having devotion
to S. Agnes, visited her sepulcher. The Religious there having unbound her
soar, at the entry of the Covent and then having with a strong faith' offered
her prayers, she arose sound, and returned to her house exceedingly comforted,
yielding thanks to God, and to his servant.

There was a Religious sister at our Lady of Angels of Perusia, who had a
mortal soar in her breast, which the Physicians had judged to be incurable;
in it there were three holes, so that the Religious women exhorted her to bear
this affliction with patience, as proceeding from the hand of God, and to
conform herself to his divine will. This diseased sister being always of
mind to recommend herself to S. Agnes, kneeling one day before the Altar, she
with much devotion commended herself to the holy servant of God, demanding
of her redress of her infirmity, vvherewithall falling falling into a gentle
and sweet slumber, Saint Agnes appeared unto her, and with her hand touched her
mortal wound, with which visitatio^ she was sweetly comforted, and cured; and
at her awaking finding herself sound, she gave infinite thanks to God, and to
her advocate S. Agnes.

Another Religious woman of the monastery of Venice, had an impostume in her
breast, which was opened by the Physicians, and found so dangerous, that they
allotted her a very little time to live. This poor sister therefore in this
diftresse, recommended herself to the two sisters, S. Clare and Saint Agnes,
and about midnight these two Saints, as most skillful physicians, brought boxes
of most precious ointments, and accompanied with many virgins entered into the
Infirmary, where this sick sister was, who were seen by many Religious, and
drawing near to her bed, Saint Clare said unto her: Sister, Be you assured
that you shall be cured by the power and goodness of God, and by the meritts of
Saint Agnes. The sick Religious not knovving who spoke unto her, doubted of
this revelation: and the Saints replied, that they were Physicians of
Assisium: then Saint Agnes anointed the soars with the ointment she had
brought, and so the vision disappeared, and the diseased sister was in such
sort cured of her mortal wound, that no appearance remained thereof.

Another Religious of the monastery of Saint Clave in Assisium, had been for
sixteen year together afflicted with such an infirmity, that the other
Religious held her for a lepar. This diseased creature besought S. Agnes to
pray to the Virgin of heaven for her recovery. and this prayer being performed
with a vow, the Religious was incontinently cured, and freed from all remainder
of her infirmity.

A Burgess of Assisium had been long time lame by the blow of a stone received
upon his foot, and being hopelesle of humane remedy, upon the feast of S.
Agnes, he went so well as he could to her Church, and with strong faith and
devotion fell upon his knees before her Altar. His prayer being ended, he arose
sound, and lusty, which he recounted to many, and thanked almighty God for it.

A Painter called Palmero being in a dangerous sickness, and by the physicians
given over as dead, one night after his speech was lost, his brother expecting
in his opinion his last breathing, was exceedingly disquieted, and coming to
his bed side, and lamenting him as already dead, he fell upon his knees,
addressed his prayers to S. Agnes, and with abundance of tears and great
confidence made a vow, that if his Brother by her meritts and intercession
might be cured, so often as he painted her image, he would set a Crown of gold
upon her head. This prayer and vow being ended, the sick party incontinently
began to speak, as if he had awakened out of a profound sleep, and called for
meat, and did hungerly eat, then arose from his bed, saying, that two
Religious women came to visit him being in his agony, and reputed for dead, and
that the same visitation had such force, as it left him perfectly cured, as he
appeared.

A woman of Assisium had a son of 12. years old that had an impostume in
his breast, where the canker was so increased, that it made it in such sort
venomous, as it exceeded the Physicians skill to cure it: this woman having
understood, that by the meritts of Saint Agnes, Almighty God had cured such
diseases, she commanded her son often to visit her sepulcher, and devoutly
to recommend himself unto her: which he did in such sort, that approaching one
evening so near her selpulcher, that his mortal soar touched the same, and
there falling a sleep, he so remained till the next morning, when awaking he
found himself intierly cured: for which having thanked God and his Saint, he
returned to advertise his mother, affirming that S. Clare, and Saint Agnes
appeared unto him in the night, and that S. Clare brought an ointment, where
with Saint Agnes having anointed him, he was presently cured.

Of possessed persons delivered by the merits of S. Agnes: and of certain
other miracles.

CHAP. VI.
THERE was a child of 12. years old in Assisium, who playing among other
children, an unknown man gave him a green bean codde, which the boy
opening, three of the beans fell to the ground, and the fourth only he did
eat, yet so soon as he came home, he vomited extremely, then began to
tumble, and furiously so behave himself, turning and rouling his eyes in his
head in such sort, as it well appeared, that he endured extreme torment: and
his gesture so terrifyed them who beheld him, that they judged him possessed:
and therefore his Father, and many other of his kindred brought him the next
morning to the Church of Saint Clare, where having offered their prayers for
him, and inuocated the intercession of S. Agnes, the child a little after began
to cry, and bark as a dog, then cried out, Take heed, there are two Devils
already gone out, say one Aue Maria, and the third will be gone, which being
presently done, the Devil withal left the child.

A woman of Fullinium, being tormented with many wicked spirits, her Father and
grandmother vowed to go with her to Assisium, to visit the sepulcher of S.
Agnes, with faith and hope, that by her merits she should be delivered, and so
this possessed woman remaining before the sepulcher of the Saint, from the
ninth hour til euensong, she felt herself freed from the Devils that
possessed her. This was done upon the feast of S. Francis* the kindred of this
delivered woman offered an image of wax weighing two pounds, to the sepulcher
of the Saint, in acknowledgement of the grace and favor received.

A man of Perusia with a continual fever had in his body an impostume, whereof
the physicians gave their judgment, he would in short time end his days;
wherefore a woman called Celiola, admonished him to recommend himself to Saint
Agnes, and to vow the visiting of her sepulcher; which having done, and his
prayers ended, his infirmity ended withal, being cured both of the one, and
the other disease; for which not being ungrateful, he visited the said
sepulcher, and every where preached the praises of the holy virgin, giving
thanks to Almighty God for such a favor.

A Religious woman of the monastery of S. Clare in Assisiu^, had lost the sight
of one eye, and was in danger to loose the other, but finding that no humane
application did avail her, she recommended herself to Saint Agnes, and the
other Religious of her monastery also prayed for her, who as she one time
prayed in the Church, saw a woman, that came to her and said: sister open your
eye, for your sight is recovered: and so opening her eye she clearly saw, but
she could no more see the woman that spoke unto her* only she was assured that
it was S. Agnes, to whom she had heartily recommended herself.

Vitula the wife of Matthew de Loupe at S. Francis gate in Assisium, had a
son called Martin, that had a deep soar in his throat, and another in his
shoulder, both mortal, whence issued such an offensive savor, that it was not
possible to come near him. At length after many remedies had in vain bin
tried, his mother recommended him to S. Agnes, to whom having with a devout
heart offered her prayers, the Saint one night appeared unto her richly attyred
with a diadem of gold upon her head, and a branch of Lilly in her right hand,
and said unto her: My daughter disquiet not thy self for thy son, for he
shall be cured, and delivered from peril; which this woman having heard, she
arose full of comfort, and went to the monastery of S. Clare, and recounted
this apparition to the Abbess and the Religious: then she heard Mass, which
being ended, the Religious showed to the Mother and the Son the sacred
Relics of the Saint, and at the instant her Son was cured of the impostume
in his throat only. After that, Saint Agnes appeared to him in vision,
together with another woman, who brought a violl full of ointment Saint Agnes
then said to the child, my Son how do you? whereto he answered: I am by the
meritts of Saint Agnes cured of the impostume in my throat, but that which is
upon my shoulder procures me extreme affliction. The Saint replied, I will
cure this, as I did the other in thy throat: then she unbound the said
^^postume, took of the plaster, and cast it upon the ground; then applied
thereto the ointment, which her companion had brought, and instantly the child
was perfectly cured. When his mother came to see him, she found the playsters,
upon the ground, and her Son sound and lusty, who particulerly recounted
unto her the said vision, which afterward was generally diuulged. This
happened in the year 1350.

The end of the life of Saint Agnes.
THE LIFE OF ANOTHER S. AGNES, WHO WASDaughter to the King of Bohemia, and
Religious of the Order of S. Clare.
CHAP. I.
IN the beginning of this Religious Order, there was another Virgin besides the
precedent called Agnes, as illustrious in sanctity, as in blood, for she was
daughter to the King of Bohemia, who promised her in marriage to the Emperor
Frederike: and this holy virgin having heard the worthy reputation of S. Clara
who then lived, by such as came from Rome and Assisium, being inspired of God,
she besought the King her Father, to give her leave, to serve rather a
celestial then a terrestrial spouse. But the King knowing that he could not
recall his word, and that whatsoever excuse he should allege to break this
marriage, the Emperor would sinisterly interpret, he utterly denied her. Now
the virgin having found the drift and cause of this denial, assured her
Father, that if he would accord to whatsoever she demanded, she would
undertake, the that Emperor should condescend thereunto, presuming confidently
upon the favor of Jesus Christ.

She knew well to deliver herself from many other allegations with so good a
grace, and with such persuasiue terms that she purchased her Fathers consent
to what she desired, without further seeking, the approbation of the Emperor;
whereupon this Princess presently sent for certain Friars Minors of Magnes,
where they had a Covent, who coming to her, did shortly after consecrate unto
God this Royal plant, with many other gentlewomen of great families in
Bohemia, to whom they gave the habit of Religion, instructing them in the life
and Rule of S. Clare. The King desiring to assign a good pension, and to
bestow upon the Monastery where his daughter was, a good rereuenew, to supply
the necessities thereof, she formally withstood him, purposing to live and dye
poor, and to be maintained by alms, conformably to her rule, rigorously
observing the intention of the holy Father Saint Francis, and Saint Clare, in
the vow of poverty, which is yet to this day in the same manner observed in the
said Monastery, which is in Prague, the chiefest City in the Kingdom of
Bohemia: and this foundation laid by this holy Princess, has always bin
furnished with gentlewomen.

Now the Emperor understanding that his promised Love had abandoned the world,
he was at the first apprehension exceedingly troubled; but considering with
more maturity, that she had not forsaken him to take another man, but for Jesus
Christ himself, he was at length satisfied, contented, and comforted.

S. Clare being advertised of all that this Princess had done, and of her life
and perfection, who also had written, and expressly sent a messenger, to
acknowledge obedience unto her, as to her mother and mistress, auouching
herself her humble disciple; S. Clare answered her by a letter filled with
much fervor and consolation, and sent her in token of amity, and good will, a
girdle, a veyle, a cup of wood, and a dish wherein the Saint herself
accustomed to eat, and many like small things, which the holy Princess with
great devotion accepted. Our Lord wrought many miracles by the said Relics,
which ever afterward were kept in the said Monastery, with very great devotion
and Reverence.

The renown of this Princess being diuulged over all Germany, there were
founded many monasteries of poor Religious in her imitation, which were filled
with many daughters of Princes, Duks, Earls, and other great Lords, and
gentlemen of that Country, who in imitation of Saint Clare, and the said
Princess Agnes abandoned the world, and the vanities thereof, and espoused,
for eternity, Jesus Christ, serving him alone in poverty, and in humility. This
Saint Agnes of Bohemia being illustrated by many virtues and miracles, having
assembled an infinite number of Religious in diverse Couents, and having
perseuered with them in all perfection of virtue, she left this transitory
world, to take eternal possession of her glorious celestial Spouse Christ
Jesus, who honored her, and made her blessed, as he has manifested by mamany
miracles, which he has wrought by her great merits and intercessio^s. The
Emperor Charles the fourth, who was also King of Bohemia, was two several
times delivered from death by the intercession of this celestial Princess,
and therefore at his death he enjoined his Son VVenceslaus, and successor to
the Empire, to procure her Canonization, but he was hindered by important, and
continual troubles and affairs, that disabled him to execute the pious and
just desires of his Father.

Of many other Religious, that flourished primitiuely in the Order of Saint
Clare.

CHAP. II.
THERE was another holy Religious of the royal blood of Polonia called Salome,
whose sanctity was manifested by by diverse miracles, which God wrought after
her death. She by her merits delivered women from peril of death in travel of
child, many lame were restored to the use of their lymmes, blind recovered
sight, and wounded persons were cured.

A holy Religious of Padua, called Helena, flourished in great perfection of
life in the monastery which was builded by the Seraphicall Father S. Francis,
and in which the blessed Father S. Antony of Padua yielded his spirit unto
Almighty God. This holy Religious living in that place, after she had there
obtained of God many virtues, she was tried by Jesus Christ, and refined as
gold in the furnace of afflictions; for she kept her bed deprived of all
corporal force, yea and of her speech for fifteen years, during all which
time, she ordinarily demonstrated by signs and gestures an exceeding great
alacrity and joy in her heart.

Our Lord reueiled many things to this Saint, which she manifested to the
Religious, who seriously recorded the same to be known to posterity. The said
Religious being demanded how the sick Religious sister could make them
understand those words, since she could not speak, they answered that
themselves then observed so strict a silence, that they opened their
necessities by signs, which were well understood among them, for expressing
whatsoever they desired to have known. And in this had they understood the
said Saint, whose body for many years after, the said Religious sisters did
show to such, as in devotion repaired to see it, remaining entiere, and
incorruptible, yea her nails and hair did grow, as if she had been living.

By her merits God wrought many miracles, and particulerly upon the Lord
Marquess of Parma, who was of the family of Lupi called Boniface, who being in
the anguish of death, his Lady making a vow to this Saint Helene for his
health, it was perfectly restored unto him.

In the beginning of the Order of Saint Clare, there was also a daughter of the
King of Hungary called Cuiga, sister unto blessed S. Elizabeth the widow, who
having taken the habit, and made profession fession of the rule of S. Clare,
became so famous after the death of S. Elizabeth in sanctity and miracles, both
during her life, and at her death, that her Canonization is treated of at Rome.

FINIS.

