THE School of Horsmanship.

Wherein is discovered what skill and knowledge is required in a good
Horseman, practiced by perfect experience. And also how to reform any restie
horse, of what nature and disposition so ever. Briefly touching the knowledge
of the Breeder, Sadler, Smith, and the Horseleach.

WITH A STRANGE AND rare invention how to make a new kind of rack, and how to
teach a Horse to lie upon his belly until the Rider take his back.

By Christ. Clifford. Gent.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Bible.

1585.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Philip Sidney, Knight.
SIR, I have written of late, not by reading, but on mine own experience, a
conference and discourse about the training of horses, and curing of their
diseases, wherein albeit I dare profess to teach a readier and better way in
training horse for service and travail, than has been either yet set down of
any, or put in practice by the delicate professors of this Art, yet my
intention was not further then to serve the private use of my private friends,
till at the last I offered it to the ce^sure of a certain honorable Gentleman,
whose singular good judgment and great experience in this matter I have ever
esteemed above al others, who liked so well of this my labor, that he not only
thought good it should be printed for the common use and profit of our Country,
but also vouchsaft by setting of his hand to testify the same. Whereupon I have
consented to the printing of it, and so have made it come to light under the
good protection and countenance of your W. both because of your great knowledge
and experience in Horsemanshippe, and in all other virtues, whereby ye draw to
you the hearts of every one that knows you, and also for your special
courtesy showed unto me: and therefore I have thus far presumed, til occasion of
further service may occur to present you with other flowers or fruits of my
experience, which is the only compass, rule, and square of this discourse.
Humbile requesting that ye excuse or pardon the homely style and tenor of
this conference, either because that true experience do need no ornament of
words, or other ways because I am unlettered and have not Rethoricke at
commandment. Which if it please you to accept after the ordinary of your
countenance, I mean to enter further in other new and rare Ingins for war,
all of my own invention and experience. And thus I end, beseeching God to
bless your life with all increase of Honor.

Your most humble to command, Christopher Clifford.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, thou shall find many things in this work placed out of order,
for that I have lacked time and am unlettered, neither have been able to keep
any servant whom I might command to write when I would, which has been the
cause that I have left out many notable things in this work, which thou shall
have hereafter, God sparing me life and ability thereunto. Perhaps some
curious riders may find fault with my homely kind of teaching, for ye, I set
not down how they should teach their horses to coruet, nor how to torment the^
vainlie with a chain or cauiso^, which is one of the principal causes that they
make their horses restie runawaies, and hard mouthed, but my intent is not to
teach any of them which make their horses more fit to dance on a carpet, then
for any other kind of service, but only to teach those, whose noble minds
delights in arms, and to have their horses made for service and travail,
which is the thing whereunto God has ordained that beast. Clifford take heed
what you do, will you speak against the chain and coruetting of horses? Me
think that shows in you small skill in riding, since they are both used
throughout all Christendom. I know that this shall be the objection of those,
that either knows not the difference between the snaffle and the chain, or
else ye will know it for no other cause, but that they will after an obstinate
manner maintain it to be good, because they would differ from others in order
of riding, and the reason why it is naught, is, that being once buckled to the
horses head, as they usually do, or drawn close, it does grieve the horse
continually, as ^^ll when he does well as when he does err, in such (...)
that the horse not understanding the cause of his needless grief, falls
into a number of disorders. And ye first reason why it is naught to teach a
horse to coruet, is, because it does greatly weaken his back and loins. The
second, it is a most cruel torment to a man in arms, for that a number of
i^des being given to coruet by nature, and used thereunto, will many times
fall a coruetting when his rider would not have him: and the third and last
reason why it is naught, is, for that when you would encounter your enemy at
hand strokes with your sword, these mistaught i^des will fall a dancing, which
is a thing very dangerous, in fighting with one horse against another, for ye
he never stands surely, and therefore is in peril to be thrown down or
else to give the riders back to the enemy; which is no less danger than his
life is worth: but gentle Reader, I have not spoken this either of envy or
malice against any particular person, for I protest before God and the world,
that I have ever been of that opinion, that he is unworthy of credit either
in ar(...) or common wealth, that is not so void of envy and malice, that he
shall take a thousand times more delight in pardoning of his enemies, than to be
revenged of them, and for proof hereof, I do not only give free leave to
all you to amend what so ever you find ami^^ in my work without any respect
of me, but only in respect to profit this our Country, and also that you do
reprove me either by your gentle admotions, or by your letters, of all such
things as you shall find by your own experience to be amiss, and I will
assure you that I shall receive it thankfully at your hands.

Thus leaving to trouble thee any longer (gentle ^^^der) until better
opportunity he offered me to accomplish my promise above said, I bid thee
most heartily farewell.

C. Clifford.

Sir John Tracie Knight, in commendation of this Book.
IF Xenophon deserude immortal fame,
Or Grysons glory from earth to sky did reach,
If Carociolus gainde a worthy princely name,
Whose Books the Art of Horsemanship do teach:
Then Cliffords praise what pen or tongue can tell,
Whose pains herein, their works does far excel.
For who delight in gallant steeds does take,
To gallop them, or how coruet they must,
Or he that seeks the fiercest colt to make,
In brauest sort, to stop, and manage just,
By this thy Book shall gain his whole intent,
Adornde with Art and Skill most excellent.
His rare conceits in this his Book he shows
How stubborn Iades reformed ought to be:
And all diseases, which by experience he knows
How them to cure, you may both learn and see:
The Sadler, and the Smith of thee may find their skill,
So in their Art thou do reform their ill.
What honors then to Martial minds are due,
What recompense is made for worthy pains,
What thanks or gifts do Virtue still ensue,
And what rewards both Art and Skill obtaines,
The same to thee for this thy good desert,
Both strangers, friends, and country will impart.
John Tracie Knight.

The contents of this Book.
ALL the principal points belonging to a good horsman, most plainly taught,
according to my true experience, which I have well approved and tried by the
space of 30. years, that is to say, of the Breeder, the Rider, Keeper, and the
Sadler, of the Horseleach and Smith. Where, in the beginning you shall find
certain brief notes necessary to be observed of the Breeder. In the first
Book you shall find the Art of Riding, with a treatise how to use your hand
upon the bridle and cauison, so plainly taught, that it is not possible for
any man of reason that is willing to learn this Art, but that he may make any
horse ready, of what nature or disposition soever he be, and after an easier
manner than has been heretofore taught by any man. The second Book shows to
reform al kinds of restie horses, or hard mouthed runawaies, both easly and
plainly. The third Book entreats of the Kepers office, how to make your
stable with a standing rack, that there may no dust fall, neither on the horses
mane, nor on his head, a most rare invention: Also it teaches you how to diet
your horse, both when you travel and exercise him: And how to master all
those horses that will bite their Keepers, or leap on them with their
forefeet, at such time as they lead them in their hands, or that the Rider
would take their backs. The fourth Book entreats of the Sadlers office, how
he should make his saddle, and what kind of saddle is best, both for service
and travel: And also how every souldior may carry both his headpeece, and
pistol, in such sort as it shall not trouble him any more than if he had
nothing at al at his saddle: Also it teaches how to make your headstall, to
serve in steed of a collar, when you travel any journey, or that you are in
service, a thing very necessary to be learned of al soldiers: It teaches
you also ^ow to make your cauison, curb, and diverse other necessary (...)tions
very needful to be used of the Rider. The fifth Book teaches how to cure your
horse of so many diseases as I have in all my life had experience of. The sixth
and last Book shows how you should shoo^ your horse: and how to make that
horse that has evil feet, to have good hoofes in very short space.

Cliffords experience and opinion of breeding of Coltes, and what Stalians and
Mares are best to breed upon, and also what ground is best to breed an horse in.
Of the Stalian.
THe Stalian would be large of body, for that we see most commonly the Coltes
to follow the Stalian in bigness, although they be begotten of little Mares, or
of Mares a great deal less than the Stalian. Let him also be of good color,
of good courage, well made: and above all things, see he be sound, and well
marked, and that he be gentle, and of an approved durablenesse in travel: and
as touching his color, there is none evil that has all his outward parts
black, that is to say, his legs, tail, and mane, tippes of ears, and his
mouzel: nor none good that has all his body of one color, sa^e the black
and white: but the black is the best of the two (...)urs last named. And above
al things see he have good hoofes, that is to say, that they be little, and
round, and hollow: for broad footed, long footed, and narrow heeled iades are
nothing worth when they come to service or travel: for in service the broad
foot will never keep a sh^^ long, and in travel they will all be lame. But if
your m^re have very good hoofs, then the Stalian with evil hoofes shall be
more tolerable: And as touching his age, the younger and lustier he is, the
better: for I have seen an horse of four years of age get so good a colt, as
an horse that was eight years of age. I have also ridd(...) ^n horse of the
Marshall Byrones, begotten of a Turkish Stalian that was 24. years of age, and
I never found in all my life a better horse both for travel and service.

As touching your mares that you mind to breed upon, the larger they are, the
better: but if you chance to have any young mares that you mind to breed upon,
take heed that you first make them to be rid and handled the 3. year, and
that you put not them to the horse til they be 4. years of age, and it shall be
good to handle them gently, and to let them have daily erercise in some
moderate travel, for if you let them stand long still, you shall greatly weaken
their bodies, and by sudden and extreme traveling of them after long rest, al
fill them full of diseases, so as they shall be very unprofitable for a race:
for it is not possible to breed sound colts, upon unsound mares and Stalians.
Let them also be of good shape and color: but the shape is much more to be
taken heed of, than the color, for that it is much helped by the Stalian, and
when you would put them to the horse, the best way is, in my judgment, to let
the^ run together at grass for the space of a month at the least. And see that
your mares have no shoes on their hinder feet, for fear of hurting your
Stalian, and let not your Stalian be too fat, and he would also be traveled a
journey before you turn him out, to the end that he may be weary, so shall he
not ouer-heat himself at the first: and the best time of the day to turn him
out, is, in the morning fasting very early before the heat of the day, and
afterward, when he has heated himself, the warmnes of the Sun shall come, by
means whereof he shall not take any cold: if he drive him self into any heat,
it shall be good to cause a boy to follow him up and down, so as he may not rest
till he be thoroughly cold. It shall not be amiss before that you turn your
mares and Stalian together, to try whether they will stand still or not to the
horse, by offering them some other nag or stoned jade, and if you see they
stand still, the^ are they not in horsing: yet have I seen some iades, being
mad on horsing that would strike the Stalian, and yet after they had been a
little weary, would stand still enough. But if you have more such convenient
ground, than may you let your Stalian serve your mares, either in the hand, or
else in some large barn or close court. But you must put them together early
in the morning, and late at night, and see ye your Stalian be not too full for
fear of hurting himself, and let him be well prouendred.

How to weane your Colts.
PVt them so far from your mares as they cannot one hear another, into some
warm ground, where there is good store of long and sweet grass, and til they
be two years of age it shall be good to feed them all the winter with fine
haie abroad: for by keeping your coltes at house in the winter, you shall mar
them for lack of exercise. For there is not any one thing more enemy to
health both for man and beast, whether he be young or old, than the lack of
such exercise as shall be most agreeing with the quality of his age and
strength. But if it be in such part of England, as the snow lies upon the
ground a month or six weeks together, it shall not be amiss to take the^
into the house all the night to let them eat: but in the day time I would have
you turn them abroad, even from morning till night, but it were much better to
make a house in the field, and place a double rack in the middle thereof: but
see that you paue such on house, or gravel it: for if you plancke it, it shall
be very dangerous for marring your colts, by slyding thereon: and if you paue
it not, it shall be al myrie, which is very naught for your colts hoofs and
legs, for the drier that they go, and the harder that the ground is, the
sounder shall your horse be. It shall be good also the first Summer that your
colts be weined, that is to say, when they are a year old and the vantage,
that if you shall perceive by going in good pasture ye they shall wax very fat,
then it shall not be amiss to eat the pasture shorter with more cattle, or
else to put them in such ground as they may travel something more to fill their
bellies. This order shall you observe the first two years, but the third year
it shall be good to put them in some such high ground and short pasture, that
they may travel almost the whole day before they fill their bellies, and take
heed that they have trees or hedges to shadow them in in the heat of the
day, and also to defend them from the cold in winter: and when you perceive
them something pinched with the cold, you may give them straw and chafe to
eat until it be the beginning of March at the least, then it shall be good to
take them into the house for the space of a month, or six weeks, and give them
straw to eat, and chafe, with a very little proue^der in it. But if you have
no chafe, the^ it shall be good to give the^ two parts of chopped straw, and but
one part of oats, and when you have made them gentle to be dressed, it shall be
good to lead them to the water, first with a double cloth girded with a
surcingle, and after that they will go gently, you may saddle them, and lead
them to the water, with the stirroppes loose, beating against their sides, but
take heed ye all the while they stand in the stable, you lay litter enough under
the^ for fear of sliding: and after you have made them gentle to go with the
saddle, it shall be good to turn them abroad every day when it is dry weather
at 9. of the clock til 3. at afternoon into some field or large court nigh to
the stable. If at any time after they are thoroughly acquainted with the stable,
they come not home of themselves, fetch the^ not til through hunger they be
glad to come. By this means you shall defend your horses when they are young from
sickness and diseases, through exercising themselves on this wise, so as when
they come to travel, they shall be sound and durable horses: By this ye I have
said, I would have said, that til your coltes b^ 2. years of age, you neither
let them suffer hunger nor cold, but that you so nourish the^ as you see good
breeders nourish their weaning calves, and the 3. and 4. Summer and winter, let
the^ fare somewhat harder than they did the 2. first years, and the 3. winter I
would have you offer the^ no hard meat, til they be glad to eat straw and
chafe, and that you give the^ no other thing ye year nor ye 4. winter neither,
til such time as you take the^ up: but it shall be good the 4. winter to
exercise them sadled with a pole or long staff, without any man on his back,
as shall be hereafter more plainly taught.

At what age it is best to take up a colt to ride him, and at what time of the
year I may take up my horse to have him most gentle, and also to make him a
good stable horse, and to eat his hard meat well.
Clifford. I Would not have you to back any horse until he be 4. years of
age and eight months at the least, by ye that I have told, I would have told
you that it is not good to take up any horse to ride, til he be over 4. years
of age so far into the 5. Winter, ye he has been glad to eat straw and chafe
the space of one month at the least abroad before you take him up into the
house, and also ye you perceive him some thing to loose his flesh. And you
shall not have made this horse thus bred and of this age, when he comes to six
years of age, not only so ready as if you had taken him up at three and the
vantage, or at four, but also he shall be worth when you have need 15. of
those horses that you shall back at the former age.


Kingdon. If I let mine horse be almost 5. years of age before I back him, he
shall become so strong and stubburn as no man shall be able to handle him, and
also if I let him go abroad till he be glad to feed upon straw and chafe, he
shall become lean, therefore I would think it much better to take up mine
horse in the beginning of Winter before he loose his flesh.


Clifford. Where thou say thy horse will become stubburne, thou art deceived,
for by trotting him sadled with a long pole the third and fourth winter, every
second day, so long as he shall stand in the stable, in such order as shall be
hereafter taught, thou shall make him so gentle as thou would wish: and
thou say he shall become lean, and that thou think it better to take him
up at the beginning of winter, this is a dream me thinks indeed of an
unskillful man, but I will not feed thee with vain things, but with experience
grounded upon reason: for if thou take up thy horse in the beginning of winter,
before he have tasted of any hardness, thou shall never make him a good
stable horse, for whiles the grass is better then haie, it is not possible
that he should eat haie well, but after the substance of the grass is gone, so
that it nourishes so little as good straw or chafe, and that the horse will
feed thereupon very well, then it is time to take him up and not before, for
there is no other reason to be found why our horses should not eat straw, but
that we take them up while they are so greasy fat and idle by feeding them in
deep pasturs where they may fill their bellies in two or three hours feeding,
whereas in deed it were a great deal better after they be two years of age to
let them go in such pasture, as they must travail almost half the day before
they can fill their bellies. And whereas thou say they shall become lean, I
warrant thee they shall become never a whit the worse therefore, for although
thou ride him every second day gently, so that he sweat not, thou shall
within one month after he comes to the house, by feeding him with good straw
and reasonable store of prouender have fully recovered the former loss, which
shall redound to thy double gain, for that he shall ever after be a good stable
horse, that if he lack meat at any time, ye shall see him eat his litter
with greater appetite than our dainty dieted iades bred as we usually do
here in England, shall eat the best haie that you can give them.


The first Chapter of this Book, of the School of Horsemanship, treats how
to back a young horse, at the first.
Kingdon. I Pray you teach me in what order I shall saddle, bridle, and back
my horse at the first.


Clifford. AS soon as he is gentle to be dressed, saddle him, and lead him to
the water, and so being sadled, with the styrrops beating loose on his sides,
and when he will go gently therewith, lead him to the Smithes, and shoe him
before you do any thing with him. That being done, bridle him with a snaffle,
brake, or trench, which would not be rough, and also without players, for fear
of hurting his mouth. Then may you bring him to a block, and offer to take his
back, which if he refuse, then tie a long pole, staff, or pike, fast to the
^ies of your brake, which would have a hole in the end for that purpose, make
also a hole in the other end, in the which you (...) put a strong piece of
cord, for to hold him by. This being done, get thee in some good ground, and
let a footeman or two, if n^^de be, set hands in the cord, which you may make
fast in the end of the foresaid staff, which being done, let them stand still,
and let a footeman lead the horse close by the head, round about the foresaid
two footmen five or six times, first on the one hand, and then on the other,
to the end you may mark out a ring unto him, which you may do, by reason of
the staff, which will keep him of a just distaunce from your foresaid two
footmen, who must always stand still without moving out of their places.
That being done, let the footeman go from him, and force him to trot, first on
the one hand, and then on the other, until such time as he will be content to
let you take his back. Then shall you take his back if he be four years and a
half of age, if he be but four, then shall you exercise him in this sort
twice in the week, for the space of six months, without any man on his
back: with the which exercise you shall not only make your horse strong, and
disposed, but also, by raining him on the saddle bow, and by tying two cords
to the buckles of his fore girt, and to the eyes of his watring bit or brake,
you shall make him rain well, and carry his head steadie, and also trotte so
bravely, as though he were ridden: by this means you shall make your horse to
trot your ring, (your six months being expired) even the first day that you
back him, so perfectly, as though he had been ridden every day: yea, and he
shall be so well acquainted with this lesson, that you shall see him gallop it,
both pleasauntly and bravely, even of him self, yea, and by that time your
horse comes to be six years of age, you shall have made him as ready as
though you had begun to ride him at three years and the vauntage: and he
shall be better than three of those which shall be marred by riding them too
young, for in the world it is not possible to find a better horse than ours,
if they were not marred by riding them to young, of the which thing, I have had
good experience, in a bay horse, which her Majesty gave to Mounsieur at his
being in England, which horse I have seen march from morning til night, with a
man on his back, with such courage and countenance, that all the men of arms
(the King of France being there) with their Turkey horses, Hungarians, Poles,
Frisons, and Flaunders horses, and also with their Coursers, and Ienets, could
never do the like: which foresaid horse, I have seen far to surpass them all
in any travail or exercise ye he might be put unto, which is not only my
judgment and opinion, but also I heard all the Captains and Riders, to
affirm the same, and they would oftentimes say unto me, that we Englismen
knew not how good our horses were: for if we did, we would never seek horses
of Spain and Italy.


Kingdon. Why shall I thus trot my horse with a pole, rather than with a cord?


Clifford. Because that he may hang him self by his legs sooner in the cord
than in the pole, besides that, you cannot hold him from coming upon you, nor
guide him so right in his rings: yea, I have diverse times trotted a young
horse, in this order without any man on his back, til he has been so perfect,
that at the first backing he has trotted his ring so orderly, as though he had
been ridden half a year, by the which means I did much strengthen my horse,
of the which thing thou must have a special care, if thou will be a good
horseman, not to decrease his strength, but rather increase the same.


Kingdon. This by the way, but to the purpose, my horse being four years of
age and a half, and I being mounted, what lesson shall I give him first?


Clifford. First you shall ride him forth right in some lane, or deep high way,
so far as shall be agreeable with his strength. And riding him once every day in
this sort, so long til he will let you mount and descend gently, and also take
his way readily, which, when he will do, it shall be enough to ride him once
in two days, for the space of one month.


Kingdon. Why shall I ride my horse forth right, and not rather in a ring?


Clifford. For that your horse being faint and unacquainted with travel, your
ring turn shall be too great a travel for him at the first, and shall too too
much weaken and discourage him, but after you have exercised him as before, he
shall be become so strong therewith, that his ring turns will not be so
grievous unto him, as they would have been at the first by the one half.


The second Chapter treats of the horses lessons, and at what time of the
day it is best to teach him.
Kingdon. Having taught me to make my horse gentle, I would also have you
teach me at what time of the day it is best to ride him, and also what lessons
he has to learn.


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, I answer, that it is best to teach
him in the morning before he drink or eat his prouender, by means whereof,
you shall avoid the danger of straining his wind, or filme breaking him. And
also, for that you may have leisure enough before bed time to dry and dress
him. And as touching your second demand, you shall first teach your horse to
tread the great ring, both upon pase and trotte: and see as well in doing the
same, as all other his lessons, that you make him rain well, ca^rie his head
steadie, and go upright in his turning: Secondarily, you shall teach your
horse to stop and go back: Thirdly, to advance: Fourthly, to gallop the
great ring, or field gallop: Fifthly, to turn readily on both hands: Sixthly,
to make a sure and perfect manage: Seauenthly, and lastly, you shall learn him
to take his gallop and career readily.


Of trotting the great ring, and what order is to be observed therein.

Kingdon. SIthence you have taught me how to make my horse gentle, it shall
not be amiss to teach me what order I shall observe in learning him to tread
the great ring, for that I have often times heard you say, that by treading
the great ring upon his pase, trot and gallop, and by observing good order,
time, and measure therein, that it is not only sufficient to make him rain
well, trot well, carry his head steadie, and to bear light, but that the
whole making of your horse depends upon the orderly using of him, in this
foresaid lesson.


Clifford. As touching the order to be observed therein, you shall enter first
upon a soft pase, giving him eight or ten turns, on your right hand, and
as many on the left: you shall change in this order from hand to hand, till
you have given him so many turns, as shall be agreeable to his strength, which
being done, ride him forth right thirty or forty paces, where you must stop
him by strayning your bridle hand, and by speaking unto him gently with a soft
voice, saying, hallow boy, hallow: looking that he stand right in his path or
furrowe, which would be made for that purpose, in some hanging or falling
ground. Having thus stopped your horse, let him stand still a preatie while, at
which time you must flatter and scratch him in and under his mane. It shall be
good also to give him a little grass to eat, to light from his back, and
lead him home, doing no more with him that day. Having thus acquainted your
horse thoroughly with this lesson upon his pase, then shall you offer him to
trot the same by helping him with your voice and calves of legs only.


Kingdon. But what if he will not go with the help of my voice and calves of
my legs.


Clifford. Then it is too soon to trot him, for I would not advise you to
offer him his trot in any case, nor yet from his trot to his gallop, before he
do it willingly, with the least help that may be, without force or compulsion.


Kingdon. What number of turns shall I give him upon his trot, and also were
it not good to give him a plain cannon and cauison? I pray you tell me.


Clifford. Unless his mouth be very good, and you your self as good as ever
Gryson was, or Xenophon, I would not counsel thee in any case to use any
other thing to teach him upon, than a trench, brake, or snafle, till such time
as he be a perfect ready horse, and as touching the number of thy turns, that
I must refer to thine own judgment, who shall know best thy horses
strength.


How to learn your horse to go back. Chap. 3.
Clifford. AFter your horse can stop and keep his furrow or path just, you
shall learn him to go back, by straining your bridle hand, and by speaking
unto him, first with a soft voice, back, back: and if need be, you may help
him with the point of your rod upon his knees, but if he will not go back
with all these helps, then you mu^^ use a footeman, with a cudgel in his
hand, who standing right before him, and threatening him, must also correct him
on his fore legs, if need be.


Kingdon. How often shall I use my horse in this order?


Clifford. Until he do it both lightly and readily, and fail not, that at
every time you stop him, to make him go back five or six pases at the least,
so withal, that you use it not half so much to an horse of a good mouth, as
to him that is hard mouthed.


Kingdon. After my horse can tread his rings, both upon pase and trot, and can
both stop and go back: then I pray you teach me which is the best way to
make him advance, that I may not distemper his mouth, nor disorder him.


Clifford. The best way that ever I found to make an horse advance is this
here following. After you have put a cauison on his head, turn him about in
his room, and make the two cords thereof fast to the two posts, then offer
him to advance by striking him on the breast with a sharp rod, and by
speaking unto him with a cheerful voice, saying, up, up boy, up, which voice
you must use always when you would have your horse advance: and likewise when
you would have him go back, always use this word: back, back, not altring
your voice: and when you would have him turn, to speak unto him with a
cheerful voice, saying: turn boy, turn: yea, and though he lift up but one
of his feet, and offer, as though he would lift the other, flatter him, and
make much of him, and give him a little grass or prouender to eat, which being
done, you may offer him his lesson again by speaking unto him as before, and
touching him with the rod a little at the first, noting, that when you have
gotten him to lift his feet both together, that you flatter and feed him as
before, and do no more with him in one half hour at the least: in this order
you shall most easily teach your horse to advance.


Kingdon. Yea, but this is in the stable without a man on his back, and
therefore when he comes without, he will be as far to seek as ever he was.


Clifford. Can thou not remember him in some deep way with thy voice, and
also by helping him with the calves of thy legs, and strike him with thy
stirrops upon the points of his shoulders, and with thy rod upon the right
shoulder if need require, and if he will not for all these, then use a
footeman standing before him, as thou have been taught before, and when he
shall hear and see the rod coming toward his breast, he shall advance
without any beating at all.


Kingdon. But I have found some horses so stubborn, that they would not
advance, neither for spur, nor rod, nor hand, neither for footeman nor rider.


Clifford. Mark, that when you teach your horse any thing in the stable, you
give him litter enough under his feet, for with one dangerous slip or
flide, you shall utterly ^ his foolish keeper, or any other that (...) the
horse, causing him to leap and cornet in his room, yet the rider shall bear
the blame. But to the purpose, your horse being tied, as before, in his room,
take ^ stick of ^ yard or an ell long, with a shar^e prick therein, which must
^^ appear above the length o^ a wheat corn without the end of the cudgel,
and prick him in the breast therewith, so long, til he offer to lift his
feet, which when he does, make as much of him, as though he had advanced, to
the end that you may make him understand your mind, with as little correction
as is possible, and let him rest one half hour at the least: t^en shall you
offer it him again, as before, which if you find, he does it but untowardly,
yet make much of him, and let him alone for that day: for the next morning,
his breast being sore, with yesterdaies pricking, you shall see him advance,
even the first time you offer him the cudgel. In this sort I made an horse of
^^r John Tracie^ to advance, which neither he, nor I could do by any beating
possible, nor whipping, until such time as I found out this invention, which is
most notable: for, since that time I have tried it upon diverse horses. Now,
when you are mounted, it the horse refuse to advance* then let the footeman
remember him with the cudg^^ in some ditch or deep high way with high ^an^es
^^ every side, to hold him in such sort, that he can not start out, nor lea^e
aside. This is a much better wai^, than the straining of your hand, beating of
your horse upon the shoulders, or striking him with your spurs, for that to
an horse of great courage, it is very dangerous* for, you may thereby
distemper his mouth, or cause him take some evil tache or other, yet I do not
deny, but that it is good to offer your horse to advance by helping him with
the calves of your legs, and with your stirrops upon the points of his
shoulders, (...) with the rod on the right shoulder.


How, and at what time you shall learn your horse to gallop the great ring.
Chap. 4.
Kingdon. AFter my horse can do al these lessons before taught, I would have
you to show me in what order, and at what age it is best to learn him the
field gallop.


Clifford. First, as touching his age I would not have you to gallop any horse
until he be five years old, and the vantage, no nor until he be fix, if it
be possible, and as touching the manner that you must observe in teaching him
the same, when he can trot his ring perfectly, (as has been before taught:)
then may ye offer to gallop him sometimes, a quarter, or half way about the
ring, and in his gallop, you shall help him with your voice, and the casues of
your legs, at which time you must ^ear^ your hand harder, than when you
trotted him, to the end, you may make him lift his feet the better, and make
him go upright in his gallop, which order observed, you shall most easily
teach your horse to gallop.


Kingdon. But in what th^e may I touch him to gallop in ^his sort?


Clifford. You shall most easily do it in the space of two or three months.


Kingdon. But my horse will gallop of himself, being perfect in trotting the
ring in the space of thirty days.


Clifford. Yea, but if you put your horse to every lesson, as so^e as he will
learn it, you shall utterly sp^ile a young horse: yea, and you shall also by
that means greatly weaken any old horse: you must as well in this, as in a^
other your doings, have patience, and take great leisure: for if thou will use
and observe these rules, already by me taught, and shall hereafter follow,
thou shall find it but a play to make any horse ready, in comparison of the
great t^il^ that our common riders do take, in making of their horses, or
rather, in marring of them.


Kingdon. I pray you tell me what you mean by this patience.


Clifford. I mean, thou should spend one whole year to learn thy horse to
rai^^ well, to carry his head steadie, to bear light on the hand, to trot
well, to stop, and to advance.


Kingdon. Wherefore should I spend a year in teaching him these lessons, ^^th
I may teach him them in the space of three or four months, although I ride
mine horse but twice a week.


Clifford. I grant: but one of these horses that thou shall ta^e a years
leasur^ with, in teaching the foresaid lessons, shall be more worth than five
of those which thou shall mar, with sudden teaching them, yea, and h^ shall
be at s^^t^en^ years of age, a more lusty and serviceable horse, than thine
shall be of twelve.


Kingdon. If I shall but only ride my horse twice in a week, in the ring, he
will become so lusty and perfect in that lesson, that he will gallop whether
I will, or not.


Clifford. I never said unto you, that you should ride your horse but twice a
week, but that you should rather ride him thrice a week, (...)ing but very
few ring turns, after he begins to be perfect, but rather ride him forth
right in some high way, a soft trot two or three miles at every time, by which
means you shall make your horse, not only to rain well, bear light on the
hand, and to trot well, but you shall also make him strong, and disposed to do
al lessons that you shall put him to, noting always, that you give not the
horse such t(...)ell as may decrease his strength, but rather increase the
same, as is before taught.


Kingdon. By this account, you will have me to take up my horse, at four
years and the (...)tage, and not teach him any thing, until he be five
years of age, and the vantage.


Clifford. Nay, in saying so, you do ^e wrong, for I have taught you how to
make your horse to trot, and to gallop your ring and the field gallop, to
stop, and to advance, to go back, carry his head steadie, and to rain
well, which is the chief principle and foundation of making of your horse: for
an horse which is perfect in these foresaid lessons upon his trot you shall
^astly make him a perfect ready horse within the ^pace of four or six
months, if so be he be of age and strength agreeable.


Kingdon. I can not deny, but that you have t^ugh^ ^ne sufficiently how to
make my horse to do al these lessons upon the trot, but as touching his gallop,
you have taught ^e nothing that I can remember.


Clifford. I grant, but now I will teach you, upon this condition, that you
shall seldom or never gallop any horse till he be almost six years of age:
and then, when you have trotted your horse, as you shall think sufficient, you
may gallop him two or three turns upon each hand, and then ride forth right in
some furrow, if he be a young horse, and of good mouth: but if he be an old
horse, and hard of mouth, stop him in your ring, and make him go back five or
six paces, which done, light from him, flatter him, give him grass to eat,
as is aforesaid, and do no more with him that day.


Kingdon. I marvel not a little, why you have with such diligence taught me
all other lessons, and would seem ^^ hightly to pass over this, of learning
my horse how to gallop.


Clifford. It is needelesse to teach you any more, for that every horse will
take it too fast of himself, and I never saw in my life, any rider that
would not both gallop his horse too young, and also too too much.


How to teach an horse to turn readily on both hands. Chap. 5.
Kingdon. H^^ing already taught my horse to rain well, carry his head steadie,
bear light on the hand, trot, stop, go back, and tread his rings upon
pas^, trot, and gallop, both orderly and justly, and that he is of age and
strength, sufficient to make a manage, I would desire you to teach me, how,
and in what order I shall make my horse to turn readily on both hands, without
straining his back and loin^s, or otherwise disordering or weakening him, for
ye I have hard you sa^e, that the furrow turns, by Gryson taught, does greatly
weaken the back and loins of any horse, and also, that diverse horses thereby
are utterly marred and made restie. And also I have often heard you sa^e, that
you have had good experience thereof, in a bay horse of sir Thomas Scots in
Kent, and also in a roa^e horse of M. Gregory Prises of Herefor^, East: and
likewise in a gray gelding of sir John Tracies in Gloucester shire, and a
dapple gray horse of Nassaws, base son to the prince of Orange. All which
four horses were disordered by turning them too short, and that you reformed
these two last named, by causing them to make their manage in a couple of
large rings. And afterward, having made them perfect therein, then you caused
them to make their turns in less and less rooms, in such sort, that they
were thoroughly reformed, by means thereof. Wherefore, I pray you to show me in
what order you did the same.


Clifford. When thy horse is of age, and can do al those lessons, by thee above
recited, then thou shall use him to one ring, and giving him five or six
turns on the right hand upon his trot, then shall you turn out of the
foresaid ring upon your left hand, as though you would mark out an other
ring: but you must not take one quarter so much compass, as your ring is in
greatness. And having brought your horse about, enter into your foresaid ring
on the left hand, and having given him 6. turns, then shall you ride out of
your rin^ and change hands as before: see that always, when you change hands,
you turn him as short as may be: and also help him with your voice, and
contrary calue of leg, and with your (...) by l^tting the point fall
toward his contrary shoulder. And when your horse can in this sort gallop
the foresaid ring, and change from hand to hand in this order, then shall you
tread out a ring something lesser: And having made him perfect in the same,
then shall you also make your third ring lesser than the second, and so shall
you, by little and little, make your horse turn so readily and perfectly as is
possible, without any disorder, for by your changing from hand to hand, you
shall teach him how to make his mannaging turns, so readily and short, as
any horse (taught in a furrow) did ever make, noting always, that when you
change hands you help him in such sort, that you make him to turn in very
short room, and also with greater swiftness than when you gallop or trot
about your ring. Also it is very good to change hands within your ring, in
this sort: having given your horse six turns on your right hand, then shall
you turn him so short upon the same hand, that you may ride to the other side
of your ring, right through the middle thereof, where you shall cause your
horse to turn on the left hand into the same ring: this is a good way to
change hands, but the former is much better, for that in the first, you turn
your horse whole about in a very narrow compass, and in this you give him but a
quarter of a turn, but it is very good to make your horse perfect in them
both.


Kingdon. Having thus brought my horse to turn readily on both hands, both
upon pase, trot, and gallop, and that he will change from hand to hand, always
keeping his gallop in one self ring, which shall not exceed above the
greatness of eight or ten paces about: then would I desire you to teach me
how to acquaint my horse first, wish his manage without disordering him.


Clifford. When he is perfect in trotting and gallopping the foresaid little
ring, then shall you make two rings of the self bigness as before, which
would be distant one from an other thirty or forty paces. That done, make a
right furrow or path, between them, entering into one end of the same, and ride
to the other, where you shall make two turns on your right hand on the foresaid
ring: that done, you shall ride back again, in the self furrow, to the other
ring, and give him two turns on your left hand: this being done, you shall
ride again to your right ring, and give him two turns, as at the first: then
shall you ride him back again, almost to your left ring, where you must
stop him. Thus shall you have made four turns on your right hand, and but
two on the left: which order you must observe in all your doings, to begin
with the right hand, and end with the same: this shall be enough for the first
time, remembering, that in giving your horse any lesson, whatsoever, till such
time, as he be a perfect ready horse, that you never offer him it, but that
you acquaint him therewith, first on his pase, before you offer it him on his
trot or galloppe: for by rash, bedlem, and brainsicke hastiness, not only
horses are disordered and marred, but mighty armies also have been thereby
ouerthrown, and utterly confounded. Note also, that when your horse has done
his lesson in this sort, walk him half, an hour, at the least, in the self
rings, and path, upon a soft pase, observing the same order, in pasing that
you did when you trotted him.


Kingdon. But how, and when shall I teach my horse to gallop these foresaid
mannaging rings?


Clifford. When he is thoroughly acquainted with this lesson upon his trot,
then shall you, when you have trotted him once about, give him the other turn
upon his galloppe. This being done, you shall ride to your other ring upon a
trot, and enter the same with a swifter trot than you did before, making him
turn once upon the same, and at the second gallop as before. Thus shall you
change from hand to hand, as often as you shall think requisite: And when he
shall be very perfect in this lesson, then may you put him to do it, all upon
his gallop, noting, that as he is perfect in the large ring, you cause him to
tread out an other pair of rings, of two pases less compass than your
first. Thus shall you diminish the largeness of your ring, by little and
little, till you have made him turn in so narrow room as is possible for him
to do, so that you will take good heed, that you change not your horse from
his mannaging rings of ten pases about in largeness, and thirty pases one
from an other, till such time as he can manage in the same perfectly,
lightly, and readily, so pleasauntly, and willingly, that you and he shall
seem as though you both had but one mind: and when your horse is in this
sort very perfect, I would have you walk him out right upon a trot two or
three miles without giving him any of these foresaid turns, and then at the
next time you ride him, give him this lesson again: yea, I have ever used
after my horse began to be perfect in these managing rings, to offer him the
same but once in eight or ten days, and to ride him a little every other
day, to exercise and acquaint him with travel, by which means I did not only
keep my horse in strength, sound, and well disposed, but also that he did his
lessons a great deal^ more willing when I put him to do them: for continual
beating your horse upon one lesson, shall too too much confound and disorder
him after such time as he can do it willingly and perfectly, as is before
said.


Kingdon. Then you will have me, when my horse can once manage in these large
rings, that then I shall bring him by less and less room, by a little at
once, as I find him willing and apt to take the same, which I must needs
grant to be a very good way, for that I shall hereby neither disorder nor
strain my horses back and loins, nor in any sort distemper his mouth: but I
pray you, is there no other way to teach my horse to turn, but this?


Clifford. Yes, there is a most vile way to teach a horse to turn in a
furrowe or ditch made of purpose, which I used by the space of ten years in
riding sir Ihon Pollardes horses of Deuon shire, sir Richard Greenuiles, sir
Thomas Scots of Kent, and Master Ba^narde Drakes, in all which time, I could
never make any horse, but that he would enterfure when he came to travel, but
for the space of twelve years that I have observed this order here by me
taught, I have not only kept any young horse from enterfuring, but also, I
have made diverse old horses, whose backs and loins have been almost marred
by sudden and short stopping them upon naughty ground when they are extreme
hot: at which time you must note, that your horse wants one quarter of the
strength that he had when he was cold: and also, by causing him to beat his
coruet, and by learning him a womanly or ta^^ata goats leap, or else, by
bounding aloft with all four, as they term it, which thing, how unfit it is
for any horse of service or travel, I commend me to all those which are
sou^^iours or riders of experience, who I am sure will confess this not to be
my opinion, but the thing which I have well tried, of which I would have you
to have a special care, that as seldom as may be, you drive your horse into
any such heats. And if at any time it chance thereby that your horse will not
willingly do that that you would have him, but that he will be stubborn, and
do his lessons out of all order, then I would wish you to walk him with a man
on his back, in the same place by the space of one hour at the least, where
you give him his lesson, by means whereof you shall thoroughly acquaint your
horse therewith, and besides that you shall keep his legs exercised, till he
be through cold, you shall also prevent the danger of marring your horse, by
putting him in the stable where he must stand still, without exercise, which
thing I do utterly disallowe, for that experience has taught me (to my cost
and shame when I was young) that this is the only way, as has been
aforesaid, utterly to mar your horse, but by following the foresaid order,
to exercise him when he is in any such extreme heat, I have found it a
great deal better, and a more sure way to preserve him than to bring him to
the stable, although I had there two men to rub him with litter enough under
him, and warm clothes to cover him, all which things shall not half so well
prevent the making your horse stiff in his legs, or ye humors that shall be then
dissolved by the means of extreme heat, from having leisure or place in the
body, thus exercised, to congeale through idleness. This (gentle reader) I know
well enough, does not belong to the riders office, yet do I account him far
unworthy of the name and authority, either of rider, keeper, or owner that is
ignorant how to use his horse when he is ridden in any sort, whatsoever,
whether it be to travel him, or to give him his lessons, running, gallopping,
or moderately to exercise him. This, by the way of communication, but to our
purp^^ there is an other way to teach your horse to turn in this sort, dig
the earth out of the foresaid narrow rings, and make them three foot deeper
in the middle than on the out sides, and cast all your foresaid earth, clean
without your rings, and this shall be a very good place to manage your horse
in at any time, and to teach him to turn: And when you will learn^ your horse
to turn very narrow and bravely, then enter into one of these foresaid
places of stop and turn, where you shall turn your horse first upon a soft
pase in somewhat narrower compass than you did before, and having so given him
six or eight turns, stop him and make him go back a little, then give him
as many turns on your left hand without once going out of the foresaid place,
and when your horse is thus perfect upon his pase, then may you offer it him
upon his trot, and also change him from hand to hand suddenly without any
staying. And when you will gallop him, give him but two turns on an hand, and
then stop him, and make much of him, which being done, give him two on your
left hand, and then return to your right hand as before, and when he can do it
very perfectly in this sort, then may you upon his galloppe cause him to
make two turns on your right hand, and two on your left, which being done, yet
give him two more on your right hand, then stop him, and make him go back, and
light from him, even in that place, without doing any more with him that day.


Kingdon. Sithence you have taught me how to make my horse to manage upon
large turns, and also, to turn readily on both hands, as well on his gallop
as trot, now would I desire you also to teach me how to make my horse to
manage perfectly, in so brave and ready manner as is possible.


Clifford. After he can turn, as before, upon his gallop, you shal-begin but
to give him one turn on an hand, noting that you take not so much room as
when you gave him two turns, having a special regard, that you make him cloase
his turn at your departure out of your place of stop and turn.


Kingdon. What mean you by cloasing of his turn, and by taking less room
than when I gave mine horse two turns: I pray you teach me more plainly, for
I do not understand your meaning therein.


Clifford. I mean by taking less room, that you should ride somewhat within
the circle of your former ring, and that you should make your horse turn in
less compass or room by one quarter than when you gave him two turns of an
hand, which you must do by a little at once, making him at every time you
manage him to turn in something less room, according as you find the
disposition and aptenesse of your horse. But if you will follow my counsel,
turn not your horse to short, nor give him to many managing turns, for that
they will greatly weaken the back and loins of the horse, of the which thing
you must have a special care that you make him turn somewhat large, and also,
when you manage him, give him not above six or eight of these turns on an
hand at once, and as touching closing of his turn, I mean, that you shall not
let him come out of the place that he turns in till he have brought his fore
feet just in the middle of the path by the which he did enter.


Kingdon. What do you mean by turning of my horse somewhat large?


Clifford. I mean by turning your horse somewhat large, that you should give
him so much compass in his turning, as the largeness of a cart or wagon
wheel is in roundnes, and that you make your path to come just upon the middle
of his foresaid round place of stop and turn, where you must cause your horse
to stop and turn when you will manage him, in form as follows: When you have
marked out two such round places of stop and turn, as has been before
specified, then shall you enter at one end of the path or furrow, and ride to
the other end thereof, and when you enter into the foresaid round place, to
make a turn on your right hand, see that you turn first on your left hand so
much, as you may ride round about your circle before you come out of the
foresaid place on your right hand: and having walked your horse five or six
turns, to acquaint him, or put him in remembrance what he shall do. Then may
you, coming out of the places of stop and turn, put your horse into a soft
gallop, and ride therevppon to the other end, and when you come to enter your
place of stop and turn, see that you stay your horse somewhat more upon the
bit than before, to the end you may make him lift his feet the better, and go
the vprighter in his turning. And in going about your foresaid circle, see that
you keep him in his gallop, and that you stay so much upon the hand, that he
may not go half so fast in his turning, as when he gallops right forth: and
that you help him with your voice, calves of your legs, with your rod upon ye
contrary shoulder, and with the contrary spur also, if need be: but I have
ever found the inside of my foot to be much better to strike him withal, than
to give him the spur, when I have managed my horse, for I will not give a
straw for that manage that ^he inside of the foot, and the sight of the rod,
with the point toward the contrary shoulder, is not sufficient to make him
turn so readily, and swiftly as is possible. And when your horse is thorowlie
acquainted with his manage in this sort, you shall see him begin to turn,
even of him self, so short as if he had been taught two years in a furrow or
ditch. But in any case, see that you take such compass in turning of him, as
has been before taught, for fear of straining your horses back and loins,
when you shall chance to ride him upon naughty ground.


Kingdon. And why, I pray you is this called a manage?


Clifford. I know not why it is called a ma^nage, but that it is usually so
called, that am I sure of, whenever a horse does upon his gallop, stop, and
turn, in two such narrow places, as has been before mentioned, being distant
the one from the other thirty or forty pases, as this figure does most
plainly represent unto you the right fashion, and true manner of the mannaging
place, used of all the best horsemen in Christendom at this day.


Kingdon. Whereas you say I must enter into one end of my managing place, and
when I come to the other, to give mine horse a tu^ne on the right hand, I must
first turn on my left, so much as I may ride ro^^de about a circle, in
largeness, and fashion of a cart or wagon wheel, and that I shall not enter
within the compass of the foresaid wheel or piece of ground of that
largeness, but ride round about the same, surely I do not perfectly
understand your meaning therein.

woodcut, diagram


Clifford. But this figure shall most plainly make thee understand my meaning
herein, and how thou should do the same: for thou shall find the place
where thou must enter first into the managing place marked with the figure of
1. and the furrowe also in the which thou shall pass thy managing path marked
with the same figure, and where thou shall first stay thy horse upon the
bridle a little and turn something on thy left hand, thou shall find it marked
with the figure of 2. and where thou shall begin to turn on thy right hand
it is marked with the figure of 3. But thou have to note, that thou may not
depart out of the foresaid circle til thou have brought thy horses forefeete
upon the figure of 2. which I call cloasing of his turn, and when thou shall
come to the left place of stop and turn, thou shall turn on thy right hand
from the figure of 4. to the figure of 5. and observe the self same order in
all points, as thou did in the right place of stop and turn marked with
the figure of 2. and 3. and the left is marked by the figures of 4. and 5. and
the place by which thou must enter, and the mannaging path are marked with the
figure 1. as before. And the little piece of ground which thou must ride about
when thou will give thy horse some compass in his turning, or ye hollow pit
after the earth is dug out, as has been before taught, is marked with the
figure of 6.


Kingdon. Now I understand perfectly by this figure, and by your words, what
you mean by digging ^waie the earth within my mannaging rings, and also what
you mean by the compass of a cart wheel, for that I see most plainly this
piece of ground marked with the figure of 6. and a circle drawn round about
the same, within the which I must not enter when I manage my horse, as you
sale, but I would desire you to show me to what purpose I shall dig away the
ground three foot deeper in the middle than upon the out edges, since I may
not turn my horse any shorter, than before the earth was dug away.


Clifford. As touching thy demand why thou should dig away the ground,
I answer, that thereby thy horse shall go a great deal the vprighter in his
turning about a pit than upon the plain ground, and he shall be in less
danger to slide with his hinder feet, wherewith thou might mar thy
horse, for that it is very dangerous to teach thy horse upon any slipperie
or even ground. And whereas thou say thou must not turn thy horse any
shorter than when thou gallopest him in the managing rings, herein thou art
deceived, for the managing rings would be eight or ten paces about, which will
amount to fifty foot in circuit or roundnesse, if thou allow to every pase
five foot (as has been before taught:) but when thou have dug away the
earth, and that thy horse can manage perfectly upon his gallop, then I have
taught thee that thou shall give him no more room than the compass of a cart
or wagon wheel, which will not amount to half so many foot about. Moreover,
as touching the compass that thou shall give him in his managing turns, it is
not only eas^e for the horse, but also it is very sure when thou shall turn
upon slippie or naughty ground, and thereby thou shall not half so soon
disorder thy horse, as if thou should turn him short: yea, I do assure
thee, that unless thou take heed to turn thy horse somewhat large, after he
begins to be very perfect, to manage upon his gallop, thou shall be worse
troubled with some horses, to make them turn large, for fear of falling upon
naughty ground, than thou wast at the first, with teaching them to turn
short: for the surest and best kind of turning, not only for any horse, but
also for the rider, when he shall come to service, is the large turn, as has
been before taught: for thou shall hardly find any horse, (after he is
thoroughly acquainted what he shall do) that will not turn too short, even of
himself.


Kingdon. I had almost forgotten two things, the first is how to remedy that
horse which will not cloase his turn perfectly at his departure out of his
place of stop and turn: the second is, how to remedy that horse, that in his
turning will prease too fast forward.


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, thou may make thy horse cloase
his turn perfectly, by giving him two turns on an hand, at every such time
as he will not close his turn well at his departure when thou managest him upon
one turn: and as touching thy second demand, how thou may remedy thy
horse that will go too fast in his turning: force thine hand in all his doings
in two sorts, the first is, as he is in his turning or gallopping, when he
begins to force thy hand out of order, then thou must stop him, and make him go
back, and ever as he presses to go forward of himself, make him go back so
long till he will be glad to stand still with the reins loose upon his neck,
and when thou will put him forward to do any lesson, do it very gently upon
a soft pase at the first: and fail not at every time as he begins his
disorder, to serve him as before. And for every turn ye thou give upon his
trot or gallop, it shall be good to give him five upon a soft pase. For I have
remedied diverse of these horses that have been also somewhat hard of mouth,
by keeping them both from trot and gallop, and by pasing them an hour and an
half, or two hours at a time, in a painful ring made in a pit, or upon an
hill side, and by stopping them often, and by making them go back in the self
same ring as before. Thou may also remedy it by managing thine horse cloase
by some wall, by making him make his last turn with his head just against the
wall at every time that thou will stop him, and let him stand still a pretty
while, and make him go back.


Kingdon. Here you put me in remembrance to demand two questions of you: the
first is of the pit on a hills side, and the other of the rings in the plain
ground, and the reasons why you teach some horses always in the plain ground,
and others, in a pit or on a hills side.


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, I answer, that the horses which thou
have seen me ride upon plain ground as well in trotting the large Ring,
pasing, or gallopping the same or any other lesson or exercise whatsoever,
were young horses of weak bodies, by means that they were unacquainted with
travel, or else old horses that were almost marred for lack of exercise and
reasonable travel, and thereby were made weak of body, and of short breath.
All which horses must be handled gently, and be exercised according to their
strength, and as they increase in breath and ability of body, thou may
increase their travail accordingly, which thing if thou observe orderly, thou
shall neither mar, or disorder any young horse, nor thou shall never find
any old horse of short breath for lack of exercise, nor any horse so
disordered, but by exercising him according to his quality and ability of
strength, thou shall eastly recover him: yea, I do assure thee I have used
more diligence, and taken greater pains, in searching out the nature and
disposition of every horse according unto the diversity quality or breed,
and how he might with most ease, and best force bring any horse to do his
lessons in good order, and then in searching what he should do, for in my
judgment, it is but a small matter to know what should be done, but it is a
great matter to know how it should be done, so as thereby, thou in
commanding observe this rule, to seek a great deal more how to command
without offense: which shall be, when thou in commanding the wise and expert,
shall entreat them as friends, and not command them as slaves, and with the
ignorant and rude sort, thou must entreat them as thou would do children or
fools, whom thou would be loath to offend, not so much for the fear of
that they may do against thee, but in respect of the shame and discredit that
may happen unto thee, by abuse, where if thou had the true use, thou
should not only keep them from coffeehouse, but also, thou thy self
should thereby be by them well served: yea, I have been long of the opinion
that he is far unworthy the credit to command, ye has not either by
reason or experience, or else by learning the knowledge how to employ the most
vilest person to some profit: yea, and that with the least ^ffence to him that
is possible, and to the other sort that are so stubborn, that you must be
forced to use a bridle, to master them withal, yet let it be so gentle, that
after they yield, for that there is no other remedy, that then they may
perfectly know, that the cause why thou have so ouermaistred them, is not of
malice, but that they have forced thee through the quality of their fault, and
thou art rather sorry for their correction, than that thou do it to take
any pleasure or delight to exercise this cruelty. If thou can well ponder
and consider these things, thou shall use so great diligence, or to speak more
plainly no such lightness, hastiness, and brainsick bedlemnesse, as thou
may see a number of madmen, monsters, devils, or torme^tors of horses use in
teaching their horses, and going about to bring them to some order, who are
utterly blind or destitute of that most noble rule, I mean the true art of
government, without the which, though a number of ignorant men, chance to make
some horses of good disposition ready enough, yet when they come to travel,
we find them marred, by disordinate handling of them, and unreasonable usage:
but as touching the horses that are of disposition stubborn by nature, where
they make one, they mar five: yea, I do certainly believe, that all those
that are ignorant in the nature and disposition of every horse that they shall
presume to teach, are but in sort a kind of presumptuous me^, for in this
knowledge above al other, does the whole ground of the art of Riding consist. I
confess I have been somewhat tedious: But oh that thou did know what
grief it is to me, that I am not able here fulli^ to make thee understand my
experience and opinion in this matter, for lack of learning to set down ye
thing in words orderly which I have so perfectly attained to, by continual use
and practice. But to our purpose, by that that I have said I would have said,
ye thou shall ride al those horses that are weak, either for lack of age,
exercise, or through evil handling, in rings made upon plain and firm ground,
and that thou therein use such moderate travel, that thy horse may daily
increase his co^rage and strength, fully as much as he profits in learning of
his le(...)ns. And as touching thy second demand why I ride in a pit, or upon
a hills side, that have I always found to be most excellent for any horse that
is of great strength and courage, and also for such horses as are stubborn, of
hard mouth, vnni^ible of foot, and that will lean too much on one ^ide in
their turning, for the ring made in a pit or upon a hills ^^de, is a thousand
times better to make your horse go upright in his turning, and to be ni^ble of
unto, than to spur the^, whip them, and hear so hard a hand upon them, that
many times they do more harm to the horses mouth in one hour, than they are
able to recover in one whole year.


Kingdon. Seeing this ring made in a pit, or upon a hills side, is so good to
reform any horse that will lean on the one side in turning, or that is very
vnnimble of foot, I would desire you to show me (for my better understanding)
the figure or form, not only of this ring, but also of all other rings and
riding places, needful to be used to make a ready horse, with the
largeness, fashion, and upon what ground is best.


Clifford. The more I teach thee, the more unskillful, I think, thou art. But
because thou shall not have any excuse of ignorance in this art of riding, I
will show thee ye true figure and largeues that is required in every riding
place, even from the first to the last, save one, which is already most lively
expressed in the chapter of mannaging thy horse. And first of the rings in the
plain ground meet to be used for a young horse, at his first entering into his
lessons, thou shall make them in form as follows: as touching their
largenes, let one of them be 50. pases about at ye least, according as this
figure does most plainly show thee: for thou shall find thy entering place into
ye end of thy mannaging furrow marked with the letter A, and the place where
thou shall stop thy horse marked with ye letter B in the self same furrow,
where thou shall stop thy horse when thou shall have made an end of thy ring
turns. And the right ring is marked with the letter C, and the left ring with
the letter D, here most, plainly to be seen: and the place where thou shall
enter into ye right ring marked with this letter E, and where thou shall depart
ye same ring to stop thy horse with this letter F, When he shall have done this
lesson of treding ye large ring.

woodcut, diagram


Kingdon. But shall I not turn my horse in this managing furrow when I have
stopped him?


Clifford. No, thou shall never turn thy horse in any furrow, for that is the
only way to strain thy horses back and loins, to the utter undoing and
marring of him, and also if the Rider lack knowledge, and that he be not very
patient, he may quickly make his horse so restie that he will neither turn
nor yet go forward, and if thou were not very forgetful, or else too too dull
in understanding I have taught thee heretofore plainly enough how thou
should make thy horse first perfect in the great ring of fifty pases about,
until he can tred this same first upon his pase, next upon his trot, and last
upon his gallop, and that in all his doings that he reign well, and that he
bear light his head.


Kingdon. How long time shall I use my Horse to these large rings.


Clifford. His age must be thy rule therein, for if he be but four years of
age, then it shall be good not to give him any other ring turn, in a whole
year at the least, yea, if it were mine own horse, I should think him
marred, to use him to any other narrow turn, before he be five years and
the vantage, by which vantage I mean six months.


Kingdon. Then if I take up my horse at four years of age, would you have me
spend a year and an half in teaching him to tread the large rings only?


Clifford. No, thou may also teach thy horse to stop well, to keep his
furrowe just and right, as well in stopping, as in going forward, thou may
also teach him to go back, to advance, and thou may acquaint him with
travel, by riding him right forth every second day an hall mile, after that
thou have (upon his trot) given him so many ring turns, as shall be agreeable
to his strength for the first half year, and the second half year you must
ride him one mile, and the third half year, thou may ride him twice as
much, if thou will take great heed, not to weary thy horse too much in
treading these rings, this kind of travail shall make thy horse, not only
light, but also he shall be very strong, and of a healthie and sound body:
yea, this is the chiefest and principallest way, not only to make thy horse
light, strong, sound, to rain well, to bear light on the hand, but also, that
he shall be a durable horse, both for travail and service.


Kingdon. But if my horse be four years of age and the vantage, then would I
know of you how long time I shall take in learning him his lesson, and
exercising him in this sort?


Clifford. Then one year shall be enough, if thou meanest by the vantage six
months.


Kingdon. I pray you teach me also how long time shall be sufficient, if my
horse be five years of age before I give him any lesson.


Clifford. Then four months shall be enough, and yet this horse may be made
as ready when he commies to six years of age, as he had been begun to be
ridden at four years of age, yea, and I had rather have one of these horses
of five years and an half of age, so that he be made gentle before, and his
mouth vnspoiled, than four of those Horses that shall be ^aught to young, for
that the one, when he commes to be ready, will have no ability or strength
of body, to maintain his doings, and the other shall be so strong, that
before (with orderly handling) he become any thing weary, the rider shall not
only have a good stomach to his breakefast, but he shall be glad also to
rest himself.


Kingdon. But if so be I chance to find a horse of six or seven years of
age, made gentle, and thoroughly acquainted with travail, how long time shall
be sufficient to teach him to tread the foresaid large rings?


Clifford. Then in two months thou may have made him tread perfectly both
upon pase, trot, and gallop, and in four months, thou may have made him
both a ready and a serviceable horse: yea, I have made diverse old horses that
have been very hard of mouth, and that never knew how to tread a ring upon a
trot, very serviceable horses within the space of six or eight months, and
to bear so light on the hand as a man could desire, without using any other
bit, than a plain Cannon, after I had perfectly reformed him upon a trench in
such order as has been before taught.


Kingdon. Now understand I perfectly how to make my horse rain well, carry
his head steadie, and how to tread his large rings perfectly, and of what
fashion they should be made. But now would I have you show me the fashion
of the one ring, by you before mentioned, in the which you would have me to
teach my horse to turn readily by changing him from hand to hand in the self
ring.


Clifford. By this figure thou may understand the true fashion of the one
ring, and how thou shall change from hand to hand as well within as without
the same ring.

How to change hands within the ring.

The place where you must come forth of your ring when you change hands
without the same.

The place by the which you must enter again into your ring when you have
changed hands.

How to change hands within the ring.

The place by she which you must enter again into your ^^g when you have
changeed hands.

The place where you must come forth of your ring when you change hands
without the ^ame.

woodcut, diagram


Kingdon. Now I perceive when I ride my horse in a ring, how I must change
hands without the same; by the little half round circle upon the out side
thereof, and how I shall change hands within the same ring, by the strike that
goes right over the middle thereof, but I would request you to teach me how
long I shall ride my horse in the same?


Clifford. Thou shall ride thy horse in this ring in such order as has been
before taught, till he will not only tread it perfectly both upon pase, trot,
and gallop, but also that he can change hands in very short room both
without and within the same ring, still keeping his gallop, and that he will
both rain well, carry his head steadie, bear light on the hand, and go
upright in his turning. And when thy horse is perfect in this ring, in such
sort as has been before taught, then shall thou begin to tread out an
other ring a little lesser, and observe the self same order as before: thus
shall thou decrease the greatness of the rings, by a little ^f once, without
any disorder or straining of thy horse, till thou have brought him to turn in
so narrow a room as if thou had taught him in a furrowe, and that you had
a footeman to thrust him about, as Pierce Plowman thrusts his Dames mare to a
block when she rides to the market, or if that thou had had one with a rod
to strike him upon his contrary shoulder.


Kingdon. But ^^ well as in a furrow turn? you have oftentimes persuaded me
that it is much better.


Clifford. Y^^, and I dare avouch the same, that it is a thousand times better
than the furrow turn, for that any man of reason may thereby make a ready
horse without hurting or disordering of him, and I have my self never hurt nor
disordered any horse by teaching him in this sort neither have I ever taken in
hand any resti^ or runawaie iades, but that I have perfectly reformed them,
whereas, if I had offered diverse of them to turn in a furrowe, it had been
impossible to remedy them* nay rather I should have made them ten times worse:
I cry you mercy, poor horses, for that I have called you iades, which is a
name more proper to those beasts which do so beastly misuse you.


Kingdon. Now do I understand how to make a horse of good disposition to turn
readily on both hands by riding him in a ring, and changing him from hand to
hand, within and without the same, and as he is perfect in the large ring, to
cause him to tread out an other a little lesser, and so still as he is perfect
in the one, to cause him to make an other lesser, till I have brought him to
turn in so narrow room as is possible, the which I must needs confess to be
the most excellentest way of all other, for that hereby I shall neither hurt
my horses mouth, nor have any need to pull him about with the one rain,
wherewith I might make him become weak necked, to run backward, or to rear
on end: yea, by turning my horse too short at the first, I may not only
disorder him, but also utterly spoil his back, loins, and mouth: and besides,
I may make him so restie, that he will not do any thing: but it remains,
that you show me how I shall make my ring in a pit, or upon a hills side to
reform those horses that are strong of body, lusty, and well able to endure
travail, and those that are hard of mouth, and vnnimble of foot, and that
will lean on the one side in their turning, and that are very stubborn and
intractable.


Clifford. The ring which thou must make in a pit, or upon a hills side
differs nothing in fashion from the other ring, but in quality there is
great difference, for that the one in five times more painful tha^ the other,
because in treading the one half of this ring, you must ride vphill, and the
other half your horse goes downehill, which will make any horse, were he
never so hard of mouth, or vnnimble of foot, or subject to lean on the one
side in his turning, wonderfully mend his faults, by oftentimes pasing him in
the same, and trotting him, and sometimes gallopping him three or four times
about on a hand, and then stopping him, and making him go back, which being
done, you must walk him in the self ring till he be in breath again, and
then give him his lesson, as before, so often as shall be agreeable with his
strength, and to take great heed that always you give him five times as many
turns upon his pase, as you do either upon his trot or gallop, and when you
change hands, you must observe the self same order as has been before
taught in all points, and as touching the ring in a pit, which is best of all
other, if the pit be little enough you may make your ring round about upon the
banks thereof, so high as your horse may get good footing: but if the pit be
bigger than you would have the ring, then may you tread it out upon one side of
the pit, and make one part of your ring so high upon the bank or side of your
foresaid pit as your horse can get good hold with his feet, and observe the
same order as in the ring upon the hills side: these two last rings are not
only sufficient to reform all the forenamed faults, but thou shall also ten
times sooner have made thy horse ready in these rings, than in the rings upon
plain ground, besides that, when thy horse is made, he shall be so sure of
foot, that thou shall hardly ever have occasion to ride him on such ground,
but that upon his gallop, he will keep his feet sure without any danger of
falling.


Kingdon. It rests that you show m^ the rest of the (...)ing places, with the
use thereof according ^^ y(...) pr(...) made before.


Clifford. I have showed thee the best; but because I have taken so much pains
to teach thee, I would now for my credits sake be very sorry not to make thee
a good horsman, in respect whereof I will show thee another kind of managing
place, not improperly invented and used of skillful riders, and also I will
show thee an other fashion riding place, which is not amiss to be used at
sometimes to recreate your horse with change of lessons, which riding place I
call a double S. which being joined together, is not much unlike the figure of
eight. And the place where thou shall first enter is marked with the figure 1.
and where thou shall begin to turn thy horse on the right hand marked with
the figure 2. and where thou shall begin to turn on thy left hand marked
with the figure 3. here most plainly to be seen: and where thou shall enter
this managing place at the first is marked with the figure 4. and where thou
shall begin to turn thy horse first upon the right hand is marked with the
figure 5. and where thou shall cloase thy turn when thou have ridden a^ ^ute
the half circle is marked with the figure 6. and where thou must stop thy
horse when he has managed is marked with this figure 7.

woodcut, diagram

And when thou have made a turn on thy right hand then may thou ride to the
other end and make an other on thy left, beginning thy turn at this figure 8.
which shall be closed when thou come to the figure 9. Then may thou ride
again through thy managing ^urrow, and give thy horse an other turn on his
right hand, as at the first: thus may thou change from hand to hand so often
as thou shall think requisite. And when thy horse is perfect in managing in
these two half circles upon his gallop in such order as has woodcut, diagram
been here taught: then may thou by a little a^^nce acquaint him to begin
to turn about thy half circle the other way, so that in process of time you
make him turn perfectly, both the one way and the other about the foresaid
half circle. Friend Kingdon thy negligenc^ or lack of remembrance to
demand those things in their proper places has been cause of some disorder
for that the large rings, which should have been in the beginning of this
Book in the chapter of treading the great ring are here placed out of al order.


Kingdon. It is no matter in what order they be placed in the Book, for the
diligent reader that will take pains to read the whole work, shall here
find a most excellent order to make any horse ready of what nature or
disposition soever he be, and also how to reform any restife or run away
horse perfectly.


Of the Bit and Cauison.
Kingdon. Having made mine horse perfectly ready upon the trench or brake
with a mousroll and martingale, I would desire you to teach me what bit I shall
give at the first.


Clifford. You shall give him a plain canon without any playing rings or
roughness in his mouth and let the esses of your curb be very great, to the
end that it may not gall the horses chin: for the small curb shall gall him
much sooner than the great, besides that, you may hold him ten times better
with the great curb than with the small: Also take heed that you take the
cheeks of your canon long rather than short: for with the long cheeks and
great curb you shall be able to hold your horse, not only from going away,
but also from casting up of his head, if you hold your bridle hand close upon
the mane: and as touching the hand upon the bit, I would have you bear it so
light as is possible, so that you keep your horse from going away, and that he
rain with his head in due place, without casting his head up or ducking it
down: and I would have you also take great heed that you never chocke your
horse in the mouth therewith, nor pull your hand suddenly at any time, but
softly and leasurely for fear of making him to check upon the bit, which is a
most vile vice, and comes most commonly either by plucking your hand too
suddenly, or by letting the bit hang too side in his mouth, or for that the
bit is too rough: it may come also by holding too hard an hand upon him, which
is one of the worst properties that may be in any horseman, for it is not good
to let him hang upon your hand or bridle, but also that you feed him with the
bit, and oftentimes that you let it go so loose ye he may rest his neck and
mouth.


Kingdon. What mean you by holding his head in his due place?


Clifford. I mean that he should carry his head in such sort that when you
would make him stand against a wall, he may touch the same with his forehead
and nose both just together.


Kingdon. But by holding mine hand close upon the mane, I shall not be able to
feed my horse with the bit, nor give him any more liberty when he does well,
than when he does ill.


Clifford. By slacking your bridle hand, and holding the ends of the raines
in your right hand you may let your rains go when he does yield to the bit,
and when he does offer to cast up his nose, or to go faster than you would have
him, then draw the raines softly through your left hand so much as shall be
requisite. And as touching the cauison I would not have you to put your cords
cross wise through the rings thereof, in such sort, that you may strain it
straight to your horses head, least you be not able to let it looser when he
does well, than when he does offend, for that shall greatly discourage him:
for both the godly and wisest travail with greatest pleasure where they gains
glory and praise, and so an horse where he finds most ease after he does
understand what he shall do under such a riders hands, can as well, I say,
consider these things, and use them in time and order accordingly. Thus you
shall hardly ever see or perceive any contrariety of will betwixt these two
bodies, although the one be reasonable and the other unreasonable, but that a
man would think when he shall see such an horse man ride, that both they had
but one will and one mind. But to our purpose, you shall make fast a strap of
leather to the right ring of your cauison, and a buckle to the left ring
thereof, in such sort, that you may buckle it so straight as you shall think
meet, but I would advise you to let it be rather an inch too wide, than one
wheat corn length too straight: for there is not any thing ye does more
disorder an horse than needless pain and correction, or rather as I may term
it, foolish torment proceeding through ignorance of a more presumptuous beast
than the horse himself: for whatsoever he is that lacks reason he differs
nothing from a beast but in name.


Kingdon. Why shall I buckle my cauison with a strap of leather, and not rather
put the cords through the rings thereof, with the which I may strain it close
to his head, and also give him ease enough by letting mine hand go, when he
does well.


Clifford. As touching thy demand, I answer, that by means of the strap
thou may make thy cauison serve thee to double use, by putting thy
martingall thereon it shall serve thee in stead of a musroll: and as touching
that which thou say thou can give him ease enough, I answer, that that
ease which thou shall give him by letting thine hand go, shall be no other
than that thou give unto thine own leg, thy boot being too straight
gartered by pulling up thine hose with thine hand. But by the use of the
foresaid strappe and buckle it is far otherwise, for that thereby thy cauison
shall hang so loose, that it shall not grieve thy horse at any time, but when
he does offend only.


Kingdon. By this means my cauison shall hang so loose that it shall be ready
to fall off my horses nose, and also when I would strain the raines thereof, it
shall come up so high behind, that it shall serve me to small purpose.


Clifford. Thou may remedy it for hanging over his nose with a small strap
of leather made fast at the one end to the midst thereof, and the other end
to the headstall betwirt his ears: and as touching that which thou say it
will use, it is easily remedied, by making a little short chain fast to the two
nether sides thereof, of such length as the cauison being on the horses head,
and the chain in his mouth, it may keep it in his due place.


Kingdon. I must needs confess that this is the best way to make a cauison
for my horse that ever I did see or hear of, for that it shall not grieve him,
but when he does offend, nor shall be able to stir out of his due place: but
I would desire you to teach me how to use mine hand upon the same, and also
whether it be good to ride an horse therewith or not.


Clifford. As touching thy demand, I answer that thou shall take the left
rain thereof so short in thy bridle hand, that thou may stay thine horse
something more therewith than upon the bit: then shall thou take the right
rain in thy right hand, and the end of the left also in such sort as thou
may draw the left rain with the right hand shorter at thy pleasure,
without letting thy bridle raines go, or opening of either of thy hands,
noting that thou strain thy right rain equally as much as the left: but I
would advise thee to carry a marvelous temperate hand upon thy cauison for
fear of offending thy horse to^ much therewith, unless it be upon great
occasion: then shall it be tolerable to draw thy left rain shorter through thy
hand, and also the raines of thy bit so short ye thou give him no liberty to
cast up his head: but thou must use such discretion therein, that thou stai^ thy
horse more upon thy cauison then upon thy bit, and having in this sort taken a
due measure of thy raines, thou may upon any occasion offered by thy horse,
correct him by plucking thy right rain a little, slaking it again so often as
thou shall think needful. And as touching thy demand if the cauison be good,
I answer that it is excellent good if it be in his hands ye understands the
true use thereof, but otherwise it is most vile. By this that I have said, I
would say that thou should stay thy horse upon thy cauison altogether, and
notwithstanding thou must hold the raines of thy bit so short, that thou give
him no liberty to cast up or ducke down his head.


Kingdon. What mean you by this occasion offered, and by plucking your raines
a little, and then to let them go, I see no reason why I should not hold my
right rain as hard as the left.


Clifford. As touching the first demand, I answer, that occasion is offered
at any such time as your horse will not go back nor keep his ground, but
will press forward when you would have him stand still, or when in his
trotting or galloping he will go farther then you would have him, or that when
you stop him he will force too much upon your hand: and also occasion is
offered when he will not turn on your right or left hand in such sort as you
would have him. But you must note ye when he will not turn on your left hand,
that you draw the rain on that side a good deal straighter then the raines of
your bridle, for fear least that when you would strain your rains, you force
him too much with your right raines of the bit, which is a most notable error,
and yet very little considered of a number of unskillful men that do not
perceive how that when they would bring their horse about on the left hand with
the rain of their cauison, by pulling their hand on that side of his man^ they
strain the right rain of the bit so as the horse cannot turn with his head
but begins to go back, to rear an end, or to fall into one disorder or
other, and the rider not understanding the cause does fall to rating and
correcting his horse, so long til he brings him home with such bloody sides,
his mouth so broken, and his nose so mangled, as would move any man of reason
to pity, to see that most noble beast, of all other most commodious for the
case of man, to be misused by him that has so much reason as to over master
him, but lackes that grace of temperance how to use him, and thereby does most
shamefullie abuse him. Thus much as touching your first demand, and to your
second I answer, that you must hold your raines both a like straight, save
when you turn your horse short, then it shall be tolerable to hold your
contrary rain so short, that you give him no liberty to turn with his head,
and that you draw the other so much that he may understand that you would have
him turn on that side. But to ye purpose, I mean by pulling your hand or
letting it go that you should check your horse upon his nose, when by
temperate carrying of your hand you cannot rule him. But in this above al other
things you must use great temperaunce, which if you do, it is excellent good.
Also you must have a special care when you hold your contrary rain, that
you give the horse so much liberty therewith that he may turn: for by holding
it too straight you shall utterly disorder him. And furthermore, as touching
the right rain of your bridle when you turn on the left hand, you may help
him to turn as well with the bit as with the cauison, by putting your
forefinger of the right hand over the right rain of your bit, and drawing it
therewith two or three inches longer then the other rain which you must hold
fast with the other rain of your cauison, without opening of either of your
hands, and when you will turn on your right hand you may let the right rain
of your cauison go, and take hold of your raines above your left hand, where
you shall draw your right rain some thing shorter then your left without
opening your bridle hand, in which instant you must hold your right rain
stiff till you have drawn it some thing shorter then the left, and then close
your hand fast, and take hold on the right rain of your cauison and the end of
it also, wherewith you may draw your contrary rain so short as you shall
think good, thus turning on your right hand, you may draw the right rain of
your cauison so much as shall be needful to cause your horse to come about so
often as you shall think meet, but see that you do it very gently.


Kingdon. You have here used one term that I understand not, and that is,
when you say I shall not check my horse in the mouth with his bit, and that
on ye other side you say, I may check him with the cauison when any such
occasion is offered, as has been above by you recited: therefore I pray you
teach me what you mean thereby.


Clifford. By checking with the bit, I mean that you should never pluck your
hand suddenly, but rather in all your doings draw it softly and leasurely as is
possible, so that you may make your horse thereby do your will, and presently
thereupon see that (...) slake it a little to the end that he may find ease
when he does well, which is the best mean to maintain^ him in well doing, and
by checking him with the Cauison, I mean that you should pluck your right
rain in such sort as you would pluck your friend by the cloak lap whom you
are loath to offend, at such time as you would speak with him: And also you must
note by the way, that at such time as you would thus checks your horse with
your right rain, you must hold the left rain so short, ye you cannot pluck
your horses head aside: and if it chance at any time that you find it
needful to check your horse first with the one rain and then with the other,
you must take great heed, that you let the raines of your bit go of such
length that you checks him not with his bit in any case, and take great care
that you check your horse in this sort so many times as shall be needful to
make him understand your mind, and when he will yield in such sort as you
would have him, then let your hand go, and torment him no more then you are
forced of necessity.


Kingdon. You have taught me that it is good to bear a temperate hand both
upon my bit and cauison, and also how much I should force him with the raines
thereof, but there yet remains two things that I had almost forgotten, and the
first is the due place of the bit; and the other is how and in what order I
shall take the raines of my bit and cauison both in one hand at once, and also
how I shall hold my hands upon the raines of my bit when I ride without a
cauison, and what you mean by drawing the raines of my bit softly and letting
it go again.


Clifford. To thy first demand I answer, that the due place of the bit is,
that it hang half a ^ingers breadth higher then the tuskes of your horse, and
to some horses it is not amiss to hang it an inch higher then the tuskes or
fanges of his mouth, but the general rule that thou shall observe herein, is,
that thou never let it hang so a side that it touch the fore named tuske, for
if it do touch his tuske, it shall cause him to check upon the bit and hurt
his mouth so as it shall bleed. And as touching thy second demand, thou shall
first take both the raines of thy cauison in thy left hand so close under the
nether part or root of your thumb, as you may hold him fast with your
little finger and thumb, then shall you take the end of your bridle raines in
your right hand betwixt your body and your bridle hand, then shall you put your
ring finger betwixt the raines of your bit without letting your little finger
go, which you must hold fast upon your cauison raines, and the neathermost
part of your thumb also. Then shall you cloase your three fingers so close as
you can, and having turned your bridle raines with your right hand over the
middle joint of the fore finger of your left hand, you shall hold your thumb
close upon the Bridle raines, so as you give them no liberty to slip
through your hand, having thus taken your bridle raines of a just length and
place, the raines of your cauison above or over them, I mean deeper in your
fist then the raines of your bit, for that you hold the raines of your Cauison
in your full fist, and the raines of your Bit but in the middle of three of
your fingers. Then shall you let the end of your bridle raines fall out of your
right hand, and take hold of the right rain of your cauison, and the end of
the left also in your right hand, then if your left rain be too long you may
draw it shorter by holding your right hand fast, and slaking your left hand a
little to let the raines of your cauison pass til you have drawn it of such
length as you may hold him therewith in such order as has been before taught.


Kingdon. You teach me here how I should hold my right hand fast upon the
raines of my cauison, and how I shall slack my left hand till I have let the
raines pass through, so far as they come to their just length, which just
length is, when I may bear my horse altogether upon the cauison, and yet
hold the raines of my bit so short, that if I let slip the left rain of my
cauison but one inch, I must stay my horse altogether upon the bit, but it
rests how I shall draw the raines of my cauison shorter at my pleasure,
without loosing my right hand or letting the raines of my bridle go.


Clifford. If thou be not more senseless then a beast, or more negligent then
a Newter, that will take neither part till such time as he sees which of them
will profit him most, I have taught thee sufficiently: But because thou shall
know that I had rather loose my life then take in hand any matter of
importance, and not be able to end or bring the same to perfection, though
not for thy sake, who has negligentlie left mining with thy pen, whiles the
golden vain of my experience was most ripe and ready, by riding into
Sommerset sheere to make good cheer, when in deed thou might have been
ten times better occupied in writing of this work which I have begone with
the same purpose of mind, that has made me patiently to ^eare all these
troubles and miseries as thou may read in the tenth part of my life which
shall hereafter follow (God willing) which mind and purpose in me was, is,
and I trust in Gods grace shall continue so long as the breath is in my body,
only to profit my Country, the true professors of Gods truth, and
advancement of his holy law. But thou shall now know that God whom I have
always served, according to the grace which I have received of him, without
the which I am not able to think one good thought of my self, has sent me
help where I least looked for it, that is to say, by the means of that
godly man master Anthony Mooreland, and by that good and learned man Joseph
Hynxman, the one of them being Parson of Tortworth, the other Butler to
Master Throckmorton, (which is a very low preferment for a Batcheler of Art
in my judgment) who besides his learning is also very patient in taking
pains. Also little Anthony Bowser I cannot here forget, sithence he has
stood so many days with me upon the cold stones in Master Throckmortons
Stable at Tortworth, to draw out the first draught or coppie of this my work,
for the which me thinks he deserves praise. But to our purpose, thou must
draw the rain of thy cauison through thy left hand without letting the
raines of thy bit go, by letting all thy four fingers go loose, and by
holding thy bridle raines with the end of thy thumb and middle of the fore
finger, and then pulling thy right hand away from thy left hand, that is to
say, of greater distaunce in such sort as thou see a showmaker draw his
threede with his right hand when he holds the left hand upon the sh^e, which
thou may imitate by holding thy left hand fast in his due place without
moving it, either when thou drawest thy raines shorter or let them go longer.


Kingdon. Which call you the due place of the Bridle hand.


Clifford. The due place of thy bridle hand is ri^^^ over thy horses crest,
and so high above the saddle ^^ thou may hold thy elbowe, almost as far
back as the huckle bone, and hold it close against thy side without letting
thy hand rest or stay upon the saddle bow: If thy Horse be ready that he
can rain well and carry his head steadie, this is the best way, but if it be
a young or old horse that will cast up his head, then I have taught thee before
that thou shall carry thy hand close upon thy horse his crest.


Kingdon. Yet there rests one thing that I would request at your hands, and
that is, how I should hold the raines of my bit in my hand when I ride
without a cauison, and also how I shall understand what you mean by drawing
my hand softly, and letting it go again.


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, thou shall hold thy raines in all
points as thou do when thou ridest with thy cauison, saving that thou must
put thy little finger and ring finger betwixt the raines, and then hold the
end thereof in thy right hand with thy rod, so as thou may draw them
shorter or let them longer as has been before taught. And as touching thy
second demand when thou would stop thy horse, whether upon pass, trot,
galloppe, or c^riere, I would have thee draw thy hand softly, till thou have
brought it so hard or straight as thou may stop thy Horse, and even in the
same instant that he is so stopped as thou would have him, and begins to
advance or yeeldes to the bit by going back, or other wise thou shall
presently let thy hand flacke a little and take so much again as shall be
requisite, yea, I would advise thee to have so great a care not to pluck thy
hand suddenly, nor to draw it too straight nor carry it too hard in
travailing or otherwise exercising thy horse as thou would have to thine
own feet when thou passest on a narrow foot bridge which lies over a deep
ditch or hollow gulf in rainie and foul weather.


Kingdon. Seeing that you now give me occasion to demand you a question of
the rod, I desire you to show me whether it is better to carry the point
thereof forward right over my horses creast and ears, or to turn the point
thereof backward toward my right shoulder.


Clifford. It is much better to carry thy rod with the point forward over thy
horses creast than with the point upward toward thy right shoulder: for when
thou carriest the point forward thou hold thy rod in thy full fist ready to
strike thy horse withal, and when thou carriest it with the point upward
toward thy right shoulder thou have no more but thy forefinger over it, by
means whereof thou can not so readily help thy horse upon his left
shoulder, to the end that he should do well, nor correct him when he does
offend.


Kingdon. I can very well both help and correct my horse upon the right and
left shoulder, when I have no cauison or false raines, but when I have a
cauison or false raines, then can I correct my horse upon his left shoulder as
before, but on his right shoulder I can do no more but help him, unless I
will let the right rain of my cauison fall out of my right hand.


Clifford. But thou may correct him as well, not only upon his right
shoulder, but also upon his right side or buttock, without letting the right
rain of thy cauison go, if thou will but (...) the point of thy rod downward.


Of Vices.
Kingdon. SIthence you have heretofore taught me how to make a horse of good
disposition ready, I would also have you to teach me how to reform those
horses that are evil given to any vice: and first of the horse that ducketh
down his head.


Clifford. I never found any horse having that vice, but that I could reform
him by striking him upon the left shoulder with the rod, not failing to answer
him at every time at the same instant that he does offend, till he leave his
fault, thou may also correct him with the bit, by chocking him therewith in
the mouth, and by giving him the spur, but these two last corrections are not
half so good as the first, for that if he be tender of mouth, by chocking him
with the bit, thou shall make him learn that vile vice of checking or casting
up his head, if he be hard of mouth, and light of spur, thou shall utterly
mar his mouth, and force him to run away. Note, that in reforming all
vicious horses, thou must have a special care to search and to find out the
nature and disposition of every of them, which when thou have found, thou must
use that temperaunce that a wise captain should in governing his soldiers,
which consists not in forcing them to do his will, but with skill and order
in making the^ do as much thereof as is possible for them to be brought unto,
without disorder or coffeehouse.


Kingdon. It seems me your comparison is very gross, to compare the
government or (...)rance that should be used unto men, to horses.


Clifford. In respect of the beast I grant, but if thou well consider what the
reason of man is, and how far the understanding of the brute beast is
inferior unto him, thou shall easily perceive that it is more requisite for
him, that shall take upon him to teach a horse, to be far more patient and
temperate for him than that governs men, for that man does far surpass the
beast in understanding what is taught him: But in the rider it is requisite he
have patience and can well dissemble, which if he have, and can use in his due
time and place, he shall hardly ever find any horse of good disposition, but
he shall make him continue the same, or any so evil, but that he shall easily
reform them in short space.


How to remedy that horse that checketh and casts up his head.
Kingdon. YOu have given me good instructions already, but yet by the way I
pray you show me how to reform that fault in a horse that checketh or casts
up his head with the bit, when you offer to do any thing with him upon the same.


Clifford. First give him a plain canon without plaiers or water chain in the
mouth, then buckle it fast with two porchmouthes to the two rings of your
cauison: that done, take a strappe of leather with a buckle upon the same, put
it through the foresaid two rings, then buckle it, and therewith strain the
cauison something close to the horse his head, then take away the curb from
the canon for the strap and porchmouths is sufficient to serve your turn as
well as the curb, and be far more better in respect of the fault. I have
many times ridden with ye same a runawaie or hard mouthed horse, and more
easily have governed him therewith than with the curb, and also have diverse
times trotted young horses that have been tender or delicate of mouth in the
same order, which if I had first given them the curb, they would have taken
the vice of checking, or casting up the head, but by observing this order and
after by giving them a curb of double leather have prevented the aforesaid
vice.


Kingdon. But if my cauison be long, it will hold the head of the bit so far
backward, that the cheeks thereof cannot be brought to their due place, which
will be very troublesome and unseemly, and the raines of the bit being
strained, the cauison will be ready to fall down over the horses nose.


Clifford. If thou be so ignorant that thou can not make thy cauison of fit
length for that purpose, and also put a strappe of leather to the middle of
the cauison, and make it fast to the headstall betwixt the horses ears in such
order that the cauison cannot fall, then thou shall shew^ thy self to be more
fitter to keep horses than come to me to learn to ride.


How to correct a Horse that will rear and fall back upon a man.
Clifford. THat comes through the fault of the rider, for that he curbeth his
horse too straight, or gives him too hard a bit, or stops him too suddenly, or
by checking him with the bit, or by letting it hang too low in his mouth, or by
bearing too hard a hand upon him, or by giving him too cruel correction in
teaching him to advance, or by putting him to too much travel at one time.


Kingdon. I grant it may come by any of all these foresaid ways or means:
but I had rather you would teach me how to remedy it, then show me how it
comes.


Clifford. I will teach thee how it comes, to the end that thou may take
heed that thou commit not any such fault by the which thou may bring thy
horse to disorder. And as touching the remedy, first ride him without a curb,
as has been before taught, or else with a trench, mousroll, and martingale,
and take heed you tie not your martingale too short at the first, and when you
will ride him, lead him forth of the stable into some deep, marrish, or
rotten ground, with a couple of footmen, each of them having a cord in his
hand made fast to the brake: and when you are come into the foresaid place,
rain your horse first to the saddle bow, that done, let the two footmen
offer to lead him forth gently: and if he will not go forth, but offer to
rear an end, then let the two footmen strike him on the fore legs with their
cudgels, which they must carry in their right hands for that purpose, holding
the cords in their left hands, it shall be requisite also to have one behind
him that may at the same instant whip him well upon the two flanckes: and when
you have made him go gently, being rained on the saddle, then may the rider
take his back, and when he is up, take away your two cords, and offer to put
him forward, noting, that at the same instant that he offers to stand still to
rear an end, you strike him on the fore legs, and let the footeman whip him
on the flanks as before. And this order being observed you shall within the
space of fifteen days make him leave his fault so clean as though he had
never had it: remembering always, that when he begins to rear, you let your
bridle go and take hold on his mane with your left hand, and when he goes
without rearing, make much of him, and torment him not.


Kingdon. With what shall I strike my horse on the fore legs, and why shall I
ride him in a marish ground?


Clifford. With a good cudgel, beating him therewith over the shinnes beneath
his knees, it were better if thou have store of rods, to take five or six
under thy girdle, with their points hanging downward, to the end, that when
thou have broken one, thou may draw out an other, for that he fears a rod
more than he does a cudgel. And as touching the marrish ground, he shall have
more mind to save himself from sincking in it, than to rear an end, in the
which passing to and fro, you shall very well tame him, and acquaint him with
the correction, by striking him sometimes on the legs. And afterward, being
come to the firm ground, carry your rod or cudgel always in such sort that
it may almost touch his knees, and you may also touch him a little therewith in
going, by means whereof he shall have more mind to kneel, than to rear.


Kingdon. By riding my horse in a marrish or rotten ground, I shall not only
tire him, but also stand in doubt to leave him behind me, as I have known
diverse ignorant soldiers to do in Ireland, by means of their brainsick
hastines.


Clifford. If thou be so ignorant that thou can not choose thy ground of a
reasonable deepnesse, and also to ride so few turns therein, as thou may
leave thy horse both in strength and courage, it shall be more reason that thy
Horse ride thee then thou him, note that when the horse is acquainted with this
correction you may always afterward ride him on the hard ground the footeman
following him as before, and forget not to carry your cudgel also in the
self sort as you did at the first.


How to correct that horse that will not go from the stable, or when he meets
any other horses upon the way will suddenly stand still, and not go from them,
and also being in company with other horses will not depart the same.
Clifford. I Have diverse times helped such a horse by riding him without
spurs, with a short whip only, whipping him therewith upon his cods, never
ceasing til I have made him to go forward, and also by striking him with the
great end of my foresaid whip staff between his two ears, if need so
require, for this is a very good correction, but very dangerous for the poll
^uill. I have also ridden upon a horse in Flaunders that had this fault, which
being before the (...)nie, and I upon him, have offered to play his pageant, so
that not having leisure to t^k^ my whip, I have been forced to strike him
(...) the two ears with the pommell of my sword, wher^with I have made him
gallop more than four English miles: you may also have two footmen, the one
with ^ whip, and the other with a go^de, and when he begins his pageant, let
them come behind him, and correct him in the tenderest places of his body, as
has been before taught.


Kingdon. I have seen some horses that would not stir for any correction.


Clifford. But if thou do but only prick him with the goade about his nose
and mouth thou shall quickly make him stir, though he be never so vile of
nature.


Kingdon. How shall I remedy that horse I pray you, that will lie down when
he is corrected.


Clifford. Throw water upon his head, and into his ears, then shall thou
quickly see him rise: thou may also cause a cloth to be cast upon his head,
and three or four footmen to hold it down close about him, keeping down his
head till he be almost smothered to death, and when he rises, let the footmen
beat and rate him with a terrible noise, but see that thou neither spur nor
strike him, but let him go gently at his own ease.


How to correct that horse which is hard of mouth, and will run away with
his rider.
Kingdon. I Pray you before you depart, teach me how I shall reform that
horse which is hard of mouth, and will neither stop, nor do any other lesson,
but when it shall please himself.


Clifford. I ever thought so, that thou would still trouble me with foolish
questions, have I not already sufficiently taught thee how to master any
horse in such sort that he should obey, and not to tell me how the horse has a
will of his own.


Kingdon. I grant that you have spoken some thing as concerning the same, but
I pray you let it not be grievous unto you to teach me more exactlie, and
that not only how to remedy it, but also what is the principal cause
thereof.


Clifford. First as touching the cause thereof, thou must note that some horses
have it by the imperfection of nature, for that their jaws are so narrow and
their heads set so right forwards upon their necks, that it is not possible
for them to r^ine well, but the most part of horses takes it through^ the
unskillfulness of the rider, by bearing too hard a hand upon them, by over
riding them or by too sharp corrections out of due time before they make their
horse to understand what he should do, by means whereof they make him so
fearful and timorous, that he becomes desperate, and not knowing what to do,
he falls to running away, to go backward, or to rear an and, or else
becomes so senseless that he will not go for any beating, no, although you
would kill him. This by the way, but to the purpose. First put on your horse a
ca(...)n without a curb, but you must have a special care that you carry so
temperate a hand upon your cauison as may be, that you distemper not your horse
by so much tormenting him therewith. Also force him with the bit as little as
is possible, having in this order bridled your horse, ride him fair and
softly in some fair or large ring a foot pase, and having walked him ten or
twelve turns upon one hand, then stop him and make him go back, but if you
cannot make him go back by gentle means, yet strive not with him in any
case, but give him as many turns on the other hand. Thus changing from hand
to hand, you shall give him so many turns as you shall think convenient,
taking heed always that to all such horses you use no extremity before you
have sought to win him by all gentle means possible. Having in this sort
thoroughly acquainted your horse in this lesson, then you may begin to trot
him, noting that upon his trot you stop him often in the foresaid ring, and
also make him go back if it may be with gentleness, if not, yet flatter and
speak him fair, to the end that you may encourage him not only to do that
lesson, but any other that you shall teach him in tune.


Kingdon. But if my horse will not go back, it shall be to small purpose to
trot him in the ring, for that I have heard you say it is not possible to make
a horse to stop well and to bear light upon the hand, except you first teach
him to go back, and that he will do it both lightly and readily.


Clifford. Have I not taught thee before how to make a horse go back by
riding him in a deep way, having high banks on each side, and to use the
help of a footman with a cudgel in his hand, and by striking him on the fore
legs, if you cannot by threatening make him go back.


Kingdon. I grant you have taught m^^ but that (...) to ^ young horse and with
a trench, but this is ^o an old^ horse with a bit and cauison, and therefore I
think it to be very hard to make him do it upon the cauison and bit, for
that I have seem diverse horses to be made desperate by tearing and pulling
them too much with the cauison, and also the number is not small of those that
I have seen by teaching them upon the bit, have their mouths clean marred
therewith, but I never knew any horses mouth hurt with a trench or brake.


Clifford. Ah, I con thee thanks for finding out so notable an error as that
is, for to confess the truth, there was never young horse made so well mouthed
by teaching him upon the bit and cauison, but that he might have been made a
great deal better upon the trench or snaffle, or old horse of any fault so
well reformed as with the same.


Kingdon. Then would you have me to ride my horse till I had made him go
back with the snaffle or brake only?


Clifford. Not so, for I would not have you ride him only therewith, but also
that you add a musroll and martingale thereto, without the which you may
never ride any horse with a brake, and also I would not only have you to
ride your horse therewith till he can go back, but also till he be perfectly
recovered of this fault or any other whatsoever.


Kingdon. But I have seen some horse so wilful that they would neither stop
nor go back for any of these helps by you taught.


Clifford. Nor I never found any but that I could help by this correction
here following. At the same instant that he refuses to go back for all
those corrections or helps, take the one rain of your trench within a foot of
your bit, lap it about your hand, and pull his head so near your knee, as it
is not possible for him to go away, spur him on the contrary shoulder, and
whippe him well behind your saddle also with your rod, or short whippe,
winding and turning him from hand to hand, so long till you make him glad to
do your will, note that in any case you hold your raines so short, that he
may not go out of his place, and that you never use this but in great
extremity and upon good ground for fear of sliding or falling.


Kingdon. Shall it be enough to serve my horse in this sort one time only?


Clifford. If he offend but once, then have thou no reason to torment him
often, but it shall be requisite at every time he does refuse stubburnlie to
do his lessons to serve him in like order, by means whereof thou shall make
him to do all those things that thou desire without once to be so hardy
as to offer to run away.


Kingdon. But I have known some horses so stubburne and crafty, that at what
time you would pull him a side with the one rain, he will hold his head out
right with such strength, and also go away so speedily, that it is not
possible for any man to stay him.


Clifford. I must needs confess that thou have set me hard, but thou shall
know that the God of Israel whom I serve, to whom all glory is due, of all
knowledge and invention has given me grace with credit to perform whatsoever
I have taken in hand, by means whereof if thou be able to demand all the
questions that is in this Art requisite, I have no doubt but to answer thee,
not with learning (for God he knows I have none, n^ not so much as to read one
line in any language) but with true experience which I have gotten by
travailing with great misery in Ireland, England, Frannce, and Flaunders.


Kingdon. In iniserie, what misery have you been in? Call you ye misery, to
be in such great estimation with Monsieur Lanow at Englemester before he was
taken prisoner, in such sort that a number of soldiers envied your fortune, or
call you that misery which happened unto you by Monsieur Velleeres when the
camp lay at Loo, who gave you credit with commission to go to Nuport to make
bridges to pass the army upon, in doing whereof your fame was so great, that
happy was he that could be acquainted with you or see your work, and ten
times happier was the army, lying shortly after at Duncarke, to have such
bridges, or otherwise the Prince of Parma had overthrown them which then lay
scattered in three or four villages, but ye espials warning Monsieur Velleeres
of the Spaniards coming, by means whereof you were commanded to make
experience of your bridges for that necessity required, where you passed the
army with such readiness over the river of Duncarke, that the Prince of Parma
came too late, and the army was then in safety by reason it was between two
rivers. Then call you that great estimation which you had of him that day,
misery? or call you that misery, to be made for your service Gentleman of the
Artillery, and also master of the Marshals horses, and from ^^tting among
serving men in England, to fit at so honorable a Table as he then kept, and
hearing the matters of the army debated, with such credit and estimation, that
happy was that man which could have you speak in his cause, your estimation
and credit was so great with the aforenamed marshall, and all other noble men
of the army which you did not at any time decrease, but increase daily, in
such sort, that the camp lying at Rosendale, the foresaid marshal Veleers made
you lieuetenant of the Artilleri^, to the great admiration of all the noble
Captains that then sat at the Table with him. Moreover he said, we shall
have fifteen Canons for the battery of Wawe, which is a very strong Castle,
belonging to the Spaniardes, whereof Monsieur Possey shall be lieuetenant of
eight of the forenamed pieces, and I make you my lieuetenant of the other
seven, for ye the marshal Beeron shall be m^ister of the one battery, and I
of the other, where with your seven Canons you had made the first breach, by
reason that the French men left their appointed place, and therefore both
vnconstantlie and foolishlie began to assaie the wall in two other places, and
the marshal Beeron sent diverse messengers to you to do the like, but you
utterly refused it, saying, that by constant following your determination you
should vndoutedlie obtain your purpose, which came so to pass, to the great
grief of the French men and great rejoicing of the English men, Scots,
Flemings, and Wallons, of all which Nations you chose some for your Canon
heirs, utterly rejecting the French men, saying they were to tender and weak
of bodies to endure so great travail as that required, which was well
approved, for that they had the honor to shoot first, which you won from
them even at the third shoot^, and afterward running into the battery of the
French men, you scorned them, saying: are ye the brave soldiers of France,
and will suffer a company of dronken Flemings to take your honor from you, and
within three times shooting to be before ye in despite of yo? and afterward
^eturning into your foresaid battery, and encouraging your soldiers, by
telling them that the general of the army did greatly commend them, with the
which invention you did make them so strive one against another for praise and
glory, that from morning till one of the clock in ye after noone, you had
shot in fifteen Canons fifteen hundred shot, for the which service marshall
Beeron gave you great commendations, thanks, and rewards, yea, and
afterward sent Captain Hunter unto you to lea^e Monsieur Velleers, and serve
him, and set down what pay you would and he would give it, which he most
honorably performed. Therefore I pray you call you this misery?


Clifford. I call not this misery, but the mean by the which I did attain to
the same credit by you before recited, was great and extreme as ever any man
did escape, and afterward did make report of the same. First thou must note,
that after I had passed thirty years and odd in England and Ireland, in all
the which time fortune was so perverse unto me, that I was never able in all
that time to buie me one suite of new apparel, but if I should recite all the
manner of miseries which I here in my Country have passed, and that they were
all written, this book should be too little to hold them, for which cause I
mind to pass them over with silence, and briefly to touch some part of those
which I passed beyond the seas, after I was preferred to the service of the
right noble Prince Duke Cassemerus, by the right Worshipful Sir Philip Sidney,
with which foresaid Duke I passed out of England, and being forced for lack
of wind to ride at the black^ Nash in France, I went a land to Bolonia to see
the fortification thereof, and tarrying a land all night, the wind served and
the shipp^ made sail, which I espying in the morning, ran along the sands,
thinking to recover Callis before them, where I might get a boat for money, but
all in vain, for before I came to Callis under a great chalk cleefe, ye tide
had taken me that I could go no farther, nor yet be able to return backward,
nor to stand in safety, for that the stones began to fall as the Sun did
rise, being frostie weather, and the Sun shining caused the stones to fall,
by means whereof I was forced to climb so high as I could, and to lean my
head into a hole, not once being so hardy as to set me down. The tide being
gone I came to Callis, where I met one master Cradocke, a merchant of Stafford
sheere, who told me it was very dangerous passing by Grauelin, for that
Monsieur Lamoate was there governor, and mortal enemy to Duke Cassemerus, and
would not let any servant of his pass, but I being not discouraged
therewith, although my money was almost spent, nor being able to speak one
word of any language beside mine own, which I think you will occount for
great misery. Afterward being examined by Lamoate, I told him that I served
Master Fouke Greyuell, who was come over to accompany the Duke Cassemerus,
and he examining an old Irish spy which he there had, and finding in deed
master Fouke Greyuell to be in the ship he let me go without any harm, and
by that time I came to Antwerpe my money was all gone. Then was I forced to
ride a couple of runawaie iades, for the which I was so badlie paid, that I
went many times supperlesse to bed. It were too long here to recite the
journey which I took in hand to serve the king of Portingale, and the great
tempests which I endured on the seas by the space of xii. days, riding then at
the Downs, where I saw a number of goodly ships torn in pieces and the men
all drowned, which I think you will allow for misery, for that I looked for
death continually, which was worse then a thousand deaths, but afterward being
returned into the haven of Flushing, and seeing my horses to be spoiled, I left
off that journey, and went to the Scottish men, who had then beaten Monsieur
Montanies folk out of Roselare, and having gotten entertainment under captain
Hammelton to serve as a common soldier, I was shortly after taken prisoner by
the Wallons of Vnreue, where I was most miserably imprisoned and hardly dealt
withal, for that they took my hose and doublet from me, leaving me nothing
but a stinking sheep skin about me, and the wool on it, and my cloak, of
the which I made a long gabberdine with sleeves, like an old popish priest:
which thing is well known to little captain Lucar, who was then marshall of
the Englishmen in Tourney, and the first that I met withal of mine
acquaintance, who did not a little marvel to see me attired in that sort, and
to see me lame that I could scarcely go, by means of a wound which I had in my
right thigh, when the said Wallons took me prisoner: then he brought me to the
lodging of captain Bows, who was then Liefetenant to captain Ihon Cotton,
who was a very brave soldier, and then lay maimed in the gest house of
Valentia, where he was prisoner. But to the purpose, I had not a penny in my
purse to pay for my supper, and the said captain Bows sent me to one Brown
a victualler of his company, or rather a hangman: I cry you mercy Master
Brown, I should have said, a Proforce with a Serg^^nt, to command him to
let me have victuals, but neither he, nor his wife would as much as bid me
welcome out of prison, nor make me drink in their house, nor suffer me to
lodge there on the ground, but afterward being brought to a lodging by the
said Sergeant, where I went supperlesse to bed. The next morning I went out
with the soldiers, where I got something to eat, and using the same daily
when they went out, one captain Morris chanced to meet me, and having
compassion on me, seeing I went with such great pain to get my victualles, he
stayed me at the port of the town, and said I should not go further in such
miserable sort, for that (quoth he) it is a shame that strangers should see us
so careless, as to let any man of our own nation, ster^e with hunger, and
for want of clothes to keep him from cold: and presently he went gathering so
much money among the rest of the Captains and Gentlemen as did apparel me:
And the rest of the winter I passed with these four unfortunate ensigns (for
so were they commonly called) that is to say, captain Floide, captain Ellis,
captain Chatterton, and captain Cotton. The spring of the year being come,
Monsieur Lanow assembled the army, and went to besiege the castle of
Englemester, where the army was overthrown, and he taken prisoner, and I most
cruelly burned with powder, where I had not so much as a shirt left upon me,
nor one penny of money, neither any place to go unto for my relief, which
thou must account for great misery, considering of that sudden misfortune to
happen unto me the morrow, having gotten my self into so great credit with
Mounsieur Lanow even the night before, and all the rest of my friends and
fellow soldiers spoiled, imprisoned, slain, or burned as my self was, then
was I (by good fortune) brought to the most horrible Spittlehouse of Gaunt, and
lying there in great misery, Coronell Cotton, as soon as he heard thereof
sent me four and twenty Florence by a Gentleman with this word, that if I
lacked any thing, I should send him word, and he would most willingly
sustain my need, but I well considering with my self the hardenesse of the
man, and that he sent the same by reason of the great estimation, which I had
gotten with Monsieur Lanow, I doubting to trouble him any farther, made the
messenger this answer.

Tell thy Master I can not lack any thing, for that he has given me a
kingdom: and so in deed this money was the only mean by the which GOD
did preserve me, or otherwise the Surgeon would have let me starus, as
he did a number of other Englishemen for want of dressing, but I gave him
almost all my money presently, by means whereof he took the greater care,
and was the more diligent, but Oh, I would to God that thou had seen with
what cruelnesse he pulled away the coares of my burning before the fire was
thoroughly killed, only of purpose to make me give him more money, to the
end, he might handle me gently, I having no more money, was forced to endure
his tyranny, till such time as a Soldier coming to see how I did, lent
me a crown, which I gave to an old woman of the house, every night to
steal me some of the Surgeons medicines, by means whereof I had enough: and
by diligent dressing my self therewith, I was soon^ healed: Oh that thou
had seen the misery that I endured the first fifteen days, for that my
^raine was so troubled with the heat of the fire, that it seemed me I saw
Lions, dogs, and Diuelles coming upon my bed to rende me in pieces. Then
began I as earnestly to pray as was possible for a wretched creature to do
in this sort. O Lord God I do confess that I was not worthy of so great
credit as thou had given me with Monsieur Lanowe, therefore thou ha^^
punished me in this, to the end, that I should know hereafter both how
to use mine own credit more mildely, and the need of others. Also I beseech
thee, O Lord God, to pardon me mine offenses, and take not my senses from me
until such time as I make testimony to the world how I honor virtue, thee, and
thy holy laws, and how heartily I love thy people, and my native country.
Being somewhat recovered and importunating the people of the house for sower
milk to eat, my inward heat and burning was so great, then an old villain
threatened me therefore saying, he would knock me on the head, and cast me into
a pit, if I would not hold my peace: And upon the same, an old woman gave me
a mess of pottage with such herbs in them, that it cast me into the bloody
flix, whereof I could not be healed in the space of three years after: yea, and
with the same they killed a number of good soldiers. But in the end, I being
strong and able to go about the house, to see how the rest of my fellow
soldiers did, which then lay there in great misery, the old villain came
to me again, and threatened me as before, if I would not keep my bed,
which grieved me more than all my other misfortunes, for that I being of
sufficient strength, not only to walk about the house, but also to go to the
army, had not one cloth to cover my body withal, but afterward, one Powell a
victualler came to see how I and others did, I told to him my grief and
lack, who caused presently clothes to be provided for me. And afterward
coming to the army which lay within four English miles of Gaunt, where my
bloody flixe took me so ertreemly, that I was glad to go to Antwarp to seek
remedy, where, having spent all the money that the soldiers of the army had
given me, I came to Coronell Cotton, who commanded my diet to be paid for, and
also my physic in his lodging, but a cruel scolde that was then hostess of
the same house (Coronell Cotton being gone) would not suffer me to tarry
there: then had I no succor, but to lie in Coronell Cottons stable upon the
straw, where, having not a penny to buie me meat, a poor skinner that
dressed Spanish leather, and had leave of the said Coronell Cotton to dry his
leather in his yard, was to pass through, he when he saw me lie in such great
misery, for Gods sake gave me to eat, but it was so little and so bad, that I
was within short time neither able to go nor stand, as Master John Sentleger
can well witness, who was then there, and talked with me. Then I desired the
said skinner, that he would bring me to the gest house, where I lay ten
weeks before I was able to go. Being recovered, I was feign to beg a pair of
old shoes, for that I had none to put on my feet. Thence I went unto Bruxels,
where, before I could get entertainment among the Scottishmen, I was feign to
lay my cloak to gage, to buy me meat: and afterward having gotten
entertainment with one Captain Tomson we came to Filford, where I passed the
space of six months with great penury, for that I was glad (being then
winter) to sleep on the cold ground without a cloak: And also I would stand
for sintenel all the night for three halfepence a night: yea, so great was my
necessity, that I was forced to get old iron, and sell it to the Mariners,
which though I carried it many times on my back three or four English miles,
yet profited I greatly thereby, for that I not only recovered my health, but
also my strength, in such sort, that there was not any man in all Coronell
Stewards regiment able to over go me, nor take more pains in any work than
I was: moreover, many times I would break or cleave a whole wagons load of
house timber, to get my breakefast, and a pot of beer. With this extreme
travail having recovered my self as before, I found an invention how to
make ten or twelve wagon loades of wood or timber, as before to fleet
down a little brook, which did drive the milles of the town: by selling the
foresaid timber to the victuallers, I got so much money as loosed my cloak, and
also bought me such old apparel of the soldiers, as not only kept me from
the cold, but also was reasonable decent. Having passed the winter in this
most extreme misery, I said on a day in the court of Guard openly before all
the soldiers: Now Clifford be of good here, for before winter come again,
God shall not only deliver thee of that need to stand for sentenell, but also
thou shall undoubtedly have credit with the General of an army, and also
have servants to attend thee: which words of me were uttered so vehemently,
that the officers and Gentlemen were thereat astonished, saying: Surely thou
have deserved it for thy constant enduring of pains and misery, which we
never knew any man do, with such patience. But one corporal Coy only
scorned me, who afterward before Bargas had been hanged for stealing of ^ine
if I would. But the Marshall sending me to see who had committed the fact, I
gallopping before the rest which he sent with me, caused him to hide himself,
by means whereof I not only saved a very good and tall soldier, but also
got great good will among all the rest of the Scottishmen: Let not any man
therefore find fault with this that I have said, until they have tried the
like that I have d^ne: or else set pen to paper to amend the same: A most
excellent invention to hold any runawa^e or hard mouthed hor^e with the
strength of one of your fingers.
which if they do, I shall most gladly embrace their doings: for the only
thing I seek, is the profit of my country. Thus by the way, as touching the
tenth part of the misery of my life.

But to the purpose, thou shall take a ring of iron and make it fast to the one
end of a strappe of strong leather which would be three foot of length, and
two inches broad, ^o keep the ring from turning* This done, make fast the
other end of the strap to the point of your saddle tree behind, which you
shall easily do in this sort: take first a strappe of good leather, and nail
it crossewise under the point of the foresaid tree. Having turned it over, and
the end forward, give it an other nail on the out side of the tree. Then may
you buckle your foresaid piece of leather, with a strong buckle thereon. That
being done, make fast a little thong of leather to the foresaid ring so long
as may come from the fore point of the tree of your saddle, to the buckle of
his breast plate, by this means the foresaid strap and ring shall hang so
close under the cover of your saddle that a man shall hardly perceive it: which
being done, take a piece of a slip or fine cord, make one end thereof fast
to the foresaid ring: and pass the other end thereof through the great eye
of your brake or bit: And then pass it through the ring where the end of it
was first made fast. This being done, pass it yet once again through the eye
of your trench, noting, that there ^e no knottes in your cord, but that it run
clear, and make the end thereof fast to your saddle bow: That done, get your
horse into some good ground as has been before taught: if it be a very fierre
and furious horse, it shall not be amiss before you take his back, to draw
the cord something straight, and make it fast to the saddle bow: This being
done, go from him, and speak to him, to the end he may try himself, neither
shall it be amiss to strike him with your rod, to the end that he may know
himself to be thoroughly maistred by this invention. Having used him in this
sort so much as reason requires, (to whose rule I would have thee have a
special regard in such extremities as those be) thou may somewhat slack
thy cords in such sort, that thou strain not thy horses head therewith: Then
take his back, and offer him gently to tread out a ring in the self place: In
doing whereof, I would have you to speak him fair, flattering, and using him
gently, to the end he may find ease in obeying your will, and also, that he
may perceive the better wheresore he is corrected. And afterward when he
shall offer to run away, or maliciously refuse to do his lessons, let your
bridle go, and draw the end of your cord so much as shall be requisite. By
this means you may easily stay your horse from going away, even with the
strength of one of your fingers: which being done, correct him sharply with
the spurr^ on the contrary shoulder, as before taught, and the rod also: that
being done, slack the cord, and offer him his lesson again, and fail not
that at every time he does err, to correct him in this order, by means
whereof you shall in short time have him as obedient as ever was scholar to
his schoolemaister.


Kingdon. But were it not better to ride him in some deep way, and having
footmen with staves, and burning straw in the ends thereof to put it in his
nose, or to run him in the field till he be weary?


Clifford. It were very good for a fool or madman.


Kingdon. Wherefore? both learned and wisemen have so taught me.


Clifford. I grant them to be both learned and wise, but in teaching such
bables, they bewray their want of skill in this art, for consider, I pray
thee, how that horse is reformed, that the rider can not command when it
shall please him without the help of any footeman: but by this last remedy,
by me taught, thou shall master any horse without help, and make him that he
shall not once dare offer to run away.


How to remedy that Horse that will turn but on the one hand.
Clifford. YOU shall remedy him in this sort following, put a false rain on
the side ye he will not turn on, if you ride him with a bit, for if you ride
him with a trench, you shall not need of a false rain. This being done,
turn him on that hand in some large ring and give him at the least ten or
twelve turns at a time, then give him two or three on the other hand,
afterward, turn him on the other hand again as before, for in observing
this order, and by holding your false or trench rain on that side so short,
that he can have no liberty with his head, you shall quickly remedy him if
you give him no short nor narow turns till he be perfect in the large, and
that you bring him not suddenly from a large ring to a little, but as he is
perfect in the large ring, so ever must you make him tread his ring less and
less by a little at once til you have brought him to tread his rings in as
small compass as shall be requisite.


Kingdon. But I have known some horses that when you would offer to turn them
they will turn on the contrary side in despite of your teeth.


Clifford. Have I not taught thee in the last Chapter with a strap of leather
to turn a runawaie horse, by the which thou may remedy this fault easily,
if thou will take heed thou turn him not too short at the first, but orderly
and leasurelie as has been before taught?


Kingdon. But I have seen you to a horse of master Throckmortons use a more
easier way in my judgment, and a far more readier.


Clifford. I pray you tell me in what order was that, for I have now clean
forgotten it.


Kingdon. I saw you unbuckle the raines of the brake and take the right rain
thereof, and put it through a ring that was made fast to your saddle with a
double piece of leather that went twice about the fore point of your saddle
tree, and having past it through the foresaid ring, you did also put it
through the eye of your brake, where the other end thereof was first made fast,
and I saw you with drawing the end thereof hold your horse in such sort that
he was not able to go away, but only to turn on the right hand,
notwithstanding you did break your rod on him and spurred him till he bled,
and afterward having loosed the foresaid rain and buckled it in his former
place, and then offered him his lesson, which he did before stubburnlie refuse
to do, I then saw him do it with such willingness, that in my judgment the
horse made a double amends for his former falt, yea, and though you did provoke
him by riding him till he was almost weary, yet did he not dare once offer to
go away, at the which I did not a little m^ruaile, knowing him to be so
stubburne a horse, and so notable a runawaie, that in the space of half a ^ere
and more before your coming he stood still because no man was willing to ride
him.


Clifford. Thou say troth, thou may also in like manner take a cord of
two fathom of length, nesse the two ends thereof first through the great eye^
of your bit or brake, and afterward pass them through the two patterell
buckles of your saddle, and then make fast the side of the cord so the eye of
your brave, and when your ^^rse does offer to run awa^e you may draw one
side of the foresaid cords, by means whereof you shall most ^astlie stay him
as before, but in correcting him if he turn so fast and many times that you
cannot endure the same, then may you let that ^aine go and pull the other, by
means whereof you shall not only correct your horse, but also be well able to
endure his turning.


How to remedy a horse that will lie down in the water.
Clifford. AT what instant he lies down in the water, cause three or four
foot men to leaps ^n his head and keep: him down under water till he be
almost drowned.


How to correct the horse that will not carry his head right.
Clifford. Hold your spur close in his side till he look that way, which
when he does, take away your spur and make much of him, as soon as he
forgets that correction see that you remember him as before till he leave his
fault.


Kingdon. I have known diverse of those horses very well reformed in their
going, but afterward when you would give them a managing turn, they will dowe
their heads on the one side.


Clifford. Take a strap of leather with a button at each end ^ut full of slits,
to the end you may shorten and lengthen it at your pleasure, pass the one end
thereof through the eye of your cauison, bit, or brake, and the other end
through the buckle of your fore girse, and make it of such length as your horse
may have no liberty to turn his head. This is much better than to hold the
contrary rain of your cauison fast, and a couple of these raines is the best
remedy that ever I found for a weak necked horse.


How to correct that horse that will not bring down his mosell neither for
bit nor musroll, and being tied in with the martingale will continually
strain the same, and hold his nose fast on the musroll, and his mouth on the
bit, and will not yield for any of them.
Clifford. YOu shall cleeue the end of your martingale, and having made two
buttons thereon, button it fast to the two cheeks of your bit, and buckle it
not too short at the first, but after when your horse is acquainted therewith,
you may make it so short as shall be requisite to keep his head in his due
place.


Kingdon. To what place of the cheeks of my bit shall I make this martingale
fast, for it seems me it were a great deal better to make it fast in the
great eyes of my bit?


Clifford. That shall never correct your horse, but as touching the making it
fast, if your bit cheeks be turned at the ends, you may put it into the same,
but if they be not turned at the ends, then make fast a ring to each cheek
thereof near to the nether ends with a pack thread or shoomakers end, by
putting it through ye one ring half a doosen times, and about the cheek of the
bit, and through the other ring also, as before.


Kingdon. It seems to me that a shoomakers end or pack-threed should not
hold my horse, and also I think this way to be very dangerous, for that my
horse shall learn to check upon the bit by reason that the curb shall pi^ch
him to sore.


Clifford. The doubt which thou have for breaking thy thread is more then
needs, for that he shall never break being tied in this order, nor ye
strength of a good codpeece point, although he be very hard of mouth. And as
touching the vice of checking, I grant it to be very dangerous if thou use it
to a horse that is very tender of mouth, but thou must never use it but when
all other remedies fail she, for if thou use it to a horse as before, it
shall work to most excellent effect.


For the horse that is very tender of mouth.
Give him a bit made with two smooth Olives, or else in place of the Olives,
fill all the ieues with plain smooth rings, and make him a curb of leather in
this sort: Take away the three esses of the curb from the rings thereof, then
take a piece of leather some thing more then twice the length of the foresaid
Esses, then pass that foresaid piece of leather thorough the ring ye shall
remain at the hook or long Ess, that is fastened on the right cheek of the
bit, then pass the other end thereof through one of the foresaid three rings,
that you fasten the curb with all upon the hook, and let the two ends of the
foresaid piece of leather meet on the out side turning from the horses ^hin on
the middle thereof, making it fast with a causiers end.

For the horse that is some thing hard of mouth.
Give him a plain scatch or else two millions joined with a piece, and put a
whole bar or trench therein full of plain rings.

Kingdon. But what if my horse will not bear light upon these two bits.


Clifford. Then take your former cannon which would have his cheeks long and
his curb great, for I have seen diverse horses after they have been ridden
with one of these foresaid bits one month, and afterward giving them their
Cannon they have become a great deal lighter thereon then at the first.


Kingdon. But diverse skillful horse men are of the opinion, that it is not
good to change a horses bridle if he be once well bitted.


Clifford. I grant, neither would I wish you to change your cannon in any
case so long as it is possible to govern your horse with him, but I have found
diverse horses ye could hardly be governed with the cannon by reason of the
hardness of their mouths, but by changing them from the canon to one of the
forsaid bits, and afterward to the canon, they become so light there upon in
process of time, that I have been able to govern them upon a canon so
easily, as though they had never been hard mouthed.


Kingdon. Then it should seem that often changing a horses bit, is good to
him that is hard of mouth.


Clifford. Yea, if thou change him upon one of the foresaid three bits, and
that thou take heed thou give him not any other rough bit: thou may also
use the scatch with ye vp^^r mouth or the whole port with two round rowles
which would not be rough nor great, and fill the rest of the ieue with smooth
playing rings on the out side thereof. These aforenamed bits are sufficient to
frame any horse, of what nature or disposition so ever he be of, not having
his mouth marred before with evil riding and rough bits, if so be thou have
the true art of riding, in the which if thou be ignorant, neither shall all
the dronken fashions which thou may see in Flaunders, nor the new sangles or
light inventions which thou may also see in Paris, nor all the moderate
fashions invented by the discreet Italians profit thee any thing.


The end of the second book.
The third book of the keepers Office. The first Chapter of the keepers Office.
Kingdon. YOu have taught me sufficiently as touching the art of riding, now I
pray you let it not be grievous unto you to teach me after my horse is
ridden, how and in what order I shall walk and dress him, to the end that he
may not take cold, for that I have often heard you say, that you account your
horse half marred after that he has once taken an extreme cold, for that he
shall be the more subject not only to take that, but also most perilous
diseases, and death may happen unto him by (...) of extreme heat and cold.


Clifford. Thy horse being ridden, cause him to be walked in ye same place
where thou geuest him some lesson in a great ring, or right forth, with a man
on his back till he be thorough cold.


Kingdon. Why shall I walk my horse with a man on his back, and not in my
hand, and also why shall I walk him in a ring?


Clifford. By walking him in a ring thou may see him as ye ridest thy other
horses by him. Also the man ye shall ride him being ignorant how to use his
hand upon the bridle, shall then have no need to check him with ye bit, for he
being well acquainted with that path, will go himself: and as touching thy
walking of him in thy hand, it is very dangerous, for ye the weather being
very cold ye air will utterly spoil thy horse, which can have no power on him
so long as he is going with a man on his back. Also if your horse be stubburne
or given to rear on end, or leap on his keeper with his fore feet, it shall be
very perilous to walk such horses in your hand, not only in respect of the
keeper, but also of ye horse, who having once beaten his keeper or broken from
him, he shall thereby become so stubburne, ye no man shall be able to lead him
without great danger: of the which horses I have had good experience in
Flanders with Monsieur Villiers, and with Monsieur De la Roshpo, one of them
being marshal of ye camp as aforesaid, and the other general of ye Infancy, ye
army the^ being at Eclow, ye Earl De la Roshpo had a bayhorse which slew two of
his grooms, wherewith he became so cruel and fierc^ not only in biting and
striking, but with rearing on end, ye he would dash out their brains and break
their bones whosoever he could take hold on. Also Monsieur Villiers had a bay
horse named Soldier, which horse when I had ridden him one day, and lighted
to make much of him, (which has always ^^n my common use when my horse has
done well) the horse did leap upon me, and rend almost all my clothes of my
back, and bit off my fore finger, to my great grief, and fear of the
beholders, who all ran away for fear of the fury of the horse, which was so
great, that not one of them was so hardy as once to help me.


Kingdon. I pray you before I go any further, teach me how I may without
peril keep or dress any such horse, for that you told me Monsieur Villiers
gave two horses to Mo^sieur de la Roshpo for the same horse, and afterward
having does the foresaid ill conditioned horses, under your hands, the space
of three years you had never any groom hurt, nor your self put in hazard
with either of them, which can hardly sincke into my head, for that an horse
beginning to bite and leap on his keeper with his forefeete, is hardly or
never to be reformed.


Clifford. I grant they are not to be reformed, but thou shall easily master
them with these inue^tions here following, in such sort, that a boy of sixteen
years of age, may dress them, saddle them, bridle them, lead them in the
hand, leap on them, and light from them, without any peril, either to keeper
or rider. First, when you would bridle your horse, you must make fast a strong
cord to the nose^and of his collar in this sort: Go to the horse on the one
side of the bar, and draw his head to you so far as the contrary rain
will give you leave, then make fast the forenamed cord, which you may easily do
without any danger, then tie him therewith to the rack, and then you may
bridle him with your watering bit, or false trench, which false trench is a
most necessary thing for such an horse, for that he being br^deled therewith,
you may not only dress your horse without danger, but also if occasion
serve, you may put on your bridle without danger, and let the trench remain on
his head, noting, that you leave the rains of the foresaid trench, so long as
you may tie him therewith to the two posts of his room being turned about.


Kingdon. I grant that I may thus keep mine horse from biting me, but what
shall I do that he strike me not with his forefeete, whiles I thus bridle him?


Clifford. If he be so froward that he will not let thee handle his head, then
take a good whip and whip him well, and having so whipped him, offer to touch
him, as before, which if he refuse, then whip him again: observe this order so
long till he be glad to let you handle his mouth, which when he will do, make
much of him, and bridle him, in suffering whereof, see that thou use him
gently, if he offer to bite thy hand, take a left hand gantlet and dash him in
the mouth when he offers to bite thine hand: that being done, take a long
rudgell, and begin to touch him therewith upon his hinder legs, and if he
strike, whip him, as before, so long till he endure to have both his legs and
feet easily rubbed and touched with the same: then begin to rub him gently
with your hands, and after put four pasturn^ on his feet, and let a cord
pass on each side from the hind foot to the fore foot, which would be of a
sufficient length: by this mo^ns may you dress your horse, saddle, and bridle
him without danger either of biting, or striking, and also your horse may both
lie down, and rise with the same so easily, as though he had nothing on: for I
have always used in the camp, when I must make my stable in a ^^rne or great
house, where I had no bars betwixt them to tie all their legs with side
langalls made of great haie roapes, which I did always carry with me for that
purpose.


Kingdon. I pray you teach me what those side langals are, for I know not what
you mean thereby, for that I have never seen any of them.


Clifford. In the north part of England they are common, and also in Scotland,
and it is made in this sort: first take a piece of a cord of five foot of
length, and make a knot on each end thereof, then pass the said knot through
the two eyes of your cord, which must be on ye ends of ye same for ye purpose:
the^ may you shift your knot backward or forward, so long til you make the two
ends thereof fit for your horses feet: then put one on his hind foot, the other
on his forefoot, noting, that daily you change the foresaid langal, putting it
one day on ye one side, and another day on the other for fear of galling him,
it shall not be amiss at the first to line it with cotton or cloth, and after he
is acquainted therewith, he will not hurt himself, though you make it of rough
or hard cord. I have also seen the Albanians use a much more easier fashion,
for ye every keeper may make it himself: Cut a piece of cord of such length
a^ may come from the hinder foot to ye forefoot of your horse, a knot being
made on each end thereof: then take two pieces of small cord, double the^, and
make a great one, make knots upon both ends thereof, and let it be of such
length as it may meet just about ye horses feet, as your pasturn does: then
with a great cudgel sharped at the end open the forenamed great cord, and pass
the small cord through the same behind the knot, and when you shall put it on
your horse, wind the loup that will remain of your foresaid small double cord
til you make ye end thereof so strait, ye you can no more but pass ye forenamed
knot: the turning will keep it so close, that it is not possible for your horse
to undo the same.


Kingdon. I grant that this forenamed langall is very good to let mine horse
that he shall not strike his keeper with his fore or hinder feet, nor to
leap into his manger, nor hang himself in his halter, nor to strike any other
horse: but yet I have seen diverse horses will turn their tails and dung in
their fellows room, by means whereof the other horse could not lie clean,
which is a filthy thing: therefore I pray you show m^ what I shall do to
keep him right in his room.


Clifford. Take the said langall from his forefeete, and tie a piece of cord
thereunto: then make an hole in his tail tree, or else must you drive a stake
into the ground, and make fast the langall thereto. This is not only good to
hold your horse right in his room, but also it is sufficient to keep him
from striking his fellows, and to let him from leaping into the manger, and
hanging himself in his halter.


Kingdon. How shall I lead such a devilish horse, when I shall bring him
forth to the rider, and how shall I take his back, that he hurt neither him
nor me?


Clifford. Take a cudgel of three or four foot of length, make an holow in
each end thereof, then sow a buckle upon a piece of leather, a spanne long,
with the which thou must buckle the one end of thy staff to the eye of thy
bit, and pass a cord through the other end, and make it so fast as you may
hold your horse therewith.


Kingdon. I grant that this is sufficient to hold any horse if he be never
so devilish that he cannot bite me: but what shall I do that he leap not on
me with his foref^ete?


Clifford. Take a piece of strong leather hunger, two inches broad, two foot
and a quarter of length, or two foot and an half, if your horse be very
great, then make fast to each end thereof, a round ring of iron, so big as shall
be requisite to serve the foresaid piece of leather, then cut two other pieces
of leather hunger of like breadth, and let one of them be two foot of length,
and the other two foot and an half, and make them fast at the one end in the
foresaid ring, cut the points of the two foresaid pieces of leather so narrow,
that you may set a stirrup leather buckle on the shorter, and that the other
end may easily pass the foresaid buckle, when it must be made fast. And when
you would lead forth your horse, put one of your foresaid pieces of leather
about his foreleg, and then pass the point thereof through the great ring, and
draw it close to his leg, and put the other end thereof about his hinder leg of
the same side through the other ring, and draw it close as before, which being
done, buckle the two ends thereof fast with the said buckle. Thus may you
lead your horse with your staff and side langall, get upon him, and light
from him, and the rider being up, you may loose away your staff, and also
loosing your buckle of the foresaid side langall, it will flee all loose,
without lifting up one foot of the horse, either when you put it on or take it
off. With this invention have I never failed to master any horse, how
devilish soever he was, and by continual using of the same, I have made them,
that being in service, I might at my pleasure get up or down, having one to
stay him by the head while I did alight on the one side, and make an other
leap up on the other side at the same instant. Thou may also make two holow
pieces of leather, much like unto two great bosses, to the which thou may
fasten a little strap of leather, of such length, that it being put over the
horses head, in the place of the headstall, the two forenamed bosses may fall
just over the horses eyes. Then take an other piece of leather of such length
as the horses forehead is of breadth, and make it fast to the fore part of the
two forenamed bosses, and make other two straps fast, so that you buckle them
under the horses jaws or throat, and before his rider get up, make the same
fast that he can not see, and after he is mounted, take it away, and when he
has ridden him and will alight, you must put it on as before, until such time
as you have brought him into the stable, and this is a very good way, but
nothing comparable to the first, for that with the one he is but deceived, but
with the other he is over maistred.


How to teach a horse to lie down flat upon his belly, that he shall not rise
till you bid him.
Kingdon. I Have forgotten one thing, which above all things I have desired to
learn, that is, to teach a horse to lie down close upon his belly, for that
it is not only good in service when a man is armed, but also it is excellent
when you are hurt or maimed, and have not any body to help you up, also it
is good when you will lay horsemen in an ambuskado, I have long desired that
you should teach me the same, for that at sir Ihon Tracies in Gloucester shire
you did once learn a horse to lie down in the space of half an hour, and so
that he never forgote the same, but would at all times do it when his rider
should take his back very gently, even with the profering of your hand to his
legs, by using this voice: Couch, couch.


Clifford. You shall teach your horse to lie down in this sort, first shake
litter enough under him, and tread it down or beat it fast, so as the horse
may not drive it upon heaps with his feet, then put on his head a watring
bit, and having tide him with two cords to the posts of his room, so low
that he may easily put his head to the ground, then shall you put a pair of
soft pasturnes, the one on his hinder foot, and the other on his fore foot on
the further side, and let the cord go betwixt them of a sufficient length, to
keep him that he shall not rear, then may you tie a long cord to the foot of
your manger on the right side of your horse, and make the other end fast to the
pasturne of his right hinder foot, then shall you put a third pasturne on his
near fore foot: and having passed a surcingle about his body, and through
the foresaid pasturne, then shall you buckle up his near foot so near his
belly as you shall think necessary, and you must see that the buckle lie
near to the middle of the horses back, to the end that when he is laid down,
you may ^astly loose ye surcingle: having thus tied your horse, you shall
begin to strike him fair and softly with a little cudgel upon his right
leg or shinne beneath his knee with your right hand, and lean your right
shoulder close to the horse his left shoulder, and with your left hand pull
down his head as hard as you can, speaking to him gently, saying to him,
couch, couch, and if he profer as though he would lie down, make much of him,
and let him rest a while, then begin to beat him softly again till he lie
down. Thus may you teach any young horse to lie down in the space of three
hours, so that with a little exercise the first and second day you shall make
him so perfect, that he shall lie down at the first time that you profer your
red to his forelegs: But if you will teach an old horse to lie down that is
stubborn and froward of nature, then must you put a sharp prick in the end of
your foresaid cudgel, and let it not exceed the length of a wheat corn
without the cudgel, and when with soft striking you can not make him lie down,
then may you prick him in the leg with the foresaid prick, and you shall see
him presently fall down upon his knees, you see that he will not lie down with
his hinder parts, then hold the bridle fast, and hol^^ your shoulder close to
the horse, then shall you strike him fair and softly upon the elbow of his fore
left leg, so long til you make him lie down with his hinder parts, which when
he does, unbuckle your surcingle, take off his bridle, and give him grass or
prouender to eat, and flatter him, and make much of him, but if he start vpp^
suddenly, before you would have him, then it shall be good to give him two or
three strokes with your rod, and presently to force him to lie down, as at the
first, but if he rise not till you would have him, then make marvelous much of
him, and give him such things to eat as he most desires, and when you have
made him rise, claw and rub him, and profer it him no more in the space of an
hour. In this order have I never failed to make any horse lie down at my
pleasure, of what age, nature, or disposition soever he was.


Kingdon. But what if my horse will start up suddenly when I would take his
back in the field.


Clifford. Then take him fast by the cheek of the bridle with your left hand,
and whip him well with your right hand behind the saddle, and cause him to lie
down presently, and by this means you shall reform him.


Of a horse that yarketh behind in his gallopping.
AT every time he yarketh in his gallopping, whip him well behind upon his
flancke, as near his coddes as is possible, and so continue the correction as
often as the horse shall make this fault, thus you shall quickly recover him.

Kingdon. But I did demand of you in the beginning how I should dress mine
horse after that he was ridden, therefore I pray you teach me what order I
shall observe therein.


Clifford. That was well remembered of thee, I give thee thanks, for I had almost
forgotten that, but now I shall most willingly show thee of all the ways that
I tried which is best. Thine horse being walked as before till he be through
cold, thou shall shake litter enough under him, with the which thou must rub
his legs well, and also betwixt his fore bows and hinder legs, that being
done, unbridle him, and rub his head well, and also his neck and breast, then
may you give him some hay or straw to eat.


Kingdon. But were it not good to let him stand half an hour on the bit, and
not to rub his legs till he be through cold and dry, and also to take off
his saddle and to put a cloth on him, and also stuff him round about with
straw?


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, I answer, not with opinion, but with
experience, that it is much better, thy horse being cold, as has been before
taught, to unbridle him and let him eat his meat, than to stand still v^on
the bit. And as touching thy second demand, I answer, it is naught to let
thine horse stand vnrubbed, for that the mire drying on his legs, shall not
only make him stiff, but also cause his skin to be so dry that it will
chap, and breed scabbie and mouldie heels: yea, I do assure thee I have
thoroughly tried this way, but I could never find any so good, as to rub mine
horse till he be dry, and as touching ye vnsadling of him, I have also tried
it by the space of ten years together, in all which time I could never be
without the horse leeches help, but in twelve years that I have observed this
order here following, I have not had need of the horseleech to drench my horse
at any time for any disease coming of cold, no nor seldom of any other.
Take had thou vnsaddle him not, nor so much as slack one of his girses, but
having rubbed him well, thou shall cover him with a single cloth, making the
corners thereof fast under his girses, and take heed thou never give him water
nor prouender until such time as thou have dined, although thou ride him
early in the morning, but if it be in winter, put a good handful of haie in
it, to the end it may hinder him and make him drink leasurelie, which also
shall some thing abate the coldness of the water. And it shall not be amiss
in cold and extreme wether to let thy horse drink but half his fill, and
often times to beat him away, suffering him to take but a little and a little
at once, by means whereof he shall not suddenly cool his stomach wherewith
he might fall into some extreme fever, and when thou have done, give him his
wet haie in the manger to eat.


Kingdon. I shall mar my horse if I let him not drink his fill?


Clifford. Thou shall not hurt him I warrant thee, for that at night thou
may give him enough without any danger.


Kingdon. But at what time I pray you shall I vnsaddle him and dress him.


Clifford. By that that I have said, I would have taught thee ye after thou
have watered thy horse thou shall first rub well his head, and then his body
and legs, first with straw and then with hair cloth, that done, comb his
mane and put on his collar, which thou must always take off when thou rubbest
his head, ye being done, give him his prouender, and vnsaddle him not till
night that the doors and windows of the stable be shut, then may thou
currie and dress him without any danger: By observing this order and giving
my horse fenegreke in his Oats after his journey, and not letting him rest,
but by walking him abroad every day or every other day easily and softly
without heating him, I have in three years and three months, wherein I had
charge of Monsieur Villiers horses, not given one drench or medicine to so much
as one of them for any disease.


Kingdon. But how long and how many days shall I give my horse his fenegreke,
and shall it not be requisite for me to beat it into powder?


Clifford. No, but in the same sort that thou buiest it of the Pothecarie, so
give it unto thy horse, and let him eat thereof as often as thou give him
prouender, for the space of fifteen days at the least.


Kingdon. But I have known some horses when you put fenegreke in his Oats he
will not eat it.


Clifford. Thou may easily remedy that by letting him fast till he be very
hungry, and by giving him a little at once till he be thoroughly acquainted
therewith, which when he is, and will eat it well, then may thou give him
thy handful at a time as before.


What water is best for an Horse to drink.
Kingdon. I Pray you teach me what water is best to give min^ horse to drink,
for that some are of opinion, that standing water will fat a horse much more
then the river or running water.


Clifford. But if thou would follow my counsel, thou should leave all
their opinions and hearken unto reason, which I am sure will teach thee, that
the purer the water is, the more wholesome for thy horse it is, and the more
healthier shall he be, yea, I would not advise thee to give thine horse at any
time any such water as thou would not willingly drink thy self: for by
seeking to fat thy horse with filthy standing water, thou shall breed him
full of diseases, of the which thing I have had good experience at sir John
Tracies in Gloucester sheere, where watering my horses at a standing moate (for
that the horse keepers were so lazy that they would not go to a fair brook
that did run a little farther off) by means thereof I had always some of my
horses sick or diseased.


Of the horses forage and prouender.
Kingdon. I Beseech you show me what forage and prouender is best for mine
horse to eat, and what quantity of prouender is sufficient.


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, thou must give him haie and all kind
of straw that he will eat, seeing always that they be sweet and not mouldie
nor foistie, noting also, ye what forage so ever you give your horse, you dust
it well with your hands or forke before you give it unto him, and that you
give it him in a small quantity at once, to the end he may eat it clean, for
by filling your rack always full of haie or straw before your horse, you
shall make him to loath the same, whereas if you give it him by handf^lles, he
shall eat with great appetite, and neither wast the forage nor loath his
stomach.


Kingdon. I grant I may feed my horse thus all the day, but what shall I do
at night?


Clifford. Fill thy rack, and the next morrow so much as remains in it, pull
it out and straw it in the manger before thy horses; if it be but a little, if
it be much, take the most part thereof away: be sure thou make clean thy
rack once a day in the same sort, and also let thine horses stand two hours
at the least, without any meat before them. And as touching his prouender,
twelve times as much Oats as you can take up in your two hands is sufficient
to give him a day, feeding him therewith in this sort, four after water in
the morning, as many after dinner, and the rest at night.


Kingdon. I have seen diverse men would give their horses four handfulls in
the morning and eight at night.


Clifford. I grant that thou have seen it, and so have I, and also have
proved it, for I have made mine horses therewith not vnlie take ye laske, but
it has passed whole through even as they did eat it. And I have also so
cloied or glutted diverse horses therewith, that they have utterly abhorred
their prouender: Therefore I would wish you to give your horse his prouender
often, and by little at once.


Kingdon. But I have known diverse worshipful men in England give their
horses but eight handfulles a day, that is to say, four in the morning and
four at night.


Clifford. I grant that diverse does so, and a number of horses will like
better therewith than if you gave them twelve, but you must have a special
regard that when your horse eats good haie, you give him a quarter the less
prouender then when he eats straw, and also that you give him more when he
is travailed than when he stands still, for when he rests, very little
prouender will serve, noting above all things, that what prouender so ever
your horse eats, that you give him rather half a pecke too little then one
grain too much, for there is not a more vile thing then to give an horse too
much prouender. Beans or peason mingled with bran is also very good prouender.


Kingdon. What say you of horse bread?


Clifford. That is good to travail with, but I never saw any beyond the seas,
neither could I find any man or woman there that could make it.


Kingdon. How shall I prepare mine horse to travail a journey, and what saddle
and bridle is best, and also with what shoes shall I shoe mine horse?


Clifford. First, as touching thy saddle and bridle, let it be as light as may
be, and as touching the shoes of thine horse, let them also be light, and
very narrow of web with two calcons, and see that you make your shoo
somewhat thick in the toe and also strong, rising with a welt or creast, round
in the edge thereof, and hollow your shoe very little, and take heed that
you make it somewhat straight so far as your nails go, and from the talent
nail backward let your shoe appear a little without the houe, otherwise it
will sink into his heels, that it shall not only lame your horse, but also
spoil his heels that he shall therewith become flat footed. And as touching
the paring of his foot, cut away as little as is possible at the heels, but
pare him well from the quarter or the talent nail forward to the tee, and that
you also not only in paring favor the heel of the fore foot so much as is
possible, and the toe on the hinder foot, for I never saw horse pricked at
the toe on the fore foot, nor in the heel of the hinder foot.


Kingdon. But how shall I diet and dress mine horse in the morning?


Clifford. Two hours or an hour and a half at the least before you will
ride, see that you let him drink, that done, let him eat hay the space of
half an hour, then give him his prouender, which being eaten, you may bridle
him and let him stand till you be ready to take his back, and take heed you
ride him very gently for the space of three or four miles, in which time thy
horses belly and stomach will begin to be somewhat swaged, then may you
mende your pase, remembering always that when you come to any hill you light
and lead him, for it is a great refreshing to your horse, and also to your
own legs, which a number of lazy lubbers do little consider, such as do
hang on their horses backs both up hill and down hill till they be tired, and
themselves when they alight, so benumbed and crooked, that they can scarcely
stand. Thus much I have digressed, but to the purpose. A mile before you come
to your baiting place see that you ride fair and softly, to the end he may be
cold when he comes to his bait, then when you come to the stable, the first
thing you do, shake litter enough under him, that being done, unbridle him and
give him a bottle of haie to eat, which being eaten, you may give him his
prouender, and see that you cause him to be well rubbed, and especially
between his fore legs for fear of plishing or galling, and it shall not be
amiss if your horse begin to heat between his fore bows, to wash him at his
first coming into the stable with a paile full of cold water, and when it is
through dry, to grease it with salt butter, being first made scalding hot,
and at night when you come to your lodging dress your horse as before at your
bait, and let him not drink till he be through cold, and that he have eaten
haie one hour at the least, and if he be hot and very fat, it shall be very
good to give him his water at three or four times, by which means you shall
make him drink enough without any danger. And see that you give him not his
prouender in half an hour^ after he has drunk, which would be four times
your two handfulls of Oats, or beans and bran, or peason and bran, or bread,
if it may be had, all which prouender is very good, but bread is the best, and
oats is the worst to travail withal, taking good heed, ye you give his night
prouender at twice, which is much better than to give it him all at once, and
in the morning give him not so much as at night, and that you vnsaddle him not
till he be thoroughly dry and well dressed on all his body. But if you come
in so late as your horse cannot be dry before bed time, then may you after you
have supped, see your horse well dressed, take off his saddle, and lay a cloth
on him, which would not be too hot in any case, nor too much straw suffer
under it, for fear of keeping your horse too hot, which shall almost do him
so much hurt as though he stood without any, and it shall take away his
stomach, and make him so faint that he cannot be able to eat his meat, nor
to travel, and being loosed out of that foresaid needelesse heat, he shall be
in great danger to take an extreme cold.


Kingdon. Shall four handfulls of prouender be enough to give mine horse at
night when I travel?


Clifford. Yea, you may give him eight handfulles, but you must give it him at
twice, and that is sufficient for any horse for his night prouender, and to
some it is a great deal too much, therefore thou must take good heed, that
thou know well thy horses eating, before thou appoint what quantity of
prouender he shall have, and then measure him accordingly, for I have found some
horses that would not eat three handfulls, which I have made to eat very
well in this order following. I have given him but two handfulls a day, that
is to say, one in the morning, and an other at night after his water, and also
I have caused his keeper to ride him once a day to the water, and afterward to
ride him half an hour, sometimes on his pase, and sometimes on his trot: with
this exercise and sharp diet, I have in short space made mine horse so strong
of stomach, that he would eat eight handfulles a day, and more if he could
have had it, which thing thou must observe as a general rule, that thou give
him rather too little than too much, as has been before taught.


Of making of your Stable.
Kingdon. Since that now we have in hand the keeping of horses, I would desire
you first to show me how I should make my stable.


Clifford. As touching your stable, I would have you build it in a good air,
and that the doors and windows be made in such sort as you may keep your
horses warm or cold at your pleasure, and as shall be needful for the season
of the year. For you must note, that in a corrupt air, neither man nor beast
can long continue sound, neither in a cold air, of the which thing you may
have a very familiar example in your self, and I would have you diligently to
note and well to consider hereof, as, what good your meat and drink shall
do you, when you in eating the same, and sleeping, shall suffer cold.


Kingdon. How should my horses be too cold in an house, for you may see that
those horses that go abroad, never take harm, by means of the air, and also
if I keep mine horse warm, he shall be the less able to endure cold when he
comes abroad?


Clifford. Thou have made a strong reason: do not thou know that the horse
which goes abroad will not rest 6. hours in 24. and that thereby he cannot take
any harm, for that he is continually exercised, and that moderately, and not
being driven into any heat: but thy horse standing in the stable, is many
times driven into extreme great heates, and at other times stands still
without exercise, the lack whereof is the reason that he can not endure the
air of his stable to be so cold by the tenth part, as if he went abroad, yea
I never in all my life could keep my horses sound in a cold stable, yet I
would advise you to take good heed that it be not so warm on the other side
that your horses therewith shall sweat, but that you use the golden mean
betwixt these two extremes which is, that your horse be not so hot to make him
sweat, nor so cold that his hair stand upright upon his buttockes or stare,
which is a most manifest sign of cold.


Kingdon. I do confess that it is good to keep an horse in a temperate air,
but I would feign know how I shall make my rack and manger, and how I shall
plancke my stable, and divide the rooms thereof.


Clifford. First as touching your manger, you may make it of three fashions:
the first is, as we commonly use them in England, which serves to no other
use, but for them to eat their prouender in, and the haie which they scatter
or let fall when they eat out of the rack: the second fashion serves both
for prouender and forage, for that it is made higher, deeper, and wider by a
great deal than our common manger is, and also it is made with staves or
laths, nailed on the bottom, in such sort, that it may hold the forage, and
let the dust fall through: and also you may make a manger for every couple of
horses of three foot long, with a partition in the middle thereof placed just
betwixt your horses, so as they may both reach their prouender in the same,
and let the partition thereof stand just with the end of the bar that is
betwixt your horses, so as the one half may be in the one room, and the other
half in the other. Thus shall your horse have place enough for his forage,
without being let with the manger: note herewith, that all such mangers as
these be, must have staves made fast at the one end in the wall, or upon the
side of the manger next to the wall, and at the other end you must make them
fast to the outside of the manger, and let such staves be placed a foot and an
half one from an other, to the end that your horse may easily reach his
forage, and yet not be able to cast it out of his manger, nor into his
fellows room with his head. The third way is to make it four times as big
as our common mangers are, so that the horse can do no more than reach easily
to the bottom, and this manger must be all plankes, as well in the bottom as
on the sides, that the horse may both eat his prouender and forage therein.
This manger have I often made in Flaunders, being in the camp, where I had no
stables, but was forced to make my horses rooms in a barn or great house, in
this sort: You must first at the one end of the house or barn, where you
mean that your manger shall stand, dig a pit in the ground three foot and
an half deep, let it be five foot from the wall or end of the house, where
your horse must stand, with his right or left side to it, and let the pitts be
from the wall that shall be before your horses head, so as your manger may be
two foot and an half wide in the bottom, and three foot wide in the top,
then shall you put a post therein of such height as you will have your manger,
then may you make an other pit in the corner of the foresaid wall, and having
nailed a strong planke at both ends to the foresaid posts, then may you make
two holes in the wall, into the which you shall put two small pieces of
timber, and nail them at the other ends fast to the two foresaid posts, a
foot beneath the nether edge of your plancke, then may you set a trough
therevppon for the horse both to eat his forage and prouender in: then may
you set an other post in the ground behind your horse to hang your bar upon,
and the other end thereof to your first post: in this sort may you make all
the rest of your rooms, with manger and bar betwixt your horses, very
commodiously and quickly. And as touching your planckes, it is a thing not used
beyond seas, and yet have I kept my horses there as sound as ever I did in
England upon the planckes.


Kingdon. How I pray you may that be? For if you should let them stand on the
ground, it will in short time become all mire: and if you paue your stable, it
will be very cold, and also wear your horses shoes, break them and his
hoofes, much more than upon the planckes, and your horses also will spend twice
as much litter as upon the plancks.


Clifford. As touching that thou say the ground will be all mire, thou art
deceived: for thou must first dig away the earth two or three foot deep,
and fill in under your horses, grauel, sand, and stones, if they may be had,
but if thou can have nothing but stones, then must thou break them with
great hammers, and cover them with horse dung and litter upon it for the space
of ten or twelve days, that your stones may be well fastened with the dung
and treading of your horse, and at the twelve days end, having taken away your
dung, you shall see your grauel or stones so hard as a rock: but you must note
by the way, that you leave a gutter right under your horses bellies clean
through your stable a foot and an half deep, and so wide as the breadth of
the planck that you can get to cover the same fitly, and see that you place
that plancke somewhat lower than the ^oore of your horses room, so that if the
horse piss either behind or before, it may have a dissent to the same, so as
all the wet may pass into the foresaid gutter by means of awger holes, which
should be made in the plancke for that purpose. This is one of the best
fashions that ever I tried or saw in any place where soever I have traveled.
And whereas thou say stones wear thy horses shoes, breaks them and their
hoofes, wastes more litter, and is more cold, I could never find my horse to
like one whit worse on the stones than on the plancks, although something it
wear their shoes more than plancks, and that he may also break his hoof or
shoe something more than upon the plancks, and I grant also it will waste
something the more litter, yet if thou would well consider how many good
horses are hurt and mischiefed in their legs, shoulders, and small of their
backs, by dangerous slipping, sliding, falling, and hanging their legs therein,
thou would grant the floor made as before, and pauement to be ten times
better than the plancks, yea, and they are made and maintained with less
charges by an half than the planckes. But you must note that when you paue
your stable, that you leave a gutter through your horses rooms covered with a
plancke, as before, and take heed that whether you plancke your stable, or
paue, or make the floor with sand or gravel, that you make it not above 4. or
5. inches higher before than behind: for by making it very high before your
horse, he shall stand uneasily, and if you shall move him never so little in
the stable, he will be ready to fall, besides that, his litter when he does
lie will all fall behind him: and also if he chance to tumble or wallow
himself in his room, you shall see him settle so far backward that he
cannot rise, for that his hinder legs will be clean without ye posts of his
room, and he hangs so short by ye neck that it is not possible for hun to rise
til you loose his collar, which is a thing very dangerous, for upon such
planckes you may soon mar any horse.


Kingdon. I grant this is a very good way to make my plancks, but I would
desire you to tell me whether it be not good to raise my horses room a foot
higher than the ground behind, to make my horses show the better.


Clifford. It were good for an horse courser to make his horses show higher
than they be indeed, but for ye ease of ye horse, it is stark naught, or if
your horse chance at any time to tread behind his plancks he shall most cruelly
strike his leg against the tail tree, and if he chance at any time to wallow
or ^^ide so far back that his legs fall behind ye plancks, he shall not be
able to rise, for that he can get no hold on the ground with his hind feet,
which things considered, I would wish you to make ye ground behind your horses
so high as the plancks.


Kingdon. I grant it is good to make my plancks no higher tha^ the ground
behind my horses, but I would have you teach me of what length I should make my
plancks, and of what wideness I shall make my rooms, also what height I shall
set my manger from the ground, and also how high I should set my rack from the
upper edge of the manger, and also how wide I should set the staves the one
from ye other, and of what length I should make my rack staves.


Clifford. First as touching your rooms I would have you allow every horse 5.
foot, and as touching the length of your plancks, I would have you make it 8.
foot and an half betwixt ye wall under your manger, and the outside of your
tail tree, then shall you make your manger from ye planks to ye upper edge
thereof 3. foot, and from ye upper edge of your manger to ye nether side of your
rack, make it 2. foot long, and let the stanes of your rack be 3. foot and an
half long, and when you will place your rack, set the nether side thereof 4.
inches from the wall, and the upper side no more but a foot and a half distance
from ye wall, by this means your rack shall stand so upright, ye there shall no
dust fall into your horses mane at any time, and although it be narrow, yet it
will be so deep from the top to the bottom thereof, that it shall be able to
hold haie enough for your horse, and also when you would shake up the haie
with your forke (which is very good to be done often) for it will not only
well dust the haie, but it will make the horse eat a great deal the better
than when it shall be tied fast in bottels, or trodden in as I have seen
diverse crafty ostlers use, to the end that they should not eat half their
bellies full, and when you would thus shake your haie, you shall not so soon
throw it over this broad rack, as over those that be narrow, and by reason
that it stands so upright, the horses shall get their meat much more easily
out of it than out of the narrow rack, for that you must place your narrow
rack high, to the end it may be somewhat flat, otherwise it will hold nothing
in effect, and if you should set it low and flat, that is to say, to set the
nether edge close to the wall, and the over edge two foot and an half from
the wall, then shall your great and high horses not be able to eat out of the
same, and if you set it so high that they may well eat out of it, then shall
it be too high for your nagges and low geldings, but in the broad rack it is
not so, for if you set the nether edge thereof so low, as the nose band of your
great horses collar when he stands still and eats not either out of rack or
manger, which will be five foot from your planks, yet shall he most easily get
out his haie, and it shall be low enough for any nag, besides that, the narrow
rack will too too much mar your horses manes with dust.


Kingdon. I grant that this broad rack thus set almost upright, is much better
than the narrow rack, for that I shall be able to keep mine horses manes clean
without dust, and also the least nag that is may reach his meat out of it
easily, and the great horse also: but whereas you do say I should set the
n^ther edge thereof four inches from the wall, I think it should not be good,
for by that means ye hay shall fall through the bottom of the rack, and also the
horses shall strike their heads against ye sharp edge thereof.


Clifford. Whereas thou say that haie shall fall out of the bottom of the
rack, thou may easily remedy it by laying a planke of six or seven
inches, broad in the bottom thereof, so as the inner side which must be close
against the wall may be a good deal higher then the nether edge thereof, which
must join those of the staves of the rack, and whereas thou say the horse
shall strike their heads against the nether edge thereof, thou may cut away
the square and make it round on the out side after your rack staves are all in,
and plain it so smooth that he cannot hurt his head nor his face thereupon:
thou may also make fast a planke of half a foot broad at the one edge, to
the out side of your rack, and the nether edge close to ye wall, this shall not
only make your rack show very comlie, but also it will keep your horse that
he cannot strike his head to the nether edge thereof. But when you place your
rack in this sort, you must make your manger so much larger as your rack
stands distant from the wall at the nether edge.


Kingdon. How shall I make this rack fast at the nether side seeing it may
not touch the wall?


Clifford. If thou build thy stable new thou must lay pieces of timber in the
wall for that purpose, upon the which thou may set the bottom of the rack,
and then drive a nail downward through the nether side thereof into the rind
of the foresaid piece of timber: but if you will place your rack against an
old wall, then must you drive therein pieces of iron made for that purpose,
with holes pierced through the out end thereof, so as you may nail^ them to the
bottom of your rack after they are fastened in the wall: you must also dig
holes in the wall a little beneath the nether side of your rack, into the
which you may make fast short pieces of timber, and you may nail them at the
other end to the rafter of your chamber, but you must let the upper edge of
your rack be within these pieces of timber at the next side thereof without,
so as you may make it fast with a little piece of iron which would be nailed at
the one end under the nether side of the racks, and at the other end to the
piece of timber which you make fast in the wall. There is also another kind of
rack which does far excel, not only this fashion, but also all other
that has been practiced.

How to make a rack that does far excel all the racklike makers invented
by the discreet Italians, of those that are used by the souldier-like
Germans, by the brave French men, proud and disdainful Spaniards, by the
cunning and skillful Flemings, and by my Country men, whose Nature if I
truly paint out, I should but offend, for the Proverb says: It is an evil
Bird that beraieth her own neast: and if I should flatter them, all wise men
would condemn me, and mine own conscience accuse me, for the Lord knows and
all those that have made trial of me, that I am a thousand times better
contented with honest painful poverty, then with the riches of India, where I
cannot be liked without use of flattery, neither resembling the Parasite
Gnato, nor yet the boasting Soldier Thraso. Thus much have I dreamed, but now
being awaked let us go to our purpose, which is to make this rare and strange
kind of rack which I first dreamed of when I served sir Thomas Scot of Kent,
to whom I am much bound, not only for that he gave me a young horse to tri^
my cunning upon, being then a stranger to him, for the space of two years,
wherein he used such wisdom and patience, that I must needs commend him before
all those that ever I have served in England, for although he could by his
skill have taught me, yet did he neither teach me contrary, or find falt with
any thing, yet cannot I commend him half so much for this, as for that he
gave me leave to beat down the rackes of his stable, plankes and posts, and
to paue the same and make the posts and bars according to mine own small
skill, but the thing wherefore he deserves immortal praise is, ye when he saw
this rack then first by me invented, not brought to any perfection, though he
had power to command me to alter it to his former fashion, yet did he wisely
wink thereat till such time as he saw I had thoroughly found the
discommoditie thereof, and then he did gently persuade me to alter it if I
thought good, by which his gentle and prudent doings he did not only make me
yield willingly to that he might have forced me by his authority, by the
which he did wonderfully content me, but also till this day, I cannot find
any man that (in my judgment) does deserve the commendations that he has
forced me to give of him, and that all the Gnatoes that shall think that I
have said thus much by the way of flattery, I do thee to wit that I parted
out of sir Thomas Scots house, not as a friend but as an enemy, but yet he
paid me my wages so justly, that I cannot but yet once again commend him,
not for that I hereby seek his friendship, yea I do not think that in my
life time I shall see him or have to do with him, yet am I thoroughly persuaded
that I shall highly offend if I should defraud mine enemy of his right. But to
our purpose. I never gave over till I had brought my foresaid invention to his
full perfection at master Barnard Drakes in Deuon sheere, who is both a wise
and an honest Gentleman: And it is made in this sort, you must first set your
manger a foot and a half from the wall that is before your horses head, then
may you palac^ upon the inner edge of the manger at every flue foot distance
a piece of timber of such length, as the other ends thereof be made fast to the
floor that is over your horses, then having made your rack in pieces of five
foot and a half of length, then may you begin to set up the first piece of
your rack, make two holes wherein you must make fast the first two ends of
your rack in the wall, and two tenans on the other two ends thereof, which
must be joined fast into two mortices which should be made in the pieces of
timber for that purpose. When you have thus placed the first piece of rack,
then shall you place another at the one end into the foresaid piece of timber
on the other end with another piece of timber. Thus when you have placed all
the pieces of your rack, then shall you plancke it close betwixt the bottom
of your rack to the edge of the manger, in such sort as no man can perceive
the hollownesse which remains betwixt the wall and those plankes, then shall
you take little pieces of timber and make them fast at one end into the nether
side of your rack, and let the other ends lean against the wall, in such sort
as you see the rafters of the roof of an house, then must you nail on them
planks or laths, to the end that your forage fall not down behind your
plankes and manger, and this sloping pentice shall always force your forage to
fall toward your rack, so as your horses may reach it at their pleasure out
of this rack, there cannot fall any dust upon your horses heads, no nor so
much as upon their noses.


Kingdon. This rack is very good, but hereby I shall loose a foot and a
half of my stable, for that the inner side of my manger must stand a foot and
half from the wall.


Clifford. But it shall save the more litter the^ the discommoditie thereof shall
counteruaile, by reason of the great room that shall remain behind and under
your manger, in such sort that you shall never see your horses to be able to
pawe out any of their litter with their fore feet, and your rack being
placed upright, they shall be able to reach their forage with a thousand times
more ease then out of our ordinary rackes.


Kingdon. What mean you by setting your rack upright?


Clifford. I mean that thou should set the upper side and nether side
thereof of like distance from the wall, and make the bottom thereof that must
hold up your forage to stand in such sort against the wall, as we commonly
see a pentice over a shop window so as there may nothing stay upon the same
but that it shall all fall toward your upright rack, whether you place this
rack high or low, yet may your horse eas^lie get out his forage, if you place
it not so high as he cannot reach it.


Kingdon. Whether is it good to make my stable door right behind my horses,
or in the end, and whether is it good to make a floor over my Stable or no?


Clifford. As touching thy first demand, it is an hundred times better to make
the door in the end of the Stable then in the side thereof, for by making it
in the end of the Stable, the wind shall never have full power upon any of
your horses, the door being open, you may also turn your horses heads
toward your house or court, and make behind them a door or window^ to throw
out your dung at, which shall be a great ease to your horse keeper, and also it
will not be hurtful to your horses, for the less drudgerie you put your
keeper unto, the better shall your horses be dressed, yea, you shall never see
where it is painful carrying out of dung, and fetching the water and forage
far off, any good horse keeper slaie long, but such drudges as cannot tell
whether to go, therefore mine opinion is, that they that will have good horse
keepers and their horses well dressed, that they seek no less the ease of
their keepers, than the commodity of their horses, and whereas thou demandest
whether it be good to have a chamber or floor over the stable or no, my
answer, I am sure shall not be liked of all, but so many as have grace to use
wit instead of will, will undoubtedly account it mere folly to build a stable
like a vain palace, which will ask ten times a man's height of wall, with a
roof over it to keep them dry, and when the rain comes there can no more be
kept dry then can stand on a floor, under which room he might make five
rooms, which would be as pleasant to nature, as vainelie to wast so much
charges to so small purpose, nay rather to no purpose, for that such an house
or stable as has no chamber in it, in Winter is so extreme cold, that
neither man nor beast may endure it, and in the Summer it is on the other side
too hot, and besides, by making the keeper wast half of his wages to find him
stockings and sh^^es to fetch his forage, thy horses thereby shall be evil
dressed, and it shall wast thee more forage in the space of seven years then
the building of a new stable would cost thee: yet sure I think him very
unreasonable that will not grant that it is better to raise the wall ten foot
higher then the top of his rack, and to make a chamber, in the which he may
lay forage enough for his horses under one self same roof, which is double
commodity and profit, then vainelie to go wast so much money as to build
another house to lay his forage in, for the wearying of the keepers, does
deceive his horses of their dressing.


At what time of the day is it best to water a horse, and also whether it be
good to wash him or not.
THE best time to water your horses is in the morning betwixt seven and eight
of the clock, and between four and five in the after noone. And touching ye
washing of an horse, it is very good, as has been before taught, and it is
also good in the Summer when he eats grass, as w^l as at any other time, the
weather being hot, to learn your horse to swim in some deep water, with a
^^ie or a man upon him, and a sursingle girded fast about his body, upon ye
which it shall be good to tie a couple of wad^ made of straw^ or haie, in such
height, that the man being mounted, and bowing his legs backward, may hold
himself fast by the said wispes with his calves or hams; this is a very
excellent way, for that you may sit as fast almost as though you had a saddle,
and take heed when you will swim your horse in this sort, that you br^^^e him
with a watering bit or snaffle, or else with a pair of false raines at his
ordinary bit, else in swimming if you should use your ordinary raines, you
shall pull his head under the water. And note always, that first when you
would learn your horse to swim, that you let him swim but a little way at
once, and then letting him stand still and making much of him till he be in
breath, you may swim him again as before: This is a very necessary thing
for a soldiers horse or horse of service to learn him to swim well.

Kingdon. I grant that it is good to learn an horse to swim, and also to wash
him often in hot weather, so that he be not driven into any heat before, for
that were very dangerous, but my purpose was to know of you whether it be good
to wash an horse after he has been ridden, yea or no.


Clifford. It is not amiss if thy horse be very foul and mirie to ride him
through some pond or watering place so fast as you can make him pase or trot
without staying him or letting him to drink, and take heed withal you ride
him not too deep, if he be a very fat horse and also hot.


Kingdon. But diverse good horse men are of opinion that it is not good to wash
an horse when he is hot.


Clifford. I grant it is not good if your horse be extreme hot and also very
fat but if he be but reasonable hot either from coming from giving him his
lesson, or travailing him you may boldly wash his legs up to his belly
without any danger as before, taking good heed that you wash not your horses
belly, or as high as the skirtes of the saddle, as I have se^ne many inexpert
horse keepers do, which thing in deed is very dangerous to an horse that is
hot: If your watring place be very nigh to your stable, then I would have
you ride your horse two or three turns after you have washed him upon a good
round trot, and as soon as you are lighted to put him into the Stable, and not
to wal^^e him in the hand in any case, for that the cold air shall utterly
mar him.


How, and at what time it is best to let an horse blood, and also by what
signs you shall know when it is needful.
Kingdon. I Pray you show me at what time of the year it is best to let mine
horse blood, for that some are of opinion, that it is good to let a horse blood
four times a year, and some but twice a year, and other, but once in a
year: and some would not have him let blood at all, except there be appearance
of sickness.


Clifford. Thou have rightly termed those opinions, for indeed they are but
vain and opinionated men that would have an horse being of good health to be
let blood at any time of the year, unless they be such geldings or horses as
you will in the spring time turn to grass: for experience does teach, that it
is not amiss to let such horses blood three or four days before you turn
them out.


Kingdon. But were it not best in the spring time to let any horse blood, for
that I have heard some of the opinion, that it is good, for that the horses of
Polonia, as they sa^, let themselves blood once in the year, and that in the
spring time?


Clifford. I grant they say so, but those that teach such untruths as these
be, I may well compare them to the learned fools which carry their science in
their sachels, and their wisdom in their lips, speaking opinions, and what
they have heard, which is intolerable in such men to recount what they have
read, but to the good rider, souldior, keeper, or farrier that will have
credit given to his words, he must not recount what he has read, but what
he has seen and done with his hands.


Kingdon. This by the way (but to our purpose:) I pray you teach me in what
vain it is best to let my horse blood, and what order is to be observed
therein.


Clifford. First, thou shall let him blood in the neck vain, which goes
right to the middle of the horses heart, and spreads not abroad toward the
neck and wythers, as some vain horseleaches have presumed to teach me, but I
doubting their unskillful malapertnesse being at sir Thomas Scots in Kent, who
is not only a very good horseman, but also a singular wise man and a just as
ever I served, I gave a country man six pence, being on a cold frostie day
to show me an horse that was dead, and as I do remember it was two or three
miles distance from Scots hall, which horse I cut up in this order: First I
began with the neck vain at the horses head, and put a small straight wand
into the same, when I had put my rod as far into the vain as I could with
my knife, I opened the same to the point thereof, so long til I thrust my rod
by the same conduct into the midst of the horses heart, and afterward
returned to the arturie which lies just under the foresaid vein, and comes
into the middle of the heart also, and carries the vital blood to nourish the
spirits withal, as the^ say, which I do not deny, and that vein, they
say, carries the nutrimentall blood, which if they would leave rolling in
their Rhetorike, and chopping of Logike, it were more proper in this art to
tearm^ it the blood which nourishes the body, for that we^ ignorant grooms
and horseleaches understand no such horseleaches latin, nor eloquent terms,
whereby they do not only seek ^^ deceive us, but a number of wise and
learned Gentlemen, for the which I do not envy them so much, as also for that
they dare presume to say that a horse has a very little brain or none at
all: in the which two things, they do most notably lie as well as in a number of
other things which were here too long to repeat.


Kingdon. How much shall I let one of these horses blood that is to be turned
to grass?


Clifford. That must I refer to your own judgment, for that some horses may
bleed more than others by a great deal, therefore thou must take heed first,
know well thy horses quality and strength, and afterward let him blood
accordingly.


Kingdon. I grant that this is good, but I pray you teach me by what signs I
shall know when to let my horse blood, to prevent sickness and preserve
health, sithence you deny me to let my horse blood in the spring time, which
cannot sincke into my head, but to be good, for that the horses of Polonia let
themselves blood by the instinct of nature.


Clifford. As touching the signs I answer, that thou shalt know it in this
sort, by that thy horse rubbeth his tail and mane, bites his body, and that
his veins swel and appear greater than they were accustomed. And also the
inside of his eyes will be very red. And as touching the horses of Polonia,
they teach thee no other thing than as I have before said, which, if thou be
not very forgetful, thou may remember that I told thee even now, that it
was not good to let thy horse blood without appearance of sickness, which
these horses of Polonia duly observe, not only in the spring time, but all
the whole year through, when they feel any appeerance of sickness, as
before, of the which thing I have had good trial, not only by four of them
which were in the Prince of Orange his stable, but also by four other, which
Monsieur Villiers had, I having the^ charge of his horses, I did observe in
them, as before.


Kingdon. I pray you show me in what place of their bodies, these horses let
themselves blood.


Clifford. Upon their shoulders most commonly so high, as is possible for them
to reach toward their withers, they will also let themselves blood on their
buttockes a little beneath the huckle bone, but this last they use not half so
common as the first: note, that these horses will always let themselves blood
so near the place where the grief or sickness is as is possible for them to
reach with their mouths.


At what time it is best to purge with grass or otherwise.
Kingdon. I Pray you show me at what time of the year it is best to purge my
horse, for that some are of opinion, that it is best to purge him in the spring
time with grass or otherwise.


Clifford. Thou shall never purge thy horse otherwise th^n with grass or
green corn, unless the appearaunce of sickness, then shall it be tolerable
both to let him blood, and to purge him with a medicine which shall be
hereafter taught in the Farriers office. And as touching purging with grass,
the best way is to give it him in the spring time, whiles it is very tender,
or otherwise it will purge little or nothing at all.


Kingdon. How many days shall I let my horse eat grass in this sort?


Clifford. Even as many as is possible for thee to get it.


Kingdon. What reason have you, for that by continual purging my horse, I
shall mar him?


Clifford. But thy horse will not purge with grass or green corn above the
space of ten days at the most, no, nor so much, if thou give him prouender,
whereof he will eat more, and with better appetite than when he eats haie.


Kingdon. Then, shall I give my horse grass but ten days only?


Clifford. I told thee even now, that thou should give it him so long as
was possible to get it, for the longer he eats it, the sounder shall he be,
yea, I have always in Flaunders and France, when my horses have failed to
eat grass once, in the summer time, one month at the least, I have always
had it for an infallible rule, that they have been a great deal more subject
to sickness the whole year following. But by letting my horse eat grass or
green corn at all times when I could get it, I have kept them much sounder
than by hard meat, and more lusty and disposed to travel or do any thing,
yea I have in my journey, or otherwise at all times when I saw my horse refuse
his meat, immediately sought to get him grass, which is a very present
medicine to make him eat his meat at what time soever he loathes the same,
which comes of no other cause than of the glutting with prouender, or when his
stomach is weak by means of extreme travel: When he shall have taken any
cold, it is very good to give him grass to eat, and venegreeke in his
prouender, and to exercise him every day once a little, in doing whereof, you
must have great care that you exercise him so moderately that in any wise you
make him not sweat. In this sort shall you rid any horse of his cold, be it
never so great, if you will have care that you keep him not too hot at one
time, and too cold at an other, and that you set him in a reasonable warm
stable, for in a cold stable you shall never keep your horse sound, but always
subject to sickness.


Kingdon. Then would you would make me believe that it is good to travel mine
horse with grass, which al good horse men do deny, saying, it is too gross
and faint a feeding for an horse to travel with, and being fed with grass, he
shall not be able to run or to do any service, as well as when he is sedde
with hard meat.


Clifford. Good horsemen I grant them, but yet in this point for want of
experience they err much, for I have never found my horse more disposed to
travel upon any meat than with grass, so that you observe this order here
following. As soon as your horse has eaten grass til his belly be full, and
that he begins to leave it, then must you offer him hate, which you shall see
him eat so willingly as he did the grass at the first. Thus by giving him
grass at one time, and haie at another, and also his ordinary prouender, you
shall keep your horse in good state, sound, and disposed to any travel, but
he shall be also very long winded, and able to do any service or travel,
that you shall put him unto, so that you exercise him daily, for it is want of
exercise, and not meat that makes man and beast unable to endure travel.


Kingdon. But were it not good to let my horse lie in his own^ dung, and not to
stir him so long as he purges with grass?


Clifford. No, it is naught, and contrary to nature, as thou may well
perceive, if thou will but mark thy horses lying when he is in the fields,
which I am assured thou will grant, for thou never saw any horse lie in
his own dung in the field, for that is proper only to swine, and they are all
but swinish and hoggish horsemen that use such beastly fashions, for the
cleaner thy horse is kept, the healthier and sounder shall he be.


Kingdon. I have seen you to let an horse of M. Throckmortons stand upon his
dung, and also throw water on the same.


Clifford. It is true that thou saw me let him stand upon it, but that was
to mend his hoofes, which were almost marred, by reason of an unskillful keeper
and far^ier, but thou did d^st never see me suffer him to lie upon it, for that
the keeper threw it away at night, and put it under him in the morning
presently when he was dressed.


Kingdon. Then, would you have me to dress my horse so as I do when he is at
hard meat?


Clifford. Yea, in the same sort, without any difference, and also ride and
exercise him daily, which is the best physic to preserve any horses health
that ever I found, if thou will add two simples more which is venegreeke in
his oats, as has been before taught, at some times, which will prevent cold
worms, and a number of other diseases. The second simple is, good diet, and
moderate feeding him with such forage and prouender, as is clean, sweet, and
wholesome.


The end of the third book.
The fourth Book.
Certain brief notes necessary to be known of every Gentleman, Soldier,
Rider, and Keeper, teaching him how he should make his cauison, his bridle,
headstalles, and raines, and also how he should make his saddle in such sort
as he may carry his head piece so commodiouslie, that although he be the
Marshall of a camp, and that he have pages to carry it, yet shall he find it
a great deal more ready, and also it shall not trouble nor let him any way,
not be able to fall off whether he gallop or run, or what exercise so ever he
does on horse back. Also how to make his pistol fast to his saddle, that it
shall be able neither to stir, nor yet shall he be let thereby any more,
either in getting up or down, then if he had no p^stoll at all.

MAke your cauison of four fashions, the first is all made of one piece, the
second is made of two pieces joined in the middle, or else of three pieces: the
third fashion is made of four pieces, each piece an inch and a quarter, being
with an hole in each end thereof, and these four pieces must be ^ast riuetted
with small nails to a peec^ of thick and strong leather so long as your
ordinary cauison, which must be covered with a piece of thin leather to hide
the heads of your nails that they cannot be seen, then may you make your two
rings fast to the ends of the foresaid leather, as you do to your cauison,
this is a very good way for that it shall not have any iron to wring your
horse upon his cheeks, but on his nose only. The fourth fashion, thou must
take six little clout or tacke nails, with their heads some thing broad,
then may thou drive them through a piece of thick leather, and let the^ be
distant one from another an inch, and having covered the said piece of leather
with another piece that must be somewhat broader then the first, and stitcht it
so near the heads of your nails as is possible, then may you make fast your
ringes in such sort as you did to your other cauison, and that being done, cut
off al your nails with a pair of sharp pincers, so as they may appear no
more than a wheat corn length without the leather. These two last cauisons are
excellent good for a horse that is hard of nose, if you make fast a strappe of
leather under his chinne, and a chain in his mouth, as has been before
taught, for if you shall slack the one hand and draw the other never so
little, you shall make your horse more to obey you, and stand in greater awe of
your cauison, then if you pulled him with the strength of two men at your
cauison made all of one piece, and the reason is, for that these two cauisons
will easily be made to run over your horses nose, in such sort^ as you
draw a Saw over a piece of timber, when you cut it, and although this cauison
may be thought too cruel of those that have not tried it, yet I assure you
that when you have once proved it so as is here taught, you shall find it
far to excel both the mousroul^, chain, and cauison, made of one piece for
with these two cauisons you shall never need to bruise your horses noses, so as
they shall swell or make them raw, no if a man have knowledge and reason, and
have these two cauisons upon any horse, you shall scarce ever perceive vp-his
nose that he has been touched with a cauison for that he shall be so light
upon the same after that he is thoroughlie acquainted therewith, that you
shall see him go backward a round trot with half the strength of your little
finger.

Kingdon. I grant that these cauisons are good, but I would feign have you to
tell me which is the best.


Clifford. That made of four pieces of iron is best of all other that ever I
tried.


Kingdon. You have taught me of what length I should make my pieces of iron,
and also how I should make them fast, but I know not of what fashion I should
make them.


Clifford. You must make them of such fashion as you do your cauison turned
hollow, and filed with teeth, and turn it a little crooked, noting, that you
make it not half so great as your ordinary cauison, nor so hollow by two
parts.


Kingdon. I have often heard you say, that while you were with Monsieur
Villiers in Flaunders, you invented how to make your headstall to serve for two
purposes, that is to say, both for a collar and for a headstal, which thing is
very commodious upon great iourneis, and in a camp for soldiers, therefore I
pray you teach me of what fashion I shall make the same.


Clifford. This kind of headstall is very commodious in deed, for ye you
shall not be troubled to carry a collar at your saddle; ^ having need to ride
your horse with false raines you may make the raines thereof with buttons, that
you may both button it to your bit when you ride, and coming into the stable,
you may bu^^ on the same to the rings of your headstall, yet I have often in
the camp^ made one of my raines to serve me for a martingale, and the other of
them for a pair of f^lse raines, by tying a knot on each end thereof, and
cutting it full of slits. But to the purpose. Thou shall only make thy throat
band and thy nose band of thy headstall double, and put thereon a couple of
rings, and let these two ringes be made fast one to the other with a couple of
linkes, two inches and a half or three inches long, and to the neathermost of
those rings you may fasten your collar raines at such time as you will unbridle
your horse. Thus shall you have no need to take off your headstall, but only
to unbuckle the two porchmouths of your bit.


Kingdon. This is a very good way for a soldier, but I think for a Gentleman
it is very unseemly to ride with a pair of iron rings at his headstall, and
with one of his collar raines made in a martingale, and the other in a pair of
false raines.


Clifford. Whereas thou say it shall be unseemly for a Gentleman, I
answer thee, it shall not be unseemly neither for Gentleman nor noble man, if
thou will leave vain pride and foolishness a mome: For I have seen Monsieur
Villiers who is a noble gentleman, and also a man of great credit and
authority, not to ride here with only in the camp, but also both in Cities
and towns, and I have se^ne him ride therewith amongst all the brave French
men that Monsieur had then in his army when he was first Duke of Brabont and
gouerneur of the low Countries, yea, and he would often say, that he would
not change his headstall for a waggen full of their ta^fata bridles: But for
such as are better, thou may unbuckle thy nose and throat hand and take off
thy rings, which being done no man shall perceive this heedstall to differ
any thing in fashion from our ordinary he^dstalls. And whereas thou say,
it is unseemly to ride with thy collar raines made in a martingale and false
raines, thou may cho^se whether thou will use it so or no.


Kingdon If I use not my collar raines to a martingale and false raines, as is
before taught, I shall be troubled with carrying them almost as badde as if I
had a collar.


Clifford. This shall not trouble half so much as a collar, for thou may
make it fast under thy saddle cover or skirt, so as no man can perceive it, for
I have made Monsieur Villiers often times carry his raines in this sort, and
yet neither he nor any other could perceive it: You must do it in this sort,
cut a thong of leather of two foot and a half of length, in which you must
pass through the cover of the saddle fast by the edge of your hinder boulster,
so high as you can reach with your hands to take hold of the points of the
foresayd^ thong, and having thus passed it through, make a knot in each end
thereof, then may you tie your raines fast in the one end of the said thong,
being first doubled a f^^te long, then may you draw the other end and make it
fast to your girse, by means whereof your raines shall lie so high under the
hinder boulster of your saddle, that no man can perceive it, if your collar be
not ^erie great, you may also carry it in this sort.


Kingdon. I grant that this is a good fashioned headstall, no^ oneli^ for
soldiers in the camp, but also for Gentlemen when they will ride any great
journey, for that they shall not need to charge their keeper with a wallet
full of collars, nor have them tied at their saddles, which is a very
unseemly fashion, and also you shall be sure that you shall not leave your
collar behind. But now I would desire you to teach me how I may make the
raines of my bit in such sort that I shall not have need with my sweord hand
when I am in service, at any time to touch the same, for that with our
ordinary raines we are much troubled when we are forced to ride with our
swords drawn, or our lances in our right hands, by reason that if we let
our raines at any time go too long, or the one shorter then the other, we
have no other remedy but to use the help of our right hand and to redress
the same, which is not only dangerous in time of necessity, but also it is
uneasy and incommodious in cold weather, for that we must be forced to wear
a glove or a gauntlet with fingers, for that we cannot be able to hold our
raines right and orderly, either in mitten or plain gauntlet, and if I
should for remedy hereof tie a knot on my bridl^ rain, I should thereby not
only hold my raines uneven, but it would be painful to carry such a great
knot in my hand, wherefore I pray you heartelie to show me if ever you have
found any other fashion that is better.


Clifford. Yes, I have seen the Germans use a much better fashion in making
of their bridle raines, and I have also proved it far to excel the fashion
which we commonly use, for that you may hold your raines right without the
help of your right hand, and you may boldly let them go at your pleasure
upon any occasion, and take them again so right, without the help of your
right hand as is possible, you may also (...) a mitten cuffe or close gauntlet,
that it shall not let you any thing at all, and the foresaid raines are made
in ^his order: First cut your two raines two f^^t^ and (...) quarter of length,
and place thereupon a couple of buckles, then shall you cut another piece of
leather of one foot and three quarters long, then shall you cut another piece
half a foot long, and having marked just the middle of the two foresaid
pieces, and stitched them fast together through the two fore taken marks, then
shall you at each and of your short piece of leather make a great button, and
see that those two buttons be of one self distance from the ends of your long
piece of leather, then must you double your piece of leather, and pearse holes
in it for two buttons to the ends thereof, then shall you buckle your bit
raines on the one end of the foresaid piece, and the other rain to the other
end thereof, and see that you buckle them of like distaunce from your foresaid
buttons, so that when you shall take hold^ of the raines with your hand betwixt
the two foresaid buttons, you may hold them of one just length.


Kingdon. But these raines will be so short that if the (...)kes of my bit be
long I shall not be able easily to put the raines over my horses head being
brideled.


Clifford. Can thou not put thy raines first over thy horses head when thou
would bridle him, or else put them over before thy curb of his bit, for
when he is vncurbed thou may easily put them up and take them down.


Kingdon. I do very well allow of this headstall and raines, but I would
feign if I might, crave so much at your hand, to tell me your opinion as
touching the making of my saddle, and what saddle is best both for service and
travail, and also whether the stool saddle he good in ser^uice or no^


Clifford. As touching the making of thy saddle, the lighter it is, the better
it is, and as touching the lightness thereof, the chiefest way is, that you
take heed that your tree be not too wide, for if your tree be large, your
saddle will require so much stuffing, that it is not possible for it to be
light, and as touching the sitting of the tree to the horse back, see that it
bear equally, in all places like much, saving on his back bone, and as
touching the stuffing of his panell, the best stuffing ye ever I could find was
buffe hair, or else fine hay, and flocks on it, but before you stuff your
saddle with flocks, you must first ride in it, and after ye the haie is settled
some thing fast, then may you stuff it with flocks upon the haie, this is a
good way to stuff any saddle, for that it shall be much lighter then if it
were stuffed all with hair, yea I have often when my saddle has been stuffed
with buffe hair or flocks, after it has been somewhat settled, taken out the
panells and stuffed it in the contrary (...) with haie.


Kingdon. I do very well like that my saddle should be light, and also ^ilde
to the horses back, for thereby it shall ^it the faster, but I would have you
to teach me how I should make the hinder and forebolsters thereof.


Clifford. As touching the height of thy bolsters, let them be five inches high
at the least, so that they may save your thigh from any stroke of lance or
other weapon: and as touching the length of your forebolster, make it not above
twelve inches from the middle of your saddle, so that when you lay the other
end of your measure to the nether point of the foresaid bolster, they shall be
but twelve inches distance, as before, whereby your kn^^ may come a good deal
lower than the bolster, by this means you shall stay your self very well by
your knees, which is not possible for you to do by your bolsters being (...),
and as touching your hinder bolster, I would have you make the end thereof of
such length, as between the other, and the middle of the seat close to your
hinder tree, it may be seauenteene inches and an half distance, and that you
place those two bolsters so far forward at the nether ends, as they may keep
your thigh close to the point of your fore bolster, so as your thigh may have
no liberty to move: and as touching the length of your seat, from the hinder
free to the ^^dside of the sore tree, let it be sixteen inches, for if you
make your saddle short i^ the seat, it shall be very dangerous when you leap
or stir your horse for (...)ne breaking of you; and it shall not be amiss to
cause the upper end of your fore bolster to stand behind the head of your
saddle four inches at the least, and that shall keep your thigh so far
backward, that it shall not be possible for you ^^ strike the ne(...) part of
your belly at (...) against the head of your saddle, and it is good to ^n^ke
the head of your saddle so as it may lean forward: for if it stand upright, it
shall be the more dangerous, not only for hurting of your belly, but also in
leaping being armed, you shall strike ye n^ther part of your armor, upon your
saddle bow, so as it shall make you believe your (...) are broken in pieces,
be(...) that also it may break the girdle of your armor, and l^^se ye same,
and when you would break your lance upon your enemy, you shall not be able to
lean forward, which is a great disadvantage: for both best and surest riding
when you would encounter your enemy is to lean forward so much as you may
conveniently; either leaping (...) other exercise, being armed ye surest (...)
is to lean forward, for fear of hurting the small of your (...), which thing
I have well approved by (...) experience in Flanders when the Prince of
Par(...) (...) (...), and (...) army, then lying before (...)it, I then riding
upon a ^aie horse of (...)sieur Vill^^rs ^^^ed Soldier in mine armor, I
chanced to put the horse suddenly in his gallop, which he took with such
fury, and leapt so suddenly forward that he had nigh broken my back, that I
being laid down, could not rise but as I was lifted up for the space of
fifteen days, which thing I might easily have remedied with leaning forward a
little.


Kingdon. I grant it is very good to make the hinder bolsters and the fore
bolsters of the saddle in all points as you have ^^ught ^^, and also that it is
good to l(...) for(...), not only when I encounter mine enemy with a (...),
but also with any weapon whatsoever, but the thing that troubles me, is how I
should hold mine hand close upon the horses mane, which is not only good to
keep in his mo^ell, so as he can not (...) it was but also it is very good to
let mine enemy, that h^^ cannot cut the ^oines of the (...)


Clifford. I do confess that the saddle that leaves much forward with his
head, is something troublesome when you would hold your hand upon your horses
mane, but you may remedy it by making it somewhat higher (...) if it be of a
reasonable height, that is to say, that it be (...) inches betwixt the horses
creast, and the nether side of the saddle head, it shall let you nothing at
all.


Kingdon. If I make the head of my saddle so high it will be very uncomely*


Clifford. It shall be pouer a whit (...) if you make your forebolsters stand
but one inch (...) from the nether side thereof, and it shall be (...) hundred
times more c(...)dious than the upright he^d, not only for the reasons before
(...) but also for that it shall much ^etter (...) you from any (...), ^ther
weapon that might (...) to be (...) against you, Besides that, the carrying the
hand upon the creast, is very seldom to be ^^d, and whereas you said it shall
be dangerous for cutting of your raines, you may remedy that by pulling dow^^
your hand when you perceive your enemy to strike at your raines.


Kingdon. You have certified me as touching my saddle, raines and collar, but I
pray tell me whether ye steel saddle be good or not for a souldior for that
they are very chargeable and troublesome to be kept.


Clifford. They are not ^o chargeable and troublesome to be kept, but they are
twice as vain and troublesome to serve in, yea, and also very unprofitable for
that in time of peace they rot, are eaten with worms, and the harnes consumed
with rust, and in time of service they are not only heavy and charg^^le for all
horse to carry, but also in rain^^ weather they are most ^^ thi^ and painful to
^e ^^pt clean, ye head whereof shall mar the handle of your sword, and the
hinder part thereof shall cut your scabberd in pieces: yea I never saw neither
Monsieur la Now, nor Mo^sieur Villiers, nor that most noble and brave
soldier, the marshall Biron ever to est^eme it, nor any other soldier of
experience.


Kingdon. What saddle then do you count best, both for travel and for service*


Clifford. A light buffe saddle is the best for great horses and great trotting
geldings, for that they are as good to serve ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ strong s^^le leather
as will cover the same, and having wet it, and nailed it upon your mould, you
must dry it in the sun, or bake it in the oven after the br^^de is drawn,
so as when you take it off the mould, it may keep his fashion like as you see
a pistol case, then shall you close on a bottom with strong shoomakers
thre^de, and on the midst you may close an other piece on the inside, also on
the vnders^^e you must leave a hole as big as you may put in your hand, the
which shall be a very good place to put your money, shirts, or stockings in,
and if you have no need thereof, yet shall your saddle hereby be almost as
light as a Scottish saddle, and the stiff leather shall always keep your
bolster in a right fashion.


Kingdon. This bolster will be too hard?


Clifford. You may make it soft enough, by stuffing it an inch thick betwixt
the foresaid leather and your saddle covering upon the inside toward your leg,
and upon the nether end.


Kingdon. You have fully certified me as touching the making of my saddle,
bridle, and cauison, but if you do remember, you promised to teach me how to
carry my headpeece, caske, or helmet, and pistol, so as it should not trouble
me any thing at all, neither in mounting on horseback nor descending.


Clifford. Whateuer I have promised th^e I shall (...) perform, through Gods
help (...) whose grace I (...) not of my selfable as much as to (...) one (...)
but to our purpose. Thou shall make thy pistol in this ^^te, take a strappe of
leather, with a buckle therein, and put the p^int thereof downward betwixt the
(...) bolsters of your saddle, and having passed the point of the said piece of
leather betwixt your tree and your panel on the near side, then shall you
close by the tree six inches beneath the head of your saddle cut a slitte of
an inch long, through the which you shall pass the point of your foresaid
piece of leather, so as you may buckle it about the fore bolster and forepoint
of your saddle tree, and then when you will make fast your pistol, draw out
your ordinary strappe, and pass the foresaid strappe that shall remain in
your saddle for that purpose, and the point thereof through one of the loopes
of your pistol sheathe or case, then shall you buckle it fast: thus shall the
head of your pistol remain^ lower than the head of your saddle, so as it shall
not trouble you any thing at all. And as touching the carrieng of your
headpeece, you must first just in the middle of the crest thereof, pierce two
holes, one an inch from an other, and having made fast a strong thing of
leather hunger, or else a cord of silk, no longer than you may get your
finger underneath it, then shall you nail a little iron hook upon the out edge
of the hinder cantell of your saddle tree, five inches lower than the middle
thereof, so as you may hang your caske or headpeece thereon: then shall you
mark where the crest of your headpeece falls, or hollow place that goes
about your neck, and just against that place cut a slitte of an inch long
through the covering of your saddle, close under the backeside of your hinder
bolster, through the which you must pass a strong girdle or strap of leather,
drawing it under the tree of your saddle, with the point backwards toward your
horses crupper: then shall you cut an other slitte in the cover of your saddle,
close by the edge of the tree, and having passed the point of the foresaid
piece of leather vpwardes, through the forenamed slitte you may buckle your
foresaid cask^ so fast, that if two men had hold thereupon, they should so
soon be able to take the saddle from your horse, or throw him down, as once
be able to move or stirr^ your foresaid helmet. And when you would put it on
your head, you have no more to do but loose the foresaid buckle with your right
hand, and lifting your caske up it will come close of it self.


Kingdon. There remains yet three things which I doubt of, that is, on which
side I should hang my pistol: and on which side I should hang my caske: and
also where I shall put my hat when I take my headpeece.


Clifford. Thou troublest me much with vain questions, but it is much better
to demand curiously than to presume through ignorance. But to the matter
which we have in hand: Thou shall hang thy pistol on the near side with a
strappe of leather going under the fore point of thy faddle tree, and round
about thy pistol case, so as it shall not be able to stir any way. And thy
bridle hand lying over the head thereof shall not be able to fall out at any
time: and as touching thy caske, thou must carry it on the right side behind
thy hinder bolster with the beauer thereof backewardes, and the creast
vpwardes, so as, although thou march all night in the rain, yet shall it be
dry when thou would put it on thy head, this is a much better way than to
hang it at your saddle bow, or to march with it upon your head, which two
ways are so troublesome and painful, that a number of good soldiers thereby
do lack their caskes when they come to service, which thing many times is
the cause that they leave their lives behind them, or else do make them that
they dare not do so much as they might, having been armed on their heads,
yea, I never account him a good soldier that will ride without his headpeece:
nor him a wise Captain of harquebuziers, that will let his soldiers go
without their murri^^s, swords, and daggers. But to our purpose: you shall put
your h^tte in your pocket, or else into your breech in at your codpeece: or you
may make a silk string fast to the inside of your hat with a great button upon
the same, and having put the foresaid string upon your saddle how, you may
draw your button up so close, that it is not possible for you to loose your
hat.


The end of the fourth Book.
The fifth Book. The first Chapter of Diseases.
Of the cold in the head.
THe signs to know it be these, thy horse^ eyes and countenance will be very
heavy, and he will not hold by his head, not to eat his meat, and there will
run at his eyes and nose clear water. The cure that I have many times used
was in this sort: put on his head a beggarly biggen, and also purge his head
with this medicine: take of vfor^iu^ ha^^an ounc^ finely beaten in powder,
then mingle it well with half a pound of fresh butter: and then having
anointed the points of a couple of g^^se or swannes feathers, thrust them into
his nostrels, but first you must make fast to the two nether ends thereof two
threedes, so as you may tie them to the noseband of his bridle, in such sort,
that they cannot fall out of his nose, then it shall not be amiss to walk him
abroad, if it be warm weather, but if the weather be cold, to walk him in
the house, with a man on his back an hour at the least: then may you
unbridle him and take out the quilles, which being done, wipe clean his nose,
and put his head into a bottomless bag, having tied it fast over his
ears, with ^ strappe or cord. And if it be too wide for his head, you may
double it in one side, and pin it with a pin of wood close to his head:
then take a chasingdish of coals, with frankencense thereupon held in the
foresaid bag or sack in such sort, that the sum thereof may enter into
his nostrels, and hold it so for the space of one quarter of an hour: this is
a very good way to purge any horses head, yet would I wish you to use it
very seldom, and but upon very great occasion.

Of the cough coming of cold.
THe signs to know it be these, when thy horse drinks he will let the water
run out at his nose, and in his coughing he will void filthy tough ^^eame
at his mouth: to cure it, take of fenegreeke, of galin^, of syn^mon, of
saffron, of tunnericke, of long pepper, of Ani^ seed, of licoras, of each one
of them a penny worth, beat al these things together in a mortar, and put them
into three pintes of Ale or Beer, and add thereunto half a pint of hunnie,
and having made it luke warm, give it your horse to drink when he is fasting
in the morning, and let him not eat any meat in six hours after. And it
shall be good to walk him one half hour fair and softly, so that you drive
him not into any sweat. When you have brought him into the stable shake litter
enough about him, and cloth him with a reasonable warm cloth, so that he
sweat not. And take heed that you exercise him every day once upon a soft
trot one hour or two at the least, but see that your exercise be such as he
sweat not, for that shall do your horse more harm than good, yea, I have many
times cured my horse only with reasonable exercise, and giving him grass to
eat, and Fenegreeke in his prouender, which is the surest kind of killing the
cough above all other.

Another for the same.
TAke of Butter half a pound, of Fenegree^ as much, of Ellecompane six
ounces. Having beaten your Ellecompane and Fenegreeke to small powder in a
mortar with a rolling pin for that purpose, mingle them all together, and
having wrought the^ well in this sort cold, if then it be not stiff enough to
make it in balls, then may you add thereunto a little wheat flower, and make
it in six or eight great bals, and when you will give them to your horse,
hold up his head as high as you can. Then having taken out your horses tongue,
with your left hand thrust one of the balls into his throat as far as you
can, and then let his tongue go till he have swallowed it, thus may yo^ (...)e
him two or three of your bals at once, then may y^^ (...)dle him and let him
stand one hour, then shall you g(...) him another third part of your medicine
as before, and then shall you bridle him, and let him stand the second hour.
Thus shall you give your horse his medicine at three several times without
doing him any harm, and the third part of the medicine being given, let your
horse stand three hours more at the bare rack upon the bit, which will be
six hours in all, then may you unbridle him and offer him some wet hay to
eat, or grass if it may be had, and let him not drink before night, and let
his water be warmed with a little grinded malt or wheat bran therein for the
space of ten days.

Of the dry cough.
THe signs to know it be these, he will cough ^erie drilie, and often,
without voiding any thing either at nose or mouth. The cure: Take of oil of
Baies half a pound, of Butter as much, then take of garlike one pound, beat
it together vnpilled, and being well beaten with the end of a great cudgel in
a dish, then add your butter and oil to your garlike, then having made it in
balls with wheat flower, give this medicine to your horse at six several times,
and let him not eae any meat til it be night, nor drink till the next
morning, and let him drink warm water for the space of xv. days, nor any
dry meat if grass may be had, but if you cannot have grass, then dust his
haie well, and wet it in fair water, and let him not eat any prouender
without fenegreeke therein, but if at the xv. days end his cough amend nothing
at all, then it shall be good to give him the foresaid medicine again, and to
diet him as before xv. days. I have never dressed my horse with this medicine
but ye he has been cured perfectly, yet would I not wish you to be too busy
in medicining your horse either with this or any other, till such time as you
find ye giving him grass to eat, fenegreeke in his prouender, and reasonable
exercise, which is ye most excelle^st medicine ye ever I found to heal my
horse of all griefs coming of cold, and is very good to preserve him from
al other sickness if you use him with good diet and clean feeding, as is before
taught will not avail.

Of the fretized, broken, and rotten lungs.
I Have never seen any of those horses cured, yet I thought good here to
declare mine own experience herein, for ye I have by the space of thirty
years and more sought with great diligence the causes of any sickness or
grief, and also the signs how to know it, as well as how to cure ye same: for
in my judgment there is no disease perfectly known, neither is it possible to
cure it unless yt cause thereof be first found out, for otherwise in seeking to
cure your horse of his disease, you may give him such medicines, exercise, and
diet, as shall not decrease his grief, but rather increase the same. The cause
of this disease, without al doubt, comes of extreme gallopping, sudden running
or leping, or by some other strain. It may come also by ye corruption of the
air, ye signs to know it be these, according to mine own experience, which I
first observed in a horse of M. Coals in Somerset sheere, which horse as they
said, had the murning of the chyne a long time, and when I came to see ye
horse, which ran at ye nose with filthy stinking water, I judged him to have
the said murning of the chine, and medicined him therefore with a drench ye I
had learned for ye purpose, but after yt he had received his drench, he never
eat or drunk any more ^ut did pant and blow continually for ye space of 3.
days, and then being dead, I cut him up, and found the one quarter of his
lungs rotten, and a great part thereof consumed. After which time I held it for
a general rule, not to drench any horse ye long time had had the murning of
ye chine, or that continually had a stinking breath, but only to give them
Licorise beaten into powder, and Annise seeds whole in his prouender, and give
him grass or wet haie to eat, and to purge his head often with frankensence,
and sometimes with Euforbium ordered in such sort as is before taught in the
Chapter of the cold of the head, but this is to be noted by the way, that
this horse did cough always hollowlie and but seldom, I had experience also
in another of those horses of master Gregory Prices at Hereford, which horse
was ouer-ridden by a man of his, and afterward having a continual cough, and
did sometime run at his nose, which was judged to be nothing else but a cold
taken by the foresaid over gallopping, but he being drenched to heal him of
his foresaid cold, he never ceasing panting and blowing till he died, and I
perceived his breath to stink, caused him to be cut up, found his lungs
rotten, as in the other horse. In a third horse also I have had experience at
M. Rothero Gwins in Carmarthen sheere, a gentleman of the Earl of Essex, I
being then come out of Ireland, and lying at his house, one of his sons
chanced to have a stoned nagge very sick, and when I looked on him I judged
him to have the yellowes, for that both his eyes, the inside of his lips, and
under his tongue, was all dyed yellow, but as soon as I smelled to his breath
and felt it stink, I told him if he gave him any medicine he would die, but
he requested the the more instantly to show him what medicine were best for
the yellowes, for (quoth he) I had rather have him die upon a medicine then
upon his sickness without any trial of medicine, whereupon I taught him to
give his nagge Cu^min and hunnie, in such sort as you may read in the Chapter
of the Yellowes, but he never drank any more, and the second day of his
sickness all the inside of his tongue and lips became of the color of a piece
of tanned leather or dry oaken leaves, and all the white of his eyes and
inside of his eye lids looked all very red, and his breath did stink most
horribly, and the horse being dead I cut him up, and found almost one half of
his lungs rotten, but you must note by the way, that this horse and master
Gregory Prices, both took their griefs with extreme and sudden galopping
them, ye one in deep and mirie ways, and the other upon high mountains, as I
did learn most certainly, and the first lived half a year after his journey,
and the other but two months, all which time it was easy to perceive that
they had taken their bane, for ye they never prospered after. I have also seen
a soreld courser of sir Thomas Scots in Kent that was judged to have broken
lungs, for that he did cough very often with great pain, and would also groan
in his coughing, and it would seem to a man that he had some thing in his
throat, and also he would void white sparks of matter as big as a great pins
head, and under his left ei^ his head did shrink in, in such sort, that you
might perceive by the said settling and shrinking in of his head under his eye,
that his eye did swell out over the said shrinking, but this horse lived as I
do remember, above four years after that his grief was perceived, this
horse died of a swelling in the cods, and afterward I cut him up, and his lungs
were so fair and sound as ever I saw any horse, his liver was also very
sound, but the grief of the horse was, for that the caul of fat ye is upon the
mawe, was grown fast to the ribs of the horse on the right side, for it was
grown very thick and hard also, and it fastened it self at one end of the
midrife, or that thin partition that parts the belly of the horse from his
heart, with the foresaid fat or spunges substance, by means whereof the horses
mawe was always tied to the horses sids, so that I have ever held it for a
general rule, that that horse that has a stinking breath, has always some
impostume or other incurable rotten disease in his lungs, and that he that
groneth in his coughing, and voideth matter at the mouth, has either his
lungs, liver, cawle, or stomach so tied, that they cannot have their due
course and moving. I thought good (gentle Reader) to recite this my small
experience in this most cruel and perilous disease, to the end the learned
and wise may search out how to cure the same.

Of the great swelling that comes by means of the hurt of an evil saddle.
IF you chance to perceive it at your bait or at night, when you come to your
lodging, then let your saddle stand fast girded upon your horse till he be
through cold, and dress all the other parts of his body, then shall you
take off your saddle and bind a great deal of haie upon the said swelling,
and make it fast with a cloth, with two or three sussingles buckled on the same
to hold it fast. Then cause your saddle to be amended that it wring him no
more in that place, for the wet hay will put away the swelling, if the skin
be not broken, and that you find it the first day that he begins to gaul,
but if the inflammation be great, and that it will not go away by means of
the wet haie, then shall you cover all the swollen place with Wine lees, and as
you see it dry, renew it with fresh lees co^tinuallie until the swelling be
quite gone, which will be in a very short space. This is a very excellent
medicine to cure any grief that may by any means come through the saddle,
if your wine lees be thin, then may you thicken them with wheat flower.

Another medicine for the same.
MAke a plaster of thick barme so great as the sore, renewing it every day
until the swelling be assuaged, and after the swelling is clean gone, if
there remain any corruption, the^ slit it down right through the middle
thereof, and cut it so deep in the nether side, that there may no matter
stand in the hollow place, then shall you wash the foresaid place with urine,
beer, or ale, made scalding hot, or so hot as you can suffer your hand in it,
that being done, dry the place by holding a great cloth fast upon it, or a
Sponge, until you have clean dried up all the wet that shall there remain,
then cover all the foresaid place with the powder of burned Allome, dress him
in this sort once a day until the flesh be grown up so high as is
needful, then shall you dress him in this sort but once in two or three
days, and if you see him skin but slowly, then may you anoint him after that
you have washed him, and after the powder is so dried, with Vnguentum album,
round about the edges of the sore, which will cause the skin to come very
fast, but if you see that with this seldom dressing and anointing him
heerewith, there begins proud flesh to grow, then shall you take a dram
of Mercury, and mingle it with an ounce of Vnguentum album and anoint all the
sore place therewith once in two days. This shall correct the proud flesh,
and cause it to skin, and heal ^erie suddenly.

Of the Navel gall.
THis comes by means of the crouppier buckle, for that the saddle is too
wide behind, and so it sits down fast upon the horses ridge, and causes
a swelling or bunch against the crouppier buckle of your saddle, and I think
it takes his name, Navel gall, for that it is right against the navel of the
horse, but howsoever the name is derived I know not, well I wot it is very
peevish to cure, therefore must you take a sharp knife and cut away all the
corrupt flesh, and wash it and cast powder on it, as is before taught in the
former Chapter.

Of the Farcion.
THis comes of abundaunce of corrupt blood, or by standing with other horses
that has the like disease, for it is very infectious. The signs to know it
be these: It begins always upon a vein, and it breaks sorth into many
little knottes or branches, which will break out and run with matter very
filthy to behold. The cure: Let him blood the first day on one side of his
neck, and the second or third day on the other side. After you have let him
blood the first time, cut a slit in his forehead of an inch long, four inches
beneath the roots of the hair of his fore top, so that the slit may be
just in the middle of his forehead, that being done, with a Cornet, raze all the skin from the horses forehead even up to his foretoppe, then shall you
put therein a docke root of two or three inches long, being first made clean
and lightly bruised with a hammer or cudgel, and let it remain in his head a
month, and see that you thrust out the matter once a day, and take heed you
thrust not out the root, but if so be it will not tarry in, then may you with
a shoomakers thread thrust through both sides of the slit, tie it so fast that
ye root cannot fall out, or else you may make fast the root by putting the
foresaid shoomakers end, through the skin of his forehead, and through the
middle of the root an inch above the slitte, which being tied fast, will hold
the root that it can not fall out, and it is a much better way than the
other, for that the matter may have free issue: you shall also burn with a
hot iron round about all the sore places: then shall you burn all the foresaid
buttons, with a blunt iron of the bigness of your little finger, so deep
until you see see the white matter spring out about the point of your iron:
that being done, sharp the point of the foresaid iron and crook it a little
an inch from the point, so that when you thrust it through the horses skin,
the point may always turn outward from the flesh: then shall you take hold
of the skin with a pair of pinsors, and pull it clean from the flesh, then
pass the iron through, so that the holes made with the iron may be four or
five inches one from an other: that being done, anoint all the burnt places
with soap, and dress him no more for the space of four or five days: In
which time, you must prepare a good quantity of strong piss; with the which
you must wash him every day, the piss being first made scalding hot, see
that you rub him well until it be ready to bleed, then having dried all
the sore places, throw on the powder of unslaked lime, or burnt alum, which
will heal much better than lime. And if you see that in any of the sores,
through negligent dressing, there rises proud flesh so high that you can not
correct it sufficiently with the foresaid powder, then may you burn any such
place so sore or sorer as you did at ye first, and dress it as before, and
take heed that you give your horse nothing but straw to eat, until he be
whole, and let him have so little rest as may be: for letting him blood, then
diet and reasonable exercise with the docke root in his forehead, is
sufficient to heal any horse, if you dress him in this sort at the first
beginning of his disease, without purging or burning him, but if it be old you
must both purge and burn him, as has been before taught: I have found some
horses that have had this disease in one of their legs, and by evil dressing
and long delaying, the humors have had so great recourse, that when I have
healed his leg, as is before taught, in one place, it has broken out in an
other, which horse I have cured in this sort, I have first cut a slit of an
inch long through the skin of his belly. under the middle thereof, and rased
the skin round about with a cornet from the flesh so far as I could reach
with the same. Then have I put in a roll of leather with a hole in the middle:
And in like manner have I made an issue under the point of the shoulder of the
grieved leg, which two issues with that on his forehead, I have let run
continually til such time as he was healed: presently after that I had made the
two last issues, I have burned all his leg with long strikes from his body,
even down to the houfes, distant no more one from an other, but the breadth of
an inch: and take heed that your yrou, when you will burn any horse in this
sort be not upon the edge no thicker than the breadth of a straw: and note,
that in burning any horse, that you begin always above, and draw your hand
downward with the hair, and that you burn him so deep that you see the
skin look brown. In this sort have I cured a horse in Paris of the
Marshall Birons that all the best horseleaches that they could get, had burned
him, purged him, dieted him, practiced their medicines, and hanged there
sorcerie writings or enchantments about his neck: thus did they torment the
poor* beast for the space of one whole year, in such sort, that it would
have grieved any man's heart to have seen him, yea, and when they had given
him over ^: and told the Marshall, that it was impossible to cure him, he
willed me to command him to be carried out of the City and be killed. But
then I undertook my self to cure him, with no small envy of all the dog
leaches of Paris, who often times did say behind my back, that when I had
healed that horse, they would loose their heads: But GOD to whom all glory
is due, so blessed me, that I healed him within the space of six months,
which thing I did greatly esteem for my credites sake: yea, I was so careful
I would never let any man dress him, although I had two farriers at my
commandment, who would very willingly have dressed him, if I would: but my
horse being cured perfectly of this disease, the dog leaches began to
triumph, saying: though you have cured him yet you can not make his leg so
small as it was, but I also stopped their mouths, for I made his leg so
small as ever it was, in this sort here following: I laid a plaster upon
his leg made of wine Lees, and wheat flower, and rolled it with a long roll,
of three fingers broad, of eight or ten foot long, made of soft Cotton: In
this sort did I make his leg small in the space of four months. During
this cure I never failed my journey, and traveled the foresaid horse at my
pleasure without any trouble or hinderaunce, save that I made his groom to
carry his roll and plaster in a little sack made for that purpose, and also
an ox bladder full of wine Lees, with the which I dressed him presently as
soon as I came to my lodging, and so taking it away the next morning, I made
the keeper to rub his leg clean: with this medicine have I healed diverse horses
that have had great legs, but two of ye most notablest that ever I cured in
England were, the one at M. Barnard Drakes in Deuon shire. The other was at
Master Henry Pooles in Gloucester shire. The horse of Master Barnard Drakes,
after that he had been tormented by cutting, burning, and mangling him, he had
turned him out to pasture for a jade to get colts, by reason of his great leg,
for that it was so stiff, that he could not bow it. This Master Barnard Drake
can well remember, for that it is not above ten years past. And the horse
that I he^^ed of Master Henry Pooles, Sir John Tracie, and Master
Throckmorton knows well of this cure, for that I did it in their houses,
where I detained the horse with me above three quarters of a year, where
diverse were of the opinion, that I should never cure him: yet I was not thereby
discouraged, but the more they did doubt, the more diligent was I, and within
the space before said, I healed him beyond all expectation. This is not much
above six years past, and the horse is yet living, which is to be seen without
any lamenesse or blemish in his leg: but after that I had made all the rest
of his leg small that remained in the splint place under his knee, where his
man had first dressed or medecined him, and other horseleaches which had him in
hand before, left him with a bunch almost as big as an egg, and as hard as
any splint or spauen, but I drive that away with this sear cloth here under
written: Take of virgin Wax half a pound, of Myrhe one pound, of Reasins a
pound, of Galbanum half a pound, of Costus six ounces, of Armoniacke six
ounces, of Swines grease or Hogs morte two pounds, put your Hogs grease first
in an earthen pot, and having placed it in a broad cauldron full of water, then
make a soft fire under it to the end that your water may boil, and when you
perceive your Swines grease almost melted, then shall you put in all your
other simples save the Costus: and when you perceive them to be al molten,
which will ask five or six hours boiling at the least, then your Costus which
is a white root, being beaten into powder, you shall add to the foresaid
things after it is taken from the fire, and mingle them well together with the
same stick or instrument that you stirred it withal, the whiles that the
foresaid things are a melting: the^ make a plaster thereof upon a piece of
sheep leather something bigger than the sore: note, that one of these
plasters will serve thirty days wi^h a very little refreshing the same
sometimes, but you must take it off every day once^, and rub his leg
very well, for fear least it itch, which may cause your horse to beat and
stamp with his foot, bite and te^re in such sort as if shall cause the
swelling to increase. Also you must take great heed, that you roll not nor tie
his leg too straight, for by letting him stand too straight, tied sire
hours, it may do him more harm than your medicine has done him good in six
weeks before. And it shall be good once in five or six days to ride him into
the water, and walk him ^n hour at the least. And as soon as he comes in,
and that his leg is well rubbed with straw, and having first warmed your
sear cloth over a few coals, which you must have on a fire shoouell for that
purpose, before you do lay it unto the sore, but if it chance the grief be
in such part of the leg as your roll and plaster will always settle
downewardes, then must you make a long round roll of woollen cloth as big as
a thumb rope, and you must sow at each end thereof a piece of strong canuas
a hand broad, and two foot long, and made sharp at the two ends; and when
you will roll his leg set one end of the canuas under your foot, and then
having rolled his leg somewhat above the upper edge of his plaster, then
shall you bring the two ends together upon the middle of the roll, so as you
may tie them both together, in s^^he sort, as the knotte may not touch the
horses leg, for if you should not tie the two ends together, the roll
would wind loose about his leg. This will hold your plaster in the due
place, without being able to sincke or settle down: and you may roll his leg
a great deal more easier therewith than with any other.

Of the scabbe or manginesse in a horse.
THis cruel kind of scabbe, scurffe, or itch, breeding over all the horses
body, and most commonly begins in his mane and tail, it comes of a
corrupt blood, and n^^deth no other signs. The cure: Let him blood the first
day on one side of his ne^ke, and wash all his body with hot brine, or else
with beef bro^h, piss, and salt mingled together, rubbing him with rough
waddes of straw till he be ready ^o bleed: then shall you let him alone till
the second ^nie, and then shall you let him blood on the other side of his
neck, which being done, and all his body rubbed with rough waddes and made
clean, you shall take of Swines greac^ a pound, of black Soap as much, of
Rape oil a pint, of brimstone six ounces finely beaten into powder, and
having first killed your Nuicke silver, mingle all these things together upon
a soft fire, without letting it boil, being so warm as you can suffer your
hand in it, anoint all the sore places therewith, and rub and chas^ it well
with your hands to make it sincke into the ski^me. And if you see the horse
rub or bite him self in any place of his body, you may wash it, as before,
and anoint it with some of the foresaid medicine. I have cured diverse horses
herewith without ointing them th^ice, but you must (du^ing this cure) diet your
horse veri^ (...)rly, and let him have so little rest as may be.

Of the grief in the eyes: and first of him that has received a blow.
IF your horse have received a blow in, or upon his eye so that he can not
hold open the same: and that there is no blemish nor white ^^lme does appear
upon his eye, then shall you remedy him in this sort. Take fair water and
salt, and with your mouth sp^^t his eye full thereof, and if his eye be not
very sore this shall remedy him, it is good also to wette a cloth therein, so
big as will fill the horses ear on the grieved side: Then chasing it, thrust
it in so fast as is possible, you must tie his ear fast, so as the cloth may
not fall out, and let it remain^ therein the space of a whole day at the
least: honey also warmed a little, and put in his eye, is not only good to
make him open hi^ eye, but will also prevent any other grief that might breed
upon the horses eye, by means if the foresaid stripe.

Of the white filme, pearl, or web that may breed on the sight of a horses eye.
TAke honey as before, and put it in his eye with a feather, if the filme be
but thin, that will remedy him, or else take the juice of Salandine, and put
to a spoonefull thereof, half a spoonefull of woman's milk, but if the filme
be old, so that it will not break, then take the powder of burned Allume,
being well burned and surely beaten, blow a little thereof with a ^^ill into
his eye, and take heed when you will dress him in this sort, that you tie his
head fast to some post, in such sort, that he can not stir, for by dressing
your horse when he is loose, he may strike his eye upon the end of your
quill, in such sort that you shall do him more harm in one moment than your
medicine shall do him good in a month, this is an approved medicine, not
only for the foresaid grief, but also for any other that shall breed in
the horses eye: but if so be that your horse have a filme over his eye so
thick, that it will not break with blowing this powder in his eye, then must
you cast your powder in, and fill his eye full thereof once a day, and having
filled it, let him ^e still, holding his eye open with your two thumbs, by the
space of one half hour, till the allume be melted, then let him rise and
dress him in this sort, but once a day for the space of two or three days,
and then blow it in his eye, as before. And if at any time you see the inside
of his eye liddes to be red, then shall you dress him with honey for the space
of two or three days, and then dress him again with your alum til he be
whole.

Of the canker in the eye.
TAke of Woodbine leaves, of Primrose leaves, of Sage leaves, of Violet leaves,
and of Rosemarie, each one a handful, and of Allume half a pound, boil all
those things together in three gallons of fair water, till two parts thereof
be consumed, and when it is boiled enough; strain it through a cloth into a
fair vessel, and add thereunto half a pint of honey, and then shall you
boil it again the space of one quarter of an hour upon a soft fire: Then
add thereunto half a pint of strong Vinegar, The signs to know it be
these, his eye will be read, and round about the same it will be full of
little knots or buttons, as big as the heads of pins, and also it will run
of filthy and stinking matter. The cure: Let him blood in the vain beneath
his eye, and also in his neck vain on the grieved side, and then wash him
twice a day with this water here following, and with a fine linen cloth dip
it therein, it being first made blood or milk warm.

Another for the same.
TAke Sage, Fennel, and Rosemarie, of each a handful, of Allome two ounces,
boil all these things together in two gallons of fair water, till one half
thereof be consumed, then strain it through a fair cloth, and being strained,
add thereunto six spoonefulls of hunnie, and boil it a little upon a soft
fire, as has been before taught in the last Chapter, and wash his eye
therewith twice a day with a fair lynnen cloth.

The Canker in the nose.
THe signs to know it be these, his nose will stink and run with matter.
The cure. Let him blood in the neck vain, the temple vain, and in the vain
under his eye, then take the water, as it is in the last Chapter saving one,
and squirt it into his nose twice a day, and take heed that your squirt be
long, for if it be but short, you shall not be able to reach the uppermost part
of the sore therewith, and then shall it be impossible to cure him, and as
touching the length, make it not above six or eight inches at the most.

Of the Canker in the mouth.
THe signs to know it be those, his tongue will be all full of blisters, and
within two or three days when the blisters are broken, it will be full of
hollow^ deep raw pits, and also the inside of his lips for company will be
raw in like sort, and the outside of his mouth and lips will be full of little
pimples. The cure: Take of Sage and Rosemarie, each one a handful, of Allom^ a
quarter of a pound, boil all these together in a sufficient quantity of fair
water, being almost boiled enough, add thereunto half a pint of honny, wash
him therewith twice a day, and give him not any thing to eat but clean
straw, till he be whole, for there is not any kind of Canker, Fistula, great
impostumation, farcion, scab, or mang^nesse, easily cured, unless that you
first let blood well, purge strongly, and keep sharp diet, and that the same
be very clean, sweet, and wolesome.

Of hurt in the tongue that may come with the bit.
CLeanse the wound with a fair cloth, and anoint it with honnie twice a day,
this will heal him, note that for any grief that may be in a horses mouth,
after you have dressed him, that you let him stand three or four hours upon
the bit, and not eating.

Of the Staggards.
THis is a pain in the head and brains of the horse, the signs to (...)we it
be these, the horse will refuse his meat and hang down his head, and he will
wink^ with his eyes almost close together, and many times you shall see him
hold his head close to the wall or manger. The cure. Let him blood in the neck
vain, that being (...) cut a slit in his forehead, raise up the skin, and
put a docke root therein, as before taught in the Chapter of the Far^ion, and
let it remain therein the space of twenty days at the least. This medicine
will also heal the Yallowes, if it be taken at the first beginning of his
sickness, but if he be far gone therewith, it shall be needful to give him the
drench hereafter following in the Chapter of the Yeallowes.

Of the Yeallowes.
THis proceeds of abundance of cholar ouer-flowing the bladder of the gall, and
so is turned into the veins of the horse, and will in short space cause all
his skin to look yeallow. The signs to know it be these, the horse will be
faint, and in his travailing he will sweat much more than he was accustomed,
the whites of his eyes will be yeallow, and also the inside of his lips and
tongue, and under his tongue will be died yeallowe also, and his tail will be
yeallowe. The cure. Let him blood in the neck vain two or three quartes, or as
much as you think he may well bear, which you shall best know by the
strength of your horse, which thing must be your rule therein. Then you shall
take a quart of ale or beer, and add thereunto five or six spoonefulls of
honnie, three or four ounces of Cummin seed finely beaten into powder, then
take a good handful of time, chop it small with a knife and beat it well in a
mortar, then put it unto the foresaid things, and with a soft fire make it so
hot, as your honnie may be thoroughly moulten, but I would wish you to keep
it hot in this (...) upon a soft fire, the space of two hours at the least,
without letting it ^oile. The^ shall you strain it through a fair cloth into
some vessel fit for that purpose, and having thrown away that shall remain
of your Cummin and Time, then shall you give your horse this drench being no
more but luke warm, and let him drink but a little thereof at once, for by
giving your horse great horns full or sudden gulfing of it into him too hot,
you may kill any sick horse: with this drench I have healed above an hundred
horses, that many of them have been thought incurable, but one of the most
notablest that ever I did cure, was at Lamspha at the Earl of Essex his house,
that stands next to Milford haven in Wales, this horse was one Cuttles,
servant to the Lord Admiral, and then master of the George, a ship of the
Earl of Essex, then in the haven of Milford, this Cuttle came to me one
morning, where I was then riding, and made his moan that he had a great
journey to go, and that his horse was like to die, for (quoth he) he has
eaten no meat this day, neither can I find any man that knows his disease,
for he will not stir (quoth he) out of his place, nor being laid down is
able to rise, and when you force him to go, he cannot go right forward but
sidewaie, by reason he is not able to hold his neck right, but hanging it
down crooketh it toward his left side, and when I saw him I perceived by the
yeallows of his eyes, and the inside of his lips and tongue, and by the feeble
drawing of his legs after him, that he had the yeallowes, but I doubting what
might make him hold his head on the one side, I first caused him to be raked
and afterward I gave him a glister made with whay and sallet Oil, and put a
docke root in his forehead, for that I thought he had the staggards, I did
also let him blood in both the neck veins four quartes, which was very much
for any horse, but in great extremity extreme means are to be used, and
afterward having given him this drench, I brideled him and let him stand at the
r^ck six hours, and then offering him a little wet hay, he did eat as well as
ever he did in all his life, although he was so weak when he took his drench,
that I was forced to make four men hold him up with two leauers under his
belly.

Of the foundred horse.
THis comes by means of extreme cold upon some great heat, either when
you let your horse drink in some shalow water, it may come also by letting him
stand in the cold wind or in wet ground, or upon cold pauement, when your
horse is extreme hot, yea, I have foundred an horse of mine own in Bristow,
travailing no more then ordinary journey pase, by taking off my saddle to have
it stuffed presently as I came into my lodging, through the negligence of my boy,
who^ I commanded to lay my cloak upon his back whiles he got the saddle
stuffed, but he deceived me, and I coming forth within the space of an half
hour, having have in my journey, found my horse unclothed, and also in that
case that he would eat no meat, and demanding of the Ostler whether he would
eat his meat at the first vnbrideling or no, he answered that he did eat it
with great appetite, but after his saddle was taken off and he a little cold,
he began to refuse his meat as though he had some grievous sickness, then I
offered him bread and Oats, but he would not eat any thing, I caused him
prese^tlie, my saddle being stuffed, to be made ready, and having him lead in
the hand out of the City, I perceived him at his first coming out of the
stable, to complain a little in one of his fore feet, then I did surely
persuade my self, as ignorant men do in sudden and unknown calamities,
that surely my horse was bewitched, for that though the weather were cold,
yet I had travailed but moderatlie and the horse nothing hot to account of, and
also was lean and well acquainted with travail, for that I had ridden him
upon the self same journey above three hundred miles, which was the reason
that did persuade me that my horse could not be sick of any grief, but by
some extraordinary means, having then twelve miles to ride, and being late
withal, I forced him to go, and after four miles travail he left his
halting being thoroughly warmed, and being come to my iourneis end, I caused him
to be well dressed, but he would not eat any thing, and doubting what grief
he had, for ye no man could persuade me that it was possible to founder an
horse on that sort, I would not let him drink that night, and the next morning
having watered him, and commanding my boie to lead him out, I perceived then
that he was foundred, for that he did not halt on one leg only, but he was so
grieved in all his legs that I had much to do to force him to go, then it
repented me that I let him drink, and I began my cure in form following: I
first let him blood in the neck vain two quartes, and reserving that blood in
a vessel for the purpose, I added thereto a pint of strong vinegar, and ten
or twelve eggs shells and all, and four ounces of bole Armoniacke finely
beaten to powder, and having mingled all these things together, I took so much
wheat flower as did thicken the same, and having wrought it well together cold
with a stick, I made two garters a foot and an half of length, and one hand
broad, and having covered them well in the middle, of such length as might go
round about the horses leg with the aforesaid medicine, I bound them fast on
the horses four legs, hard above the knees, and let them remain there twelve
hours, then with the foresaid charge I charged all the horses loins,
buttocks, hipp^s, back, and shoulders against the hair, and having set him in
the stable the space of 12. hours, then I loosed his garters and forced him to
go, and after he was walked one hour upon the sand ground, I offered him a
little w^t hay, and gave him no drink, in 24. hours repenting me not a little
that I had let him drink ye morning before I knew he was foundred, but the 24.
hours being expired, I gave him to drink, and also ye same day I caused him
to be dressed with an old comb, and turned him to grass, ye third morning
going to see my horse and two mo with me, we could scarcely all three catch
him, which was not a little strange to M. Trockmorton, who told me within
four days riding in his park, that the horse was so lusty that he began to
run and fling so as he thought marvelous strange, for neither he nor any
other that saw him four days before would have given me one shilling for him,
and some would have had a penny thereof abated, yet thought it an hard
bargain, note that I medecined this horse within 24. hours after he was
fou^dred, yet because I would have no man to doubt to cure his horse with this
medecin ye shall be above 24. hours before he can have him dressed, I thought
good to show you what cure I did once upon a horse of M. George Deuoraxes at
Hereford East, which horse was first M. Vggans of Bulson by Milford haven in
Wales, who foundred the foresaid horse in his journey he made to Hereford with
M. George Deuorax, who finding me there, demanded of me whether I could cure
ye foresaid gelding or no, for ye he was then five days foundred, lying on the
ground not able to stand, and had beaten all the skin of both his huckle bones
with lying, not being able to stand or move otherwise tha^ he was lifted with
leauers put under his belly. This M. G. Deuorax after he had given M. Vggans a
pipe of white wine for ye horse, which was worth 12. pounds, I let him blood ye
6. day 3. quarts in his neck vain, and made my medicine, and dieted and
exercised him in the self same order, but I was longer curing this horse than
the other of mine own, for that it was 15. days before he began to find his
feet, all the which time I caused him to be exercised two hours in the
morning, and as much at night, by walking him in a man's hand, and another
following with a cudgel: thus did I cure this horse perfectly beyond all
expectation, where my self also doubted.

Of the bots or worms in a horse.
THere be four kinds of worms that breed in a horses belly, but the worst
of them and most dangerous, is the trenchions or grubs, for so they are named
in some parts of England, I call this kind worst, for that they most commonly
both in the maw and fundament of a horse will stick fast like tiekes on a dogs
ear, as I did once see in a horse at sir Thomas Scots in Kent, that after he
had been drenched three several times within the space of six days, in all
which time he did not eat any meat, and after he was dead I presently cut
him up, and found above five hundred trenchions in the top of his stomach,
all knit together, and not one of them dead. Also in the end of the great gut
that goes from the stomach to the horses belly was full of the worms. Also
then I learned perfectly that the horse had had Sauine given him, Rewe,
Brimstone, and baie Salt, all in a drench, and also strong lee made of ashes,
with the which the horses stomach was almost full, and yet the cruel
forenamed worms did hang so fast in the top of his stomach, that the
medicine could do them no harm, and they had not eaten any holes either
through mawe or guts, but what kinds of worms so ever your Horse have, you
shall perfectly cure him as hereafter follows: the signs to know it be these:
the horse will ^^iske and beat with his tail, he will also look toward his
belly, and strike at his belly with his hinder foot: some horses will also
lie down and wallowe. The cure: Take of sweet Milk one quarte, and give it
your horse to drink: and having letten him stand four hours brideled, then
shall you give him this drench. Take of Ale or Beer two quartes, and put
therein half a pound of Soap, as much Butter, Brimstone finely pounded or
beaten into powder, a good handful of Salt, two or three spoonefulles of
chimney Soote finely beaten into powder, or otherwise it will cause your horse
to cough a long time: and having molten your Butter and Soap upon a soft fire,
and let your drench cool till it be no more than lukewarm, then shall you
give your horse a pint thereof to drink: then bridle your horse, and walk
him a quarter of an hour. Thus shall you give your horse his drink at four
several times without any danger. But if your horse be extreme sick, I
would wish you to make the foresaid things in ^alles with wheat flower, and
give it him at four or five several times, as before, this is much better
than to drench your horse if he be extreme sick.

Of the grief in the legs of a horse: and first of the wrench in the shoulder.
THis comes of some dangerous slipping or sliding, sudden stopping, it may
also come by falling on the planckes, or on some slipperie ground: The signs
to know it be these: the horse will halt very much, and in his going upon rough
ground you shall perceive it best, for he will be forced to go on three legs,
by reason that he is not able to lift his leg, or to bring it forward, but
will bring it after him. The cure. Let him blood in the breast vein. Then shall
you with an iron of two foot of length, sharp at the point, with a hole
therein, like a drawing nail, pass a ruell of hair from the fore point of
the shoulder up even to the top of his withers, and then passing it overthwart
the side of his wythers, or spade bone of the shoulder, you shall bring it
downewarde by the hinder edge of his shoulder, even to the upper joint of his
forelegge, and there having put it out the space of two or three inches, you
shall draw it through forward till you come within two or three inches of your
first place where you shall make the two ends thereof fast: in this sort shall
you ruel your horses shoulder round about, but you must at every eight inches
or half foot leave it two or three inches without the skin, then must you
stir the ruel once a day, and if the issue become so straight that you
cannot thrust out the matter, you may with a lancet or point of a razor cut
them under. This being done, set a patten shoo on the sound leg, which patten
shoo would be turned round so as the horse can not stand on the same, but shall
thereby be forced continually to stand upon his fore leg, to let the
corruption that it shall not be able to enter the joint of his shoulder, and let
him rest for the space of xv. or xx. days with a pair of pasturnes upon his
forefeete, and litte under him, for fear least he slide upon ye plancks, and
at the xv. days end begin to walk him once a day, the space of half an hour
fair and softly. And having observed this order xv. days more, then may you
take off his patten shoo, and try whether he go sound or not, and if he go not
sound, it shall be good to set it on again, and to erercise him as before, and
stir the ruels every day once, for the space of a month or six weeks, then
may you take out your ruel, if he go sound. I never saw any horse dressed in
this sort, but that he has been cured perfectly of his grief.

Of the shoulder pight.
THis comes of some dangerous slide or slip backward, so as the horses leg
slips backward, and thereby drives his shoulder clean out of the joint. The
signs to know it be these. The bone will stick out on that shoulder a great
deal farther than the other, and he will not be able to set it to the ground.
The cure. Lay straw enough under him in his r^m^, and put a pair of straight
pasturnes on his forefeete, and another pair on his hindfeet, then having
thrown him down, hang him up from the ground with two ropes, to put the bone
into his place, then having let him down fair and softly, lose the fore
pasturne of his ^^und leg, and with a cord before you ^et him rise, tie the
lame leg to the foot of the manger so short, as in his rising he shall be forced
to hold his leg before him, for fear of putting his shoulder out of joint,
and let him stand so tied for the space of three days, and presently when he
is up burn all the point of his shoulder with a hot iron cheker-wise a full
foot square at the least, and let every streeke be no more than one inch
distant one from another: And having burned him well, charge all these burned
places, and all the rest of his shoulder, with Pitch, Rozen, and Tar, m^lten
together, and laid on something hot, with a cudgels end, and when you have
covered it over once, then clap presently upon it Towe or Flax, being first
chopped with a hatchet. Then charge him once more upon the Towe, and at the
three days end lose his foot, and put a pair of pasturnes upon his feet,
and let him neither lie down, nor stir out of the stable for the space of
sixteen or twenty days, then may you lead him abroad, and see whether he
go well or no, and if he go not sound, you may let him rest as much more.

Of the spleeting in the shoulder, or renting the shoulder from the breast of
the Horse.
THis comes by means of some dangerous slide, either upon the plankes or
upon the side of a bank, so as one of the horses legs slips away and rents
his shoulder from his briscot, not on the skin but on the slesh, so as the
horse halteth. The signs to know it be these: he will draw his leg, and
not be able to lift or bring it forward, and he will sometime halt so little
that you can scarce perceive it, and at other times he will be very lame, but
chiefly when you ride down a hill, or upon hard ground, then he will halt
much more than upon the soft or plain ground. Also when yuu turn him in a
little ring upon the grieved side, he will go very lame. The cure. Put a
pair of straight pasturnes upon his fore feet during this cure, and having
first letten him blood in the great vain on ye inside of his grieved leg,
then shall you take of Oil of Baies, of Sallet Oil, butter, and Swines
grease, of each half a pound, melt all these things together, and anoint all
your horses shoulder therewith, being so warm as you can scarce suffer your
hand in it. Anoint also between his fore legs, and even up to his withers, so
as you leave no part of his shoulder vnanointed, and dress him every day
once in this sort, til your medicine be al spent, but within 2. or 3. days you
shall see swelling appear betwixt his legs, and all the rest of his breast and
shoulder therabouts will begin to swell, his fore leg also will swell, yea, I
have dressed diverse horses in this sort, ye their bellies swelled so great,
that I have been forced to lay wet hay with a couple of sur^ingles, just
before the ^hafte of the horse to defend the swelling from his coddes, and yet
the swelling has all gone away of it self without coming to a head or
breaking. But if it chance to come to a head, you may slit it with a razor,
and heal it, by thrusting a teint of flax or towe in it* being first dipped
in this salve here following. Take of Turpentine, of Honey, of Hogsgreace, and
of Wax and sheeps Suet, of each a like quantity, melt all these things
together, and apply it as before. This is a very good salve to heal any
wound that may happen on a horse, yea I have cured my self diverse hurts
therewith without any other medicine, saving warm white Wine to wash the
wound withal. But to our purpose: Thou shall let thy horse stand still,
without once moving him, for the space of three weeks or a month, the longer
the better, and at the first walking him abroad, take heed that he be rough
sh^d. And that you lead him not upon any s^ipperie ground for fear of
hurting him. And although he go very sound, yet would I not advise you to
stir him in fifteen days more.

Of the wrenching or splint in the two shoulders of a horse.
I Have in my life time seen but one of these horses, and he was one Master
George Deuerishes, who then (...)aie at Lampha, and I being at his house, he
instantly requested me to look on the said horse, and to see whether I could
cure him or not, but when I had enquired the cause thereof, they told me that
they had yoked him in the head of a cart, with the which they did gather
tything ^orne. And the horse being unacquainted with that kind of travel, he,
for lack of use, or else, through negligence of the gouernoures thereof, fell
upon the side of a bancke, and the horses drew him a good way under the
carte, so as he was neither able to rise, nor stand, but being lifted up, he
would wrestle and fall on the one side or other, by reason he was not able to
bring his legs forward, but I doubting whether his shoulders were wrenched out
of joint, or rend from his briscot, laid good store of straw under him, and
cast him therevppon, and with four pasturnes pulled him up from the ground
to put his shoulders in their iointes, which was a very good way, if they had
been out, but whether they had been out or no, I have told you both the
cause and signs thereof truly. And the way whereby I cured him perfectly
here follows: I did first cut a couple of holes through the skin, four
inches under his toe, shoulder ioints, or points of shoulder, and with a quill
I blewe up all the skin of his shoulders full of wind, even up to the
withers: and having in this sort blown up the skin from the flesh, and
thrust out all the wind again with my two hands, I then made two ruelles of
the upper leather of a shoe three inches broad, and having made them round,
and cut two holes in the middle thereof, I raised all the skin from the
flesh round about the two foresaid holes or slittes, and having put the said
two pieces of leather therein I charged all his shoulder with Pitch, Tar, and
Rozen molten together, and let him stand still with a pair of straight
pasturnes upon his feet, and good store of litter underneath him for the
sp^ce of one month: then I caused him to be led forth of the stable, and
perceiving him to go sound, I put on his pasturns and let him stand in the
stable three weeks more: and then having turned him to grass till he was
well pinched with the srost: he ever after went sound.

Of the wrench in the wyther joint.
THis comes by treading his foot in some hole or in some rough or stony
way: The signs to know it be these: The horse will halt, and his joint will
swell, so as you shall perceive it to be bigger than the joint of the other
leg. The cure. Take heed you let no dogleaches let him blood in the shackle
veins, as I have seen diverse of them do, and striking him so often into the
sinews and veins of the leg till they have doubled his pains. The cure that
I have always used is this. Take of black or gray Soap half a pound, and
having made it hot in a pan, you shall take two or three good handfulles of
of Towe, and dippe them in the Soap, you shall lay it hot to the horses
joint, and then having rolled all that joint with a band of six foot long,
and three inches broad, you shall let him stand one whole day, and a night
before you dress him again, and observe this order every day once till he
be whole, and when you will roll your horse leg in this sort, turn up your
roll round upon a hard lump, as you see the Surgeons do: then shall you take
the first end thereof, and put it under your foot, and having wrapped all the
rest of the band about his leg, you may tie the two ends together, so as you
shall not wring your horses leg, I thought it good to teach you this much,
for that I have seen diverse Horseleaches, or rather Sowegelders, or butcherly
tormentors that would lay a plaster with a clout upon a horses leg, and
afterward tie it so hard with a cord, that the medicine has not done the
horse half so much good as the cord has done him harm: when I lacked Soap,
I used Wine lees, and wheat flowar, whereof I made a p^^ister, being warmed,
which I have found almost as good as the other.

Of the Collicke.
I Could never find by experience any horse to have this grief, but when he
did stand long idle in the stable, and I have never used any other cure than
to trot him till he was well warmed, which will cause him to break wind, and
remedy him till such time as you let him rest too long again, which rest is
the worst thing that may be for a horse that has the Colic: the signs
differs nothing from the bottes, but that his ^ellie will swel very big. And
if you stir him but a little, he will wind backward very much.

Of the Curb.
THis happens to young horses by traveling them too much, or by straining
them otherwise, and it is a little swelling beneath the elbow of his hough on
his hinder leg: it comes by means that the back or master sinew is
strained and retched too long: the signs to know it be these: the swelling
will be apparent to the eye, or the leg under his hough will seem as though
it were crooked or bowed too much backward, and the farther he goes the
lamer shall he be. The cure: Make an iron no thicker tha^ a little straw
breadth, then shall you burn him therewith, even from the upper end of the
swelling unto the nether end thereof right down the middle, and then burn on
each end of the foresaid struck two other strakes ^n the self (...) so as your
strakes may be no more but half ^n inch one from another, and see that you
burn him well, but not so much on the two sides as in the middle, then shall
you charge him with Pitch, Rosen, and Tar, molten together, and flocks put
upon the same, and let him stand in the stable for the space of three weeks or
a month without stirring of him, and see that you lay litter enough under him
for fear of sliding.

Of the wing-gall in the hinder iointes of a Horse.
I Have seen diuers^ horses that with extreme travail would have a soft
swelling in ye inside of his hough, and it will also go through the hough, so
as you may perceive it on the out side of his hough, where if you thrust it or
strike it but a little with your thumb it will be clean gone, but it will come
again, and when you grope on the fore- side of his joint with your fingers,
you shall feel a great soft swelling: this comes by means of extreme
travail, and your horse too young, it needs no other signs, for that you
may ^asilie perceive it by the prescription above mentioned. The cure. Take up
the two master veins on the inside of his leg both above and beneath his
hough, and having tied your vain fast on the upper side, let him bleed well
from below, and having made fast his veins with a waxt thread, then shall you
^ouer all his hough with a thick plaster made of Wine lees and wheat flower
mingled together, and roll it with a long roll, dress him in this sort once
a day till he be whole* I have never used any other medicine then this for
any strain or swelling that might happen in my horses hough or hinder joint,
but if your wing-gall will not away for all this which may happen, if it be
old and of long continuance, then shall you ^^it it from the nether side to
the middle thereof, then having let the corruption out, you may heal up the
wound with the salve before recited in the Chapter of the splenting of the
shulder, and when it is whole, it shall not be amiss to draw three or four
streekes with a hot iron downwardes with the hair, and to charge him thereupon,
as is detlared in the Chapter going before, but I would not counsel you to
be too busy in burning your horse for any grief that may otherwise be
remodied, for the hot iron for some diseases or griefs is excellent, if it be
used in time and place accordingly, but if it be abused it is as hurtful and
dangerous, therefore I would not wish you to suffer any man to burn your
horse, but such as be of approved experience and practice.

Of the horse that is cloied, pricked, or wrong with a nail.
THe horse is said to be wrong, when as the nail is driven so near the
quick, that it wringeth the horse and causes him to halt, you may draw out
the nail and power in a little hot burning Turpentine, if the grief be new,
this will cure him. The horse is cloied when the nail is driven in the quick,
and so cleanched, in this sort you shall son perceive by the high broching of
the nail, or by striking a hammer upon the clean^ches thereof, then if it be
new done, you have need to do no more then to draw out the nail and power
in hot Turpen^ine as before, but if he halt as much when the nail is out, as
he did before, then it shall be good to take off the shoe and search the
bottom of the sore, and make the hole some thing wide then, that the humors
^aye have fr^^ passage downwards, for otherwise it will break out above, and
danger him to loose his hoof, which shall not happen when the sore is wide
enough at the first below. Having thus opened the hoof and found the bottom^
of the sore, ye than stuff it with ^ine Towe or Flax dipped in Turpentine,
and hogs grease moulten together once a day if the grief be new, but if
it be old, stinking, and full of corruption, it shall be good to dress him
twice a day till he be whole. Having thus dressed him, make his shoe
hollow, and tack^ it on with four or five nails, and it shall be good to
fill all the sole of his foot with Towe dipped in the foresaid medicine, and
to cut a sole of the over leather of a shoe for his foot, and make it fast
with small sticks, cut them like splintes, and so that your shoe be made so
hollow that you may ^astlie dress your horse without taking off the shoe at
every time, and during this ^ure let him tread on no wet, but if the grief
burst out above the top of his hoof, then it shall be good to cut away the
sole of his foot an inch broad along the side, so far as you shall find
the horn loose from his foot, and to dress him with sponge wet on the one
side in the foresaid medicine, then shall you take two or three eggs, yolks
and whites and all beaten together, and add thereunto an ounce of bole
Armoniacke, and as much Bean or Wheat meal as will thicken the same, make a
plaster thereof two fingers broad, and as long as will go round on the
top of the horses hoof, bind it fast with a roll, and renew it once a
day, but below dress him twice a day until he be perfectly whole. But if
you chance at any time to have your horse through evil dressing so far
gone, that neither this binding charge above, nor the great issue below will
any thing help him, but that his gri(...) (...)eth all (...) ^or rather
w(...)th worse and worse, then shall you perfectly with adrawer begin to cut a
slit even at the top of the horn to the nether edge thereof clean^ through to
the quick at the one end of the loose place, then at the other ^^d of the horn
so loosed from his foo^e, there shall you begin to cut another slit, in such
sort as you may pluck the loose peer clean away, then may you see whether
there be proud flesh, high gristell, or little wartes or buttons of vicious
and vile flesh, then may you cut them away with a raso^, and lay on powder of
du^nt Allome, and a plaster made of the medicine before rec^ted in the Chapter
of the shoulder splent, and make a doote for him till he be whole, thus may
you heal your horse of any such grief of false quarter perfectly without
any danger, the false quarter is no other thing but a clift or open right even
^om the top of the horses hoof to the bottom thereof, and it will be so
painful, that it will cause the horse to halt, and it will bleed in the
travailing upon hard ground, and need^th no other cure but with a drawer to
cut away the horn of each side thereof half an inch on every side of the
slit, so as you may take away the ho^ne an inch broad even from the top
thereof to the bottom, by this means the horn shall grow down whole and
so^nd, thou must dress him as before, and put a boot upon his foot.

Of a prick in the sole of the foot with a channel nail, rustie iron, stub,
or sharp stone.
THe cure Open the mouth of the sore, and having searched the bottom with a
quill, then power in Turpentine and hogs greas^ together boiling hot, and put
therein a little fine flax or cotton made of linn^^ clothes dress him in this
sort twice a day, and in a piece of leather, as before, that the medicine
fall not out.

Of the Horse that is grauelled.
THis comes by reason that grauel gets in under his shoe, and so fretteth
the horn: the signs to know it be these: the horse will halt, and if you put
your knife point betwixt his heel and the spring of his shoe, you shall
straight perceive the grauel which will crash upon your knife. The cure. Take
off his shoo, pare his foot, pick out the gravel, and mend the shoe, and
set it on again, and put therein a little Turpentine, sheep Suet, and Wax
molten together, and stuff it well with a little Towe or Flax.

Of the Surbate.
THis seldom happens to a horse with a good hoof, those that are flat footed
are most subject to this disease, it comes by travailing on hard ways in the
Summer time, or else by riding him upon stony and hard mountains. The signs
to know it be these: the horse will halt much more upon hard ground than
upon soft, I never had any horse lame of this grief but one, and that on
one foot only, which horse I cured in this sort: I roasted a couple of eggs
hard, and having first powered hot Sallet oil in my horses foot, I thrust the
hot eggs in also, and tied them fast with a cloth over his foot, and letting
him stand all night, I found him sound the next morning, and so continued all
my journey, which was above three score French leagues.

Of the rotten or matering frush.
THis comes for lack of paring and clean keeping of the foot. The signs
to know it are these: the horses frogge or frush will run of filthy and
stinking water. The cure. Take off the shoo and pare his foot well, if you
will wast your labor and charges, you may ^aie any other medicine unto it,
but I for my part never used any other medicine than to pare my horses foot,
as has been aforesaid, and to keep it clean.

Of the manginesse in the tail and mane.
THis comes commonly by the means of dust falling out of the rack, and for
lack of combing his mane, and for want of currying and rubbing him under his
mane fast by the roots thereof. The cure. If it be in the mane let him blood
on the neck, and cut away the hair a finger breadth clean through the
middle of his mane, even from the wythers to the ^ares, so as on what side so
^uer you turn the mane no man can perceive one hair thereof to be cut, then
shall you with a hot iron so big as your little finger, burn all the place
where you cut his hair even from the one end to the other of his mane, then
fill all that same burned place or surrowe full of black Soap, and if you
would keep your horse from itch, it shall not be amiss when that you
perceive the hair to come again, to burn him as before, and this will cause
his mane to be a great deal the finer, and thereby shall be the less subject
to itch. If it be in the tail wash him with strong lee and Soap.

Of the falling of the creast.
THis comes most commonly when a fat horse falls lea^e by sickness or
travail, it needs no signs, for that you may easily know it by means that
the horses creast will hang all on one side, it was my fortune to find one of
these horses at Sir Henry Cromwels in Huntington sheere. This was a black
baie horse in the Queens Stable, named baie Story, he had turned him to
grass for a Stallion, and having showed him to me, and commended him for a
marvelous ready and serviceable horse, with all he told me that if I would
venture to dress him according to the order set down by that famous Marshall
Martine Almon, that he would venture his Horse, for (quoth he) as he is, I
esteem him nothing at all, but in fine he read me his book, showed me the
figure, and I burnt the horse accordingly, but seeing him never a whit the
better, but that in time I saw his creast began to sattle down as low as
ever it did, I sitting upon the bar by him one day, I set my left hand on
his mane, and pulled over his creast on the right side, and then fastening my
right hand close upon the skin at the fore edge of his shoulder, a foot and
some thing more beneath his creast, and then letting my left hand go, and
helping my right hand also with my left to hold the foresaid skin, I
therewith hold his creast so upright as ever it did stand in all his life, by
which trial I found that if that skin could be so shrinked and kept up
short, that it was the only way to hold up his creast, but I found that
it was waxed so great, for that it had been fallen four years, that if I had
set it up by the foresaid means, that then it would fall on the other side. I
devised with my self a great many of days what were best to do, and I ever
carrying so obstinate a mind, that I disdayned to have begun any thing
which I should not be able to perform, at the ^^ngth it came to my mind to
dress him as here under follows.

Having cast the horse upon a soft dunghill, I with a long knife cut away
the flesh on the hanging or under side of the creast, even from the sore end
thereof to the hinder end, six inches broad, and two inches thick, and
something more in the middle there^f, where it was thickest, and groping the
creast with my two hands where it was thick, I cut and pared it so long, till
I made it just of one thickness, then holding the horse still fast bound, I
covered all the place with great handfulls of Swines dung, which I caused to be
holden fast with men's hands for the space of an hour, in which time the blood
was perfectly stauncht, then I let the horse rise, led him into the stable,
and tied him in such sort, that he could neither rub his neck nor lie
down, and the next morning betimes I thr^we good store of burnt Allome upon
all the sore place, and so I let him stand for the spa^e of two days, never
touching the wound for fear of making it bleed, and at the two days end, I
fair and softly bathed the place with a lynnen cloth dipped in warm piss,
and then having dried the sore, I threw on burnt Allome beaten into fine
powder, and after I perceived it to be well fastened and thorough dry, I
anointed him with Vnguentum album, round about the edges of the sor^ a quarter
of an inch broad. In this sort did I dress him every day once on that side
of the creast that did fall, and how I dressed the contrary side hereafter
follows: I did first plat or trace all his mane on the contrary side, and
then I made fast with strong thongs or points of leather, a cudgel of a foot
and an half long, to the ends of the foresaid plattings of the mane, then I
did hang to the middle of the foresaid cudgel, a piece of lead with a hole
in it, of such weight as did poise his creast, and hold it upright in his due
place, then did I burn long strikes, beginning at his creast, and ending ever
almost as low as the point of his shoulder of the same side as the weight did
hang, and they were no more but an inch and an half one from an other, and I
burned them also well with an iron half an inch thick, but whereas I made but
si^e great strikes, if I had made twelve very small ones, it had been much
better, because that when he had been healed, it would not have been half so
much seen. But to conclude: I charged the burnt places with Pitch, Tar, and
Rozen molten together, and let my weight hang until he was thoroughly healed in
both sides of his neck, with this I set up his crest so stiff that it is not
possible to stir it, neither to the one side nor to the other, but it will
presently return into his proper place again, and so continue.

Of the upper taint.
THis is a swelling in the back or master sinew of the foreleg, and comes
by means that the horse strikes the sinew with the toe of his hinder foot,
it needs no signs for that you may easily perceive it by the halting of your
horse, and by the long swelling that will remain upon the forenamed sinew,
you shall cure it perfectly by dressing him every day once with a plaster
made of Wine lees and wheat ^^owar, as hash been before taught, or else you
may take black Soap and Bores grease of each like quantity, sealding hot,
make a plaster thereof, so long and broad as the swelling, with these two last
named medicines, I have never failed to cure my horse of any grief in his
legs, that comes either by strain or stroke, and if at any time you make
your horse go sound with the foresaid medicines, and that some swelling
remains, or vile vicious sore, that you can with no salve or medicine heal
it, then shall you burn all his leg with long strikes from the upper part of
the swelling unto the neathermost part thereof, drawing your strikes downward
with the hair, which order you must observe in burning any horse, that you
draw your hand so near as you can with the hair, and that you make the edge
of your iron very thin, and burn your strikes thick, and also somewhat deep,
and after his burning anoint his leg with black Soap two or three times: but
if it be a gelding, turn him to grass, wherewith you shall find him
perfectly cured within a short space, but if it be such an horse as you can not
turn to grass, see that you exercise him every day twice at the least.

Of the pains, scratches, moulie heels, or any other scuruie scalles
whatsoever, that may breed in a horses legs or heels, whether they come by
means of evil humors, or for lack of good dressing, or clean keeping,
whether they be matterie and filthy running sores, or dry scabs, you shall
cure them perfectly with this medicine.
TAke of Turpentine, Hogs grease, Honey, and black Soap, of each like
quantity, and having molten them upon a soft fire, take it off and put in a
little bole Armoniacke finely beaten into powder, then work all these things
well together with a stick in your right hand, and a dish of wheat flowar by
you, that with your left hand you may put it in a little at once til you have
made it thick like an ointment or soft salve, then shall you make a plaster
upon canuas or linen cloth, so big as the sore, and having first cut away
the hair apply your plaster, and dress him in this sort once a day until
he be whole.

Of the Fistula or any hollow ulcer that may breed in any part of your
horses body, either by evil curing of a wound, or by bruise, stroke, or
wringing with an evil saddle upon his wythers.
THis is an hollow filthy mattering ulcer, and most commonly a great deal
straiter at the mouth than within. The cure. First search the bottom thereof
with a Goose or Swannes quill, or with a small rod well covered with fine
linen cloth, and having found the bottom thereof, cut it so large with a
razor, that the matter may have free passage downward, for otherwise it shall
be hard to cure it, by reason that the matter standing in the sore shall fret
the good flesh, and make the wound daily greater. But take heed that in
launcing it, you cut not any master sinew, for a sinewe once cut will never
grow together again: having stanched the blood with Swines dung, you shall
then take of honey one pint, of Verdegreese one ounce, and boil these
together upon a soft fire three quarters of an hour: then having cle^^sed the
wound or sore, by tying a teint of ^^re or fine linen cloth to the point of
your quil, with a threede draw it softly into the wound, then cut off your
quill or feather so long that you may take good hold in the nether end of the
teint, that then shall come out at the bottom of your sore: then dippe an
other teint in the foresaid salve or ointment, and then with a needle and a
threede make fast your teint to your first clot at the upper end thereof, then
draw out your first teint downward, so shall you draw your teint with the
medicine eastly into the wound, and your first teint will have cleansed the sore
very clean: and if the matter do abound much, then it shall be good to dress
him twice a day, but you must not dress him with this medicine no more but
one day, and afterward you shall dress him with this medicine following: Take
of Turpentine and Swines grease, Honey, and sheeps Suet, of each like
quantity, melt them together, and make a salve thereof wherewith you shall
dress your horse four days for one day that you dress him with your former
medicine made of Honey and Verdegreese, and take heed that you make your teint
of very soft linen cloth, ^or fine flax, and let not your teint be too big
after the first two times dressing, but presently after the first dressing ye
must cover all the sore place, and round about the same with this pultis here
following. First take two gallons of fair water, and having boiled and scu^med
it so long til you have perfectly cleansed it of al corruption, then take two
or three handfulles of Mallows, and as much of Violet leaves, and two or three
handfulles of Date meal, and having boiled all these three things well in your
former prepared water, you shall add thereto of Hogs mort, and fresh Butter,
of each a pound, then shall you let it boil so long till it become thick like
Paste or Pappe, and then apply it hot to the sore so as has been before
taught, and take great heed, that in opening this sore you let not any one
strike into it, and on the other side, that you keep it not too hot: and if
it be in the horses withers, you must take heed that you tie his heed to the
rack so as he may neither lie down, nor put his head lower than his manger:
for if you suffer him to feed on the ground, when he has any grievous sore in
his wythers, if shall hardly be possible ever to cure him. But if you perceive
the wound to heal a pace, and that it matter but a little, then shall it be
enough to dress him once a day, and also it shall be good to take great heed
that you make not your teint too big, and see that you use your poultis till
he be perfectly cured.

The sixth book of the Smith.
Of paring and shooing.
OF the sound and good foot: I call that a sound and good foot that is holow,
round and upright, so as the horse may tread almost as high at his heel, as
at the to, and also this hoof is something large at the heels, but yet upright
without turning together, or without spreading abroad.

How to pare the good foot.
YOu shall pare it very little at the heel, that is to say, no more but to
plain the seat of your shoe, but forward toward the toe you may pare it
something more: also open his heels well, and pare the sole of his foot
something thin, if it be in fair weather, but if in frostie weather and
stony ways, you must travel, it shall not be good to pare your horse thin
upon the sole of his foot for fear of laming him, and if he should chance to
cast a shoo, he shall not be able to set his foot to the ground.

How to make the shoe for the sound hoof.
FIrst make it of such iron as will not break, and so light as is possible, so
as it be strong enough to bear your horse, and make it of a very narrow
web, and let it be something bro^der in the toe than at the spunges or
calcons: let it also be strong in the toe, and round about, and round about the
in edge: let it also be something strong in the two spunges or calcons, which
calcons are the best kind of shooing for a sound and good hoof: let the
calcons also be but short, and blunt at the points, for fear least he set
one foot upon an other: and see that you make it full as straight as the horn,
so far as the nails goes, and pierce the holes so far from the edge, that
when you would drive your nails, you may set them right in the middle of the
holes, and take good hold, for by piercing them too near the edge of your
shoe, you shall be forced to make it fit within the horn: for if you would
make it large enough, then shall you be forced to set your nails so near upon
the in edge of the hole, that thereby you shall cleave off the outside of your
horses horn, which a number of ignorant Smiths do little consider, that they
do utterly spoil ye horses hoof thereby. But to the matter: you shall let
your shoe from the two heel nails backward lie the thicknes of your nail
shanke without the horn, and give this shoo 9. nails, that is to say, four
on each side, and one right in the middle of the toe, and let the spunges
thereof sit a straw breadth behind the corner of the offine, and let the
heads of your nails be so fit for ye holes that they may enter into the shoo,
so as they may not stand above half a straw breadth higher: for if the heads
be high, and the holes strait on the outside, then shall they s^^ne break off,
or else turn aside, and thereby break the clause, the head of the nail, and
the hole would be made in such sort, that when you drive your nail in the
shoe, you shall not be able to get it out again: yea I would not wish you to
let any such ox shooers, shoo your horse, as to loose their nails, and work
the holes of their shoes so wide on the inside as on the outside: for in the
true knowledge of shooing I am sure it is required to make the holes so wide on
the outside, as the head may justly enter into the same, and on the in side so
strait, as the shanke of the nail or neck may have no liberty to move to or
fro. Also take heeds that you hollow your shoe very little.

Of paring and shooing the hinder foot.
IN paring the hinder foot, cut but a very little of the toe: also make your
shoe a little stronger at the toe than behind, and take heed that you drive
not any nail in the toe of the hinder foot, nor take so much and so deep hold
with your nails, as that the heel for the chief strength of the hinder foot
is at the heels, and of the forefoote in the toe.

Of the splay or crooked foot.
THe hoof is said to be splaid or crooked when the one side is higher than
the other, so as the hoof seems to be a great deal larger on the one side
than on the other. But it is much worse when it is higher on the outside than
on the inside: for thereby it shall make the horse tread inward, and strike the
one leg against the other, and lame himself: the remedy is to pare his larger
side well, and pare nothing on the other side, but only to even the side of
your shoe.

How to pare and shoe the flat foot.
THe foot is said to be slat when it is so high in the middle as on the
outside, you shall p^re it as little as is possible at the heels, you may part
it well at the toe, and on the sole very little, holowe your shoo well, make
it with a broad web strong about the in edge, and at the spunges, and take
heed that you make no calcons for any horse that has a weak or straight
foot, and let it lie at the heels without the horn, and round about full as
long as the foot, and it will be good to pierce your holes somewhat farther
from the edge, than you do for him that has a perfect foot.

How to shoe a horse that ouer-reacheth.
MAke his shoe no longer before than the heel of his horn does of necessity
require, and at the toe end of the hinder foot, set your shoe a full quarter
of an inch shorter than the horn, which horn you must not cut, but let it
hang over the shoe: this is the perfectest way or remedy that ever I could
find for him that ouer-reacheth.

For the horse that enterfeers.
THis comes undoubtedly through weakness of body, for that he is ridden
too young. The best remedy that ever I could find is to pare the foot on the
out side, and also to break off the calcon on the outside of the shoe, and to
leave it a little thicker on the inside than on the outside. Also you must cause
the shoe to be made to lie within the horn, from the heel nail to the
foremost nail on the inside, but at the heel let it lie something without the
horn, as well on the inside as on the outside: for otherwise the sponge shall
sincke into his heel, and so consume the same, that it shall be lower than the
outside, so that the shoe by consuming the heel on the one side, and the
Smith paring him on the other side, shall clean mar your horses foot.

For an horse that has an eu^l hoof.
LEt your horse stand upon his own d^^g, and throw water upon it good store,
and every night take it away till the next morning that he be dreast: this is
very good to recover a horse hoof that is evil through the negligence of his
keeper, but if so be your hors^s hoof be reasonable good, and that you would
keep the same and make it soft and tough, then anoint it every day once
with Turpentine, Hogs grease and Honey, and of each like quantity molten
together.

For the horse that has naturally an evil hoof, or has been foundred, by
means whereof his hoof is so marred that he is not able to carry a shoe.
FIrst shoe him in the new of the Moon with high shoes, upon the second or
third day after ye change, then make him a pair of boots in this sort: first
cut a piece of strong leather a finger breadth larger then the horses foot,
which is best done by laying the horse shoe upon the leather, then shall you
cut so much of the leg of an old boot as will go about the forenamed sole,
then close it fast round about upon the edge of your sole, and let it be sire
inches long, and as wide above as below, then put it on the horses foot and
mark it round about an inch above the horses hoof, the^ take it off again
and cut it full of long flits, so as you may pass a piece of leather of an
inch broad with a buckle upon the same, that you may make it fast upon the
horse foot, then shall you take Turpentine, Hogs grease, and Honnie, of each a
like quantity, melt them all together, and being warm, anoint the horse foot
therewith, then shall you dip a cloth therein, with the which you must stop the
horses foot before you put on his boot, it shall be very goo^ to (...) a
piece of soft cotton round about the top ^ the horses foot, being first dipped
in the foresaid medi^ne. T(...)al not only defend your horses foot from
galding with the girdle or boot, but the warmnes^e of the cloth shall
wonderfully cause the horse foot t^ increase, it shall be good to take off
his ^oote every two days once, and to let him stand four hours at the least
before you dress him, and put on his boot to the end he may rest his foot.

FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London by Thomas East for Thomas Cadman, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Bible.

1585.


