PO-PAIDEIA, OR THE INSTITVTION OF A YOUNG NOBLE MAN, BY JAMES CLELAND.

SAPIE^TIAE ET ^^^ICITATIS. ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS



AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1607.

TO THE MOST Illustrious, and Potent Prince CHARLES, DVKE of YORK, and
ALBANIE, Second Son to our Sovereign Lord, KING JAMES.
AS the Gentiles were wont to worship some public Genius besides their private
Spirits, and to consecrate the tree Aesculus unto their Gods in common, as
several trees, severally to every one of them: so I, albeit somewhat to their
imitation, have dedicated the particular parts of this Institution unto my
especial good friends, yet I dare not offer the whole unto your GRACE, whom I
honor above them all. For his MAJESTY'S INSTRVCTIONS being so perfect, and for
the most part appertaining by right, no less unto your Grace, then unto his
HIGHNESS; he might be esteemed distracted of his wits, and void of all
understanding (as Virgill write to Augustus about his Aeneids) whosoever would
presume to present you any other.

Wherefore, for the present in emploring most humbly your Gracious protection
against the fiery tongues of Sycophants, without al prophanes, idolatry, or
blasphemy, I vow and consecrate my self with an euerburning affection to
live and die,

YOUR GRACE his Most humble, and most obedient servant. JAMES CLELAND.

TO THE NOBLE READER.
C. Cornelius Tribune of Rome, during the Consulship of L. Aurelius Cotta, and
of L. Manlius Torquatus: perceauing the Praetors to be too partial in judging
of the Nobles, enacted a Law that every Praetor in demitting of his office
should render a public account unto the people how he had discharged his
duty. After whose example, resolving with my self to give over the Tutorship
of young Nobles, to say with our Poet, --. sterilesque valete Camaenae,

I have penned this Institution to witness unto their Parents my answerable
proceeding, and to leave it unto my Pupils in particular, for a token of
affection at my farwell, to be an impartial Counceller, and a faithful
Admonisher of them in all their offenses in my absence: persuading my self that
none of the^ will grudge that you all have the communication of this their
private right; seeing it is only the more known to be theirs, and the benefit
nothing the less. Herein so far as it is possible for me, I have essaied
espetiallie to imitate our Sovereign and Royal Doctor, who seeks not after
those extrauaga^t forms of doctrine used by Plato in his Commo^-wealth, by
Xenophon in the Institution of young Cyrus, by Cicero in forming his Orator, by
Horace in making his Poet, or by Sr Thomas Moore in describing his Vtopian,
(which are all fair shadows in the air) but plainly out of his own common
practice, and usual experience has proposed a Princely Pupil for a perfect
pattern to all your imitation; whose example I wish you rather to follow by
practice, then my precepts by contemplation.

As for my self I permit those men, amongst whom I shall live, to point me
out to my own rules, and vpbraid me in my aberration and straying ther-from,
as respecting more (with Aristotle what may be done, then what should be
done.) Yet I leave this Institution unto you young Nobles, non quod acipenser
iste paucorum sit hominu^, or that I would debar others, whom it shall please
you to invite, as Pontius did Scipio in the Town of Laurentu^: But permitting
every man to feed, where it best pleases him, like Lucullus his flock, nec
suam inuidens Cyprio bovi merendam, (as Ennius says in his Sotadicke) I desire
only those, who cannot make that use and profit, which I wish, to blame rather
their own fortune, then me, and to endeavor themselves to come as near you,
as their ability will give them leave.

Which I add, not that I think my advises so absolutely perfect, that they
are worthy to be observed of all Scholars: for I protest, not after a common
ceremony of submission, but out of a true and essential feeling of my own
imbecilitie, that I am so far from pleasing of my self, that as many times
as I look the^ over, so often am I vexed at them, -- et scripsisse pudet, quia
plurima cerno
Me quoque qui feci iudice, digna lini.
Neither do I propose them otherwise then those Scholars, who in Schools
publish doubtful, and Sophistical Questions to be disputed and canvased, not
to establish any doubt, but to find it out. As well the penning of the^ was my
last Lents labor, so that as Philocrates sported with Demosthenes, you may not
marvel Athenians that Demosthenes and I do differ, for he drinks wine, and
I drink water: Non equidem hoc studeo, bullaris vt mihi nugis Pagina
turgescat. And that I study not for fine Rhetorical terms, -- veluti pueris
absynthia taetra medentes
Cum dare conantur, prius oras pocula circum
Contingunt mellis dulci, flavoque liquore;
Vt puerorum aetas improvida ludificetur.
The condemnation of them (with reason) will be no less acceptable and
profitable unto me; then their approbation, deeming it ever absurd whatsoever I
have set down, either ignorantly, or unadvisedly. For I acknowledge my self
too meanly instructed, that I should take upon me to teach others any
longer, either by word, or writ. Wherefore as the Poet Philetas being so little
and light, that the wind threw him over, was wont to underprop himself with
leaden shoes; and as the Sea-Vrchin armeth it self with little stons against
a tempest: so have I covered my self (like another Teucer) under the buckler
of famous Authors to shoot my darts against Ignorance: and vt Fertur
Prometheus addere principi
Limo coactus, particulam vndique
Desectam, and insani 'leonis
Vim stomacho apposuisse nostro.
If I disse^ble and hide of te^times their names in using their reasons and
comparisons, know (young Noble Reader) that I wish you to imitate the Poet,
of whom Plautus says -- Tabulas cum cepit sibi,
Quaerit quod nusquam est gentium, reperit tamen.


Also that I do it to bridle the temeritie of those Carbiles and Aristarches,
who cast only their basiliske eyes to carpe other men's honest endeavors, that
they may beat a Seneca, or a Plutarch unawares, when they think they have
bitten me with their viperous tongue.

Happy I beyond my merit, if I get only this portion of public approbation,
as I may cause honest men of sound judgment and understanding to think, that
I would make use and benefit of my learning, if I were endued with any! As for
those Zoiles; and Critics, who by nature or custom think to honor themselves
in disgraceing others, and like Spiders suck venom, where bees gather honey;
taking althings with the left hand, which are offered with the right, as
Ariston said, I am provided with counter-poison, in not regarding what they say.

Therefore let them examine these my advises and exhortations, letter by letter,
measure every syllable, weigh the words, control the points, censure the
periods, and condemn the whole book, so much as they please, without farther
Apology I request them only to serve themselves with the darkness of my
ignorance, to shaddowe and set forth the lively colors of their good wits. So
doubtless you young Nobles -- quibus art benigna
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Ti^an,
will show your selves thankful toward them, for their rare invention, as in
the mean time I hope you will well accept of my good intention, knowing -- In
magnis voluisse sat est.

THE SVBIECT, AND ORder of these six Books.
The first book shows the duty of Parents toward their children,
containing 9. Chapters. D. to my Lord Hay. The second book advises Tutors of
their duty, containing 12. Chapters. D. to Mr. Newton, and to Mr. Mourray. The
third book shows a young Noble man's duty toward God, containing 3.
Chapters. D. to my Lord Gordon. The fourth book shows a young Noble man's
duty toward his Parents, and Tutor, containing 8. Chapt. D. to Sir John
Harington. The fifth book shows a young Noble man's duty in Civil
Conversation, containing 31. Chapt. D. to Mr. Francis, and to Mr. John,
Stewarts. The sixth book points out a young Noblemans way in traveling,
containing 5. Chapt. D. to my Lord of Essex.
THE CHAPTERS OF THESE six Books of Noble Institution.
A Preface 1. prooving that there are Noble men: 2. describing their diverse
appellations: 3. showing who they are: 4. how many sorts of Nobles there are,
and 5. a brief comparison of all the sorts. Page 1.
The first Book of Noble Institution showing the duty of Parents toward their
Children.
The Summarie 11. Chap. 1 Of the begetting of a Noble Son. Page 12 2 How he
should be named after he is borne: 16 3 Of his Nursing. 18 4 Of his
Institution. 21 5 A Description of his Tutor. 25 6 Of the Tutors recompense. 30
7 At what University he should learn. 34 8 Of his Seruing-men. 37 9 Of his
fathers Allowance for his maintenance. 41
THE SECOND BOOK OF NOble Institution, Advising Tutors of their Duty.
The Summarie. 49 1 How a Tutor should know, and use his Pupils nature. 50 2
Of forming the Judgment. 55 3 Of reforming the Imagination, and opinion. 58 4
Of Catechizing. 60 5 Of fashioning his young manners. 62 6 Of admonishing and
correcting him of his faults. 67 7 General advises to be observed in teaching.
70 8 Of teaching to read, write, and the Rudiments of Grammar. 74 9 Of teaching
the Grammar, and Humanities. 79 10 Of teaching Logic, and Philosophy. 85 11
Of teaching the Mathematickes. 90 12 Of teaching the Laws. 95
THE THIRD BOOK OF NOBLE Institution, showing a Noblemans Duty toward God.
The Summarie. 99 1 Of a Noblemans duty toward God. 100 2 Of his duty toward
the King. 115 3 Of his duty toward his Country. 119
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF NOble Institution, showing a young Noble man's duty toward
his Parents and Tutor.
The Summarie. 125 1 Of a young Noble man's duty toward his Parents. 126 2 Of
the Pupils Duty toward his Tutor. 131 3 How profitable learning is, and how
hurtful ignorance is unto a Noble man. 134 4 How he should attain to learning.
140 5 What course he should keep in studying. 142 6 How Necessary the Laws
are to be learned. 144 7 What books he should read priuatlie by himself.
146 8 How he should make good use of his reading, and judge of books. 155
THE FIFTH BOOK OF NOBLE INstitution, Containing a young Noble man's duty in
his Civil Conversation.
The Summarie. 163 1 A comparison between the effects of virtue, and vice. 164
2 Of Prudence in general. 167 3 Of Common behavior toward al men. 168 4 Of
his behavior at Court. 172 5 How he should make reverence. 176 6 Of the most
Honorable places in company, and unto whom they appertain of duty. 179 7 How
a Noble man should speak. 184 8 In what things he should be silent. 189 9
With what company he should converse. 191 10 How he should know a flatterer
from a friend. 193 11 How he should love one in particular. 196 12 Of Justice
in general. 198 13 How he should keep his promise. 199 14 How he should be
liberal. 201 15 How he should show himself thankful. 205 16 Of Temperance in
general. 206 17 How he should be continent. 207 18 Of his diet in eating and
drinking. 209 19 Of Sleep. 213 20 Of his Apparel. 214 21 Of Riding, Shooting,
Running, Leaping, Wrestling, and handling of Arms. 217 22 Of hunting and
hauking. 222 23 How he should play at the Tennis Court, and dance. 224 24 Of
House-games. 226 25 From what games he should abstain. 228 26 Of Valor in
general. 230 27 Of the Single Combat. 232 28 Of deadly Feids. 239 29 How he
should overcome Self-love. 241 30 How he may overcome Ambition. 242 31 A
remedy against the Courtiers love. 244
TH SIXTH BOOK OF NOBLE INstitution, Pointing out a young Noble man's way in
Traveling.
The Summarie. 251 1 Of a Noble man's provision for Traveling 252 2 Some
general points to be observed in Traveling 255. 3 Of Some things in Special
to be observed. 258 4 A directorie of his way, with so^e particular things to
be observed therein. 262 5 Of his behavior after his return home unto Great
Britain. 269
Moreover as the Tradesme^ of Greece put ever some hideous thing or other in
the beginning of their works, to deturne the eie-bytings, and enchantments of
the envious; so I (friendly Reader) in craving pardon of my faults, and
desiring that you would bear with my oversights, have here set down of my
errors, that you may see this work is (...), as Philostratus says of
Aristides his. Nam cauis fest(...)s coe^^s parit cat^los.

Read then Chap. 5. for Chap. 6. page 25. and 269. Pupil for Pulpil. p. 55.
read mutual for natural p. 125. l. 16. read feids for fends. p. 155 leaving the
rest to your own correction.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY Lord HAY, the Pattern of true Nobility.
MY Honorable Lord The Title or Inscription of this Treatise needs no other
declaration, then your Lordships name Printed in the fore front, and first page
of this Book. For your perfection is the lively image, which my thoughts had
in this Description: you are the real pattern of this verbal discourse, and
the Cyrus meant in this Institution: You are the mirror, (as Socrates, or Bias
said) wherein I would have all Nobles to conte^plate themselves, either to see
their own beauty, if they be truly Noble, and thereby to continue in virtuous
and laudable actions, or to wash their spots, and amend what is amiss, if they
be degenerate or ignoble. Yea since it has pleased God to match you with such
a Virtuous, Noble* and Fair Lady, I judge it most convenient (in Ioining the
Theorie to Practice, the effect to the cause) to submit this Preface, and first
Book unto your favorable construction: not as a sufficient description of
your perfection, or as a recompense of your well deserving, but as a short
abridgment of your ample virtues, and a poor pledge of my bounden duty. And
seeing Nec laudare satis, dignasque rependere grates
Sufficiam, referant Superi.


Your Lordships most affectioned in bound Duty. I. C.

A PREFACE DESCRIBING who are Nobles, and the nature of Nobility.
ACCording to the Nature of all Arist. 1. Poster. 1.
discoursing doctrine, and discipline, for a more facil Introduction, I would
advise you to consider that golden Inscription fixed on the Frontispice of the
Temple at Delphos, as containing a plain and full exposition of the title or
subject of this Institution; that you would learn to KNOW YOUR SELVES. Which
is a warning Lesson, little in words, but great in matter; taught by many
Masters, but learned of few Scholars; contemplated by all men, but practiced
by God only; who continually beholds, considers, and well knows himself:
yea it is easy in the ear, but most difficult in the understanding; every
man persuades himself so, that he knows nothing better, when he
understands nothing worse. Whence ensues Plat. in Men^n.
this Platonicall subtilitie, that neither those which know, should enquire
any farther, for as much as they know already; nor they that know not;
because to enquire, it is necessary to know what to enquire after: so that men
cannot attain to the Science of things. Every one is so satisfied, and thinks
himself so sufficiently instructed in this knowledge, as Socrates taught
Euthydemus; that we may say well with Aristarchus, D. ^^r.
In ancient time there were scarce seven wise men found in the world, and now
hardly seven ignorant. Wherefore as many diseased persons need not only
medicine to assuage their pain, but also to awake their se^ses, I here exhort
al you Nobles, to examine seriously and try, 1. if there be any Noblemen. 2.
Whether the Name, and 3. if the essential definition of a Noble man, does 4.
rightly appertain unto you, or 5. if you usurp only wrongfullie the title
of Noble. Which are the five points of this Preamble, correspondent to the five
things requisite to be foreknowne Plat. epist. 7. Zabarel in 1. post. tex. 2.
in all Sciences, as Plato says, and the Oracle of Logicians does comment. 1
That there are Noble men.


To satisfy then the common objection of the vulgar, who disapproue al
inequality, in demanding

When Adam delu'd, and Eva span,
Who was then a Noble man?
Which Boethius concludes thus, more formallie, Consol. phil. 3.
Quia Genus and proavos strepitis?
Si primor^ia vestra,
Authoremque Deum spectes,
Nullus degener extat.
Mortales igitur cunctos
Edit Noble germen.
I grant that not only in respect of our beginning, but of our ending too, we
are all equals without difference or superiority of degrees, all tending alike
to the same earth from whence we sprung: vnus introitas est omnibus Genesis 3. 19.
Philo in Nobil.
ad vita^, vnus and exitus, as the Jew said. King and subject, noble, and
ignoble, rich and poor, al are borne and die a like: but in the middle course,
between our birth and burial, we are overrun by our betters, and of
necessity must needs confess that some excel and are more noble then
others. For children are like their parents, and we learn of the
Cosmographers, Ptolom.
that one part of our mother Earth is more noble then another. -- Nonne vides
croceosvt Tmolus odores, Georg. 1.

India mittatebur, molles sua thura Sabaei?
Yea in one Country, under one climate, one piece of ground is better then
another: Hic segetes, illic veniunt faelicius vnae.

And to descend unto another kind of our mothers Job. 17.
ospring; is there not an Eagle among the birds, and a Lion among the beasts?
Yea in each kind, does not one excel another? as among horses, is not one more
generous then another? Why then among men, for whose use al things were
created, is none more excellent and noble then another? Doubtless Plutarch
said well, that there is greater disparitie between man and man, then between
beast and beast: for we may evidently observe a greater difference between
this man and that man, to say more then Plutarch, Teren ^ Phor^. 5.


( Hem vir viro quid praestat!) then between that man and this beast. Let
ignorant people say, or think what they please in the contrary; there is
surely great odds between a Menelaus and a Paris, between Ulysses and
Thersites, Achilles and Automedon, and in a word between a Noble man and a
Peasant* so of necessity Boethius, and his clients must acknowledge the truth,
as Mopsus does in Virgil.

Tu mayor, tibi me est aequum parere Menalca. Ecl. 5.
When people did multiply and increase, so that 2 The names of Noble men.
they were forced to separate themselves into diverse parts through the earth,
they elected some of the most wise, valiant, renowned, and generous men of the
whole troop to be their Leaders, Captains, and Governors, who^ the Hebrews
named Elohim, Beveelim, Beueorim, Ieduim, Aduchim, Hachamim, Nedivim, Moses.
Avarim. And the Grecians called them (...), Homerus.
(...), to signify (as I take it) that Nobles should behave themselves holy,
as the children of God. But the wisest Latins ascended noe higher for an
honorable title to their Nobles, then Fost. Pomp. Non Marc. Plaut. in. pseud
their own virtuous actions merited, in naming them, Nobiles, quasi notabiles,
importing by this appellation, that those only should be dignified by the name
of Noble, (which we retain of the Romans) that are virtuous.

For as the Lacedaemonians acknowledged noe 3 Who are Noble me^.
man to be of their Country, but such as had the figure of a Lance drawn upon
their skin: so no man is worthy to be accounted Noble, but he who is marked
with the glorious Character of Virtue: under which ensign only Alexander the
great would have his soldiers fight against the Barbarians, who^ he esteemed
to be Iuuen. 8.
al vicious: Nobilitas sola est atque vnica virtus. It is not the great
revenues, fair possessions, pleasant Palaces, many Lordships and infinite
riches, that can make a man Noble: al those things are but external
accide^ts, subject to the mutabilitie of Fortune, whereas Nobility is permanent
in the mind. For who will praise his horse rather for his harness and
furniture, then for his comlie shape and stately pace? or his Hawke for her
bells, hood, and chesses, then for her good flight? why then should we
esteem a man for that which is without him, rather then for that which is
within? Measure him without his stilts or pantofles (as one wittinglie said)
strip him into his shirt, see if al he has be his own; if he be Horat 2.
Satyr. 7
-- Sapiens sibique imperiosus,
Que^ neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent,
Responsare cupidinibus; contemnere honores,
Fortis, and in seipso totus teres, atque rotundus.


If he be endued with those properties, then judge him to be Noble: Otherwise
though by the courtesy of wise men, or simplicity of fools, he may have
fair and honorable titles of my Lord etc. yet let him nor be deceived, he is
noe whit the more honorable: for he must pass through the Temple of Virtue,
that would enter into the Church of Honor. So we may collect that the
doubling of your cloakes, the fashion of your clothes, the Jingling of your
spurs, your swaggering, your swearing, and your refined oaths, horrible
protestations, your odd humors, and your drinking of Tobacco with a whiffe,
make not a Noble or a Gentleman: but that it is to be wise, affable,
temperate, and discreet in all your actions and conversation; and as the
Emperor answered to one, who besought him, that he would make him a
Gentleman, Virtue only is able to make thee Noble. Yet I mean Mani^^^.
not that every one who lives virtuously, and can daunt his affections, is
forthwith a Noble or a Gentleman, but he only whose Virtue is profitable to
the King and Country; whom his Majesty esteems worthy to bear a coat of
arms, and to enioie diverse priueledges for services done to him and his
kingdom. Services I say, because as one swallowe makes not Arist. Ethic. 2.
c. 4.
Summer, or one courragious act a valiant man, or one just dealing a just man;
noe more is one virtuous exploit sufficient to cause a man ever after to be
accounted Noble. He must continue in well doing, otherwise it may well be
thought that his good performance for once, or so, proceeded of mere accident,
and hazard, or of a favorable opportunity, rather then of his own proper and
natural disposition: for often times men are forced to perform virtuous
effects by vicious impulsions. Behold therefore your coats of arms and their
impreyses, how they change never, but remain such unto the son, as they were
bestowed upon the father, to incite you never to be weary of well deserving, to
teach you not only to follow your Ancestors, but also to guide your
Successors. Remember they are as so many seals, whereby the King has bound
your obedience, faith, and dutiful allegiance to him, his, and his state: and
as you can nether add, or take away any thing from them without spoiling or
falsifying the seal, noe more are you able to be deficient in your required
duty without the crime of Lazemaiestie and condemning your selves as utterly
unworthy to be rancked in these ensuing sorts of Nobles. 4 The Species of
Noble men. 1. ad. Theod.


Aristotle divides Nobility into that, which is common to many men, termed
Civil Nobility, and that which is more strict as peculiar to a few, called
Proper Nobility. In the first sense a man is said to be noble, when he is
borne in some ancient country or city: so the Egyptians vaunted of their
Nobility above all other nations; and the Arcadians were not ashamed to
contend for antiquity with the Moon. Plat. in Menex Herod. in Terp. Isocrat.
in Panagyr.
Thus striued the Gracians against the Barbarians; and amongst themselves the
Athenians bragged of their Nobility above the rest of the Cities in Greece,
wearing golden calls wouen after the form of a Grasshopper, to testify how they
were (...) and not inquilini: so among the Latins it was reputed greater
glory to be a Roman, the^ of any other city: as here it may be more
accounted to be borne in London, then in an obscure village.

But Proper Nobility being more to our purpose, I subdevide it into two
branches only, lopping of al other sorts of Nobles, as barren, withered, dead,
and unprofitable boughs, without fruit either for Prince, or people. The one
branch may be termed Natural Nobility, as that of the Jews was, who
descended of the twelve Tribes; of the Gracians who had their offspring from
Cecrops, Aeacus, Hercules, Achilles, or such like Porph. Isag. 2.
Captains, or Princes. The other branch may be called Personal, or Inherent
Nobility, because it is attained by ones own proper Virtue; as when by valor,
learning, wisdom, or other like virtuous means, a man is worthily promoted by
his Majesty. Whosoever intrudes him self, and creepes into this rank
otherwise, whether by money, or a friend in court, I may justly mainetaine
that his title of honor redounds in a double dishonor to him. First for
surprising his Prince vnavvares, by seeking a title which suits not, neither
can agree with him; whereby he brings his Majesty's prudencie in question for
giving equal honors to unequal deserts. Which provoked Achilles his choler
against Agame^non; Iliad.
and now a days makes many to contemn and vilepend that, which has been
formerlie so highly Budaeus in pa^d. Demost.
accounted of, besides the ruin of many common wealths. Next they make their
honorable friends, who procure them this title as much murmured and grudged
at, yea with extenuation of their judgment, Cic. ad Attie.
as Pompeius was disgraced in Rome, for advauncing by his authority an
unworthy person to the Consulship. Virtute ambire oportet, non fauitoribus,
which who Pla^t. Amph.
so do, howsoever meanly they he borne, I dare be bold to compare them with
the highest Nobles of this Land, after this manner.

Certainly this common proverb, all comparisons 5 A comparison of Noble me^.
are odious, was bred and invented, when some wiser then my self would have
made a parallel between those who are Nobles by birth, and those who are only
by merits. My intention therefore is not to grind my self between two
milstones, in extolling the one above the other, more then the Poet in
comparing Natural and Artificial poesy.

-- alterius sic -- Horat. de Art P(...).

Altera possit opem res, and coniurat amice,
Or as another speaks of the Muses.
-- nobis aequaliter adsint,
Nullaque laudetur plusue minusue mihi, Ovid.

As for others, who brag so presumptuouslie of their Nobility, and ancient
descent, (having nothing else) I dare resemble them unto the Athenian
Thrasilaus, who walking every day upon the Pyraeum accounted all the ships he
saw to be his own: or unto the man of Abidenos, Qui se credebat miros audire
tragaedos, Horat. 2. epist. 2

In vacuolaetus sessor plausorque theatro.
Or unto that ignorant rich man Calvisius Sabinus, who thought himself very
learned because he maintained Seneca Epist.
learned men about him. Surely such nobles may very properly be esteemed
nobles of blood; but of blood only without bones, without flesh, without
sinews, and so of themselves unable to bear any burden either for the
public or private. Yea it avails no more a vicious person to brag that he
is come of this Duke or that Marquis, then their good health is able to make
him whole when he is sick, or their sight to make him see when he is blind.

Virtute decet non sanguine niti. Claud. 4. Cons. Honor. Paus. 5. Philostrat.
Nobility consists not in the glorious images of ancestors, nor (as the
Sophister Herodes reproacheth against the bragging Roman) should it be worn
in the shoo-heeles, but their virtue should be a pattern for thee to imitate,
and a spur to prick thee forward in that virtuous course, wherein they have
placed thee; otherwise thy vice shall sooner obscure their brightness, then
their virtue is able to cloak thy lewdness. Finally unto what can I compare
more fitly him whom the Poet describes to be, -- superbus opibus and fastu
tumens, Auson. Epig. 25.

Tantumque verbis nobilis,
Then unto a counterfeit noble of coin? For so long as we take it to be of
good gold, and to have the Kings right stamp we change it, and give it
intercourse among us but as soon as we perceive it, to be counterfeit and
made of brass, copper, or other metal overgilted only, we name it no more a
noble. In like manner be a man never so wealthy, never so highly preferred,
if he lack the character of virtue, he is to be valued but as a sta^pe of honor
set upon base bullio^; and although for a time such men please themselves with
those undeserved titles and illude the world, yet at length (if they mende not
their manners) they will loose them with greater disgrace then they possess
them with honor.

Wherefore I exhort all such as covet to excel in honor that they study
likewise to exceed in virtue, (as in these seven books following I will
endevor my best to direct them) otherwise I wish the^ to persuade themselves
that his Majesty who has erected them to honors in pretense of their virtue,
may degrade them again for their vice, as Caesar did Avienus, Bello Afric.
T. Abienus, and L. Clusienus with sundry others, for certes, Qui dedit haec
hodie, er as si volet, auferet, vt si
Detulerit fasces indigno, detrahet idem. Horat. 1. Epist. 16.



THE FIRST BOOK OF NOble Institution, showing the duty of Parents toward
their Children.
The Summarie.
APOLLO having showed us, by his Delphicke Inscriptio^, that Virtue only is
the essential form of Nobility: we will now declare, how that by Nature,
Nurture, and Institution only, it Plut. Edu^.
is retained or obtained; as Plutarch compares the production thereof most
fitly unto the tillage of a corn land; wherein Nature resembles the soil,
the Nurse represents the Husb(...)n, and the Tutors instructions, and
examples, are well compared unto the seed; which three shall be the
principal parts, of my advise in this book. Desiring first, all those who
would be Parents of Virtuous children, or Noble sons, to be very careful
of their primarie production, which is of a greater efficacy, and force then
men do think or believe. For assuredly the original temperature of the
Parents constitution, corrupts not only the childs disposition, and
virtuous inclination, but deiecteth his courage, as being privy to the basnes
of his birth, and as knowing in himself some defect, and imperfection from his
Parents. whereas contrariewise, they that are known to be the children of
worthy Parents, may be bold to bear their heads aloft, and speak their
minds frankly, whersoeuer they come, as full of stomach and generositie.

Chap 1. Of the begetting of a Noble Son.
ALthough this first duty of parents in endeavoring themselves to have virtuous
children merits chiefly to be considered, as that which gives the substance,
the constitution, the nature, and to call it so, the very temper to a man; (and
so is natural unto him,) whereas Nursing and Institution are only artificial:
yet I see few, who consider well how to perform it, as they should. They that
fail in this first point, will as hardly correct their fault by the other
two, as a man's second and third operation of the stomach can digest that
meat, which the first concoction could not: so that the omission thereof, is
one of the most enormous, and remarkable faults, that can be in a common
wealth, albeit no man complains to have it amended. But alas! I hear many
cry out against me, that I should be so bold, as once to think, I am able to
note that, which so many wise men cannot, or rather will not observe: that I
should complain of that, which no man feels, and take upon me, to counsel
others, wherein I am no ways experimented my self. My intention will excuse my
vnexperience; which is only to propone the opinion of the most skillful
Philosophers, and Physicians; with this assurance, that God works all things
by second causes, and that they who will have it otherwise, do nothing else (as
Job said to his friends) but speak wickedly for Gods defense; and gladly I
embrace the Poets Job. 13. 7.
allegory, that the highest lincke of Natures chain, is tied to the foot of
great Iuppiters chair.

To begin then, I wish you to know, that as the Jmages of Mercury were not
made of every kind of wood, the Persians Royal ointment of all sorts of
spices, not the Mythreda^e of all Jngredients; no more are virtuous children
begotten by every man. But as the heathen Gods were all made of the wood of
Thya: so Noble sons are engendered of some rare, Homer.
and singular substance, which Nature brings not forth, in every person, nor
every day. Wherefore, I will here use the policy of a skillful Gardener, who
purposing to have in his Garden a rare, and precious herb, which should be to
him, and others, both pleasant, and profitable, will first search where he may
find the most mellow, and fertile earth to pla^t the seed in. J counsel then
al Noble men, to be as careful in choosing of their wives (which must be the
soil) as the Romans in electing the Vestal Virgins to see that they be
virtuous, well nurtured, wise, chaste, of gracious countenance, of personable
body, of pleasing delivery of speech. For albeit many Philosophers be of
contrary opinion to Hippocrates, and his interpretour Gallen, concerning the
mothers part; yet the child receaueth increment, and nourishment from her,
sufficient to alter his constitution. It were no less ridiculous then tedious,
to insist in particular probation of these perfections premitted: wherefore
before they sing Hymen Hymenaee, I reiterat only, that they have a due regard,
of her personable body; because a goodly presence, is much worth in a Noble
personage. 2. fast Aen. 4. 6.
Genus arguitur vultu, as appears by the description and praises of Aeneas,
and Marcellus in Virgil. Yea J wish them, to sacrifice rather unto the three
Graces then to Moneta and Plutus, preferring ever the beauty of Venus, before
the riches of Juno: and that they remember in their pursuit of marriage, Ludet,
quislerili semina ponit humo. Propert.


After such heedfull choice I wish them to solicit with ardent prayer, not
Pertunda, Prema, or Perfica, as many yet Gentilize, but the Almighty
President of marriage; craving him, to sa^ctifie their Couch of Matrimony,
with godly and wise children; as our first Parents obtained of God by prayer,
(after Genesis 2. and 4. 21. 30.
the birth of wicked Cayne) a righteous Abell, and then Seth that Holy man; So
Abraham after a cursed I smaell, had given to him a blessed I saac; and Jacob
received a faithful Joseph; Elkana and Ha^nae prostrat before God, had a
Sa^muel, who did minister before the 1. Sam. 2. Sam. 22.
Lord; David and Bethsheba lamenting their sins, enioied Solomon of excellent
wisdom; Sacharie, and Elizabeth feareing the Lord, were blessed with John
Baptist, the forerunner of the Lord.

With that supernatural help of prayer, natural means will succeed the better,
which I think consists cheiflie in the temperature of the elemental qualities,
Hyp^er, Galen. Propert 3.
(as the most learned physicians say, and some of the most judicious Poets;
Naturae sequitur semina quisque suae,) Even at their forming, not expecting the
influence of the stares, and conjunction of Planets, at their howet of
Nativity; nor yet the guydance al their life time, by a poetical Fate.
Therefore J advise al Noble Parents, to be very careful in keeping of a good
Diet; which particularly here I will not prescrib nor yet show, how children
should shake of the ba^ds of nature, wherein they are detained the space of nine
months; fearing J should be paid with Protagoras praises, by Apelles, and the
Centurions commendation, non amo nimium diligentes, as the Africa^ said.

Non etenim cuivis, se praebet Apollo videndum. I will only thus devoutly
implore Lucinas help, to grant the mother an happy delivery.

Lucina if thou be, as Poets write,
Goddess of Births, and Aid in women's woes:
Propitious be, when they implore thy Might
In their life-giuing, and Death threatening Throws.
Ah spare the Mother, spare the infant tender;
Must she for giving life, her life forgo?
Must the infant, life scarce fully given, straight render?
In greatest Need, thy greater skill bestow.
Who knows how great this little babe may prove?
Perchance some Monarchizing Alexander:
Or some sage Nestor, who by Art, and Love,
May merit to be Countries Great Commander.
Lucina therefore help, and so much favor daigne
That fruitful wombes may escape the grave, though not the pain.
Chapt. 2. Of the Childs name.
AFter the birth, The Name should be the first benefit which Parents bestow
upon their children, and that withal convenient speed, not delaying Mar^. Cr^^.
Plu. Ro^. Quest. Genesis 21.
til the seventh year, as the Polonians and many other do; nor to the
Romans cleansing day, observed upon the ninth day for boys; nor yet to the
eight day, as the Jews did their circumcision: but rather let them be
Christened upon the very birth day (if it 31. 18.
be possible) after the example of Jacob and Zacharias; according to our
ancient Britain custom. I would wish that they give their sons, pleasant
and easy Names to be pronounced and remembered; because good names were ever
esteemed to be happy, and first enrouled in the Roman musters, first called
out Corn. Tatit.
to sacrifice at the establishing of Colonies, and ever erected to high honors:
as appears by Constantine, who of a simple soldier was chose^ Empetour at
Silcester by the army of the Britains against Honorius, only for his luckie
name. So was one Religianus of no greater quality made Emperor of Illiricum.
In all contries and nations there has ever been some names more affected then
others, as JAMES in Scotland, HENRY in England, and CHARLES in Germany. These
in special I recommend unto al Nobles to be their triae nomina* as ever
importing unto us and our posterity a most fortunate and happy reign For as
his Majesty's dominion is limited with the great Ocea^, and his most famous
name spread through the whole world: so one day by Gods grace: -- HENRICI
auspiciis, haec insula magna,
Imperium terris, animos aquabit Olympo. Aen. 6

Hic rem Romanam, magno turbante tumultu,
Sistet eques; sternet Papam, Gallumque rebellem, Ae^. 6. Apoc. 17.

as is not only prophesied by Apolloes Priest, but also by Christ's Prophet;
that on day there shall be a Triu^ph over the seven headed dragon, and Trophaees
planted upon the top of the seven Mountains. As he is the ninth both of
England, and Scotland by name, he HENRICUS STVARTVS Lips. de Constable. 1. 16.
prognosticats the most dangerous Clymactericall year to that Antichrist.
Therefore Lipsius, thou did not err, when thou saw a Sun rising in our
Occident some thyrteene years ago. And O Thricehappy Prince, -- cui vnus non
sufficit orbis Aen. 12.

Sis memor -- cum mat^^a adoleuerit at as,


ET PATER Aen^as, and Avunculus Excitet Hector. Remember then how this Tyrant
the Pope has detained Christ's Spouse these many years in bondage. Consider
even now how the particular members of Christ's Church have their eyes fixed
upon your Highness, as the Goats of Candie, upon the Canicular star, when it
arises in their Horizon. They adore your rising as the Elephant does the
Sunne's, hoping it shall be the Popes downefal. O sweet hope that stayed last
Hes^^d.
in Pandoras box! O hope the only Balsamum of our wounds! O most Noble Prince
when shall we cleave the Alps with you? When shall the distressed Protestants
of Saluce, and the people of Piem^^t cry with Pier. Hi^r^g. 1. Plin. 10. 21.
joy or fear, this is that Rampant Lion so highly renowned, going to tear the
Tiger in pieces. Courage then, most hopeful and dreadful Prince, -- Fatis
accede Deisque.
Quis procul ille autem ramis insignis oliuae Aen. 6.

Sacra ferens? no sco crines vultumque paternum
Regis Britanni.
It is he who shall loose the Adamant chains of Mahomet, and restore the
Christians to their liberty. For of him it is truly meant, vos etiam pelliti
Scythae potentimanu habenas temperate Asiae, atque isti ipsi m^x Lips. ibid. ^b
Turcas dicit qui ex tllis
discedite* and sceptrum relinquite huic ad Oceanum ge^ti. Now are the Turks
prophesies fulfilled, and by the valor of our Augustus his sons; one day
shall it be sung, Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.

Chap. 3. Of Nursing the Child. 2 Duty of Parents. 6. in verr. 1. ^^il. ^^
pro dom^ sua.

IF ever there were cause to cry out against many Mothers, as Cicero did
against Verres and Cateline o tempora! o mores! surely it is now, when I see
so many, after they have nursed their children the space of nine months, and
have endured so great pains and danger in bearing them, before ever they knew
or saw the^, to expose them or rather more truly, to forsake the^ in their
greatest need. Oh what Homilies of the ancient Fathers? what reasons of learned
S. Chris. in Ps 50. hom. 1. Judge. 1. Gen 21.
Pyhsitions can persuade them? how is it, that the example of Anna the mother
of Sam^el, of Sara the mother of Isaac, of blessed Marie the mother of Christ,
is not able to move the^ to pity? who should tell them of H^cuba that nursed
Hector, of Thesalonice, Illi^d. 22. ^ustin. 16. ^drss. 11.
Penelope, and many other Queens both Christian and heathen that nursed their
own children? When the pitiful cries of the poor Infa^t, their own flesh and
blood cannot provoke them to do the office A Gell. i2. 1.
of a Mother* Does not nature herself complain many times in their own
papps? How many mothers labor by their Physicians means, to change Gods
blessing into a curse of dry breasts! Al you tender Plut de Edu
hearted and wise Mothers discharge not only the half, but even the whole and
best duty of a Mother, if your health will permit. Otherwise I counsel you to
provide a Nurse four or five months before you be brought a Bed; and to give
her of the sa^e meat you eat your selves; to the intent the child may suck
milk made of the same substance he received be fore he was borne. And to show
you of what quality and complexion the Nurse should be, these are my best
Gallen.
observations. vid. She must be young of a hott and dry complexion or at the
least cold and dry in the first degree only: which you shall know by her quick
wit to understand any thing, by a brownish coulor in her face, by the
thicknes of the hairs of her head etc She must be of a middle stature, nether
to fatt, nor to lean: as also her papps of an indifferent bigness, and full of
sweet milk, which will be nether too thick nor to thin; as when you milk it
upon a glass, it will not fleet but stand, except you bow down the glass. Let
her work much, eat little, lie hard, and be able to endure heat and cold: let
her be ever of a merry and cheerful countenance: for a frowning face abaseth
the courage of the Child, and makes him troublesome not knowing his own
desiers, and causes also a fear which in many years will not be forgotten.
And because little Infants are very subject to fear, as being Hip^^. 6. Epid.
sect. 1. Arist 2 Eth. c. 2.
not yet able to make difference between good and bad; Let the Nurse therefore
ever bear the child in her arms, or rock him in the cradle. Albeit some
Physicians hold the opinion that the crying of young children consumes the
melancholy humors, which they retain of their Mother, yet J counsel the Nurse
to still them; and so soon as they begin to cry, that she begin to sing unto
them. Not because I think the soul is a harmony, as some hold; or that I
think Pyth.
of too contraries the stro^gest expels the weakest; but because J know,
that the vegetative faculty of Arist. 1. de ^nima.
the soul, which is most powerful in childhood, takes delight in pleasant and
joyful things, and naturally abhors the contrary. I must also remember
her, that she be very heedfull he receive no hurt or blemish in his body, by
slrict swathing, falling, lookinge awrie, or by any other carlesse negligence.

Gratior est pulchro venien^ de corpore virtus. Aen. 5.
Lastly, that she never suffer indecent words to be spoken, or uncivil
actions to be done in his presence, Maxima debetur Puero reverentia: si quid
Iuven. 14.

Turpe paras, nec tu Pueri contempseris annos.
For this cause Xerxes said, that the mind of man dwelt in the ears. Because
it reioiceth when the ears hear good things, and is sorry at evil things:
And the Ancients, considering that the ears were very capable of Jnstruction,
believed, that they were consecrated to Learning; which made the Fathers ever
to kiss their Sons ears, and the Athenians to hang pearls at them, upon
the Oracles answer; as many do yet amongst our selves, not knowing the true
reason thereof.

Chap. 4. Of Institution.
SOlon and Lycurgus, understanding both, that Fathers 3 Part of Parents duty.
Plato. 4. 5. and 6* de leg.
ought to be as careful of their Sons Instruction, as willing to their
Begetting, or dilligent in their Nursing, by a Law inacted, that Sons should be
freed and quite discharged of duty toward their Fathers, who in their
childhoode had not been instructed by them. They well considered, how the
Institution Arist. 8. pol. c. 1
of youth imported, and how nearly it concerned a well governed Commonweal.
For it is the spring, not autumn, which makes a good harvest: Si been
floruerint segetes, erit area dives; Ovid. 5. fast.

Si been floruerit vinea, Bacch^^ erit.
Wherefore the Lacademonians, when Antipater required fifty children as
pledges for truce, very wisely answered; that they would rather give a hundred
men, then ten Children. For (as Pericles said) children are the hopeful Plants
of a Commonweal, and as they be taught in their tender years, such shall they
be in their man's estate. Bad children* do become worse young men, and die most
bad old men: they can no more change their ma^ners, then the Leopard his spots,
or the Aethioptan his color: Genesis 7. 2^ Hor. 1. Epist, 2.
Quo semelest imbuta recens, seruabit odorem
Testa di^.
The greater diligence the Father has used, that his Son should be borne of
a wise disposition, the more pernicious and dangerous will he prove to his
Country, without good Jnstitutio^. The fatter the soil, the greater
abundance of thistles, and weeds, except the ground be well husbanded. Ovid.
de Tristi. 5.


Fertilis assiduo si non renovetur aratro
Nil nisi cum spinis gramen habebit ager.
Therefore Noble Fathers show yourselues no less diligent, in this third part
of your duty, then in the two precedent, Gratum est quod Patriae ciuem
populoque dedisti; Ju^^. 14.

Si facis vt Patriae sit idoneus, vtilis agris,
Vtilis and bellorum, and pacis rebus agendis.
Plurimum enim intererit quibus artibus, et quibus hunc tu
Moribus instituas.
To purchase this Park, that Farm, this Baronie, or that house for your
Son, and to have little or no regard of purchasing Wisdom and Virtue, is (as
Crates cried out in choler) to love your shoe better the^ your foot. Sic
coelo praefertur Adonis. Rather provide your Son of such possessions and
riches, as may serve him in time of wars, and in time of Peace: that will
maintain him abroad, as well as at home, such as nether the water drownes, nor
the fire is able to consume; but will ever follow and escape, as Anchises did
the flames of Troy, and Aristippus his goods, that perished not by shipwreck.
Lay up in store for yur Sons such Jewels, as can neither be lost, nor stolen
from them; such gold and silver, as the Canker cannot eat, nor rust devour;
that is a mind beautified and replenished with letters and good manners.
Sueton. in. Aug Caes.
This did Augustus Caesar, Charles the Great, and the very Turks at this day,
to their children and nephews: not for fear of any Athenian Law, but to
discharge a fatherly and natural duty. Herod. lib. 1. Paulus Aegin lib. 1.
art. med. Quint. 5.


Delay not till the fifth year, the Instruction of your Sons, as the Persians
did: nor til the seaueth, as Paulus Aeginita prescribes; but following Fabius
his Institution, so soon as they begin to move* their mind with the Body,
in speaking and walking, and when the faculties thereof unfold, and as it
were, spread themselves abroad, which is at the age of three Arist. ^0. sect.
proble. 4
or four years; then without farther delay provide a fit Tutor for them. Vdu^
and molle Lutum est, nu^c nu^c propera^dus, et acri Pers. 3.

Fingendus sine fine rota.
New wax is best for sealing, as fresh claie is fittest Arist. 3. de anim^
for working: the woole of young lambs is aptest to receive the surest die, so
youth is fittest for good impressions. For when will and wit by increase of
years, are once misled with folly, delighted in vanity, filled with
flattery, and let loose as it were to disobedience, hardly or never will such
be reclaimed. And though childrens understanding be capable of any Instruction,
as they fable, that Theramenes his shoe fitted every man's foot; yet, as no
man's foot can be fitted by every shoe, no more is every Instructor alike
proper for your Sons Institution. So far as his quality exceeds the common,
so much should his Tutors sufficiency surpass other common schoolemasters.
Alexander would not be painted but with Apelle's pencil, nor Caesar suffer his
acts to be enregistred, but by the pen of the most learned in his time. Why
the^ S^^^. i^ ^^l. C^
should not you be as careful to see your own lively Image well drawn? It is
the sons life and conversation, that writes and witnesses the Fathers Acts.
Have then a special eye to this Limmer, who in one Picture must pourtraie both
Son and Father. Choose him not upon letters of commendation, or because your
friend does solicit for him, no more then you would take an ignorant Physitio^
in your sickness, because he is your kinsman, or of your acquaintance. Who will
pass the straicts with a young pilot, or commit his cause to a Pettifogger,
because they are his friends or alies: nay what Noble man in choosing his
fauckner will not curiously inquire how he can diet his hawk, how he mewes her,
how he gives her casting, keeps her from sickness, casts her of, and reclaims
her, before he admit him to his service? But alas! of a Tutor, to whom he will
commit his Son to be trained up in virtue, whose life, shall be the principal
monument of his name and honor, he never makes farther inquiry, but where he
may have a Schoolmaster for his Son (if he will have any, as too many will
none at all and for how little he may begotten: Chrysogonus quanti doceat, vel
Pollio quanti. Juv^^. 7


The King, the Contrie and their own Tennants, will I fear, one day have
just cause to complain of this negligence; Yea J am sorry to see so many
hopful young Nobles, borne and ordained for more generous designs, to trouble
their heads seaue^ or eight years with the Heteroclits of Despauter, throw the
little Judgment of their Tutors, who often have even as much wit, as a Gnat
has blood. Such ignorant guides dragging young Noble spirits through so many
briars and brambles, cause them to forsake al good letters and to despise the
very name of learning and the professors thereof.

Chap. 6. The Description of a young Noble-mans Tutor.
SOcrates who was (according to the Divine Oracle) D. Laert. in Socrat.
the wisest man living, esteemed a good Tutor to be as necessary for a
Scholar, as a skillful midwife for a woman in childbirth; and therefore called
Institution it self, Midwife-craft, by which (...).
men's minds were holped in bringing forth as it were, a birth of true and
virtuous knowledge. Philip king of Macedon seemed also to be of this opinion,
who said that he reioiced more that he had Aristotle to be his Sons Tutor,
then that he had Alexander to be his Son; yea Alexander himself would often
confess that he was more indebted to Aristotle his Master, then to King Philip
his Father, because the one was the cause of life only, and the^ other of a
virtuous and happy life. A good Tutor is one of the principal Pillars in a
Commonwealth, which Maecenas very well knew, when he councelled Augustus, that
the young Nobles of Rome should be instructed on* lie by such Tutors as
affected most the Monarchical Government, which was establishing at that time,
to the subversion and downfall of Democratie. For quoth he, when children are
well instructed in their childhood, they busy not their brains afterward
with innouations, they plott, nor conspire not against their Contrie, but
submit themselves and cleave to the government of the higher power, as the
Bees, to their honny-combs in winter. Therefore I first counsel Parents to be
assured that the Tutor be godly, and free from al erroneous opinions in
Religion (which is the Fabius inst it. orat. 12. c^. 1.
true foundatin of al well established States) that he may inform his Pupil
according to Gods word and the law of the Contrie. Next that he be wise and
descended Plut. de Educ.
of honest Parents; that he be of a gentle and mild nature, having his head
noe less fraughted with Mother wit (as we call it) then Schole-learning. For a
dram of the first, for our purpose, is worth a pound of the latter. Magis
magniclerici no^ sunt se^per magis magnos sapientes, the greatest clerks are
not ever the wisest men.

To have such a Tutor who shall be as wise as learned, you must seek him abroad,
and not in the Schools. Nam qui in Scholis habitant, non magis saperepossu^t,
Petron. Arbit.
quam been olere, qui in culina habitant. He is conversant with the world, not
locked up in a study. He is a man who delights in honest company, and not
one who is as astonished to frequent other men, as the Owl is to behold the
light. He holds more of Jupiter the^ of Saturn. And to describe him more
particularly, al his civilitie is not in his hood; Nor is he a freshman
newly cast in Tullies or Aristotle's moulde, but on who has purified the
grosser aier of Schools, which makes the day light so dark to many, that
their eyes are not able to endure it. Quia nihil ex ijs quae Idem.
in vsu habe^tur, aut audiu^t, aut vide^t, et cu^ in foru^ venerint, puta^t se
in aliu^ orbe^ terraru^ delatos. Nether is he a whipping Orbilius, or a
mourning Heraclitus, but a mild Agaraspides, more ready to pardon the^ to
beat; not furious or chollerick, but meek and gentle. In his actions he is
advised, in his discourses modest, not contentious, proud arrogant, or full of
babbling words.

Be well advised therefore in your choice, that for saving of charges, or such
like consideration, you admit not a Pedaunt, a simple Schoolmaster to be a
pattern of your Sons behavior al his life time. For children fashion
themselves more by example then by reason; as they see their Tutor demean or
carry himself, so will they ever study to imitate him.

It was Aristotle's stammering, that caused many of his Scholars to stutter in
their speech, as it was Platoes example that made his followers to hang down
their shoulders: and the Historiographers testify, that the hearers of Portius
Latro usually rubbed their faces with Cummin seed, only to make them pale like
their Instructour, who was so by studying. Alexander learned his drunkenness
of Leonides, and Nero his Plut. in Alex. Sueton. in Neron.
cruelty of the Barber. Read only the lives of Vitellius, Commodus, and
Heliogabalus, and I am of opinion you will think it superfluous for me to
allege more examples, or use more reaso^n to prove, that you should be very
circumspect in choosing a godly, a wise, and a virtuous Tutor for your Son,
and withal a learned man: because it is impossible,

Cum sibi semita^ non sapiunt, alteri monstrent via^. A blind man borne cannot
point out the way to an other. Who will crave of poor Codrus the riches of
Craesus? Or beg a good suit of apparel, of one more naked the^ L^berides? No
more can you look or imagine, that an ignorant Tutor, is able to make a
learned Pupil. There came never an eloquent Orator from Sabinaeus, or Rufus
his School: Chaerilus never made good Poet, nor Volusius a skilful historian,
nor Cronus a quick Logician, nor Philonides a profound Philosopher.

I would have our Noble Pupil instructed in all Arts and Sciences. And
therefore can I not marvel enough at the impude^cie of many, who dare
undertake the office of a Tutor, and to teach that which themselves never
learned. O miram impudentiam! and quibus os est adeo duru^, vt vel pugiles esse
possint! How pitiful a thing is it, to see a young Nobleman loose the flower
of his age under such Coraces, and ignorant Tibia's? After they have both
deceived the expectation of the Parents, and caused the Son to consume the best
of his years for learning, then must he in all haste, be sent to some
Timotheus; or a Perseus must be found out, to free and deliver him from this
Medusa, his ignorant Pedaunt. How much better is it to provide in time such a
one, as is able to instruct him in all kind of good Letters? And as learned
Politianus requires Inmiscell. co^t* 1. cap. 4.
that a Po^t should watch at Aristophane's lamp, and draw at Cleanthes his
bucket, so wish I, that our young Noblemans Tutor were profounde as well in
la^guages as in Sciences: especially in the French tongue, (next the Latin and
Greek) because it is most used now universally. Albeit some hold that in the
Institut. orat. 2.
beginning it forces not, that the Tutor be so absolut as I have required; yet
I am of Quintilians mind, that it is best to be first instructed by the^ that
are learned, by reason it is a hard matter to put out of mind that which we
have learned in younger years. Jf a man desire to make his son a Tailor, will
he first bind him prentise to a Botcher? or if he will have him a cunning
Goldsmith, will he first set him to a Tinker? Others say, when we wave found
out such a one as you have described, shall we bestow so much upon on
Schoolmaster, as will well maintain two Serving men? Aristippus answers the^
thus. Hier you two Serving men with that money, and be assured you shall have D.
L^^rt. 8
three. It is pity that men should more regard their Horse-boy* then their
sons Tutor, they deny it inwords but confirm it in deeds. For to the one
they will allow a pension of twenty or thirty pounds yearlie, to the other
they will not so easily afford so many shillings. But this their liberality is
worthily rewarded, when they have horses well broken, and unruly sons.
Therefore I wish al Noble Parents that have happily found such a Tutor as I
have discribed, that they entertain and esteem of him according to his office.

Chap. 7. Of the Tutors Minervall.
TO find out a word more significant or proper then Minervall, to express a
Tutors honorable due recompense, were a thing as hard for me, as it was to
Aristotle for to give a reason, why there 30. Sect. Proble. 10.
was not a certain price and reward appointed for learning, as well as for all
Labors and Exercises of the Body.

Al men know that, hier, and salarie, are unworthy to be attributed to a Tutor,
who as he is a free man should freely be dealt with, and as his profession is
liberal and of liberal Arts, so should his recompense be of liberality rather
then of precedent pactio^. The ingenuous Tutor will blush to set price on his
learning, as Apollodorus the Painter did on his pictures, before he showed
them; but like Xeuxes rather, will freely bestow his endeavors and pains on
his Pupil esteeming no price worthy to match or cou^tervaile them. Nether
craves he dubble payment, like Gorgias or Protagoras, but what a Noble man
liberally offers, he receives thankfully, as Socrates did of his Disciples.

It is too base either for a Noble man or Tutor, to merchandise for wages
mechannicallie, with what will you give? Or what will you take? Plato would not
compact so with Dion, or Aristotle with Alexander, Xenophon with Agesilaus,
Socrates with Timotheus, or Lysides with Epaminondas. With what alacrity trow
ye, should a man go about a lesson for his Scholar, when pure need compels
him to provide otherwise for his necessity? Phormio the Athenian refused to
be General in the wars of Peloponesus, because he was poor; his reason, as
I conceit, is very allowable and good: for a poor man has neither great
authority in commanding, nor a quiet mind to think of those things that be
necessary. So let a Scholar have many good parts in him, and yet live in
want, he is neglected. Let him be virtuous as Aristides, learned as Aristotle,
eloquent as Demosthenes, if his attire be base, his words shall seldom be
gracious, -- Rara in tenui facundia panno.

Suffer not then the Tutors wants to disgrace him, chiefly with his Pupil, of
whom he should be most honored, if ever you mean to have him profit. For
Honor is the second part of a Tutors Minervall.

Honos alit arts. You must therefore persuade your Son ever to have a good
opinion of his Tutor, that so absolute a man as he, you could find no where to
instruct him. To induce him to conceive thus first of his Tutor, next of his
Book, there is no better way, then to use the Tutor kindly your self, and as
your familiar, specially in your Sons presence to grace and respect him. For
how can the Pupil reverence him, whom the Parents so little regard? Yet every
Jacke that can cunningly flatter, and at every syllable add ( and please
your honor) talk of the running of a dog or a horse, shall be entertained as
a companion, when the modest Tutor, must sit below the Salt.

-- Veniat qui fercula docte Iuue. 7.

Componit, veniat qui pulmentaria condit.
And which is woorst of all, I have hard that some Parents rubb their invention
to weaken honest men's deserts, to recompense their diligent pains by
scandalous imputatious, and malicious traducements. Jf the Tutor have made his
Scholar apply his book hard, they cry out their Son has not the humor
of a Gentleman, if he have trained him up in exercises beseeming his quality,
O then, he might have learned his lesson; if he have learned little, the Tutor
is negligent; if enough for his time and capacity, yet he would have been a
better Scholar, if his Tutor had been sufficient: if he be ignorant, the
Tutor has no learning; if a Loggerhead, strait-waies is the Tutor an Ass. My
Son has a sharp wit, but his Tutor is a Buffle: my Son has a good memory,
but his Tutor will not exercise it: my Son would be of a sweet and gentle
nature, but his Tutor is harsh. Jf their Son be a glutton, he has learned
it of his Tutor: if he be wicked, qualis paedagogus, talis discipulus. If he be
of base courrage, his Tutor is a coward. Let the Tutor admonish him of his
faults gently, he is too meek, to soft, he cannot keep him in awe, he is too
familiar with his Scholar, he cannot retain the gravity of a Tutor; a child
should never have a good cou^tena^ce says they. But let the Tutor correct him
discreetlie, O then he is to rude, too cruel, and of no moderation in
government. Seneca. Epist. 5.


Seneca makes mention of a blind woman, who by all means would have
persuaded the^ that came to visit her, that the house was so dark she could
not see In like manner such Parents would cover their own ingratitude, by
laying the fault always on the innocent Tutor. Let him do his best
endeavors, he shall never escape their venomous teeth, so that, as Cor. Tacit.
Annal. lib. 4.
Tacitus wisely observes, when a man has deserved a greater recompense then
can be given him, he may expect rather a displeasure, then a requit all.

I advise al honest Tutors rather to undergo the burden of ingratitude and
contumely, then ever to repent them of well doing; Let the testimony of a good
conscience, that he has faithfully discharged his duty, be a comfort to him
in all displeasures.

-- hic murus a heneus esto. Hora. 1. Epist. 1.
Learn of the heathen Socrates when thou art accused to be a corrupter of
youth (as he was by Anytus and Melitus) to answer as he did: sivera vitia
nobis obiecerint, Plato. Apolog Socrat. Plut. in. Aristid. Homer Iliad. 2.
corrigemus, sin falsa, nihil adnos. Though you be detracted with Aristides for
discharging your duty, yet I wish thee to endure patiently as Agame^non did
Thersites his contumelies, and as Damon Pericles his Tutor being banished by
the Athenians, and Heromodorus by the Ephesians. But to determine this bargain
I wish that Parents would accept of Protagoras offer either to pay the Tutor
according to his own demand, or else that the Pupils would give their oaths
to tell faithfully how much they have profited by his instructions, and to
content him accordingly. Which law well observed would cause the diligence of
a good Tutor, to be easily discerned from the idle endeavors of a Pedant,
enterprising the thing he can in no way accomplish, prostituting good letters
to a mercenary gain, having no other intention but to benefit himself, to the
utter overthrow of many a brave spirit, and idle consuming of precious time,
which may be best recovered in this Academic following.

Chap. 8. Of the best University for a young Noble man.
Clcero who was sufficient and able enough either Offic. 2.
to have taught his Son himself, or to have entertained a Cratippus in his
own house thought it better to send him to Athens the most famous University
in those days, to the end he might as well profit by example as by instruction.
He understood well how it much impaired the Tutors sovereign authority, and
the Pupils learning to study under the elbow of his mother Terentia. He forsaw
that she would not suffer him at his book an hour or two in the day, or
endure to see her child take a foil in his hand, to ride a great horse, to
come from his exercises a little sweating or dustie: but (forsooth) he must
still be cockered like a babe. He knew very well that he who wilbee a man for
his Prince and country must not always feed at the Physicians diet. Hor. 3.
C^^. 2.


Vitam sub dio, and trepidis agat In rebu^ Jf you mean your Sons should
profit in learning and good manners, send them to the University as the
Gracaeians sent their children to the Caldean Schools, and the Romans to
Athens. It was abroad Genesis 12.
where the Lord would bless Abraham and therefore commanded him to leave his
fathers house: your servants puffs up your sons mind and makes them so
insolent in their childhood, that they are not Plut. de Edus.
ashamed to brag with Diaphontus, who was wont to say in the hearing of many,
whatsoever pleased him, the same also the people of Athens thought well of: for
that which I would have done (quoth he) my mother likewise says Yea to it:
what my Mothers mind sta^ds to, Themistocles my Father will not gain say it;
and look what likes him the Athenians all are well contented there with. Yea
many thinking themselves Sovereign of the village in their youth wax
rebellious being me^.

Without offense to either of the famous Universities A description of the
Princes Court.
here, or our Colleges in Scotland, for all sort of good learning, I recommend
in particular the Academie of our Noble Prince, where young Nobles may learn
the first elements to be a Privy Counselor, a General of an Army, to rule
in peace, and to co^mande in war. Here they may obtain his Highness favor, as
Hylas won the love of Hercules: Patroclus of Achilles, and Ephestion of
Alexander the Great. School kindness (as we say) is never forgotten, witness
Artaxerxes in pardoning Sorobates, and Herodes, in forgiving the treason of
Olethes. Here shall a young Noble man learn to fashion himself, and to have a
good entregent (as the French me^ call it.) Here is the true Panthaeon of Great
Britain, where Virtue her self dwells by pattern, by practice, by
encouragement, admonitions, and precepts of the most rare persons in Virtue and
Learning that can be found: so that the very accidents of young Noble men's
studies cannot be but substantial, as sympathising with the fountain from
whence they flow. Here is a glorious and laudable emulatio^ among Peers
without fraud or envy; al striving to do best; and to merit most his
Highness favor, stimulos dedit aemula virtus. Lucani. 1.


For exercise of the body there is none lacking, fitting a young Noble man, so
that he may learn more in this one place, in one month, then if he should run
over al France and Italy, in a year; yea his Highness Dinners and Suppers are
an other Salomons table, where the wisest men of any country may come to learn
of him and his attenda^ts. Their wise speeches are so pleasant, and their
histories so profitable, that his ordinary meals surpasses many degrees
Varroes perfect feasts, Satyra. ^menipp A. Gel. 13. 11.


Who would not leave then Platoe's Academie, Aristotle's Lycau^, Zeno's Stoa,
Epicuru's Porch, and Tullie's Tusculan to come to the Prince his Court, which
retains ever worthily and with good reason the name of NON-SVCH. Athens her
self the mother of al Sciences even at her best would not have been offended
at my advuise. She had but one Goddess, who was forged by Vulcan out of
Jupiters brain: Here dwell all the Gods and Godesses: They have bestowed their
gifts every one upon this Court, as upon Hesiod. (...).
another Pandora. The nine Sisters hearing of our ninth Prince HENRY
acco^pained with his nine right honorable nobles left the waters of Aganippe to
come here riding upon their Pegasus, who with his hoof has made another
Hyprocrene to spring in the midst of his Court. Here are they making so sweet
and harmonious music at the name of nine, that Phrix and Mysius would dance
to hear them. Jam persuaded that they were never more upon the high topps of
Cythera, Parnassus, and Helicon, then now they are in the low valleys of
NON-SVCH, accompained with the Oriades, Dryades, Napaees and Dianaes Nymphs.
So that whosoever were once hear he would bid farwell to Alcinous, Adonis, and
Lucullus their Gardens, and would not envy the Thessalians for their Tempe. Yea
Plat in Timeo. ^^ Crit.
(with Platoes favor) the air is more pleasant then that of Athenes, and the
flowers smell so sweetly that if Epicurus the Master of Pleasure were here,
doubtless he would wish either to be al nose to smell, or else al eyes to
delight his sight. Why then should not J wish my self now to be al tongue, or
at the least, that the tongue which J have might be hard from the Orie^t to the
Occident, from the Septentrion to the Meridian; yea that it might ascend from
the lowest center of the earth unto the highest circumference of the Emperick
heaven, to inuit al young Nobles unto this (never sufficiently praised)
Academie, as also Gods Angels to be their guard?

Chap. 9. Of a young Noble-mans Seruing-men.
Plutar. i^ Cicer.
PLutarch showing how young Marcus Cicero was corrupted by Gorgias: gives al
Noble Parents to understand that it is not the learned Cratippus, or the famous
university of Athens, which is able to make their Son a good Scholar, if he
have bad Servants about him. Gorgias will do more evil in an hour, then
Cratippus can do good in a month. And Athens will not be so profitable by
example, as the pleasures there, will be hurtful by persuasion. The Astrologians
make Mercury to be the Planet of young Ptol^^. quadrip. constable. l. 1. c. 4. te^.
31.
men, so far as my judgment can collect, because that Planet is good or bad as
he is in conjunction with another: So young Nobles follow often times the
vicious persuasions of their Servants rather then the Tutors good precepts: and
show themselves like to those who are about them. In Plautus and Terence you
shall see almost in every Commedi^, that the wicked inticements of Geta, Dauus,
Phormio, Gnato, and such lewd servants, have had greater credit at their young
Masters hands; then honest Parmeno's councels; yea among our selves yet, there
remain many Geta's but few Parmeno's. wherefore seeing a young Noble-ma^
besides his Tutor, has need of Servants to attend him, as a sick man must
have others, besides the Physician, I will council al fathers to send with their
Son, some honest, and discreet man that is neither flatterer, gamester, or
otherwise vitiouslie given. I would have him such a one, as his gravity and
good example, may be powerful in his Masters heart; and make himself to be
respected by his good councels. It skils not much whether he be learned or no:
for Cicero Epist^d. s^^.
writes of one Curio, and I can witness my self of one with Sir John
Harrington, who can neither write nor read, yet by his speeches, example, and
good advise is very profitable to that young Nobleman, as al men know that
know them both. This honest man should concur with the Tutor in forming of the
young Noble-mans manners; having both one intention, albeit they use several
means in attaining thereto: either of them must labor to commend the others
doings before the young Gentleman, and to maintain one another authority,
without crafty emulatio^ or iealou sie, that one should be more in the Parents
favor the^ the other, or more respected of the Son: whatsoever the one says,
the other must allow of, if he be present, or otherwise if he hear of it in
the Gentleman's presence. If they disagree within themselves, the one will hinder
the other. But if any thing be amiss, and that the one misliketh the others
proceedings, I advise them both that the one admonish the other kindly and
freindlie, when they are apart by themselves. In so doing their charge shall
prosper and they shall have honor of al men; a recompense of the honorable
Parents, and for ever they shall win the young Noble man's favor and kindness.

Thus agreed Seneca and Burrus in the education of Nero* as Cornelius Tacitus
testifies in the description Cor. Tacit. A(...) 30.
of Nero's institution. The like shall one day be recorded in our Britain
Cronicle of the sweet harmony and brotherly agreement betwixt Mr Newton
Tutor. and Sr David Murray in the Institution of our Noble Prince Henry: it is
manifest enough how this godly Knight observes inviolablie, the old Persia^
custom, every morning in saying unto his Highness, Surge Princeps, atque ea
cura, qua te curare voluit Mesoromasdes. Arise Prince, and do those things
which the great God has ordained you to do, and discharges the duty of
Philipps Courtier in saing HOMO ES HENRICE.

As for such as attend our young Noble man in his Chamber, I wish them also to
be wise, faithful, dilligent and of modest behavior, both in words, and action:
-- Homini seruo, suos Plaut* Miles. Glory,

Domitos habere oportet oculos, and manus, Orationemque.


Take heed to a company of Thrasoe's and flattering fellows, who like the
Harpyes about Phyneus table, study only how to smooth a young Gentleman in Aen.
3.
his humors. Such men are very pernicious, because they may soon corrupt
youth in the mornings or euenings, at dinner or at supper; and where the Tutor
cannot always be present: they may alienate the young Noble man's mind from
his Tutor, or the honest man whom J may call purse-bearer, because J would have
him to keep the purse, and to have a care of his Masters clothes, and other
necessaries. Wherefore the Parents shall do well in my judgment, if they command
these to respect their Sons Tutor, and obey him, as one who supplieth their
place, and that by no means they meddle to be Censures of his actions and
diligence. And so admonishing the rest of his Jnferior servants to do the
like, and to abstain from drunkenness, whoredom, swearing, and blasphemy,
that they avoid scurtilitie and baudie talk, and dissolute laughing, chiefly
in their Masters presence: that they be very carful in their offices, and to
atte^d their Master when he goes abroad.

Chap. 10. Of the Fathers allowance for his Sons maintenance.
CAesar amongst many other Judicious observations Iul. Caesar. 6. in moribus
Galiorum.
in his French wars, registered an ancient custom of the Gauls at that time,
which is worthy to be noted and followed of al Noble Fathers especially.
Children (says he) never came in their fathers sight, unto the time they began
to bear arms. As if he would infer and comme^t of that place; That Fathers
should be most loving and careful of their sons, when they grow unto men's
estate, in raising and advancing their sons fortune. At that time they should
help them most and show themselves men. Before while your Sons were little,
young, weak, and that they could not enterprise any thing for themselves:
your affection was natural, and common with other living creatures, but now
when you set to your shoulder, or lend your hand to set them forward in the
world; it is a token that you are a man, and that your love is reasonable. My
council is therefore ( Noble Fathers,) that you deny not a sufficient and
honorable allowance for your sons maintenance now when he begins to
manifest these reasonable faculties of his soul, which lay inuolued in his
childhood. Now as he grows in years and comes either to serve his Noble
Prince, or to go abroad to some other University: so should your fatherly
affection increase: you must join Nature, and Reason hand in hand; and
pronounce with a Humane voice, this or such like better exhortation and
encourageme^t. Dear Son if thou show thy self diligent in the Schools of
Virtue and good Learning, and willing to maintain that honorable rank which
thou have received of me, and my Ancestors, I will spare no cost for thy
preferment and instruction, according to my ability and means. For alas, how
many brave and Noble spirits have I seen remain al their life time lurking
and hiding themselves in the midst of the base multitude, and in the end die
in Ignorance, for lack of an honest allowance befitting their quality!

Haud facile emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat Iuuen. 3.

Res angusta domi.
And which is more pitiful, how many gallant young gentlemen of good houses,
may I say to have both seen and heard of, who by their Fathers wretchedness,
have been forced, to provide for their necessaries themselves, by all means
whatsoever, either lawful or unlawful!

Vnde habeat quaerit nemo, sed oportet habere. Who will not condemn of
Injustice an old crazed sinew-shru^ke^ father, sitting with one foot in the
grave, and the other in the Chimney corner, to hoord up like an old Euclio, or
else spend prodigally so much goods himself alone, as may suffice for the
maintenance of al his children? This is the cause that many Sons expect daily
for their fathers death.

Would you then fathers be beloved of your Sons, and that they should not wish
for your death? (albeit such an horrible and detestable wish can no wise,
justly or with reason be excused) Labor to be beloved of them in furnishing
and allowing them, as much as you are able commodiously; without hurting your
selves, according to your degree and quality, their age, and the place where
they remain, rather then by churlishnes, frowning, and niggardnes. Terent
Adelph. Act. ^ ^c. 1.


Liberalitate liberos
Retinere satius esse credo quam metu.
Assure your self that Virtue, sufficiency, wisdom and Reason shall ever work
a greater respect and honor toward you, in your Sons heart and eyes then all the sharp and niggard dealing, that you can devise against them.

Errat long mea quidem sententia, Ibid.

Qui impertum credat grauius esse aut stabilius
Vi quod fit quam illud quod amicitia iungitur.
Ye that are venerable Fathers never think that your Sonns, for whose
virtuous education ye have been thus careful, can ever contemn, or misprise
you, be ye never so feeble and decrepit. They have learned, and still will
retain in memory for a Pattern to imitate, that the ancient Romans respected
the very dumb and senseles Pictures of their honorable Fathers in their
galleries; and as yet continue to reverence the old Relics and ashes of their
rotten bones.

But what shall I think or say of some Fathers Indiscretion, who after their
death leave their Sonns in a greater misery then before, (not that they wasted
all themselves as many unthrifts do) but in leaving their wives full poor to
dispose of their goods and Lands at their pleasure. Ah poor Gentleman!.

He is out of the pan into the fire. It is very dangerous to fall under woemens
Judgment, which commonly is unjust and fantastical; for what unruly appetite,
and distasted relish or strange longings they had when they were with child,
the same have they at al times in their minds: they are commonly seen to
affect the weakest, simplest, and most abject, as appears by ma^ie examples
both in holy and profane writings: because their Judgment is so weak, that
they cannot embrace who^ they ought, they follow their natural inclination,
which is grounded upon a very sandy and slipperie foundation; as we may
perceive by many Mothers, that have noe pity, to wrest the papp out of their
own childrens tender mouth, and to leave them, crying and sprauling for help,
only to gain a little money. This indiscretio^ of Fathers is the cause that
many Mothers curse their children, make our youg Lords and Lairds To begin
their first war upon their Mother. Wherefore to remedy this heavy and REX.
(...). lib. 2.
pitiful effect her after, my advise is that husband sleaue their wives so much
of their livings, as co^petentlie and largely may maintain their estate,
according to the quality of their house and age: and for the rest to leave it
a among his children, according to the laws of the Country where they are
borne, hoping that they will have more wit, reason, and discretion (if they be
of full years) then their wives; considering the weakness of their sex. But if
the children be in their minority, there is some show of reason that the
mothers should have the administration of the childrens goods until they come
to full age themselves, to have the managing thereof by the Laws of the
Country; yea if there be not sufficient goods for both Mother and children:
they should rather lack then she: because need and want is much more
unseemly and difficult for women to endure then me^.

To end then this duty of a Father, and to keep his bones from cursing
either by his wife or children: as also to save the Sons from their Mothers
curse: and lastly the Lawyers from money, and the whole house from decaie; my
opinion is, that the best distribution of goods is, when you die, to distribute
them according to the custom of the Country. The Laws have thought better upon
them then you: your goods are not properly your own: since without your
advise in particular, they are ordained by a Civil proscriptio^ to certain
successors. And albeit your liberty be somewhat extended, I think it very
Jniustice to deprive and debar one of that right which Fortuen has allotted
him, and the common Laws of the Country have called him unto: except there be
an evident reason and cause to the contrary. What can be more unjust then to
make a man loose the benefit of his whole life, for one mistaking, or an ill
word, and to suffer one fault to weigh down twenty years good servise? Happy
he that at this last passage is ready to sooth and applaude their will: The
newest and latest action transporteth, not the best and most frequent offices,
but the freshest and instant work the deed. They play with their wills and
testaments, as with apples and rods, with children; to gratify or chastise
every action of theirs; who pretend any interest thereunto: It is a matter of
greater consequence then at every minut of an hour to be varied and changed.
Wise men resolve themselves once for all, ever respecting reason and public
observance before all particular considerations.

Take this not only to be my advise, but also the wise law-giuers answering
his Citizens. Why then say they (in your name) perceiving our end to
approach, shall we not dispose of that which is our own, to whom and how it
pleases us? O God what cruelty is this, that it shall not be lawful for us to
give more or less, according to our fantasies, to such as have served us, and
taken pains with us in our sicknesses, in our age, and in our business? To whom
the Lawgiver answers in this manner. Plat^ 11. de legibus.


My friends (says he) who doubtless shortly shall die, it is a hard matter
for you both to know your selves, and what is yours according to the Delphick
Inscription. As for me, who am the maker of your Laws; I am of opinion that
neither your selves are your own, nor that which you possess: And both you
and your goods past, and to come, belong to your family* and moreover both
your family and goods are the common wealths. Wherefore least any flatterer,
either in your age, or in time of sickness* or any other passion should
vnadvisedlie induce you to make any unlawful convayance, or unjust Will and
Testament, I will look to you, and keep you from it. But having an especial
respect both to the universal interest of your City, and particular state of
your houses; I will establish laws, and by reason make you perceive and
confess, that a particular commodity ought to yield a public benefit.
Follow that course merely whereto humane necessity does call you. To me it
belongs, who have no more regard to one thing then to another, and who as
much as Ican take care for the general, to have a regardful respect of that
which you leave behind you.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY Mr. ADAM NEVVTON Tutor to Prince HENRY'S Excellency; AND
TO Mr THOMAS MOVRRAY Tutor to the DVKE of YORK his Grace
SIrs in aduising Tutors of their Duty, least I should be thought unadvised in
my own -- ipse semipaganus

Ad sacra vatu^ carme^ affero nostru^. I offer this book in particular,
(according to the ancient custom of Egypt) as unto the two most skilful and
judicious Censors of this Art. I present it, as Apelles and Policletus did
their pictures and images, holding the pincel and pincers as yet in my hand. to
add, change, or clip away what you Judge expedient, Your (...) or (...) shall be
an advertisment to me not to fail hereafter in the like case* as your
approbation may be an incouragment to attempt some higher disseing, whereby I
may better testify my zeal toward those, of whom you merit to be esteemed
as Homer was of King Ptolomie and Frontinus the Philosopher of M. Antonius the
Emperor.

Yours ever in duty as Sometimes Imitatour. I. C.

THE SECOND BOOK OF Noble Institution, advising Tutors of their duty.
The Summarie.
Cic. 2. de orat.
Caius Lucilius was wont to say, that he would the things he wrote should be
read neither of the worst learned, nor the best: for that the one sort could
not understand him, the other happily might see more then he of himself.
Verily, I have not that double care of Lucilius, because all my aduises are
attempted only in the behalf of the unlearned: yet is my fear on the other
part by so much the more exceeding his, that I acknowledge my writings far
inferior unto his. But howsoever, not fearing to abide the censure of the
learned who have judgment, and therefore can; and reason, and therefore will
equally accept, and accordingly allow of this my affection toward those
unskillful Tutors, whom I wish here to consider their office, and how they are
fathers of the mind: and so should proceed with as great diligence 1. in
Forming. 2. Reforming. 3. Confirming the three faculties thereof: as the
natural father lib. praec.
should be in discharging his threefolde duty concerning the Pupils body.
These are three parts of a Tutors vocation, and shall be the three principal
points of my advise in this book, after I have showed him how he should know
his Pupils Nature, that he may teach him accordingly.

Chapt. 1. How a Tutor should know, and use his Pupils Nature.
A skilful Husbandman, unto whom Plutarch compares Plut de Educ.
the Tutor, co^sidereth ever first the Nature of his soil, before he sow his
seed: Et quidquaeque ferat regio, quidquaeque recuset: Which makes me advise
Tutors first to do the sa^e, Cic. ad Brut. Aelia^. var. hist. ^7. Naz Epist.
ad Eudoz.
as was commanded unto the Thebans and Lacaedemonians by Lycurgus his cruel
laws, in causing those who were borne blind, crooked, or with any bodily
imperfection to be flung headlong down the Hill Targeta as children marked of
God and Nature to be pernicious against the Commonwealth if they had bin
nourished. This made Plato also (who was more pitiful Plato. in Rep. 1
then Lycurgus) council his citizens to put such children out of the City to
be nourished, and to debar them for ever from bearing any office in the
Ovied. in histor and.
state. The Indians in like manner used to present their children of two
months old unto the public view of al men, either to be thrown into the
wilderness if they had bin misshapen, or otherwise to be nourished. And as I
suppose this day in Germany boys are mocked by their companions when they go
first to the School, of purpose to try their disposition, and how their
nature is inclined. Yea the Turks discipline exceeds all laws and
Institutions recited, and al others that ever I have hard, or read of. For in
Constantinople you may see an innumerable company of young boys called
Amasoglants o^ children of the Tribe diligen^tlie considered by the most expert
Masters of al Arts, liberal, and illiberal unto whom every one is recommended,
according as his nature inclines and leads him; having their choice of all
things to try them by.

But I see no reason why our young Nobles should be thus used; they are borne
to command, and must learn to do it, albeit perhaps their natural instinct
leads them more to so^e Mechanical trade. Wherefore my advise is, that the
Tutor labor to instruct and teach the^, howsoever their nature be otherwise
the^ to learn. This is most sure, by reason their tender and young inclination
is so uncertain, that me thinks it very difficil for any man to give any
solid and infallible Plut in. The.
judgment: as thereof: it is euid e^t by Cimo^ and Themistocles and a thousand
others, who proved other men, then they appeared boys. There is nothing so
variable and hid, as both man's and child's nature, which oftentimes like the
flood of Eur^pus and Alphaus running under the ground breaks forth contrary
to our expectation, and when we are least awares. Therefore I would have them
presented unto Socrates his mirour, and if they be fair of body to dress
their minds thereto: otherwise to make the perfection of the mind by virtue,
perfect the imperfection of the body, as Socrates did in himself.

If your young Pupil appear to be of a dull and somewhat hard ingine (with
Platoes permission who Plato lib. 7. de Repub.
in his 7. book attributes so much unto his 7. tokens of a good wit) you shall
not be discouraged and refuse to teach him, as Apollonius master of Alabanda
^ic. 1. de. ^rat.
used to do at the first. Think that by your pains, diligence, and skilfulnes
in rightly instructing him to make him profit. For you see that of rough and
knotty wood well handled, and wrought with the wood, as it should be, is made
the fairest image for pleasure, and most durable for profit: in like manner
hard wits albeit they be hard to conceive, yet they are sure to retain; they
are painful without wearines, constant without new fanglenes, and attentive
without wavering, so that they attain to that perfectnes of wisdom and
learning oftentimes, that men may wounder: as for example Cleanthes was
accounted of so dull and lumpish wit, that noe Master would admit him unto his
School, which moved the young man to study so diligently, that after he
deserved and got unto himself the name of second Hercules in learning.
Xenocrates also was thought very ^ude and unapt for the study of Moral and
Natural Philosophy, Cic. lib. de sato
yet became under Platoes disciplnie on of the greatest Philo^ophers of his
age; and by his precepts he made Polemon who was a young man of a most
dissolute and lewd life, to be accounted the best Governor, that ever ruled in
Athens. Despair not then, nor be not afraid at young Gentlemen's dumpish
disposition in the beginning, but instruct the^ with a pleasant countenance,
Obest plerunque ijs qui discere volu^t, authoritas ^orum qui docent.

For we see by the history of F^rius Cresinus that Pli. not. 18. 6.
the most steril and barren feilds well labored, will bring forth plenty of
good corn, when seed sown in evil tilled ground takes noe root and may only
spring up unprofitable reeds empty of al granes; whereunto I may compare those
Natures of young men, who are very quick, and that shoot forth al their virtue
before harvest, or the due season, and grow Idam. 25. 16.
to no greater maturitie then the Almond Tree.

They are old men in their childhood, and children in their old age, as it is
reported of Hermogenes the sophister. They are wonders to look unto in long
coats, but as they grow in age: Seges eludet messem fallacibus herbis. You
shall hear their tongues ever prattling, and very wisely as appears, but yet
with small judgment. Wherefore my advise is, you use them very gently: for
he that would have a Rose, or a Violet to smell sweetly, he must not crush
them in his hands* or burn them in the fire. These would have somewhat greater
liberty then others.

By a double conjunction (as it were) of their two Natures together, there are
two other sorts of wits between them, which are both very apt to Learning. And
above them all four, I may affirm there is one like a Quintessence, above
the four elements, which contains such wits, as appear not to be taught or
informed by men, but infused by God; they are able in the twinkling of an eye,
at the first motion to conceive, invent, and retain al things most accuratly.
Of such wits I have never read, seen, or heard of one comparable to the Kings
Majesty, who by the finenes of his understanding moves the learned men both
S. Fr. B. Adua^^ment of Learning.
to think and write with Plato, that all our knowledge is but Remembrance. He
stands invested with that triplicitie, which in great veneration was ascribed
to ancient Hermes, the power and fortune of a King, the knowledge and
illumination of a Priest, and the Learning and universality of a philosopher.
These are the special sorts of Natures to be considered in a Scholar: for
Bodins subtle and curious search after Vitruvius his Imitation, and the
Astrologians pretty divisions, according to the predominances of Planets, nor
yet those wisest sort of Relations, which the Italians make touching Conclaues
of Cardinals, are not for this purpose: therefore I omit them, wishing the
Tutor to observe the discovering signs of his Pupils nature.

Fabius in his Institutes discovers the variety of Quint inst. 1. 3
Natures best by play, thinking that children cannot dissemble. Democritus
judged of Protagoras aptness for Philosophy by his knitting of a faggot in
Geometrical proportion, and so of a common Porter made him a rare Philosopher;
who judged after of his own Scholars by Physiognomie* but me thinks a wise
Tutor shall easily perceive his Pupils nature by his frequent conversation,
and will instruct him accordingly Wherefore to come to our first point of duty
to Inform our Pulpils Judgment, I will only wish the Tutor to hide his own
disposition from his Scholar, as carefully as I counsel him to discover his.
In my opinion there can appear no greater wisdom, policy, and virtue in a
Tutor, then to behave himself in such a continual frame, that his Pupil
although he be of never so pregnant a wit, shall not be able to know his
disposition: for many children having once found out the smell of their Masters
foot, will cast and give themselves unto such peevish shifting paths, that it
will be very difficil to retire them.

Chapt. 2. Of Informing the judgment.
SEeing the principal end and chief scope of all teaching tends to make
Pulpils godly and wise, ye should endeavor your selves to follow the easiest
and straightest way to attain soonest unto your inte^tion: which is by
Informing the Judgment first. (according to the judgment of al wise men) For
the Syracusians the Sparthyans, and people of Locris disinherited their
children, if they were not able, at twelve years of age to render good reason,
wherefore they loved and desired one thing more then another: why they were
Graecians, and not Barbarians: why they were borne free men and not slaves:
they knew that the judgment of man is capable of al things, visible,
invisible, universal, particular, sensible and insensible. The Judgment, as
Epicharmus, Pythagoras his Scholar said, hears, sees, works, and
governs al things without the which man is deaf, dead, and biinde. In
tellectus est omnia; and to mount somewhat higher, it Arist. d^ anima. 3.
may be called a linelie image of God, a drop of immortal substance, an
heavenly beam, by the which we have Parentage with God. Why then should not
we be careful to instruct it first? But as it is hard for Seal. exer.
man to comprehe^d the Name and essence of his spirit, whereof the judgment is
the most excellent faculty: so is it to any man to reckon all the precepts
requisite in this Institution. Wherefore I submit these few unto your best
consideration without farther Preface.

First of al a Tutor should ask oftentimes of his Pupil many questions; he
should cause him to speak, and tell his opinion at al occasions, of every
subject.

That which we know a right and properly is without book, and we may dispose
of it at our pleasure. Wherefore a Tutor should rather pardon his Scholar, for
not learning by heart, 7. or 8. lines; then for not judging well of any matter.
So then he must awaken and sturr up his wit by frequent demandes, making him
to express his mind first, otherways he lends only a deaf ear and
thinks himself not of the set.

After he has given his opinion first, press and urge him for the reason of
his judgment, to the end he speak not rashly and unadvisedly: and to
encourage him the more, afford it some praise, how ever it be. Socrates Plat.
Math. 16. 22 Luke 10. 24.
was the first inventor and dilligent practiser of this form of Institution,
which our Savior used in Instructing his Disciples. I would not that the
questions should be of his Lesson only, but of every thing even of matters of
little importance, and of trifles, according to his age; for the works and
operations of judgment consist not only in grave and high affairs, but to
esteem and resolve Justly and rightly whatsoever thing Xenoph. Cyr. 1.
it be. Astiages in Xenopho^ calls Cyrus to an account of his last lesson by
this question, A great dad (says he) having a little coat gave it unto on of
his companions, who was of a lesser stature, that had a big coat, which he
took from him, having asked his judgment herein, Cyrus answered, that the
matter went well after that fashion, and that both seemed to be better fitted
so: his instructour did chide him for considering only that which was fitting,
and not that which was equal and just, as he should have done. So that it is
not sufficient simply to tell them the English of their lesson or to cause them
to learn it by heart, but their Judgment would be essaied at al encounters. As
when they shall learn that Cato killed himself at Vtick: and that Brutus and
Cassins were the authors of Caesar's death: I would hear their judgment, if
they did al well or not; if they deserved well or not of their Country for so
doing: if they did with wisdom, prudence, Justice, and valor, wherein they did
well, and wherein evil.

Because he who asks nothing knows as little, you should also fashion him
to an honest curiosity to know al things, and that he lay his eyes about him,
to consider what is done, that nothing may be done or said without his
judgment, at the least priuatlie, in his own mind; yet with this caution that
he never put to great trust and confidence in his own wit: for when he has
once a good conceit and opinion of his own Judgment, yours will be little
regarded. Let him be familiar sometimes with the meanest trads-men: asking of
every one according to their trade, Quae tellus sit lentagelu, quae putris ab
aestu. Propers. lib. 4.

Ventus in Italiam quis been vela ferat.


He may learn somewhat, (if he can make his profit) of the least footboy that
goes by the way. There is no field so barren, but there may something be
reaped; which made the musician send his Scholars to hear a bad plaier, to
avoid his faults and wrong cadences. But in no case he must be permitted to
entertain his own thoughts with any solitary pensiuenes, by reason a child
not having sufficient good stuff to entertain his mind withal, he feeds it
with vanity. Therefore ever keep him exercised and imploid in one good thing or
other, wherwby he may profit.

Chap. 3. Of reforming the Imagination, and the Pupils Opinion.
I Magination follows next in order to be rectified 2 Part of Parents duty.
and guided by the understanding, whereunto by the help of our five external
senses, and our inward common sense, named Phantasia* it represents al things
to receive judgment, and after approbation, to be committed unto the Memorie's
custody, until the time our judge call for them. Imagination works Plin. 7. 4.
maruailous effects; as the Changing of the sex in Lucius Cossitius, altered
from a woman to be a man at the day of her marriage: It makes the du^be to
speak, as Craesus his Son: wise men fools, as it did Gallus Vibius who
beca^e a fool in studying to find out the essence of folly. And this is it
that cause the common people to believe so many false miracles. Yea in it
Opinion is lodged, which (as al me^ know) is the mother of al mischeifs, and
co^fusio^s, and that may be termed very properly the guide of fools, as
Reason is the conductor of wise men. Opinione saepius quam re laboramus. For if
we knew the being of things, as Arist metaph.
they are indeed; the verity which is uniform, and never but on, should be
embraced of all the world alike. But seeing there is so great a variety of
opinions throughout the world; my opinion is here that a skilful Tutor should
frame and mould his Pupils Imagination according to the general pattern of the
world to make him universal, in representing unto him in his very childhood,
the catholic Countenance of Nature, that all the world may be his book. The
finest and most Noble spirits are universal and most free: by this manner the
imagination having before conte^plated al things, admireth no thing, which is
the highest point of wisdom. As Socrates being asked what country man he was,
answered wisely, of the world: he said not of Athens: his Imagination was
further scattered, embracing the universe, as it were his City, exte^ding his
acquaintance, his society, and affection unto al mankind: whereas ignorant men
are as it were heap't up into themselves having no longer prospect then their
own noses. When it raineth above their heads, they think it does so through
all the hemisphere: when the plague is in their town, they think that the
wrath of God is powered out against al mankind, and that Doo^es-day is the
morrow. O the weakness of men's minds, to think that all the world lives,
believes, faith, does and dies, as we do in our own country! As many men
rashly and vnadvisedlie do, thinking their own country fashions the only
rule and square of all civility and honesty, in condemning other country
fashions different from their own, as barbarous. Wise me^ are more wary what
they judge, and take better heed, unto that they will utter: yet I would not
have your Pupils to light of belief, because they that believe easily change
their opinions as quickly, especially in youth, whose humors are in perpetual
motion. Therefore I hold Solons Ne quid nimis to be l'^rent. Andr. Act. 1.
the best rule of Imagination and Opinion.

Chapt. 4. Of Catechizing.
IN respect that Conscience and Will are necessary consequences of the two
faculties premitted; who will justly blame me for giving my advise, how a Tutor
should inform his pupils mind toward God, and his young childish manners
before I pass unto the Memory Humane sciences for the most part require that
the pupils Judgment be almost solid and perfect; but he cannot begin too
soon to be taught Godliness: he should be catechized in his Nurses arms, that
he may suck in with her milk precepts of Piety, which he should practice al
his life after. As he begins then to move these foresaid faculties, teach
him that it is God, who by his almighty hand made him, that brought him into
this world and preserves him, and that bestows 2. Cor. 4.
all things which he has upon him. Make him to fear and tremble, when he
shall think or hear of his infinite Majesty, and therefore should with all
awful reverence both begin and end the day with reciting the first rudiments
of Religion, as the Lords prayer, the Articles of faith and the Decalogue;
neither should he ever eat or sleep without due acknowledgement of his
Creators goodness, so that the very hours and time, may put him in
remembrance to serve God al his life. As he grows in years, so let his
instructions increase: cause him to read diligently one or two Chapters of the
Bible every morning, and at night going to bed.

For the will, if you be of my mind, next unto God form it to Reverence his
Sovereign, as the lively Image of God upon Earth, that in his manhood he
may prove a loyal subject, and an loving citizen unto his country. This
briefly for the first principles of Religion which shall serve for a sure
ground of his ma^ners, and al his Learning hereafter, without the which al you
can teach him is hurtful, rather then profitable either for himself, or others.

Chapt. 5. Of fashioning his Manners.
AS Chiron nourished his pupil Achille; with blood and marrow of Lions, to make
him have a strong and stout stomach: so al Tutors should feed scholars with
the very marrow, and substance of Philosophy, to make them truly and
firmly honest me^. Words or languages are not able to do it, but the
practice of the precepts. It is nothing to make a scholar congrow in Latin
and Greek, and to suffer his ma^ners to be out of al rule: when he reads in
his humanities of the continency, valor, and Eloquence of Alexander, Caesar
and Scipio; he must think them, as so many patterns sympathising with his
own mind, and that he will rather imitate their perfections with his hands,
then hear them with his ears. Sophistes the orator was banished publicly
out of Athens for teaching his scholars more to speak well, then live well.
Wherefore you should not delaie while your Pupil come to his Logic, to teach
him to discern truth Arist. 1. Top. c. 11.
from false, good from evil, but even when he is in his Nurses lap, according
to Agesilaus his council, who invited Xenophon for this cause to send his
children to Sparta, not to learn Rhetoric, or Logic, but the best science
in the world, which is to know how to obey, and to have skill how to command.
Al Learning is nothing if it be not founded upon virtue.

Fit mox exig^i pretij, perditque nitorem
Ipsa suum quoties vitiorum faecibus oblita Pal. li. 1. zod.

Induit informs vultus; s^u sordet laspis
In putri dimer saluto: seu Phoebus ab atra
Obduct us nebula.
Teach the^ your Noble Pupil without delay to love virtue, noblely,
ingenuouslie, like an honest man, not baselie, or for any other consideration
then for love of Virtue her self. Frame him to accommodate himself when he
shall be of age, unto al kind of honest fashions, whatsoever company he be in,
Omnis Aristippum decuit color and status, and res. Hor. 1. ep. 17.


To be free from al kind of strangnes and particular humers, as enemies of
co^uersatio^. For who would not marvel at Demophons complexion, who swet in the
shadow, and trembled for cold in the Sun? As Germanicus could not endure
either to see, or hear the crowing of a Cock There is perhaps some occulte
propriety in all these things, which may easily be helped (in my opinion) if
they be taken in time.

Let him learn to be able to do al things; yea sometimes to use excess if
need require, and that he can abstain, not for lack of force, and skill, but
that he will not do it. Multum interest vtrum quis peccare nolit, aut nesciat.
The Philosophers themselves found fault with Calisthenes, for loosing
Alexander the Great his favor, who was his Master, in refusing to drink his
pledge. Sundry have bin in great danger of their lives, chiefly in German,
and Dutchland, for lack of this ability and precept. Wherefore train up and
frame him to imitate Alcibiades his marvailous nature and constitution, who
could transform himself so easily without hurt of his health to al fashions
where he came, sometimes exceeding the riotousnes of the Persians, so^times
submitting himself unto the austeritie and frugalitie of the Lacedaemonians,
showing himself as much reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in Ionia.

Mirabor, vitae via si conuer sa decebit. Horat. ibid.

Personamque feret non inconcinnus vtramque.
Withal I would have him modest in all his doings and saiings, not contending
and disputing with every man, upon every light subject, but in considering
time, place, and persons, with whom he has to do, to answer soberlie, as the
Romans gave their judgment by this word, it a videtur, it appears so to me;
or in propou^ding his question with submission, if the pe^so^ be his superior,
either in rank, age, or learning; there is a Decorum to be observed always.
Away with imperious, affirmative, and resolute words.

Moreover as you are careful to teach him good manners, so be as circumspect to
keep him from evil and bad fashions, as lying, swearing, blaspheming, and
speaking of scurrill talk, as fool, knave, rogue, and such like; if the heart
be tender the tongue cannot be rough.

Nether suffer him to hurt either man or beast, albeit many mothers delight to
see their son beat a boy or a fellow, that dares not strick again, or defend
himself, thinking al such deeds true signs of a Martial courage; when
certainly they are the very beginnings and assured tokens of cruelty,
oppression, and tyranny.

Nor shall you winck at his little cousening tricks, albeit his Mother
accounts him of a fine wit, and of a good subtle ingine, when she hears
that he has cousened his companion: when indeed they are infallible signs of
Treason: to cloak and excuse his fault, either by the tenderness of his years,
or by the smalnes of the matter, it is impossible. For it is nature that
shows it self more plainly the yo^ger he is, seeing he cannot disse^ble well:
and this is a sure co^clusio^, if he couse^ for pins doubtless he will do it for
crowns.

Embolden him against a foolish shamefastnes in hanging down of his head, and
blushing at every light word, which makes him astonished at every grave
countenance and sharp word that is spoken. It is natural unto many, but yet
(after my advise) it should be amended and changed into an honest and comely
fourthenes. J mean not that bashfulnes, which the Latins call verecundia, and
Socrates taught his Scholars, and Terence commends in Pamphilus, as we do in
every youth for a token of modesty; but I understand the Grecian (...), which
made Antipater of Cassandrie dye miserably: for being invited by Demetrius to
supper, whom he had invited first, he was ashamed to show that he mistrusted
him and to refuse, albeit he knew it was present death for him if he came, as
it was.

Observe that he use noe affectation in his speech, in his countenance or
behavior, in his going, in the carriage of his body, in his clothes, or in
any other thing: al affectation is but vanity and pride.

Above althings take heed he be not wilful, cholaricke, and dispightful in his
childhood, for this cause let him never have any thing for his spightfull
tears, and for his anger, to teach him that al those means are naught,
unprofitable, and filthy. There is nothing that spoileth many a well natured
child more, the^ in giving him al his will when he weepeth. The best and surest
precept of virtuous and good manners is, when the Tutor himself shows a good
example unto his Pupil: non sic inflectere sensus Claud. in 4. Ho^ consolatu.

Humanos edicta valent, quam vita regentis.


The Ephores of Sparta, hearing a dissolute fellow propose unto the people a
profitable and good advise, commanded him presently to keep silence, that an
honest man, might be the Proponer, and have the praise of the invention
thereof: they knew that fair discourses of virtue are naught if the speakers
life be not correspondent and conformable. Beware therefore Tutor, that you
point not out the way to your Pupil, like the images of Mercury that stand by
the high way side, and never move themselves out of their place: nether think
to escape blame with Cassiodorus his damnable excuse Follow my doctrine and not
my ma^ners, or that another ma^s faults makes a man to be awares, and not a
follower. When I read amongst the ancient writers that on has done those
things which he wrote, I believe him more then one, who has spoken only: as I
think Brutus was more likely by his writings to free a city from tyranny
then Cicero, and while I compare Tullyes and Senecas works, against the
menaces of death, I believe the last best, for I think the first would resolve
a man to do that, wherein he is not fully resolved himself. So soon as I hear
of any among our selves now adays that has written of Virtue and Honesty, I
presently inquire what he is, and how he lives, what is his conversation.

Quiscaelum terris non misceat, and mare caelo, ^^ven. 2. ^

Si fur displiceat Verri, homicida Miloni?
Chap. 6. Of admonishing, and correcting of faults.
COlumella counseleth his husband-ma^, to beware Columel. de re Rustic. 13. 1.
that he fall not, rather the^ that he should bethink himself how to amend his
fault after it is made; so I wish the Tutor rather to prevent and foresee, that
his Pupil commit no offense in his manners, then that he should correct him
after: yet seeing there is noe nature so well disposed, but at some time or
other it may fail. -- quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus, the next best is to
let him see his own offense, and with meeknes and gentleness correct him that he
may take heed, least he fale into the like hereafter. Jniurious and vpbrayding
words are proper for va^lets, as strokes are only for brut beasts. When gentle
spirits are thus imperiously dealt with, they curse both manners, learning,
Psalm. 41. Prou. 25. 12.
and Tutor, and conuerts that which David calls a precious balm, and Solomon
an ornament of fine gold, into bitter wormwood. Have ever a regard therefore
v^no time and place, in all your admonitions. Ovid. 1 de reme


Temporibus medicina valet: data tempore prosunt,
Et data non apto tempore vina nocent.
To admonish him in time of great mirth, that were to trouble the feast; as to
reprove him in time of great grief, and when he is sorry for his fault, that
were more the office of a foe then of a friend: comfor him rather. For even as
honey which is sweet of his own nature Plu^. in Ph^cio^
engenders grief and pain being applied to parts infected; so do good
admonitions provoke the more such as are in misery, if they be not well
sweetened and mingled with consolation.

But while you would shun this extremity of grieuing him, beware ye fall not
into the other, which is worse, by feeding his humors, giving him free
liberty for fear to displease him; like a man who suffers one to be
drowned, because he will not pull him out of the water by the hair of the head,
fearing to hurt him, or because ye think your preferment is marred, if he be
never so little discontented.

Sunt delicta tamen quibus ignovisse velimus* ^ora^. de Art. Poe^*

Na^ neque chorda sonu^ reddit, que^ vult manus and men's.
His admonition should be private in his chamber: for Pythagoras his
unskillfulness in this point, made one of his Scholars hang himself, he was so
ashamed to be Plutar. in Alex.
reproved openly. And Plutarke thinks that Alexander the great killed his
own dear friend Clitus; because he reproved him before company. Which makes
me condemn and disallow the imperious, peda^tike, and grim countenance of
many Tutors, who to show their authority and power, have eue^ their eyes
fixed upon their Scholars every where, and spare not for the least fault to
reprove them, before what company so ever. He should have an eye (I confess)
upon his Pupil, but with such a dexterity and close carriage, that the company
perceive it not by any means: so his Pupils actions will be more free, and his
admonitions of greater force. For I wish ever a Tutor to beware that he abase
not his Scholars courage: that he let slip some little pertnes, which is
excusable in that age, rather the^ he should make him du^be, and as it were
stupid, without life and senses. Yea in admonishing him use these or such like
words of your own that shall be better. N. You forget your self: whereon
think you? This were more befitting for you to do then that which you do:
There is a great difference between this thing which you have done, and that
other. Who would say that they were both done with one hand? And so forth,
beginning with some sharp and quick words, and ending with sweet
exhortations to amend his fault the next time, and so continuing to entertain
him with fair speeches, and to go forward with that which you have in hand.

This was Sarpedons fashion of admonition, and Catoes Plut. in Caton. Fab. lib.
7.
own advise, as likewise Quintilians, in wishing you to use fair words and
admonitions, without gal and bitterness. For strokes, I will no more remember
them, in teaching a young Noble man, then Plato made mention of any punishment
in his Common wealth. It must be love of virtue her self, honesty, and
honor, that shall retain our Pupil within the limits of well doing, or else, the
ouglines of sin; the reproach of his friends, or the displeasure of his own
mind. Where Reason and meeknes cannot work, force and fear will never
prevail.

I will not greatly contend with public Schoolemasters for beating, only I
desire them to be councelled and ruled with the book, which they hold as much
in their hands, as Cicero had it in his bosom, and that they Terent. Adelph
Act. 1. Sc. 1.
preesse rather to allure their Scholars by fair means, then to terrify
them, as many do, in punishing oftener Nature, then they correct faults. Above
our Pupils Schoole-chamber, I would ever have Joy, Lady Flora, and the three
Graces painted as they were above Speusippus School, that they may see their
pleasure joined with profit.

Chapt. 7. General advises to be observed in teaching.
COnfirmation of the Memory rests to be consulted 3 Part of Tutors duty.
upon in this last place, albeit common lie it is accounted the first and
chiefest care of a Tutor to stuff and fill it: yea fathers aim at nothing else
then to have their sons head stored with Learning, without al respect of
Judgment and Virtue. They are ever asking if their son has learned much
Greek, and Latin, if he can write a fair hand; but whether he be grown
better or wiser, not one word. Tutors themselves labor and toil usually to
garnish this faculty, which serves most for Traffiquers, Pratlers, or liars;
the weakness whereof is not so hurtful as want of Judgment, or corruption of
Opinion; yea it makes men not to lie or to be full of words, but to forget
offenses which are committed Plu^ in Themist.
against the^. Therefore Themistocles wished rather the art of Oblivion, then
of Memory when this was offered unto him; because he remembered many things
which he would have forgotten, and could not forget those things which he would
not have remembered. But to satisfy al parents in this point also, not by
Simonides his Art, Cic ^. de. orat.
or in appointing places and pictures into Julius Camillus his Theater, but by
conuersing with the mother of the Muses and digging down into Anton.
Sabellicus his treasure of al Disciplines and Arts; wishing al Tutors first to
consider, that whatsoever thing they enterprise to teach, it be true and
profitable: to observe a good method in teaching, which is the most admirable
and profitable thing in any wise man's mind and work that ca^ be; as Xenophon
and Scaliger say. Xenoph. Cyr. 2. Jul. Seal iger. Exercit. 303. Sect. 9.


Begin at the principles, and pass through the middle sciences by little and
little to attain at last the degree of a Doctor: begin at facil to come unto
difficult things, at simple to attain unto composed matters. There is no good
method kept in beginning at Logic, and Rhetorcike, and the rest of the
Sciences, when he has not learned his Grammar, thinking to advance the Pupil,
when they put him back, in causing him to clime higher, then his wit can reach.

With a good order there should be joined a plainnes of words; they should not
use such terms, as if they were talking with Numa's Egeria, or Evandrus his
Carmenta, as many do, delighting themselves with such Beotike Aenigmes, and
Delphicke discourses, that Apollo himself could not understand them. These
Tutors would be recompensed with some old stamp of Ianus or Saturnus his
coin; so that me thinks it were better for them to follow Phavorinus his
council, in holding their peace (if they would not be understood) then to
incur Augustus his reproof, against Antonius and Tiberius. The duty of an
Interpretor is to make plain and facile those things which are obscure, and
not to Imitate the chattering of birds, that require the exposition of Augurs.

Quicquid praecipies, esto breuis; vt cito dicta Hor. de art. Poes.

Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.
Tutors may teach also that which they should, but otherwise then they should,
as Alexandridas reproached the Ambassador, who made a good speech before the
Ephores, but too long, and tedious: and Phidias after he had made Jupiters
Jmage, which was Fran. Pat. Inctis. Reip. l. 9.
admired of all the world, yet because it was so big, that if it had stood, the
Church roof could not contain it, he was reproved as exceeding measure. He
should follow the Pythagorian form, never to teach any thing in any science,
which is not very necessary. As no man uses to hear with his eyes, and see
with his ears, noe more should they mix the Arts, in teaching Logic with
Grammar, etc. every art has his proper and fit place -- Haec virtus erit et
venus, aut ego fallor.

Vt iam nunc dicat, iam nunc debentia dici Ibid.

Pleraque differat, and praesens in tempus omittat.
It is a great skill, and worthy to be praised in a Tutor when he has noe less
care of his Pupils good health of body, then of filling his Memory. The
Parents will more easily excuse him, when their Sons head is empty, the^
when through his ouer-loading of him, he pineth and consumes in melancholy.
Health of body is better then all the rest of the things in the world unto us,
except it be health of the mind. Learning, No bilitie, riches, are nothing
without health: yea life it self is not worth the having without it: wherefore
me thinks that Pyrrhus king of the Epirots sacrificing to the Gods had reason
to require for health, rather then increase, and enlargement of his Dominions
and Honor. A Scholar shall profit better in learning little and little, as
Sertorius his old man pulled out the horse tail, then ^al. Max. 6.
by wearying him self day and night. Yea albeit he be given to his book, by a
solitary and melancholic complexion, he shall not be suffered to continue
always like a Carneades, who had not leisure to pare his nails, nor cut his
hair, he was so besotted with learning that Melissa put the meat into his
mouth. This aviditie and indiscreet plying of himself to his book will make
him unapt for connersation, and more necessary affairs; and as the subtle,
and profounde Scaliger says in reproving Ca^danus, it evaporat's so hu purest
spirits, that Exer. 309. Lib. de Legibus
there remains nothing after but ary ashes. For which cause me thinks Plato
had reason to show himself as careful of childrens plays and pastimes, as of
their studies, and that Anaxagoras should be praised in Schools Plat^^.
who being asked of the Lampsacens what he would command them before he died,
answered no other thing, but that the Scholars should play all that day,
wherein he died, which was diligently observed. Remember Herod. in Thal.
then Amisis saying, that a bow will break, if it stand ever bent, and be as
careful that your Pupil play sometimes, as that he study.

Keep him in appetite and desire ever of his book, as those who supped with
Plato, that he may return again with alacrity. At his games and exercises be
always distilling into his ears some pleasant and profitable sentence,
according to fit opportunity and occasion. As in special, because children take
great delight in fables, refuse not to tell him sometimes one or two, which are
profitable, as that of Phaetons and I^arus his fall, of Gellius his Lark of
Menemius in Livie, of the Metam. 2. lib. 2. cap. 19. lib. 2. Emb. 124. Hora^.
ser. l. 2.
Country and City Mouse in Horace, of Ulysses his co^panio^s, how they were
metamorphised into hogs. The^ entertain him with some aenigmes, as that of
Sphinx, of Gobryas and Zopirus: with Emblemes, as that of Isis Ass in
Alciatus. For histories show him of Scipio's Alcias 7.
and Alexander's continency; of Decius, Curtius and Luc. zeuxi^. Livius lib.
22. Xenoph. 2. reru^ Graecarum Plin.
Thrasibulus love toward their Country: and such whereof he may learn good
lessons, in making the application to himself. Let him hear of Annibals,
Caesar's, Antiochus, and Eteonicus, stratagemes. At the hu^ting be telling him
of the Hares Nature, and how she Aelian. de not. animal.
conceiueth after the first young one another: how the Heart eats a serpent,
and casts his horns, and specially the left: also how the Lions are taken
in Lybia with firebrands, and how such a courageous beast cannot endure to
hear a Cock crowing. Lastly, at fishing, he may hear how the Remora a little
fish holds a great Rondelet. and Plin. 32. li. 1. c.
laden ship from stirring: and how the Lamprey spawneth with the Serpent, and
how the Crafish by craftines eats up the Oister. Young gentlemen will this way
be easily allured unto their books.

Chapt. 8. Of teaching to read, write, and the Rudiments of Grammar.
Let a man have never so strong and robust a breath to play upon a flute, or
pipe, yet if he cannot place his fingers, and remove them as he should, he
cannot be accounted a good plaier: ^o al these general aduises are nothing
worth, if they be not practiced in teaching Grammar Logic, and the Sciences
-- Hoc opus, hic labor est. Remote and superficial generalities do but make
knowledge contemned of Practical men: and are no more leading to practice then
an Ortelius universal Map is to direct the way between Arist. 1. Metaph. 1.
London and Edinburgh. This makes the Philosopher to say that a wise man is
only able to teach, and has caused others to confess that there is no
painefuller and harder labor then a teachers and a woman's in childbirth: there
is no marvel, when Pallas her self the mother of Learning was beaten out of
her fathers brains, by force of Vulcan. But to pass their pains with
silence, where I see so little pity. I council them to remember that Speech
is the chiefest instrument of understanding, and therefore should chiefly be
well framed in the beginning, in seeing that the Nurse and others pronounce
their language distinctlie and articulatlie omitting nor changing any letter
or syllable, as foolish folks oftentimes do in wantonness. For Tullie
attributes the eloquence of the two Gracchi, unto the perfect pronuntiation of
Cornelia their mother.

They should not suffer their Pupil to rattle in the throat, nor to make any
grimme countenance in his speech, listing up or down his brows and eye lids.
If he have any impediment, naturally they shall labor in good season to
remedy it; as Demosthenes, when he Cic. ^rat.
could not pronounce P. he put some little stones in his mouth and repeated
oftentimes these two words (...), until he was as perfect in that letter, as in all the rest.

In playing with him* they shall show him the letters Quin^ lib* 1 Inst c. 2.
either in Jvorie, in bowls, or limmed after a pleasant manner upon any play,
wherein he takes delectatio^. Plato. lib. 1. de ^eg.
So Socrates would have children deceived to their profit with their pleasure:
and all the Ancients signified as* much in painting the Muses with fair may den
faces playing upon a Cittern, accompanied with the three Graces.

After he is perfect in the knowledge of the single Letters* teach him to spel
and read with a sweet accent, not pronouncing verse as prose, or prose as
verse, nor reading with a sharp shril voice as a woman, or with a rough and
hulke voice, as an old man does, but with a pleasant harmony, reading at the
beginning with leisure, pawsing at the full periods, and taking his breath at
the broken points, lifting or basing his voice as the subject requires, and
the admiration or question offers.

To encourage him the more, draw him some fine patterns of writing to copy,
with some pleasant and profitable sentence, as Fear the Lord* Please all men:
Do as you would be done to. Augustus Caesar delighted Suet in Aug.
much to see his sons imitate his own hand writing: and Alphonsus King of
Spain was much disco^mended, because his subscription was like monstrous
Characters rather the^ letters. Begin with some good hand writing, seeing that
he study to follow his pattern, laying a piece of thin Venice glass upon it,
and then to draw his letter to the proportion of his pattern, until he be
well accustomed to frame it.

Teach him to decline perfectly a Noune, and then a Verb: if he be not well
grounded in these two parts of speech especially, it well be as difficult for
him to be a good scholar without beginning again, as it is to make a just
account, when the counters have been wrong laid at the frist. To trouble
young children with the manifold divisions, partitions, powers, and number of
the Letters, before their judgment be more informed, me thinks Tutors do
consume only the subtilitie of their ingeny in superfluous and vain things, as
Xenocrates did the half of his life time, in finding out an hundred Millions,
two hundred thousand syllables, by a diverse conjunction of the Letters; or
else as Aristomachis of Solin, who passed threescore years of his age, in
measuring flea-leapings. Or like unto Callicrates who Plin. 7. 21. Aelian Var.
hist. 1. 17. S^lin. ^. 6.
made little ivory Eamets, and Mermecides who wrought so curiously a little
coach and a coachma^, that a flies winge covered them al. They employ their
labors in shadows, as Zeuxis and Parrhasius did. Their pain should be far
better bestowed, in making their Pupil to know the nature of the 8. parts of
speech, every on by themselves simply, then how to conioine the^. And as a
Tailour cannot shape in the air, as the Mathematitian considers his
quantity, so the Tutor shall provide some good book, as Dion Cato's moral
distiches, or those ^f Publius Syrus* or else Pybrakes Quadraines turned into
Latin and Greek out of the French, by Florent Christianus, Ludon: Viues; or
Corderius his dialogues, to be the Subject of the words, and matter of their
concordances.

He should english these Authors or any one of the^ word for word at the
beginning, causing their Scholar to understand rather the proper and primitive
signification of the words, then the propriety and elegancy of the phraise.
The^ he should parse it perfectly; and make him to do the same over again,
and render a reason out of his Concordance of every constructio^. Yet many wise
and learned men banish al rules from a Noblema^s instruction, to have him only
conversant in Authors, and confirmed in his Latin tongue by authorities. Which
way is both tedious and unsure, as they can testify who have experienced it.
Others are so conceited, that they have caused their sons to be brought up
only in speaking of Latin with their Tutor, as we learn English, and for that
cause have suffered none to speak any other thing, but Latin in their
hearing: who when they come to man's estate, must go to School to learn their
mother tongue, and forget their Roman rote. I wish rather that parents were
willing to have their sons taught by frequent usage, and custom the French
language, which is so pleasant, common, and spread through the whole world at
this day. Childhood is the fittest time; and parents should sacrifice as the
Graecians did to Opportunity; their tongues will easily turn and apply unto the
French accent, which is so difficult in ma^s estate.

Chapt. 9. For teaching the Grammar, and Humanities.
AFter the Tutor has dug, as it were, the ditch of his building, then he
must place the corner stone of Learning, which I account to be Grammar; without
the which a Scholar is no more able to profit in his studies, then a man is to
move his body, without sinews. It will be paineful unto him I confess, but
yet profitable for his Pupil. It is of no greater show then a foundation should
be, therefore it should be as surely laid, if he will have the building
strong, and to stand.

Unto the Etymology, add you for Authors Tullies Epistles ad familiares, or
his book de Amicitia; or else some selected Epistles out of Ovid, or his books
of Metamorphosis, wherein a Scholar should be well instructed for poetical
Fables in his youth, as a time most apt for that study.

In the morning join unto the Rules of Syntaxis, some of Tullies Orations, as
the Catalinares, the Philippicks, that for Rabirius, or for the Poet Archias,
or Maniltias Law, or some other demonstratiue: after dinner read Terence his
Commedies, Virgils works, Horace his Episties, expounding all the Mythologies,
which serve for the knowledge of history, and antiquity.

With his Prosodia read Iuvenal, Persius, Plautus; In exposition of which
Authors, load not his head with school a^notatio^s, or any other marginal
notes, the^ the diverse passages of that same Author which ye read: every on
expounds their own meaning best in other passages, which may easily be done
in reuoluing Manutius Commentaries, and Nizolius treasure upon Cicero
Franciscus Gambarella upon Terence; Erythraeus upon Virgil; Threterius upon
Horace; Langius upon Martial; Obertus upon Lucretius; Tuscanella upon
Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius: and such like Authors who have labored for
you.

Suffer him not to err from book to book, or from poesy to history until
he be perfect in his Latin tongue, which easily may be performed by giving him
an English, changing a little the times and moodes of Cic. de. Claris. orator.
Plin. Secundus
Verbs, and cases of Nounes in his lesson, to put it into Latin that day, for
to give it him raw, he will render so it again; change it, and chaw it that he
may make it his own by digestio^. The morrow cause him to turn his Latin
translation into French, that he may profit in both the tongues together: this
being done, compare his Latin translation With Tullies works, or his lesson,
laying them both together, where he has done well praise him (for praise is a
good whetstone to sharpen a wit, and to encourage a will to Learning) where he
misled either in forgetting a word, or in changing a good with a worse, or
misordering the sentence: I would not have you to frown and chid with him, if
he has done his best; say rather Tully (or his Author) would have used such a
word not this, he would have placed it in such a case, this number, this
gender. etc. He would have used this simple not that compound: the adverb here
not there: he would have ended the the clause or sentence with this verb, not
with that Partiple or Noune. Do thee same in turning of verses. By this
exercise of translating are learned easily, by little and little, not only all the difficult congruities of Grammar, the choice of aptest words, the right
placing and framing of them and sentences: comlines of figures, and forms fit
for every matter, and proper for the three tongues: but that which is greater
also (in observing daily, and Imitating diligently thus the stepps of the best
Authors) like invention of arguments, like order in disposition, like utterance
in Elocution is easily collected; whereby the young scholar shall profit in true
understanding and right judgment, as in speaking and writing.

Moreover as the Ancient Romans made their young soldiers bear heavier armor
at home then they used at the wars: and as our masters of dancing cause their
apprentises to use leade^soales, to make the^ more disposed in Company: so
according to my judgment make him to dilate and amplisie his Latin tongue, in
prescribing unto him some short Moral or politic sentence, (called commonly
in the Schools a Theme) to co^pose: as those golden sentences which J have
hard pronounced of his Highness own mouth. Nemo regere potest, nisiqui and
regi. Non fas potentes facere, fieri quod nefas etc. Ever regarding Cassianus
his Cui bono, in doing, teaching, or saying nothing, but that which should tend
to make him wiser, better and learnedner. Fabius permits young scholars to
abou^d in this exercise by inuenting and collecting many things, albeit little
to the purpose sometimes; because with age and farther judgment they will learn
to polish, and cut of al superfluity, as Demosthenes his oration was shorte^ed
by Phocions authority. Wherefore discourage him not in the beginning with a too
exact correcting, and blotting of his exercise, but gently and softly take away
and amend some of the worst things, as a Chirurgian handles a wound stroking
it rather then cutting it at the first. For the Jews rub only their Palm
trees without, with a wooden or bone knife, when they would have abundance of
balm, if they touch the bark once, or open it with an iron knife, the tree
withers and grows dry. Nether be ye offended if he insert some sentence of
Cicero, or other orator, or that he use an hemistiche out of any Poet, that he
apply an Adage out of Erasmus his Chiliads, or one of Lycosthenes Apoth. until
he be able to swim without cork.

Correct this Composition as ye did his English before, recommending chiefly
to his judgment the chosing of Verbs, and of their placing, seeing they are the
soul of an Oration: next that he take heed unto the Nounes substa^tiues,
which are the body: thirdly to the Nounes adjectives, or his Epithets, which
are like the fair clothes and garments of a speech. When ye have taught him
the Latin Grammar lead him unto the sweet fountain, and spring of al Arts
and Sciences, in reading Clenards his Institution of the Greek tongue
precisely, and not for fashions sake, as many do, making their scholars
neglect that lesson which is as profitable for their understanding as the
Latin tongue for speaking. The teaching of this Institution will serve for a
repetition of his Latin Grammar, in conferring the one with the other, until
he come to the practice of his precepts: the^ I wish you to begin his Greek
Authors at some part of the New Testament, making him perfectly to understand
that book, before he read I socrates, Xenophon, or any Greek Poet.

In the study of Humanity rests the teaching of Histories, which kind of
learning the Lacedaemonians reserved only for themselves, and it should be the
chiefest study of a young Noble man, when he comes to any perfection of
speech and understanding. Before that time Tutors deceive both parents and
Pupils, while they advance the^ to read Titus Liuius, or the Commentaries of
Caesar, when they are not able to make or understand a period of Latin. It is
not the phrase, and Grammatical construction, which they should teach chiefly
in Titus Liuius or in Plutarch; It is the conjunction of minds, and sympathy of
designs which they should intend principally to work in their young Noble
Pupils. They are deeds, and not words, which the Pupil should have for the
chief object and subject in that study. The Tutor should rather inform him
how to imitate the person described, then the describer, if his actions be
worthy, otherwise how he should shun them, least he fale into the like
errors: As Themistocles imitated Miltiades, as Alexander the great, was
encouraged with Achilles his praises: as the elder Scipio emulated Cyrus the
King of Persia; and as Julius Caesar was inflamed in heart with Alexanders
Trophies, and won 800. strong cities, and killed in 9. years war, among
the French men. 3000000. valiant men. This should be a young Noblemans study,
like an Apothecarie, who gathers root and flower to make some wholesome potion
for a patient; good and bad serve for the ingredient: and not like a maid, who
will only pluck those flowers, which are most pleasant to the eye, to make a
nosegay of. Tutors should not so much busy their brains to cause their Pupils
to conceive and retain the date, and day of Carthage, her ruin and
destruction, as to tell them of Scipio's and Hannibals manners, and valiant
exploits, in both sides: Nether should they be so curious of the place where
Marcellus died, as of the reason why he died. This is the Anatomy of
Philosophy and the study of Judgment, (as I have said) the framing whereof,
should be a Tutors principal Intention always. He should proceed methodically
and orderly with consideration of the Pupils capacity, in illustrating the
history which he reads by the like, in bringing the hypothesis to the
thesis; which are the special things to be observed in all historical
narrations.

The masters of al method have ordained some Introductions to be premitted in all disciplines. Why the^ should not Tutors begin at Florus a flourishing
compendiarie of the Roman History, before they read Titus Liuius unto their
Scholars? A young memory will retain better a short substantial enarration of
Julius Caesar (me thinks) or of Salustius, then one of Titus Liuius prolixe
orations. Which method should be diligently ocserned not only in teaching of
hnmane Authors, but also in reading of the discoursing Art, and in all
contemplating Sciences.

Chapt. 10. Of teaching Logic and Philosophy.
THis compendious doctrine, which Irecommend so instantly and affectionatly,
imposes that law upon me silently, which the common criers of Areopagus
enioined publicly to all the Orators; to wit, that they should plead their
cause without al proemes and Epilogues. Therefore I continue still without any
preface to counsel al Tutors to premit some short Systeme of Philosophy unto
their Pupils, as in histories, before ever they bring the^ unto the
Philosophers text. Compendiaries lighten much and prepare the Pupils young
wavering thoughts, and make his judgment more solid to understand Aristotle
the better; who testifies the same to be true by his book de mundo, which he
wrote for a compendiarie unto Alexander of al Philosophy. Amongst al these
compendious Systemes I recommende unto the Tutors approbation that learned and
most fortunate man's in that kind, above al others in my Judgment,
Keckermannus his of Logic most exquisitly and methodically elaborat to the
adua^cement of al learning: or else that most learned and cunning Lawyer's
Julius Pacius.

Having passed through this Systeme, indite unto him some short preamble
co^taining the diverse names, De disposition^ ^licuius Disci^linae. Psalm. 10. de
leg^bus.
the nature and division of that Art or Science, first in general, and then in
particular of every book, reducing every chapter into Aphorisms, which
direct the mindeas a square and straight line in the operation of Logic, and
knowledge of the Sciences. Show your self an expert and cunning Interpretor in
distinguishing and putting a difference between Aristotl's precepts, and his
prolixe deductions and demonstrations, his disputations, and defenses thereof
against his adversaries; his exornations, additions, and repetitions of those
things which he treats in so^e other place. For this collatio^ of places (as
I said) confirms the memory much, and brings a great light to the place
expounded.

Jf Aristotl's praecepts be too strict and agreeing more to his own time and
place, where he lived and wrote, illustrate them with an apt and short
paraphrase; as Andronicus Rodius did in interpreting the book of Simplicius in
c. de Homonym.
Predicaments, and that learned Logician Baptista Mo^lorius in his commentaries
upon the two books entitled the first Analyticks, as likewise Zach. Vrsinus
upon the same books, and that great Peripatecian Themistius upon the two
posterior Analytiks, whom Zabarella Com. in Poster. Analyt. cap. 1.
esteems so much; which form Vinc. Iustinianus, Hispanus, and the Colleges
of all the Jesuits observe diligently in their teaching. Cause him to learn al
these definitions, divisions and canons, which I named Aphorisms, or Theoremes
(if they be in the sciences) by heart, to the end he may quote the^ readily in
his disputes, and conferences of that subject. For other men's Canons can have
no authority, seeing there are so many Systemes of Philosophy forged and
dreamed by every man, that, that which one approves another condemns and
contemns utterly; and a scholar is compelled to change his opinion, and to
forget this year what he learned the year before with great pains; such is
the calamity of this age.

Seeing Aristotle's Rules and Theoremes are True, Universal, Conditiones
praecep^. Disciplinarum.
Necessary, Methodicall and profitable, tending to the good and end of the
disciplines which he treats of, agreing with the principles thereof, as
amongst the^ selves, ye should make them Plain and perspicuous. For albeit
he hide not his doctrine under Aenigmes, and Symbols, as the Aegiptian and
Chaldaea^ Priests did, who builded a tomb for those who revealed their
philosophical mysteries, as if they had bin dead, while they were alive, as
appears by Orphaeus his Theology, Trimegistus his Hermetis, by Pythagora's
Symbols, and Zoroasters Epist. Lycides ad hypor. Alex. li. 5. strom. Oris. lib.
1. adversus Celsu^. Arist. 1. me^. c. 4 and 4. me^. c. 8. in fine de mu^d^.
doctrine, and many proofs and testimonies of faithful writers. Yet Aristotle
affecting obscurity by a Laconical and Chilonian style made his Acroamaticall
books only intelligible unto his own Auditors, as he wrote to Alexander the
great, who was offended at him for divulging of his doctrine. Therefore ye
must Simpl. prolog in Categ. ante opera, Arist.
bring your Pupil unto Aristotle's own school to at tain unto the knowledge of
Philosophy in hearing the ambiguous terms of his precepts expounded, that he
may see the diligent search and investigation of ca^ses, with the demonstration
of the proprieties, and Accidents of that Science which he learneth.

To reckon unto him the diverse opinions of Aristotle's interpreters, I think it
were an infinite, and laborious study, both for Tutor and Pupil; there are such
innumerable Comme^tators, whereof never two agree in one mind.

Also I think that it is very unprofitable to move and resolve all the doubts
that can be objected against Aristotle's text. For as it was said of Seneca the
Philos.

Verborum minut ijs rerum frangit pondera: so may we say Justly of
Schoolmen that use this doubting doctrine. Quaestionum minut ijs Scientiarum
frangunt soliditatem. It were better for a man in a fair room to set up a
great torch, then to go about with a small watch candle into every corner:
such is their method, that rest not so much upon evidence of truth proved by
arguments, as upon particular confutations of every scruple, cavillation, and
objection, breeding for the most part one question, as fast as they resolve an
other, even as when you carry the light into one corner, you darken the rest.
The fable and fiction of Scylla seems to be a lively image of that kind of
Philosophy, which was transformed into a comely Virgin in the upper parts, but
then Candida succinctam latrantibus inguina monstris: Virg. Ecl. 6.
so the generalities and Quodlibets of Schoolmen are for a while good and
proportionable, but when you descend into their distinctions, insteede of a
fruitful womb, for the use and benefit of a man's life, they end in monstrous
alterations and barking questions.

As this caution of doubting is to be eschewed in all disciplines, so I wish it
most to be avoided in teaching of Logic: because whosoever thinks the right
use and fruit of Logic to consiste in trying and examining the matter or
precepts, he calls the whole Art in Question; He is never able to settle and
place any rule and foundation. Fonseca the Jesuit compares such teachers
^onseca. (...). 2. metaph ^. 3. quaest. 4 (...). 3.
unto those Mercers, who think that the use of their weights is to try,
whether the one be not heavier then the other, and never to weigh any thing in
those Boys, who consume the hour, that is prescribed to write in, only in
making their pen, ever cutting it, that almost there is nothing left to writ
withal. Logic is an Instrument (as appears by Aristotl's inscription
Zabarella. lib. 1 de. Na^u. log. c. 10.
and Zabarel's sufficient proofs, and therefore should be taught plainly and
breiflie to be employed in other Sciences, in disputing of virtue and vice, of
natural and Arist. 1. Top. i^ Cic. 2. de orat
supernatural things: tending to show Good and Evil, and what is true and
false: ex art et non de art disputare, not in consuming the time idlelie in a
cu^ious search of Notion, of Notions, of the diverse subtilities of universal:
and in staying upon the Asses bridge. Al these Ar. 1. prio* c. 28
subtle contentions are very thin and fine, like the cobweb, but as little for
any great good use. And because J wish a Noble man chiefly armed with this
weapon, that he may in cumbat vanquish al heretical and erroneous opinions both
in Religion and policy; I council al Tutors to be very diligent in making
him perfect in the Precepts, and then to show him the use thereof in all other
things, applying it to divinity, Laws, and other faculties: otherwise it is no
more worth, let him have the precepts never so well, then many Philip. melanc.
praefat. logicae. K^ck. in praecog and Gymna. log.
baggs and purses are unto a man, that has never a penny to put in them: or
barrels in a cellar without wine. Change then Aristotle's alphabetical examples,
which were fit for the university of Athens, to illustrat his Logic precepts
with some examples of Christ's School, or law Lectures. addenda. log. Keck.
Sect. Poster. c. 2. 2.


He should either add himself the doctrine of Methods, definition and division,
which is lost in the 54. books of Aristotle's Logic, or take Keckermannus
help, who may ease your pains sufficiently.

Omit also many things which are little appertaining or profitable to the
right use of Logic, as proper to the Greek tongue, and served only for pomp
and show in establishing his doctrine in the beginning, to make his scholars
prattle and talk in open assemblies and companies: as that troublesome
doctrine of mixed omittenda.
Syllogismes, of which he treats at length from the 8. Chapter unto the 23:
of the first book of the Analytickes, and many other things in the Elench's,
as cheiflie in the 4. and 14. Chapters of the first book, and 7. 8. 9. and 15.
Chapters of the second book. How profitable this form of teaching is, I remit
my proof unto their experience, who have practiced it. Rhetor. doctrinae.
Arist. c. 1. Rhei ad Theod. Zab. 2. de Not. Log. 2. c. 16. 17


Aristotle, and that divine oracle of Logicians, from whom J cannot dissent,
make Rhetoric a graft of Logic, and therefore J recommend Zuares or Talaeus
his Systeme, unto your Lector, after that your Pupil is well exercised in the
Total; for J have unto higher and more pleasant studies for a young Nobleman,
which are the Mathematics: ascribing them a Chapter by themselves; albeit they
are in the midst between the Physics and Metaphysics.

Chapt. 11. Of teaching the Mathematickes.
FOrasmuch as it appears that al things had their first original being from
Numbers, and that Arithmetical figures were the principal pattern in Gods
mind; I wish you to read first unto your Pupil Clavius his Arithmeticke, or
Mr. Blondevils Exercises, which are excellent for all this study of
Mathematics almost, and worthy to be read first as a co^pendiarie, until he
be perfect in all kind of numbers whole and broken; Making him to draw the
figures and sums himself, upon some clear polished Stone, made for that
purpose.

When he is perfect in that science, read unto him the 7. 8. and 9 books of
Euclid's Elements, which contain a great secret knowledge of Numbers, and also
will serve for an easy entrance unto Geometry. Wherein if ye would have your
Scholar any ways to be conversant, read the first six books of Euclid's
Elements with Doctor Dees Mathematical Preface, which I esteem very
necessary to be known for the general Proeme: use these Scholies annexed by
Mr. Billingsley, as also Forcadels Commentaries.

Cause your Scholar to draw first upon the paper with his pen, coal, or
chalk plainly, (not fouling his fingers with colors, as Painters, and
hirelings do,) the situation of a Town, City, or any house; the course of a
River, or the camp of an Army, etc. before you put him to practice by the due
applying of Compass, Rule, Square, or such like instruments, to be certified
either of the length, perimetry, or distance Lineal: to judge of the height of
a Tower, the depth of a ditch, or of any such like thing appertaining to
military discipline, and principles of Architecture: which I think necessary
also for a Gentleman to be known; not to work as a Master Mason, but that he
may be able in looking upon any building, both naturally in respect of it
self, and in respect of the eye, to tell what is Frontispice, Tympane,
Cornishes, pedestals, Frizes, what is the Tuscane, Dorik, Ionik, Corinthian,
and composed order, like a Surveyer.

For the understanding of Astronomy, which demo^strareth the distance,
magnituds, and natural motions, apparences, and passions proper to the Planets,
and fixed stars, for any time past, present, and to come, in respect of a
certain Horyson, or without any Horyson; read unto him Ioha^nes de
Sacrobosco's Sphere with the Learned commentaries of Clavius the Jesuit, which
are as good as the text.

Also show him the use of the Astrolabe (by Stophlerinus) which is but the
sphere in plain, and it were only to know the quadrant geometrical, and the
scale of Altitude, whereof Captains have so great use in the wars. Yea it is a
shame for a great warrior, or a general of an Army, to be ignorant of the
Elevation of the Pole, the situation of Shires and Provinces, the diversity of
Climats, the length of days and nights, according to the Pararels and
Meridians; not to know the temperature of the air, the quality of the earth,
and many such things requisite for the right leading and conduct of an Army,
the placing of a Camp, or the winning of a battle.

As for Astrology which demo^strateth the operations and effects of the
natural beams, and secret influence of the Stars and Planets; I would have it
hid from a young Noble man's eyes, as forbidden by Gods own Esaiae. c. 47. 44
Hierom. c. 10.
Mouth: and condemned as a most pernicious knowledge by the heathen in
aduertising Nobles to beware of Judicial Astrologians, calling them genus
hominum potentibus Corn. Tacit.
infidum, sperantibus fallax.

To teach him in Geography, by which in sundry forms (as Sphericke plain or
other) the situation of Cities, Towns, Villages, Rivers, and such other
things upon the outward face of the earthly Globe may be represented, use
Ptolomie with his cards newly printed, with Maginus his Annotations, Abraham
Ortclius his Theater, his Geographicall Synonymes, and his mapp of the world,
with the four particular cards of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America by
themselves; having them hung in his Schoole-chamber, or some gallerie, where
he may see them in playing or walking there; as also Mr. Blondevils
exposition of Petrus Plancius his card.

Read unto him the first book of Ptolomies Geographie, for the difference of
Meridians, the proportion of the paralels, and for a perfect knowledge of the
terrestrial Globe, which he will easily understand, being instructed well in the
Sphere and Astrolabe.

For his easier understanding, let him see al upon Mercators Globe terrestrial,
or Danf^yes* which are newly set forth. For the bigger the circle is in
Diameter, the supputation may be made the more exact, and just by* the marks.

I would not have a young Gentleman much troubled in reading of the five books
of Ptolomie following, except it were to know how the names of Cities, Isles,
and Countries are changed since Ptolomies days, and to know the elevation and
basing of the Pole, and how that time consumes al things.

Having done that, turn over unto the latter end of the fourth Chapter of the
seventh book, reading unto the 8. Chapter, where ye shall leave to read the
8. book which is short: ask of him in what country is this River, that city:
where is this I Will, that haven, etc. if he cannot tell, show it presently upon
the book or the card, and so in playing ye may make him as familiar with all
the countries, cities, and Rivers of the world, as with the paueme^t and
boards of any chamber. To make a little description sometimes of the manners and
fashions of Contries, it would doubtless conform the Pupils imagination and
rectify his opinion much; wherein Paulus Merula's Cosmographie will be a good
help to you. But to end these my probable propositions, with a Mathematical and
necessary conclusion in my Judgment. The Tutor must see him bring al his
speculation to practice, or else to think with me he can do nothing. For what
will it serve to have his board or paper full of numbers, and yet cannot lay an
account of 40. shillings? to hear him say that he will measure the height of
Paul's Steeple, when he comes to short or too long in the shaft of a brom?
What pleasure is it to hear him talk of fortification; and then to see small
essays only upon the paper with rule and compass? to say that he has
learned the Sphere, when he knows not the Pole? and to hear him bragg that
he has learned his Geographie, when he cannot tell whether Ireland be in
Europe, Asia, or Africa? Surely I think he had better employed his time and
money in the Tennis Court: I account so little of all this book learning, which
cannot be put in use.

Chapt. 12. Of teaching the Laws.
WHEREAS a young Nobleman is not only borne to serve his Prince and Country in
time of wars, but also in time of peace, it is necessary that he be versed
as well in the laws as in the Mathemat. Parui su^s foris arma nisi sit co^siliu^
domi. In this study I require not of a Noble man Bartol's solutio^s, or that
perfect knowledge, which our Cou^cellors, Advocats, or Atturneys have, to
resolve al Clyents, and to answer al comers. I would think it sufficient if
he have learned Justinians Institutes; that he be able to find any law in the
Cod, and Digests, or a Disposition Cannonicke in the Cannon Law. I would have
him conversant in the Kings Statutes, and our Acts of Parliament, that he know
the Cannon Law and Customs of the Country where he is: yea that he be not
ignorant altogether of the Style used among the Practitioners, Scriveners,
Clerks, and Notaries: to the intent by these means he may be able to defend
himself from the crafty and subtle surprising of the world: and to give his
friend and Neighbor good Council: to mainetaine a poor Widdowe, and a little
Orphane from wrong and oppression. For to be learned and experimented in those
things which are pleasant, and to be ignorant of those which are necessary and
profitable, that learning is little worth. And because this study of Laws is in
it self most harsh and least pleasant of al others, as having no pleasant
object (except it be filthy gain unto mercenaries) I wish that some learned
Lawyer would bring the Common Law into some better method, and polish the
language wherein they are written, for (if I durst be so bold, as to speak of
that which I understand not) they are involued in such a barbarous language,
that is not onlievoide of al Eloquence, but also being abstracted and separated
from the exercise of the Laws, it is utterly unprofitable and unnecessary for
any purpose; no man is able to understand it, but by Cabal, and tradition of
the Lawyers.

But if the Noble Student be willing to aspire to some rank and place, where
the Laws are professed, as to be Lord Chancellor, Lord President, or to have
any place in Council and Session: the Tutor shall learn of the Emperor
himself, to accompany the student unto the Law Schools: where he must study
five Justiniaenus. Proem: digest.
years after he has passed his course in Philosophy, before he sue for any
office or place in Justice. For he will have them Oratores maximos and
fortissimos Iustitiae satellites. So, that ye may learn of the Emperors
precept, that there is more pains required to be a counselor, then to go to
Poictiers or Padua, to the University, or Innes of Court, after he has hard
his huma^ities thus, and so, with some few Ruls of Logic, and there to pass
his time in dansing or fensing and playing at the racket court as many do,
laboring to abrogate, by the first essay of their sufficiency lege^ deambitu.
Using the reasons and strong arguments of Dame Moneta.

O pitiful studying and suing for offices! habere Remp. guaestui non mod^
turpe, sed sceleratum and nefarium. Which grieueth me so much, that I am
enforced to imitate Timanthus in painting Agamemnons displeasure, by hiding
under the veil of silence, that which cannot be figured by words, and will
rather labor to inform the young man himself, by directing him in a better
course then to exclaim against the Fathers and Tutors indulgency, who permit
him to use so great liberty.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE Earl of ENZE, Son and heir apparent to the
MARQVESSE of HVNTLY.
MY most honored Lord, his Majesty's good Instructions and precepts being
sufficient not only to move your Lordship to acknowledge and embrace the Truth,
but also to continue constantly in the same, as your Glorious Ancestoures have
done in virtuous Nobility, I have only designed these few advertisme^ts for
your better confirmation, and for an essay of my particular affection toward
your Honor. What I cannot express in so short time, the same I point at
briefly with my finger until a fitter occasion.

Verum animo satis haec vestigia parua sagaci
Sunt, per quae possis cognoscere caetera tute.
Therefore I beseech your Lordships favor to accept, read and retain them with
that same mind as they are offered; to incite you and al other young Nobles
for ever to be aware of al erroneous doctrine and idolatrous superstition: to
cleave continually unto our only true Catholic religion; wherein I sign my
self.

Your Honors most humble at command. I. C.

THE THIRD BOOK OF Noble Institution, showing a young Noble man's duty toward
God.
The Summarie.
TO the end we may have a GOOD, PROSPEROVS, HAPPY, AND FORTVNATE SVCCESSE in
showing Pupils their duty, I wish you first of Cic. 3. de Div.
all Favere Linguis, To give ear; according to the ancient custom of the
Egyptian, and Roman sacrifices. Virg. Ecl. 3.


A love principium Musae; Iovis omnia plena. God only gives the increase,
albeit Paul planteth, Apollos 1. Cor. 3. 6.
waters. That is, albeit your Parents have provided sufficient Tutors for
your Instruction, and they be both painful, and diligent in discharging their
honest Psalm. 127. 1.
duty: Except the Lord build, they labor in vain. Therefore my advise is that
you Learn to perform your duty toward your Father in Heaven, by studying
above al things, to know, and honor him aright: which lesson will not only
enable you to perform a duetiful obedience toward your Parents both of body
and mind, but also make you to excel other men, as they do bruit beasts. For
the Turks, the Tartareans and Barbarians, the Margyats, or those of China are
able to contend and contest with you in all moral virtue, and may exceed you
without the Apostles armor, as Lactantius Ephesians 6. 13. Instit. lib. 2. c. 3 lib.
3. c. 10. lib. 5. c. 15. Tho p 2. 2. q. 81
and the Anglelike Doctor show at length in diverse places. We differ only by
Religion and Gods true worship, which I briefly comprehend in three principal
Heads: First of your duty toward himself: secondly of your duty toward his
Lieutenaunt here upon Earth: thirdly toward your Country.

Chapt. 1. Of a young Noble man's duty toward God.
THe right knowledge of God is the first fountain, and lively spring of al
duty, the principle of principles, and first foundation of all understanding,
as his fear, which is grounded thereupon, is the beginning Proverb. 1.
of all wisdo^e. For of the true knowledge of things, proceeds the Honor and
respect, which we bear unto them.

To attain to this knowledge he has laid open unto Romans 1. 19. 1. Cor. 15. 28.
us, first the large volume of this world, wherein we may see his Image
painted more lively upon it all, and every least portion of the same, then
Phidias the carver drew his own picture upon Minerua's buckler. So that as
this engrauers image could not be scraped out, without spoiling the whole
work, no more can Genesis 1. Mat. 10. 29. Act. 17. 28.
any man behold this universe, not seeing his divine Majesty; who of naught,
in no time, created it al by his almighty power; as by his providence, wisdom,
and goodness he gouernes the same.

In reading of this book, al Nations, al Philosophers, in all times, in all
Sects, learned that there is a God, who^ D. Plessaeus. lib. de veritate Rel.
christ. c. 3.
they feared and worshipped, albeit after a diverse kind of Religion. Go from
the East to the Weast, from the South to the North, unto al Countries, and
amongst al people, you shall find no nation, no city no town, no not one
cottage, without some sort and kind of divine worship: So that as Hermes the
most ancient of Hermes in Paemandro.
al Philosophers said: God may be felt with the hands, smel'd with the nose,
and hard with the ears: albeit by the senses of the mind he is in scrutable.
Whereupon Auicena's Avicenna.
conclusion follows necessarily: whosoever knows not God or Nature, he
lacks not only understanding, but also his senses. Wherefore let us pray with
Psalm. 136.
David. Bless ye the Lord all his works: ye heavens and earth, and thou my
soul bless the Lord for ever. Just. de monar. and ad Gentes. Homerus passion
4. Georg. Aen. 6. Ephesians. 3. 5.


The heathen philosophers of al sorts acknowledge that there was but one God:
yea the Poets confess, and the Devils themselves tremble at his very name, as
appears by the writings of Orpheus, Homer, Virgil, the false and deceitful
oracles of Apollo, and his priest Sybilla, and al others.

But God of his more special favor toward us, has reueald himself more
particularly by the mouth of Moses, his prophets and Apostles in his written
word: yea in sending his well-beloved son, who is one with himself in
substance and essence, making him to od Heb. ^. 14. 2. Cor. 5. v. vlt. Romans 4.
vlt. 1. Cor. 15. 12. 13. 14. Heb. 9. 24. and 10. 19. Ephesians 4. v. vlt. Act. 2. 30.
take the form and flesh of man: to free us al from sin, and the cruel
torments of Hell, and taking upon him our burden upon the Cross in rising from
the dead, and ascending the third day into heaven; where he sits at the
right hand of God; unto the day that he come to judge the quick and the dead.
In the meantime for our commemoration and better assurance, he has left unto
us annexed unto his written word, the Sacrament of Regeneration, and of his
body and blood, as the only two Romans 4. 5. and 6. Gal. 3. 6. 7. Ephesians. 4. 16. 1.
Cor. 218. 19 Matthew. 9.
tokens and infallible signs of his favor toward us.

Wherefore I wish you al to embrace this his passion, and death by faith as ye
would be saved, believing that he is the only head of the Church, by whom all the body being coupled and knit together by every joint. for the furniture
thereof (according to the effectual power, which is in the measure of every
part) receaueth increase, Mat. 28. 20. Ioh. 14. 17. Ephesians. 4. 14. 15.
life, moving, and being. Also that he is the husband of the Church, not
having spot or wrinkcle, or any such thing, but remaining holy and without
blame.

That he is ever present with her, and will not commit his dear and well-beloved
spouse unto the custody of any vicar, to be defiled, but that he has sent
down his spirit from heaven to comfort, guard, direct, and save her, from such
ruffians and lecherous Bucks.

Know that this is the ancient true Catholic, and Apostolic Religion, which
kindles, and quenches not our faith toward him; which extolleth him and Romans
4. 25. Gal. 3. 6.
abaseth us, which attributes our whole salvation unto his passion, without
ascribing the least part thereof unto our selves: that we are only saved by
grace, without all consideration of our merits, which in themselves deserve
death and damnation, as works of the flesh. Romans 14. 23. Ephesians. 2. 1.
This is the true Religion which teaches him only to be King, Priest, and
Prophet, and our only sufficient Mediator, and Aduocat, making peace between
God and us.

These things are to be learned, believed, and followed of you al: and al
heresies, sects, and contrary opinions are to be shunned and not harkened unto,
as the doctrine of Antichrist, who is an adversary and exaulteth 2 Thessalonians. c 2.
4.
himself against all that is called God, or that is worshipped, who sits in
the temple of God, showing himself that he is God, creator, redeemer, and
savior of the world, not contenting himself with a triple Diadem and
threefold crown of Gold; when our Lord Jesus had but one of thorns.

This I say and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth Ephesians. 4. 17. 18.
walk not as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind; having their
understanding darkened through the ignorance, that is in them, because of the
hardness of their heart.

Being fully assured and persuaded, that the Lord has suffered for every one
of us, and that al good co^eth from him, and our evil flows from our selves,
and Romans 8. 28.
that whatsoever he sends, is for our good: My counsel is that you take al
in patience, submitting your selus unto his good will and pleasure; honoring
him by lifting up your hearts from al carnal, earthly, and corruptable
imaginations, and with your most holy and chaste conceptions, praising and
magnifiing his name, with the most excellent and glorious titles that your mind
is able to conceive.

God is a spirit, and therefore will be honored with a Romans 1. 1. Seneca.
clean free and vnspottted heart. Sacrificium Deo spiritus, says the Ethnic.
Optimus animus, pulcherrimus Dei cultus: Religiosissimus cultus imitari, vnicus
Dei cultus non esse malum.

An honest man is a true sacrifice unto God: his heart is Gods temple, his soul
is Gods image, his affections are the offerings, the greatest and most solemn
sacrifice it self is performed in Imitating and serving God.

So that you see that a man must have an unpolluted soul in serving God,
especially in prayer, which is one of the cheifest parts of divine Service:
otherwise our prayers are not only in vain and unprofitable, but also do us
harm. For Gods Justice and power are in separable, so that whensoever we
present our selves before him with an heart fraught with vitions passions,
hatred, malice and envy: in liew of redressing our fault, we redouble thesa^e:
forgive us we say our offenses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
What else infer we by that petition, but that we offer him our soul void of
al revenge; and free from al rancour?

For which cause I approve not, nor commend those Pharisaical humors, whom I
so often behold praying unto God more then ordinary: except their actions
immediately proceeding or succeeding their prayers, witness some show of
reformation or hope of amendment.

sinocturnus adulter
Tempora sanctonico velas adoperta Cucullo. Juven. 8.

The state of a man that connexeth devotion unto an execrable life, seems
unto me to be more condemnable then his, who is comfortable to himself, and
every way dissolute. The Pythagoreans would have their prayers to be public,
and hard of every man, to the end that noe man should pray and request that
which was unlawful and unjust, as he who, -- clare cum dixit Apollo
Labra mo^et metuens audiri: pulchra Laeuernae Hor. 1. Epist. 16.

Da mihi fallere, da iustum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus obijce nubem.


My advise is that you pray unto God in heart, and with your mouth, that he
would grant you.

Men's bona, fama, fides, haec clare and vt audi at hospes. P^rs. 2.


And in a word, that in all your thoughts, words, and works, you behave your
selves so before God, as if all the world hard you, and that you converse and
behave your selves so in the world, as ever in Gods sight and presence,
referring al unto his glory.

What should be the form of your prayer, and what circumstance of time and
place, you should observe (...).
in praying, I remit you to his Majesty's wise and godly precepts: wishing you
to speak of God spareingly, soberlie, earnestly, with all honor fear and
respect, not rashly as many do in their vulgar and familiar discourses, as
an interiection, exclamation, by use and custom, not thinking once upon him,
but only by the way: nor yet to allege his sacred name as a witness, or
comparison intermedling him in your actions. It is of the conscience and not of
the mouth that God should be called one for witness.

Seeing faith comes by hearing. I counsel you to Romans 10. 17.
come unto Sermons, to be present at the public Service of God in the Church,
to give attendance and reverence without ostentation, vanity, ambition and
hypocrisy, ever with this assured and undoubted truth God will be served in heart
and mind. For that which is exterior and public* is more for our own selves,
then for Gods service* and serves more for the conjunction, unity,
edification, and good example unto others, then for Gods truth: potius admorem,
quam ad rem pertinet.

Many are diligent and curious obseruers of these external ceremo^ies, which
within are nothing the more Esa. 29. 13. Ma^h 15. 8.
godly, as God says, they come near unto him with their lips, but are far
from him in their heart: they make piety a cloak unto impiety, and their
hypocryticall and cou^terfeit devotion an excuse of their horrible
dissolutnesse. Act. 17. 11. ^ohn 51. 39. ^. Tim. 16. and 17


That this is the true doctrine, search the holy scriptures, as those of Berea
did, and ground not your selves upon human traditions, as the Papists do. For
Christ says The Scriptures bear Testimony of me, and the whole Scripture,
says S. Paul, is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to
convince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect unto al good works; albeit ^ellar. li. 4. d:
verb Dei.
the Papists are so impudent, as to affirm that they are insufficient and
imperfect as namely that blasphemous book of Cardinal de Perrons Bishop of
Eureux answered by Tilenus. Lay not the safty of your conscience (...) ^ib. 1.
upon the credit of your own conceits, nor yet of other men's humors, how
great Doctors soever they be, but ye must only ground it upon the express
Scripture, for conscience not grounded upon sure knowledge is either an
ignorant fantasy, or an arrogant vanity: And as our eyes are deceived by a
cloud of water: so are these minds, which are covered with a cloud of opinion.

Wherefore as those who would root Tirannie out of any City, first
undermine, and cast down the Tower or Castle: so whosoever thinks to be
saved, must ruinate the strength and foretresse of opinion. Ibid.
And as his Majesty counsaileth, beware in this case of two extremities, the
one to believe with the Papists the Church his authority better the^ your own
knowledge: the other to lean with the Anabaptists to your own conceits and
dreamed revelations.

You must knock, search, and ask your selves, if you would enter, find, and
have salvation: let not your Math 7
selves be deceived with the Impostures of the ignorant Priests, or preachers,
be they never so learned: the only touchstone of al true doctrine, and Religion
is the word of God, in the old and new Testament compared with it self, which
of it self is clear, manifest, perspicous, and easy to be understood, as the
Royal Prophet says. Psalm. 19. 8. 2. Pet. 1: 19. 2. Cor. 4. 3. Plin. li. 9. c.
29
Albeit the Papists like unto a fish called Cuttell, lest they should be
apprehended and taken in their error, trouble the clear spring of the holy
Scripture, in making men believe, that it is obscure, and difficult to be
understood.

To cloak their superstition, and to hide their malicious and perverse
ignorance, they are not content to cause men to believe, that God (the author
of al language, and who speaks more plainly then all the me^ in the world are
able to do) has revealed his will unto us in obscure terms, but has found
out also a most pernicious and detestable distinction of Spiritual and
Temporal men, to terrify me^ from reading of the Scriptures, as not
appertaining unto their calling* when the Apostle without exception of persons
assures us, that whosoever has not the spirit of Christ, the same man Romans 8.
9. Gal. 4 6.
is not his. So that Prince and people, Noble and ignoble, if they be Christ's,
are al spiritual, and must walk in Gal 5. 22. ^o. 19.
the spirit, and perform the works of the spirit, which are l^ue, joy peace,
long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith* meekness, temperance* flying from
the works of the flesh: which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
wa^tonnesse* seditions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, gluttony and
such like; which make those that do them, not to inherit the kingdom of God.

Beware therefore of reposing your salvation on the faith of your Curate, for
ignorance excuses no man: and you may read how the Prophets, the High Priests
Aen. 6.
the Flamines, Divinors, Southsayers, Sybilla, ye how Apollo himself deceived
men, and gave false oracles.

Yet by reason I read that Harpocrates the God of silence was ever set beside
Isis, and Osiris, and that Minerva Plut. in Isid. and Os^r.
blinded Tiresias, for looking upon her when she was naked, to instruct us, to
lay our hands upon our mouths, and to beware of an overcurious search in
divine mysteries. Therefore I recommende unto you his (...),
Majesty's cautions in reading of the Scripture, That you read it with a
sanctified and chaste heart admire reverently such obscure places which you
understand not blaming only your own capacity, read with delight the plain
places, and study carefully to understand those that are somewhat difficult.
But seek not curiously to seek out more then is contained therein* for that
were too vnma^nerly a presumption, to strive to be further in Gods secrets,
then he is willing you should be: for what he thought needful for us to know,
that he has revealed there.

Delight most in reading such places of the Scripture, as may best serve for
your instruction in your calling, rejecting Tit. 3. 9.
foolish curiosities, upon genealogies and contentions, which are but vain and
profit not.

Be not deceived by the external and outward appearance of the Papists
superstition, or of any other heretical sect.

-- Nugae, non si quid turbida Roma Pers. 1.

Elevet, accedas; examenue improbum in illa
Castiges trutina: Nec te quaesiveris extra.
Neither believe their fair promises and offers, otherwise then the song of
Sirens by antiphrasis: and as the people of Rome believed Carbon, swearing
never to credit him. Their actions should rather be respected then their fair
promises; there are too many examples, that should cause you to embrace this
advise. The Devil spak so devoutly and deceived our first parents. Genesis 4.
You shall not die (said he) but shall be like unto God himself knowing good
and evil: so Caine desired friendly his good brother Abell to go forth when he
killed him; Read how Ioab spoke unto Amasa holding his chinne 2. Kings. 20.
Judges. 16. 1. Mat^. 16.
with his right hand to kiss him, and stabd him in the side with the left.
Consider how Dalila betrayed Sampson* and how Ptolomeus the son of Ahab
having feasted Simeon and his two sons, killed them al three in his own
house.

Come to the New Testament, and observe how Herod cou^terfaited that he would
have worshipped Christ, when he sought to kill him. Mark how the Devil tempted
Christ with fair words upon the top of the Math. 2. 22. Ibid, 4. 6.
mountain; and how Judas kissed Christ. Mahomet deceived by his show of
devotion al Asia; and at this day such is the superstitious devotion of
Talismauler in Turkey: of Mopht and Cadilesquer in the Mosquees: of the Caliph
among the Arabians, Syrians, and Aegyptia^s: of the Cadis that never drink
wine, for the like devotion. The pilgrims of Chazi moved with the like
superstitious devotion pull out their own eyes, so soon as ever they have
seen the Arc of that false Impostor Meche, contenting themselves with that
sight, and never after to see any thing. Such is the superstition of the
Papists, who like unto the Scribes and Pharisees, or white sepulchers, are
fair without, and al rotten within; they offer you a golden cup full of poison.

Of al sects and heresies I wish you to be most diligent Alciat. Emb. 6.
and circumspect to avoid and shun Papistry, as having the greatest
appearance, and resemblance of the truth: Decipimur specie recti; Likeness is
the mother of error: for by this means the Wolf is taken for the shepherds
Dog, the serpent for the Lamprey; Latin for fine Gold, as Tin for Silver, the
Crystal for the Diamond, an^ Glass for Emeralds. After this manner Zeuxis
grapes deceived the Pigeons: Aeneas embraced a phantasme for Creusa, and Ixion
a cloud for Juno. So are the Partriges and Plouers catched by the fained voice
of the fowler: and in Virgill the resemblance of the two twins deceived their
nearest friends. Many men by the like proportion of body, by the likeness of
face, speech, and carriage have crept into the couches of the most chaste
Lucrece's. Smerdis in Herodotus Herodat. 3.
after this fashion came unto the Monarchy of the Persians faining himself to
be Cyrus his son, unto who^ he was like in name and visage: So Pompilus
calling him self Antiochus his son obtained the kingdom of Val. Max. lib: 9
c. 15. Fulgo. lib. 5. 16. In. histor. Gall.
Siria: Sidonian the Jew by the resemblance of his face with Alexander Herod's
son, was crowned King, and afterward discovered by the roughnes of his hands.
So Boduin calling himself the Earl of Flanders was created King of France, in
the Reign of King Lewis the seventh.

O Papists, Prothee's and Camelions of this age how long will you suffer your
selves to be led captives in superstitious ignorance, and wilful blindness? Ye
Mass Priests how long will ye be Satan's Organs, and instruments of falsehood?
Will ye ever remain sacrificers unto Hell? the Hecatombe of Acheron? and the
holocaust prepared unto the eternal flames? Miserable creatures have pity
upon your own souls: Repent in time, otherwise I denounce a tempestuous
storm against you, when ye cannot recall for fair weather: when your
shadows shall disperse, and fly from the face of the almighty, who will
render to every one according Math. 25. 34.
to his works.

Moreover you Nobles, know, that the way which Math. 7. 13. 1. Pet. 2. 2.
leads to destruction is broad, and it was prophesied that many shall follow
this damnable way, by whom the truth shall be evil spoken of.

Therefore be not moved at that reason which commonly they object unto the
ignorant, but resolve it as wise Socrates answered the impudent whore Thcodote;
who mocked him saying that her power was greater then his, because she allured
many of Socrates his scholars, but he could never allure on of her lovers. I
marvel not said he, (as we may say to the^) for where thou leadest them to
pleasure, and filthy lust in plain and easy way; I conduct the^ unto virtue,
by a narrow and rough path. Nether walk ye in the ordinances of your fathers,
nor defile your selves* with their Idols.

Be no more children, wavering and carried about with every Ezec. 20. 18. Ephesians.
4. 14. 15. 1. Cor. 10.
wind of doctrine by the deceit of men, and with craftines whereby they lay in
wait to deceive But follow the truth and in all things grow up into him, which
is the head, that is Christ. For it had bin better for you not to have 2. Pet.
2. 21. Math. 27.
acknowledged the way of righteousness, then after you have acknowledged it, to
return, as the dog does to his own vomit and the sow to the mire.

Moreover seeing the open and manifest profession of great me^ works great
effects in many men's minds, as appears by Nicodemus of Arimathea, and Pilat's
Pieri. Hie. 35 Egesippus e Romam. Arch. 1. Pet. 3. 15.
own confession, and washing of his hands at Christ's arraignement, as by his
letter to the Emperor Tiber*

I wish you al to be ready to give an account of your faith unto whom it
appertains, and not to be ashamed to profess Christ before all the world: for
whosoever denies him before me^ on earth: him will he deny in heaven, before
his father. Not that I council you ever to be prattling and disputing in all
places and companies, using your Religion, as it were an heap of Counters to
lay an account withal. Nor yet that you should be deaf and dumb when you
hear any thing spoken to the disgrace of your Religion, but thar you should
know the whole points of your belief to form your life accordingly, and be
able to maintain the^ with as great meeknes in conversation, as you should be
resolved to dye a thousand times, rather the^ to renounce the least of them,
that serve necessarily to salvation.

As touching indifferent things, my advise is that Gal. 2. 4. 1. Cor. 8.
you observe both in word and deed, the Canons, Laws and customs established
by his Majesty whersoeuer you are, without scandal, offense, light dispising,
and co^demning those rites which are not agreeable unto those of your own
Country: but try and examine them both in the balance of reason. For this is
the rule of rules, and the general law of al laws, according to the opinion of
wise men (...). That a man should follow and observe the laws and custo^es of
that Country where he is, avoiding diligently all singularity and strangnes
of opinion, different from the common, approved, and received custom Non
conturbabit sapiens publicos mores, nec populum in se nouitate vitae conuertet:
you must ever submit your selves to the Cannons of your superiors, without
controversy, dispute, or altercatio^, not taking sometimes upon you to dispe^se
with them, sometimes to augment them, and at other times to pare, and diminish
them, according to your own fantasy.

With my council you shall respect Gods Ministers above al others, as his
Ambassadors, nether forbear ye to reverence them in respect of some man's
particular ignorance or corruption of his manners: for the Son is not
infected, or the worse, that it shines upon an unclean place.

I wish you to remember, that it is an unjust thing, that any man should reap
that field which is ordained for the Ministers maintenance. Whosoever does it,
is no less profane, then he that spoileth Gods temple. I will have no better
witness for my proof the^ the Lord Math. ^2. 21.
himself, who comanded to give unto Caesar that whih is Caesar's, and unto God
that which in like manner appertains unto him.

Also I would have you to remember, that with your best means you help the
advancement and propagation of your Religion in founding Colleges or Schools
for good, true, and sound doctrine, as many Ethnicks did for their Paganism,
and the Papists do yet imitating their Idolatry.

Yea and to consider that it is not sufficient for Noble men to believe in
their hearts, to pray with the spirit and tongue, and to profess God openly
with their mouths, which are necessary for all men to do. But that you must
protect and defend also with your hand and whole strength of body, the true
Gospel against all the assalts of the enemies, to uphold it: yea as God has
given you a sword to maintain the true Religion, so would he have you to cut
and root out the very lowest root of superstition and Idolatry, that they
grow not amongst you.

So to crown this first part of your duty toward God, with the Kings
conclusion, worthy to be printed in your hearts with golden Letters. Keep God
sparingly in (...),
your mouth, and abundantly in your heart: be precise in effect, but sociable
in show: show more by your deeds then by your words the love of virtue, and
hatred of vice: and delight more to be virtuous, and godly indeed, then to be
thought and called so: expecting more for your praise in heaven then here; and
to apply to all your outward actions Christ's command: pray and give your alms
secretly: so shall ye on the one part be inwardly garnished with true
christian humility, not outwardly (with the proud Pharisee) glorying in your
godliness, but saying as Christ commanded us all, when we have done all that
we can. Inutiles serui sumus, and on the other part ye shall eschew outwardly
before the world the suspision of filthy Luke 10. 17.
proud hypocrisy, and deceitful dissimulation.

Chapt. 2. Of a Noble man's duty toward the King.
KIngs are Gods children and are named Gods after their Father by the sage
Hebrews, who had great familiarity with God, to teach us, that we should
honor, reverence, and obey them next unto God, whose Lieutenants they are here
upon earth: and as Tullie terms them, they are the Fathers of the Country.
Wherefore God in the first precept of his second table commanded to honor
them; as our Lord Jesus, to give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And to be
brief in so clear a matter, observe the Apostles commandment in diverse
places, as amongst the rest in a Statute to the Romans (who at this day Romans
13. l. 2.
glorify in violating of it).) Let every soul (says he) be subject unto
the higher powers: for there is no power but of God: whosoever therefore
resist the power, resist the ordinance of God, and shall receive unto
themselves condemnation.

What man is he then so rash and unadvised to say or mainetaine that you
should not obey your Sovereign if he be cruel or rigorous? Where find you
that Gods commandments will suffer Kings to be thrown out of their thrones?
THAT THE POPE HAS POWER TO TAKE FROM ONE KING HIS KINGDOM, AND Bellar.
^^ontro 3 lib. 5. c. 6. page 1081. printed. An^. 1601. doctrine of all the
Jesuits
TO GIVE IT TO ANOTHER? AND UPON HIS LEAST DISPLEASVRE TO GIVE IT AWAY? Yea if
he refuse, to send an Ahab or a Iehu, to kill a good Prince, as if he were as
cruel as Hol^fernes, Moab, and Nero were? This is the Papists doctrine: this is
the Roma^e Religion I wish you to beware of: this is the Catholic zeal to
stab good Princes in the midst of their guards as Brutus and Cassius did Caesar
in the Senate house. They teach to throw our Gracious Sovereign into the
Tames, as they threw Scylla into Tybre. They may pill Princes palaces as they
did Otho's, and blow up a whole world with a train of gunpowder without hurt
of conscience, or any fear of Paul's condemnation, which you see here
pronounced. Yea alas! If any zealous Catholic Roman can perform any on of
those, for expiation of his fault he shall be canonized as a Martyr ^. Henry
the 3.
with Clement that stabd the French King: a day shall be consecrated to his
execrable fact, and his name marked with red letters in their bloody Callender.

Proh superi, quantum mortalia pectora caecae Ovid. me^am. 6

Noctis habent! ipso sceleris molimine Tereu^
Creditur esse pius, la^demque a crimine sumit.
All the ancient Doctors of the Church had not Bellarmines subtility and wit to
excogitate this sharp and powerful distinction of time, and place, to cut a
Kings throat, and to blow him, and al his subjects unto Heaven. All the Councels
that ever were, could not devise how to cast such a wide mouthed Canon as the
English Roman carrying of 36. barrells of powder. etc

The Doctors understood this place plainly and simply (as it is) to wit, that
every one should obey his S. Aug. li. 3. confess. c. 8. S Cyp. con^^a Deme^r.
lust. Mar. Apol. lib. Ano^. Pyam. Tert. Apol. c. 30.
King, be he never so wicked, ungodly, unjust, never so cruel a Tyrant or
profane Atheist, as David obayed wicked Saul, id in Imperatore scientes quod
Deus voluit, (As the eloquent Tertullian says) bonosque principes voto
(debemus) expetere, quale scunque tolerare. The very Ethnicks Religion was more
godly in this point, then the Papists; they acknowledge and confess, that the
Kings Majesty, Hor. lib 3. od. 13
Non sumit aut ponit secures.
Arbitrio popularis aurae.
Their Popes first predecessor (as they say only) had not so great power, when
he exhorted al men to submit themselves 1. Pet 2. 13.
without exception, reservation, aequivocation, or other collusion, unto al
manner of ordinance (prescribed by the king) for the Lords sake. So I wish you
al Nobls to do the like, rather for the Lords sake, then for any other
particular, either for hope of greater preferme^t, or to be more in his
Majesty's favor, nor yet for any fear, but freely and ingenuouslie as
becomes loial and faithful subjects.

Man's laws are noe less ielous of your allegiance L^cogitationis ff. de
pa^is. L. si quis c. de sacr^ sanct^^. Eccle.
toward your Sovereign: for they condemn to death not only al those that
are attainted against the Kings Majesty's own sacred person, as Gods law
does, but also al those who are consenting; those who know of such a
detestable design, and reveal it not: yea even those, who violat their
officers and Magistrates: If you have never cast your eyes or looked upon the
Code or Digest, read now, legem ^uliam, and ad Corneliam, de crimine loesae
Maiestatis, whereunto I remit you for breuities sake.

Reason her self exhorts you to honor and reverence our gracious King JAMES,
who is an ornament and perfection of al Kings past, and a pattern for all Kings
to come in wisdom, Justice, and meeknes. His admirable actions are a fertile
field for all writters to exercise their pregnant wits, and to imploie their
learned hands. The 5. of Nov^^ A^o. D^. 1605
He like another Asclepiades, reached forth his health full hand unto this
Country, and redeemed it from the horrible jaws of Orcus: He restored our
Country unto life, and us again unto it: He rent our mourning weeds, and wipt
away our sorrowful tears, and quenched the flames of our universal fire: He
delivered our throats from the traitors knifes, and set our necks at liberty
from the heavy yooke and bondage of strangers: without his healp great
Britain had been forced to obaie shamfullie those, whom it used to command
before.

Impius haec tam culta novalia miles haberet,
Barbarus has segetes. Virg. Eclog.

O how much are we al bound unto your Majesty Gracious Sovereign! what praises
and thanks are we obliged of duty, -- o qua Sol habitabiles
Illustrat oras, maxim Principum? Her. lib. 4. Od. 14. and od. 2.

Quo nihil maius meliusue terris
Fata donavere, bonique Divi,
Nec dabunt, quamvis redeant in aurum Tempor^priscum.
Let us al therefore with one accord, and harp in hand Pier. Hiero. 17.
sing for his Paean, who erects the Storcke, and treads under foot the
Seahorse, (...) Pind^r. Pith. ode. 8.

(...).
And let us pray unto God as Martial did for Traian, Dij tibi dent quicquid
Princeps Auguste mereris, Mart. li. 10. Epigram. 34.

Et rata perpetuo, quae tribuere, veli^t.


Chapt. 3. Of Noble men's duty toward their Country.
YOU ought also to love our common Mother your Country, as I wish you to
Reverence our general Father the King: for she has bred and nourished us al,
showing especial favor toward you that are Nobles, in bestowing a greater
portion of her goods, then upon others, with more ample Honors. Your Nobility
is best known, and most respected with her. Which made the Persians to swear
by the Sun rising never to become Grecians, Romans, Jews, or Aegiptians but
to remain Persians. This love caused Themistocles to drink a bowl full of
bullockes blood, rather the^ to go against his native country, who rejected
him.

Excessitque fidem meritorum summa suorum. Hereby King L^onidas comforted
himself and three hundred of his servants, who were killed at Thermopilas
fighting for the defense of his country, as appears by Simonides his Greek
Epitaph, turned into Latin by Tully thus Dic hospes Spart^, nos te hic vidisse
iacentes, ^ic 1 Tus.

Dum sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur.
The three Decij lost their lives for their country: so did Curtius, Gobrias,
Zopirus, C^: Scipio. Fulvius N^ssus; and many others offered their lives
willingly for the safety of their countries. It is these valiant men's examples
that J wish you al to imitat, when need requires and occasion is offered. For
it is better that one perish, then Hor. 3. car. od 2.
all. Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori.

But while I remember that devilish disseigne, and Jesuitical intention, never
to be forgotten, of those cruel Panthers, Hippocentaures, Crocodils, and
venomous 5. Na^. 160 5
vipers, who so unmercifully would have killed both our Father and Mother, King
and Country at one blow, I am more astonished then Pompeius was in seeing the
Sanctuary; then Alexander in looking unto Ammons mysteries, or Apuleius in
beholding the witchcrafts of Isis and Osiris. It was such a Tragaecomedie
(praised be God) that the like was never de ficto, much less de facto; yea
that Attellanus himself would not be able to act the least part thereof.

-- bella horrida bella Aen. 6

Et Tamesim multo spumaentem sanguine cerno.
Will ever our posterity believe that such an ungodly, ignorant, furious and
desperate crew, would have returned us again unto the first Chaos? who can
think that such a well governed and glorious Monarchy should have been changed
into a deformed Anarchy? Oh our licentious and loose liberty would have
continued longer then five days* as it did at the death of the Persian King! O
monstrous confusion where al divine and humane laws should have been
destroyed, and discipline abolished, al manner of sins against God and man
set abroach, no rank, no dignity kept, but the inferior made aequal with his
superior!

-- Facinus quos i^quinat, aequat. Luc. 5.
Al Dicaearchus his pains reckoned by Cicero should have been nothing
comparable unto the torments these horrible traitors had inflicted upon us.
Cyrus his overthrow by Tomiris, nor Othryades his victory had not been aequal
to our destruction. There should have been more Britains bones to hedge the
Parks, then there were of the Ambrouns and Teutons bones about the Massilian
vineyardes. This is the Roman Religion.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum:
Qu^ peperit saepe and scelerosa atque impia facta.
The Tygres may be accounted pitiful, and the Cannibals and Carthaginians may
bind themselves apprentises unto the Papists in such prodigious practices: yea
the very Instruments of Satan and those insolent Copronines at last should
have been devoured by that polyphemus Cyclop the Pope, as Ulysses in Homer for
his good wine he gave him: where they thought to have (...) ^vid. 14. mei. ^En.
3.
ruled al, he had not suffered them, more to be Protect^urs, then King Philip
permitted the traitors of Carthage to be Portors. The Pope is Hematike, and
cannot be satisfied otherways then with men's flesh and blood, like the people
Odrysae, and the inhabitants of Euxenbridge.

-- Nullus semelore receptus Lucan. 1

Pollutas patitur sanguis man sue scere fauces.
The traitors themselves mingled their blood as the Scythians, and drank it
like the Catilinaries in their Jesuits. Ca^
CHAMBER OF MEDITATIONS, where they learn that treason, sedition, rebellion,
and al horrible cruelty that can be devised, is not only lawful and permitted,
but also meritorious, and worthy of great praise, and the factors are ca^onized
like Martyrs for the Catholic cause. As the wicked Jews thought al things
lawful for them to do, when they offered unto the Temple, in saying Corban: S.
Hier. in c. 15 (...).
even so do the Papists, as one of their own Popes wrote unto Theodosius the
Emperor, Cupiditatum quisque suarum Papaleo ep 25
religionem habens velut pediss^quam.

O Caecas hominum mentes: o pectora caeca! (...).

Qualibus intenebris vitae, quantisque periclis
Degitur hoc aeviquodcunque est.
Young Nobles learn then in time by their example, to detest and abhor from
your heart such pernicious principles of Religion against God and man: and ye
Papists repent also in time, and make not your selves any longer members of
that head, which brings the body unto such torments in this life, and the
soul also unto Hell, without contrition, and unfeigned repentance. M. Varro.
Be not deceived because you escape Maenias Law; that you are not sown in a
sack and thrown into the Tames instead of Tyber?

Ignovisse putas, quia cum tonat, ocyus il^x Pers. Sat. 2.

Sulphur discutitur sacro, quam tuque domusque?
Idcirco stolidam praebet tibi vellere barbam
Jupiter.
God has woollen feet, but leaden hands, albeit he be slow to wrath, yet he
recompenseth his slownes with the heaviness of the pain, which he inflicteth.
Therefore I conclude here with this admonition, Discite Iustitiam moniti and
non temnere divos. Aen. 6.


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL and hopeful young Gentleman Sr. John Harington Son
and hear To my Hon. Lord Harington.
Most worthy and dear Sir, seeing the love of Tutors toward their Pupils
should always continue, as the love of Parents toward their obedient
children, in token of my perpetual affection, I send this book to you. For as
Cicero exhorted his Son Marcus by his books of Offices* albeit he was well
advanced in Philosophy, and wroot his Academique Questions to Verres: so I --
si parvalicet componere magnis, have chiefly intended this whole work for your
instruction, who does profit as well by good examples, as by precepts, idque
Athenis, at the Princes Court. As in my part shall ever appear some signs of
that love which was betweeene Tully and Horte^sius, quorum alter ab altero
semper adiutus est, et communica^do, et monendo, et fauendo: so I doubt not Sir
but according to your virtuous disposition you will receive embrace, and
welcome my admonitions and exhortations, yea and practice the^, as coming from
one of

Your most faithful and loving Tutors. I. C.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF NOBLE Institution, showing a young Noble man's duty toward
his Parents and Tutor.
The Summarie
EVen as the body and soul are conioined, so me thinks the duty of children
toward their natural Parents, and of Pupils toward their Praeceptors should
not be separated. And as freindship cannot consist without reciprocal
affection, no more is this faculty of Teaching and Learning called by the
Greeks Arist. 3. de. partib animal.
(...) able to be accomplished without effecting of a natural duty between the
instructour, and him that is instructed. The son must be obedient and
willinge to learn, as his Father and Mother are careful of his institution:
and the Pupil must be attentive in hearing and reading as the Tutor is
diligent in teaching, otherwise they shall ^l roll Sysiphu's stone and be noe
more able to make him wise and learned, then Danau's daughters to fill with a
siffe their pierced barrel. Yea as the wives fault in violating her wedding
vow is greater and far worse then her husbands, albeit they be both bound
alike by the same words, ceremonies, and solemn promises of marriage: so is
the sons and scholars disobedience and negligence in not studying, more
hurtful then the Parents in not instructing. Therefore adeste ^quo animo and
consider how you shall perform your Dutiful obedience toward them: the^ how
you may profit your selves i^ Hearing their instructions: and thirdly by your
own Private reading; which are the three principal points of my advise in this
book as they are of al young Noble men's duties toward their Parents and
Praeceptors.

Chapt. 1. Of a young Noble man's duty toward his Parents.
NAture her self mixeth so the blood of all well borne children with a
dutiful respect of their parents, that I need no more to exhort you to
perform this duty, then the wise Lawgiver thought it necessary to ordain a
punishment against Parricides. The heathens themselves acknowledged the Law of
Nature* in permitting full, absolute, and universal authority to all fathers to
dispose at their own p^easure of their childrens lives, honors, liberty and
goods as Dion. Halic. lib. ^. Aul. Gel. li 2
the words of Romulu's Law witness most plainly: parentum in liber os omne
ius esto* relegandi, v^ndendi, occidendi: excepting those only, who were not
past three years of age. Which Law was renewed by the Law of twelve tables,
whereby it was permitted unto fathers to sell their sons three times, as the
Persians, and ancient Gauls did according to Aristotle's, and 8. Eth. c. 20. 6.
de bello. Gall
Caesar's testimony. Whereby it appears evidently, (as also by many
particular instances of sons, who submitted their necks willingly to their
fathers swords) that whosoever rebel, and refuse obedience unto their natural
Parents, they are guilty of Leaze-maiestie against Nature her self.

Nec est humano sanguine cretus*
Illum sed genuit praedur is cautibus horrens Aen. 4.

Caucasus, Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera tygres.
And albeit neither the Law of Nature, nor of man exacted this duty of us, yet
Gods commandment (above Exodus 20.
them both) given with a blessing unto those that keep it, and a heavy curse
against the transgressors thereof, should move us al to perform this duty, as
it is written partly in the first Table of his Law* partly in the second:
Philo. Judaeu^ in. Decalogo.
to teach us (as Philo and Hierocles observed well) that we must honor the^ as
half Gods, as they represent the Image of God invisible, better, and more
lively the^ all the Images which the heart, and hand of man is able to conceive,
and frame.

This dutiful honor is not performed by an outward behavior of the
countenance in uncovering the head, in bowing the knee, or in naming them
father, and mother (which I think the most honorable style or title that
children can give to their Parents) but requires also that you reverence them
in heart, and mind, acknowledging them to be the secondary causes and next
authors unto God of your being, and liueing* and in that point are like unto
his Almighty majesty.

Therefore show not your selves disobedient, stubborn, Deuteronomy. 21.
or unwilling to their (though rude, and rigorous) commandments, more then
Isaac who submitted his neck under his fathers sword, without grudging or
repining, or more the^ the Rhacabits, who willingly abstained Hierom. 35.
from the drinking of wine al their life time, from building of houses to dwell
in tents, from sowing of seed to obey the voice of Ionadab their father.

Suffer pacientlie, and endure willingly their imperfections, Terent Hean. 1.
choler or frowardnes, Iniquus sit, feras tamen, bear with their severity
and rigor as Manlius Liu. 7.
did: For the Tribune Pomponius having accused Manliu's father before the
people of many faults; and among the rest that he used his son too
roughly, making him to labor the ground, and do many other servile and base
offices: Manlius without farther delay went unto the Tribunes beds side with a
drawn sword in his hand to swear him that he should desist to prosecute against
his father, choosing rather to suffer his fathers rigor, then to see him
followed and pursued in that action.

Nether would J wish you only to be pacient* in suffering your Parents
austeritie; but also to support, and help them in all necessirie and adversity,
and weakness, as Aeneas did* who through flame and fire, carried ^en. 2.
his old Father Anchises. As also amongst that weak sex of women kind, you
read of one who nourished her father upon her breast, and so of another daughter
who gave suck unto her mother, both which were condemned to starve in prison
for hunger, according to the accustomed punishment of the ancients. Yea amongst
the brut beasts, the Storke may be a pattern Pli. li. 10. c. 23
in this point of piety, and duty toward our Parents. For the little Storks
nourish the old ones, covering them with their wings, and coupling themselves
to bear them when they are unable to fly. Their love makes the^ inue^t this
devise, which is so manifest that this point of childrens duty has been
expressed of the Grecians in this word (...) in Latin recico* niare: Also for
this cause the Hebrews call this bird Leu. 11. Job. 35.
chasida, which is to say thankful and charitable.

Moreover I wish you particularly that you interprise nothing of any
importance without their consent, approbation, and allowance, cheiflie in
marriage. For a man marries not for himself only, and to content his own
fantasy and humor; but also for his posterity, his house, for aliance, and
many other things, which are to be considered beside love. And we see that
private marriages done against the Parents likeing, do never prosper.

Gods law, the law of Nature, and civil law wills Leu. 20. 9. Deuteronomy. 5. 16.
Ephesians. 6. 2.
the same honor to be given to your Mother, that you should give to your
Father, without exception, Quae long a december tulerit fastidia menses.

Beginn not then your first wars upon her, but practice earnestly to deserve
her blessing* Nether deceive (...)
your selves with many that say, They care not for their Parents curse; so they
deserve it not. O invert not the order of Nature, by judging your superiors,
chiefly in your own particular* assure your self, the blessing, or curse of
the Parents has ever a propheticke power joined with it.

But to end this duty, I wish you al young Nobles, as you hope, and expect to
inherit your Fathers possessions after their death, so toe honor them also
when they are dead.

Est honor in tumulis ^nimas placare paternas, Ovid. ^
This advise is both civil, and Natural, as appears by the law scriptus
haeres side religios: And by the custom of the ancient Egyptians in building
sumptuous Diod. Sycul.
and honorable tombs: as that of King Simandius, the Pyramides, which were
erected by Artemesi^, and Hadrianus his tomb in Cizico, which are two of the
seven miracles, saying that our dwelling houses in our ^vid. 1. de trist.
life are only Inns, wherein we stay but for a time, but there we shall dwell as
in our proper and natural lodging unto the last day. Ye have also in this
point a notable example of Cymion ^onn to that great Miltiades, who died in
prison, he sold himself and his liberty to bury his father. With what
ceremonies you should perform this funeral duty, learn of Aeneas.

Nampius Aeneas ingentimole sepulchrum Aen. 6.

Imposuit, suaque arma viri, remumque, tubamque
Monte sub aerio, qui nunc M^s^nus ab illo
Dicitur, aeternumque tenet per secula nomen.
Aeneas thought it not enough to put him in a coffin, or to embalm and anoint
him with odoriferous spices, wax, and Honey, and to wrap him up in fine syndon
as the Jews, Assirians and Scythians used to do, but would have his armor
hang above him with learned epitaphes to be as many tokens of his valor, and
to terrify (as I take it) al those that would stain his good name or trouble
his repose in the grave.

Howsoever it was, the honor which you owe unto your Parents when they are
dead, commands this ornament of their Tomb, which for this cause is thought
to be from the French word Tombeau as who would say Toutbeau, it should be al
fair: as likewise in Latin to be called sepulchrum ^uasi seorsum pulchru^.
You therefore that are of ability and have power to bestow honorable funerals
and fair tombs upon your Parents.

Et tu mulum facite* and tumulo superaddite ca^me^. Virg. Eglog 5
Chapt. 2. Of the Pupils Duty toward his Tutor.
THis duty is so straightly conioined and unseparably connexed with that of
children toward their natural parents, that it were superfluous to persuade
you thereunto by discourse. The very reasons and precepts of the Heathen Qui
praeceptorem sancti volue^^ parentis Juven. 7.

Esse loco
are sufficient to move you: therefore I advise you only to Honor and obey them
with a free mind, as is co^venient Quint. lib. 2. ^ 10.
for men of your quality, and not for fear of any punishment. Your obedience
must spring from a fountain of affection toward him, who will love you again.
For Love (as Parmenides holds) is the efficient of all things. Obey him for
your own weal, and honor him, that is the chief cause of your honor:
consider how Theseus honored his Tutor Connidas in sacrificing and dedicating
one day to his honor before his own: as the good Emperor Antonius respected
so much his praeceptors that he kept their images of gold in his chapel: and
so Caius reverenced much his Tutor Agrippa. When he admonishes or reproves
you somewhat sharply, think it is for your ame^dme^t, and that he loves you,
seeing monitiones and obiurgationes verae amicitiae proprium, and they should
be taken friendly. Learn of Titus Vespasianus his son, who being sent for
unto India at his fathers death, desired of Apollonius some precepts whereby
he might govern his Empire well; and when the Philosopher answered that he
would give him one of his scholars that should show him of his faults freely
without al flattery or fear, as Diogenes the Cynick used to do: The young
Emperor hearing this word [ Cynic] I accept, said he, of your present most
heartily, and will suffer him not only to bark against me, but also to bite me,
when he perceives me to do any thing worthy of reprehension. Xerxes had ever
with him his Tutor Damarathus, who admonished him likewise freely amongst the
innumerable army at Hellespont. Craesus used Solons council, as Alexander the
Great gave ear unto Calisthenes his free admonitions, and Dionise of Syracuse
was never offended at Dions and Platos reproves. Wherefore harken unto ^eremias
exhortation, that when you have such a Tutor that freely, friendly, and
faithfully will, and dare advertise you of your faults, keep and entertain
him as Jerem. 1
your own heart. He will be as necessary unto you to show you of your vices
without hypocrisy or dissimulation, as a fine Venice mirror shows a Lady of
the spots upon her face, or any fault in her attire and apparel.

Therefore Noble Pupils I counsel you not only to be loving and obedient unto
your Tutors, but also thankful in advancing and enriching them according to
your abilities, as Achilles did his preceptor Phoenix, Alexander did Aristotle,
Traiane the Emperor in promoting Plutarch to be Consul of Rome, as Theodosius
did Ausonius. Severus the Emperor bid his Tutor Hermocrates ask of him what
he pleased, who having asked fifty talents of gold, commanded to give him
more, thinking that suit too little for his recompense. What shall I allege
Theodoricus King of the Goths (or any other foreign and strange Prince for an
example) who advanced his preceptor Cassiodorus unto so high honors, when you
have a familiar and present pattern nothing as yet inferior to the best I
have named, either in honoring, loving, obaying, or advancing his Tutor, Mr.
Newton as he well deserves? Ye who have the honor to attend his Highness, can
testify that it is as impossible for me to express any ways his perfection
in this point of duty only, as it is difficil for you to follow his example.

Whosoever shows himself unthankful toward his Tutor in special, that has
taught how thankfulness is the ornament of al virtues, and the bond of humane
society, it is no maruail if hereafter he regards neither Religion, faith,
Justice, and that he tread laws and al aequity under foot. Therefore that the
meanest of you may shun this ugly and monstrous name of ingrat ( na^ dixerint
maledicta cu^cta, cum ingratu^ dixerint) which name is repugnant to nature, as
appears by Plato in calling Aristotle Ingrat mule, I counsel you al to
confess and acknowledge at least in word, by whom ye have profited, as Thales
conditioned with Mandraitus, to supply with affection and good will that which
you are never able to perform by effect, when ye have done your best. For as
the common sentence bears, a man can never requite that, wherein he is
obliged unto God, his Parents and Preceptour, as ye may easily judge by the
profit of your Tutors pains in this antithesis.

Chapt. 3. How profitable learning is, and how hurtful ignorance is unto a
Noble man.
FAlse and fantastical opinion prevails so against reason now a days, that
ignorance is thought an essential mark of a Noble man by many. If a young
child loves not an Hawke and a Dog while he sits upon his nurses lap, it
is a token, say they, he degenerates. Such is the misery and blindness of this
unhappy age, that many growing in years profess nothing more then scoffing
at learning and the professors thereof, in calling them al clerks or pedants. If
they perceive any Noble man better disposed to learning then themselves,
presently after a scorning manner they will baptize him with the name of
Philosopher: have he a compass and a rule in his study, then he is an
Astrologian; can he make half a sonnet, he is a rimer. Notwithstanding
learning only puts a difference betwixt men, as reason makes us better
then the brut beasts.

By learning we know Nimrods pride and Non justice: Abraham's faith and the
incredulity of the Jews: Tobias godliness and Corahs Atheism; Cyrus meeknes,
and Antiochus rigor. Learning teaches us to make a ladder with Elias and Enoch
to reach unto heaven. It tells us of an Achilles amongst the Greeks, and of
an Hector amongst the Tr^ia^s. Alexander should have been smothered under the
ruins of Asia without learning, which shows us the sorrowful funerals of
Princes and the tragical ends of those, who appeared to be fortunate in their
beginning: it lets us know of Julius Caesar's honor, and Heleogabalus shame.

Mars sine Pallade mors: marcor sine Mart Minerva.
Pallade Mars vivit,
Mart Minerva viget.
A Councellor must be learned, and as Mutius Scavola reproached Sulpitius a
Noble Roman, and Ammianus Marcellinus said unto Orphitus, it is a shame for a
Noble man to be ignorant in the laws of his own country. By learning only he
is able to sit in a Kings Privy Council, to have a voice in the Parliament
house, to undertake an embassage, or to be employed in some other honorable
charge for the public, and himself, and his friends in private. Except he
be conversant in the laws, how is he able to maintain his tennants in good
order, to speak for his friend in any controversy, to end their quarrels and
to give the^ a wise advise?

Many think it sufficient that a warrier can keep his armor clear from
rusting, and see his horse well dressed; unto whom I would assent if I knew not
that great Captains have ever achiued more with their heads then with their
hands, and that the most renouned warriers have ever bin endued with learning
as well as with valor, as is vndoubtable by Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, and all the rest. They deceive them selves to think that courage appertains only unto
Mars, and that he only shows how to fight, because they have never seen --
galeamque hastamque minace^,
Aegidaque horrificam turbata
Palladis arma.
Aen. 8.

They have never learned that Ulysses fighting deserved and obtained Achilles
armor before Ajax, and that strength without wisdom is but like a sword in a
mad man's hand. The wise Romans made ever the first skirmish in their long
gowns before they armed themselves against any enemy. They had rather
attribute their dignity of ruling over the world unto their learning the^ unto
their strength, unto the first beginning rather then unto the ending; which made
Augustus take so great pleasure in repeating this verse.

Romanos verum dominos, ge^temque togatam. Aen. 1. A learned Courtier is
capable of his Majesty's profound discourses at al times, he can court the
ladies with discretion and intertaine them in wise and honest conference, and
is able to win al men's favor by his meek, gentle, and civil behavior, as
to be employed by his Majesty in some serious and important affaiers.

A Noble man will live priuatelye in the country, by reading he shall have
both profit and pleasure, as Nicias, who took so great pleasure, that he knew
not when he had not dined without asking his servant, and Archimedes who could
not abstain to draw Geometrical figures in the oil of his annomting before
dinner; and in our own days Adrianus Turnebus and Budeus, who could not
abstain from their book upon their wedding day. Would you have more Noble
examples of those who delighted in reading? Alexander was never without Homer
or Xenophon in his hands. C^sar had commonly in his pocket a Salust. Scipio was
inloue with Eu^ins. M. A^to^ius took great pleasure in reading, as appears by
that exclamation, o ten thousand men! remembering of that history where it is
said that Xenopho^ the captain brought back out of the wilderness of Scythia
ten thousand men. Eumenes read always Th^ci^^des, and Pyrrus caused Herodotus
to be read unto him. Charles the Great was very diligent in reading the Bible,
and composed great volumes, whereof the Germans bragg at this day-So did
Dag^b^rt and composed hymmes which are sunge in some Cathedral Churches in
France. But to omit Ptolomeus, Justinian, Aurelian, Emperors, and Alphonsus
and Iuba, our Sovereigns diligence may sufficiently in cite you all to read,
and to read his own books, which are so learnedly penned, that thereby ye
shall reap both profit and pleasure.

Ignorance is a living man's to^be, the death of the mind, a hell unto the
body, and as Cicero says after Plato, it is the chiefest and greatest evil
among men. Wherefore the M^tileneans thought they could not punish a man more
grievously then in debarring his children from learning. What is an ignorant
man able to do? Or what service can he perform either for Prince or
Country, or yet for himself? No, he is not only unapt for all dignities,
offices or Charges, either in time of peace of war, but will cause a desolation
to betake his nation, and knows not how to behave himself either abroad or
at home, as by this short induction may appear to every one.

An Ignorant councellor loves not virtue, because he knows it not, neither
is he able to discern between good and evil, because he sees al things
confusedly without al distinct perspectiue. He is cruel when he should be
merciful, he is severe, when meeknes is required, and rash in pronouncinge
sentence, when he should advise with leisure. And as the wise man says, he
runs upon his wrack without delay, like a moth and falls into dishonor
with out shame; for he knows not the pytr but by his own fall.

An ignorant warrier cannot range his troop in order, or make of his army a
trench; his company shall never be well lodged, he will think himself
surest in greatest danger, and will walk in fear when he should sleep in
security. His army shall want water in Summer and wood in winter: he cannot
find the ford in a brook, nor go unto the bridges of great rivers, and shall
fa^le in a thousand such like things, whereof the least is sufficient to ruinate
the greattest Monarch upon earth. He is not able to judge of good service, and
to observe who meriteth to be reco^pensed. Al his skill consists in his eyes,
which are so pore blind that he cannot see an inch before his nose. I remit to
your own reading sundry examples of inco^ueniences, that have befallen in
wars through the ignorance of natural causes, of the ecclipses, of the
impressions fashioned in the air, and of a superstitious fear of the
celestial signs: and how by the ignorance of Cosmographie, Chorographie, and
Geographie, they have not been able to know their way, not to judge of the
height of the wall which they have been about to scale, but have come a great
deal to short.

Where an ignorant Courtier in hearing his Majesty speak of any thing
except dogs or hawks he is like a cyphre without the significatiue figures, or
dumb letters without the vowels; he he makes the chamber maids laugh at his
discourses, he measures himself by the imbroderie of his own hatband and
gay clothes, but when he goes through the court, no man will say this is
he, whom the King sends unto Constantinople, or to confirm our ancient
alia^ce with the French King, or to make some accord between the Electors of
Germany.

An ignorant Lord Living at home shall be a scourge unto his farmers, a torment
to his family, a mocking stock to his neighbors, a shame for his friends,
and a slander to his Parents. He shall not be a boue the meanest of his
tenants, if he go not up unto the top of his tower, and walk upon the leads:
the Clarke of his village shall laugh and mock him in his presence* His so^ns
Tutor will neglect his duty in instructing his children if ever he have any,
and his very serving men will contemn and misprise him in his face: And which
is worst of al and most to be lamented, his gentleman Usher, will not be afraid
to court his lady in his sight, and she will admire ever, and love a more
gallant man then he. Therefore I council you all of whatsoever degree or age ye
be to study, and think no time soon enough or to late: for as Diogenes said
unto a young man, who fled into a tavern being ashamed to be seen, the
farther you go, the farther are you in the tavern* so the longer you de lay
to learn the longer you remain ignorant.

Chapt. 4. How you should attain to Learning.
A certain Lacedaemonian seeing Xenocrates studying 2 part of the Pupils duty
Rhetoric in his old age, asked wisely of him, when will thou be a
Councellor? Or think you to be an attorney at Rhadamanthus bar, that have
delaied unto your white hairs to study? Which moves me to wish you that are
young to employ the age fitting for the first rudiments of learning.

Non omnibus annis* Convenient cadem. Therefore anoint your ears, as the
ancient wrestlers used to do, that you may show your selves willing and
prepared to learning: and as a people of India named Strabo. 5.
Panoetij use their long ears for garments, so let your attentive and patient
ears serve for the first instrument of your instruction, -- da te^ues aures,
anim^mque sagacem,
Ne fieri negites quae dicit posse retorqui
Vera repulsanti discedant pectore dicta
Tutemet in culpa cum sis, ne cernere possis.
Laugh upon the three sisters when you come to make love unto Jupiters thrice
three daughters. You must make an offering unto Venus before ye enter into the
Plat. Sympos. ^
school of Athens. Love has placed her altar at the school door and has
christened the Sciences after her own name, naming them (...) and (...).
^socr. ad Demo
(...), if ye be willing to learn ye shall attain to the knowledge of many
rare and singular good things. It was good will that made Demosthenes, who
naturally stammered in his speech, speak plainly: that delivered old Appius
from his palsy, Bias from his slownes, and made Alexander conquer the world
almost without soldiers, and have soldiers without money. We live not now
under Saturnu's reign, but we must make our vows unto Ceres, holding our
hand at the plow stilt and bewitch our steril soiles, as Furius H^si^d. in ^per
Plin. 18. 6.
Cresinus did. No man is so fortunate now a days as to become learned, as
Amphiraus did, by dreaming, or as Ganimedes was admitted at the Gods council
table by Gyges his ring. Whosoever would eat the kernel Pla^^.
must crack the nut.

Dij bona solerti vendunt sperata labori. The long gown requires a long and
continual study, which the Romans understood very well in choosing it for their
young Nobles weed before any other garment, cutting it a little shorter as
they grew to man's stature.

Nevertheless be not weary; for albeit the roots of learning be bitter, yet
the fruit thereof is sweet, like unto Platoe's suppers, which pleased and
tasted better on the morrow after they were eaten, the^ that same night. Or
they are like the fountain Anio called Teveron, which at the first entry of
those that bathe themselves therein appears very cold, but after a little
space becomes so pleasant and warm, that they would dwell there: so at the
beginning many detest learning, as one who had tasted of snailes flesh, but
after they had digested it and felt the sweetness thereof, they are allured
therewith as it were with honey, or sweet new wine, that they cannot be
satisfied before death call upon them.

Chapt. 5. What course you should observe in Learning.
AS in time past whosoever sued to serve the Noble Romans went first unto the
Usher of their hal called Ser^^s Atriensis to be infourmed of their Lords
pedigree, to know his valiant acts and the order of his house; so I think it
necessary that you speak first with the Atrienses of learning, which is the
Latin and Greek Grammar (conioining both together as Cicero Offi^. 1.
councelleth his son) before ye preasse to have entry at Apollos cabinet,
except ye will do as the Romans who were thought to be dead, that came in at
the win dow or top of their houses and not at the door. For the knowledge of
these two are the chief keys to all Sciences and gives only access to the
nine Virgins. Be not deceived then with the Franciscan Friars manner of
teaching, who say Non te grammaticas as opus est ediscere n^gas, ^^^ha
^rancisca^.

Et tetricis languere scholis; tantum elige gnomas
Priscorum e libris paucas: tria commata Tulli,
Virgilij totidem versus, vel carmen Horati
Dimidium, haec, omnis seu condimenta loquelae,
Semper habe in promptu, sic cre s^et opinio surget
Hinc decus and stupidi magna admiratio vulgi.


I add for encouragement unto the Greek tongue that of the seven special and
principal tongues: viz. the Assyrian, Arabic, Aegyptia^, Hebrew, Greek,
Latin and Dalmaticke, the Greek is most easy, as shall appear unto him who
will travel with Ulysses, and hear it commonly spoken in all countries, and
specially in our own where we retain yet many Greek words, as a welread
R^m^in^s of a greater work.
author observes, and gives sundry insta^ces. The objection of the
difficulty thereof was invented by the enemy of mankind and pronounced by his
attorney Clement the 5. at the Council of Vienne to lock up the sweet
conduits of Gods true word in the New Testament. By the knowledge thereof
their malicious ignorance is discovered. Be not therefore deterred from
learning so pious and sweet a language, ever used by Mercury messenger of the
Gods, and which will lead you to the spring of all sciences. Let Themistocles
example move you not to believe the translatours in so many good histories as
are written first in Greek, who having to communicate somewhat priuatlie to
the King of Persia, would not ask presence of his Majesty until the time he
could deliver his embassage in Persian language, fearing that the trunchman
would either add somewhat unto, or detract from his message. After ye are
well grounded in Grammar my next advise is, that every Noble Scholar, -- Det
primos versibus annos
Maeoniumque bibat faelici pectore fontem,
Mox and Socratico plenus grege mittat habenas,
that he pass through all the arts and sciences in order, not mounting higher
then his forces permit. To insist in the commendations of Logic, Rhetoric,
and the rest of the Sciences particularly, which are so known lippis and
tonsoribus, I might be longer in every one, then my purpose is to be in all
this volume. Wherefore I wish you only to consider that the ancients painted
man commonly with both his fists folded on his breast, to teach us that we
should follow on the pursuit of learning learning and al virtuous enterprises
with a never fainting resolution, Non omnes arbusta invant humilesque myrica.
Virg. Ecl. 4.


A man loses his time that runs, run he never so fierclie in the
beginning, if he become weary before he come to the race's end, as many young
gentle men do, who in their infancy were admired for their aptnes to learning,
and prompt speaking of eliga^t Latin, being men have not only forgotten to be
congruous, (as the common word is) but which is worse, have al learning in
derision; and in scorn thereof will speak the most barbarously they can
imagine.

Learning is circular, and the Muses stand round about Apollo, having no
beginning nor ending more then a geometrical circle, so that he who would enjoy
one of the disciplines must labor to be acquainted with them all. Therefore
Noble Pupil His animum succinge bonis: sic flumine largo
Plenus, Pierio defundes pectore verba.


Chapt. 6. How necessary knowledge of the laws is for a Nobleman.
Moral, Natural, and Supernatural philosophy, as all the parts of the
Mathematics, are so alluring and perswasiue of themselves, that I will only
put in remembrane of that faculty, which has no pleasant object except it be
gain, and therefore is neglected of you almost, albeit it properly
appertains unto you, not only by birth right, but also according to the
ancient customs both of Greeks and Romans who never thought their young
Princes, and Nobles worthy to have any office, until they were well seen in
their own country laws. The great council of the Amphictions, Areopagus of
Athens, the two Consuls, the six Aediles, the ten Tribunes, and the 18. Pr^t^rs
of Rome were al Nobles, and surmounted the rest of the City as much in
learning, as in extraction of blood. I omit P. Papirius, who wrote the laws of
Kings and Mutius, Brutus, and Manilius, who established the Civil law, to
exhort you to embrace the law of your Country chiefly, that you may discharge
the duty of a true Noble, in defending the innocent, the widow and the
orphant, the oppressed, and the feeble: ye must help them with your tongue
before you put to your hands, you must maintain them with reason and Justice,
in letting the Judge understand priuatlie, that ye know their right, and how
they are wronged; yea if need require to stand their attorney before his
Majesty, in making him understand by the laws how the poor petitioner is
abused, and that his petition is grounded upon the laws of the Realm. It is a
Christian and charitable exercise to defend the opressed. Also by skill in the
laws you shall not only preserve your self from any wrong, but also
determine causes and make an agreement betwixt your neighbors and friends,
rooting out the seeds of dissension, strife, hatred, and deadly fands, which is
the cause of much bloodshed. Daiely there happens accidents at every hour
when ye are least aware, that require a present resolution without se^ding to
an Advocate or an Attorney to have his council. The ignorance of this Science
has brought great Cities into desolation, only for mistaking of on word, as
the saccageof Carthage by Scipio the younger shows, because the Carthaginian
Embassad our understood not the difference between the word City, and the
word Town, et quod Respub non sit in parietibus as Pompey said unto the
Senators at Caesar's persecution. There was the like fault made in the treatise
of peace between the two Cantons of Barn and Friburgh, in the year 1605,
where by their second article it was agreed, that the leege between them
should remain as long as the wales of their town shall appear. So that you
see that this study is most necessary both in public offices and private
conversation, at home and abroad, as well in time of wars as in time of peace,
and as the lawyer says, Respublicas instituere, fin es imperiorum regere,
causas regum disceptare, populorum mores sanare, Principum faedera sancire,
diuinas humanasque leges ad hominum inter homines societatem accommodare.

Chapt. 7. What books you should read privately by your self.
While I am about this last part of your duty, 3 part of the Pupils duty.
Apollos answer pronounced by the Oracles mouth unto Zeno, being inquisitiue
of the same point, comes into my mind, and by appearance roundeth into mine
ear, that there are no better means to attain unto learning, then to
frequent much with the dead, which is, as I understand to read diligently, and
reuolue their books. Wherefore as ye are curious in choosing your armor and
horses, and in trying your Hawcks and dogs, I counsel you to be as choice what
books ye read; and that ye come prepared, as the Egyptians fed at the Sons
fabulous table, not eating but of the daintiest dishes, albeit they had a good
stomach. For there are some books, which are only worthy to be tasted,
others to be swallowed, and the best to be chewed, let down and digested. I
cannot find a fitter similitude to explain this point of reading then a man's
traveling through some strange Country; he breaks his fast or dineth in some
towns passing slightly through them, in others he will lodge al night, but yet
he will choose some pleasant and convenient City to learn the language in, and
there have a settled stay for a time: so are some books only to be read in
parts, others to be read wholly, but cursorily, and some few to be read wholly
with great attention and diligence. Of these few I will give you this short
catalogue, withholding and restraining my pen from the large field of general
praises of History, Oratorie, and Poesy, or any of the Sciences.

First I commend unto your diligent reading the history of the Old and New
Testament, wherein ye may profit more, both for Religion and state matters, and
for the particular leading of your own life, then in all the Greek and Latin
Histories, which stutter in respect of the sweet and lively eloquence of Gods
book and divine history. For what book in the Bible is to be exempted from
this title? The 5. books of Moses, the book of Judges, the 4. books of Kings,
Job, Hester, Judith, Ruth, Tobias, and also the history of the Machabees
(which is separate from the other) I suppose none will deny but they be al
historical. Also Esdras, Nehemias, Ezechiel and Daniel although they be
Prophets, yet are their works compiled in form of narrations, which in the
Rhetoric schools are called Enunciatiue, and only pertain to histories,
wherein is expressed a thing done and persons named.

All the other Prophets although they speak of the time future, which is out
of the description of an history, yet either in rebuking the sins and
enormities past, or revealing the destruction of their Country, or captivity
of the people, and such like calamity and miserable estate in moving and
persuading the people, they do recite some circumstance of a narration.

As for the New Testament, do not the Evangelists co^taine the temporal life of
our Savior Christ, King of Kings, and Lord of the world? The order and
disposition of the text in narration, verity in sentences, gravity and
validity in council proves the same. None will deny the Acts to be an
history. The Epistles of the Apostles do contain councels and aduertisements
reciting diverse places as they were an Epitome or abbreuiation of history.
Therefore I exhort you to be as diligent in revoluing this history first as
the young Princes and Nobles both men and women were in the time of St.
Jerome, Basil the great, Ireneus and St. Augustine. In this labor you shall
find both grace and comfort by Gods holy spirit, that will ever be present, if
ye invoke him as ye should do.

If you would learn of the Greeks, read Thucydides, the fabulous history of
Herodotus, Xenophons commentaries, Lysias, Arrianus, but chiefly Plutarch
amongst many others, in whom pleasure is so mixed and confounded with profit,
that I esteem the reading of him as a paradise for a curious spirit to walk
in at al times, and a fountain of al learning for an ignorant. In him ye shall
see al men painted in one sheet of paper, all virtues in one leaf, al vices
in the reading of one line, and wisdom her self in every letter.

Amongst the Romans I recommend in like manner Caesar, both for the sweet
flowing of the style (according to his Majesty's judicious Judgment, whereunto
(...). 2
the learned sort subscribes) as also for the worthiness of the matter it
self. For I have ever bin of that opinion (says he) that of all the Ethnic
Emperors or great captains that ever were he has farthest excelled both in
practice and precepts of martial affaiers. Then read Cornelius Tacitus,
Suetonius, Salustius, Julius Florus, Patritius, Alexander of Alexandria, with
others, whose names were too tedious to recite.

J would have you also to be familiar with the histories and cronicles of your
own Country, ne sis peregrinus domi, before you read those of France, Italy,
Spain and Germany especially; that you may know the life, Nature, manners,
and estate, both of your friends and foes, which may be very profitable and
pleasant unto you at al times.

In Scotland we have very few of this kind, except it be Hector Boethius,
and a short harmony of the Kings of Scotland, England, and France written in
French by one L. Chalmers: a book albeit but little, yet very worthy to be
read. I think that our predecessors could do better then say, and were more
occupied in virtuous action then in contemplation and writing. But now adays I
think we come short both in the one and the other, in doing or writing well,
except it be his Majesty, whose example well and duly followed, is able to
make us perfect in them both; his actions and gentle nature, more then humane,
makes him admired, as his diverse learned and eloquent volumes inimitable,
wherein he Anni. 1.
meriteth worthily those praises which Cor. Tacitus attributes unto Augustus
Caesar; Augusto profluens and quae Principem deceret eloquentia est. For if ye
note it well, ye shall find it Princelike, flowing from a fountain of
learning, and yet streaming and branching it self into natures order, full of
facility and felicity imitating none, and yet inimitable by any. Yea Athens
her self was no more Attike, al things therein are so sweet and pleasant to
look to. In reading of them Cato would not have complained for want of
gravity, Varro for lack of weight, nor Tacitus crave greater po^pe in the^;
nor would Graccus ask for violence, or Caesar say they lack heat, neither
would Crispus be offended at the sparing of his words, nor Cicero require a
greater abundance; so plentiouslie are all the parts of Rhetoric lodged in his
writings. I particularly recommende unto your reading his (...), whereunto I
am much obliged in this. For if I durst speak my simple judgment, it
exceedethas far Xenopho^s (...) in good and godly instructions, as currage does
couard lines. For albeit Xenophon has a good beginning for the Institution of
a young Prince, yet (if you will mark well) forgetting himself, when he comes
to State matters and making of wars, he makes Cyrus to triumph only by
Treason, and to be rather a coward then a valiant Prince, which is a bad lesson
for any young Prince, or Noble man. As he faineth one Araspas Xenoph. Cyr. 4.
to have received some little discontent by the Assyrians and Lydians, therefore
to betray them, who trusted in Cyr. 5.
him as their special friend: so he calls Gadatus a good and virtuous
Prince, whom afterward he shows to commit a horrible treason; and which is
worse, he makes Cyrus to be the plotter and first inuentour of these
treasons. So that by Xenophons lessons it appears that it was lawful to
deceive and betray those who put their trust in you, in so much that he thought
his 8. books were a sufficient Institution for all Princes and Nobles. For if
he had written them as a simple narratio^ appertaining to the verity of the
History, I would judge him excusable for setting down these damnable
practices, but he will have them to be instructions. You shall not find the like
of the least of these faults in his Majesty's Instructions, which have worn
Xenophon out of credit in all other Countries, where they are truly translated
and read unto all Noble men's children, the fathers themselves not disdaining to
keep a book of them in their own bosom; as I council you especially to do,
who daily see the practice of these precepts by the Pupil, unto whom they were
first taught.

Here in England I have seen many good parts of an History written by
diverse learned men: but I know none that is perfect. Wherefore I wish that as
his Majesty has joined the great Island into one Monarchy for time to come,
so some learned man would join us faithful without any parcialitie in on
history for ages past after the manner of the sacred history, which draws
down the story of the ten Tribes, and of the two Tribes as Twines to gether.
It were a work doubt. less both profitable to us and honorable to his memory
that did it.

Amongst other good English books, J reco^me^d particularly unto your pervsing
the history, or rather Poem of Sr Philip Sydneyes Arcadia, both for the worth
of the writer, and the eloquence of the English style. His discourses and
poesies are so judicious, his passages so pleasant, and variety so delightsome,
that I may with out reproach or offense apply Homers elogi^ unto his praise;
his wit is so excellent, his invention so rare, and elocution so rauishing.

France has many learned historiographers, as amongst the rest Eugerrand of
Munstrellet, Philip of Commines, the Lord of Haillant, who is both learned and
profitable, and pleasant in my conceit. The Commentaries of Bellay and the
Inventorie of John Serres newly printed and worthy to be read, both for the
good and compendious compiling of the story, and also for the French eloquence
wherein he flows. For military affairs ye may read the Lord of Noue who
is so^what difficil for some men, and also the Comme^taries of the L. Mouluc
which are good both for a young soldier, and an old Captain.

Amongst the Italians you hane Guichardine, who is renouned throughout al
Europe for history. For other Sciences you shall read Picolomineus, who
contains al things in his writings fitting and belonging to any Noble man
whosoever; he is admirable in the doctrine of good manners, excellent in
policy, necessary for the state, and proper for all society. Ye may read
Tasso's book of Nobility, and Boccatius works, except his Decameron, which
is full of idle, wanton, and bad inve^tio^s, and worse discourses: the Courtier
of Count Baldessar Castilio is very necessary and profitable for young
Gentlemen abiding in the Court: if you under stand not the original, Mr. Cleark
has translated him into very pure latin.

Of new books which move to a good and virtuous life, we have but too few,
and can never have too many: but of such as follow their own fancies in
showing forth their wandering imaginations, we have too many, and J wish we
had none at al, scribimus indocti, doctique. Good and learned men are not only
otherwise employed, but also greatly discouraged: For when they set forth any
notable book of Divinity, Humanity, or any of the Sciences to help and
benefit us and our posterity, it is in no request, except it be to stopp
mustard potts, or wrap up Groasers ware in. The reason is because every
Stationers shopp, stal, and almost every post of the City gives
aduertisme^t of a new toye, which oftentimes intercepteth the virtuous
disposition of such as were willing to buie good books. Which makes me to
praise the Phaeton up on earth, and the firebrand of the whole world Caligula,
causing such Aquino's, Caesio's and Volusio's to abolish and deface their writs
with rods, or to fling them into the river. J have written this to show my
self comfortable unto the age wherein J live; yet for my part J wish that the
ancient Jndian custom were renewed in this Contrie, both for expressing of
idle brains empty of al virtue and honesty, and for recompensing of the
Godly and learned writers, But J pray you to forbear those vain, idle,
wanton pamphlets, and lascivious love books, which inflame the concupiscence
of youth: For in my opinion nothing does more corrupt young and tender wits,
then such unsavory and vnseasonnable books, as hurtful to youth, as Machavell
to age. Be not allured by their fine phrases, inkehorne terms, swelling
words, bumbasted out with the flocks and scuming of sundry strange languages:
they will tie you in the fetters of lust, and keep you in the thoughts of love;
they are like an Apoticaries gay box, painted without and full of poiso^; they
have glorious outsides, and goodly titles, but within they are full of strong
venom: while the mind is occupied in such toies, the common enemy of man
kind, does secretly lull the soul in security: they are like fauning
curres, which never bark til they bite. Some me^ are so charmed with these
Sirens and Circes potions, that they spend their whole life in vain reading of
them, because they see in these books, as in a looking glass, their own
conditions, sucking in such fragments as fit their humors. Unto such readers
Pythagoras reproach against a lewd fellow may be well applied, that it is no
marvel that swine delight more in dirt then in p^re and clean water, which J
council you ever to drink, and to employ your reading upon good and profitable
books, making your use of them in this sort.

Chapt. 8. How ye should make good use of your reading, and judge of books.
Having made choice of good books, consider, when you begin to read every one
of them, of what profession the author was, and whether his subject be taken
out of his own profession, that is, as the learned say, if he has written
Dogmatically. For there are three ma^ners of writing which you must observe in
reading al books, Dogmaticke, Ethicke, and Elenchticke. The first sort is,
when every man contains himself within the limits of his own profession,
as when a scholar writes of learning, and a soldier of wars, when a
Grammarian writes of Grammar, etc. As Apelles said every skilful man must be
best believed in his own profession and trade. Al Aristotle's works,
Hippocrates, Galens, Ciceros, Euclides Elements, and such like, are esteemed
Dogmaticall, unto the which I may add al histories, because al
Historiographers are tied to write according to the truth, as al other writers
are bound to observe the rules and principles in that Science which they teach.

Wherefore by reason al things written in this kind, are easy to be judged by
the proprieties, causes, rules, and principles of the discipline, I will only
advise you to observe these few things in reading of any history, which is
more difficult. The authors profession, if he be a school man and medleth
only with schoole-learning, as humanity and Philosophy, note chiefly his fine
style, and eloquent speech; if he be a Divine remarke church government,
Ecclesiasticke matters, marriages, and such like things as principalie
appertain to Theology: if he be a Lawyer learn the controversies of the
points in Law, the establishing of states, and policies: if he be a Physician,
believe him best, when he speaks of the temperature of the air, of health,
of the complexion of Princes, of their hurts and sicknesses: If he be an
Ambassador pry into his practicks, his intelligences, and fashion of
behavior: If he be a man of war, observe chiefly the exploits whereat he
was present himself, and things of warfar: If the author be a Courtier, you
shall learn fashions and ceremonies. But of whatsoever vocation the author be,
I council you to esteem most of such Historiographers, which have had least
passions and partiality, and the best means to discover the truth, either in
being there themselves in person, or having certain intelligence from them
that were present, and are men of faithful and sincere judgment, speaking
without affection. Be not of too quick a belief, nor too incredulous, least
ye take copper for gold, falsehood for truth, or profit not a whit at al. For
many historiographers, through ignorance, hatred, covetousness, and favor of
such great Personages, as gave the^ pensions, have colored their lying, and
disguising, under a belief they had, that few should have bin able to discern
their cousenings: they have named sundry men wise, prudent, and valiant, which
indeed have bin most wicked, foolish, and ignorant, which ye are able to
discover easily in prying narrowly into their pretexts, cloakings, and
occasions.

The second sort of writings respect only the circumstances of time, place,
and person, like a Lesbian rule, applying al things more to a glorious show of
Ethick, figurate, and allegorical words, then to any Dogmatical doctrine. Such
are many books of Plato, Lucians Dialogues, and compositions of Orators, and
Poets, tending rather to pleasure then profit.

Apply not your judgment in judging such kind of books by considering the
whole book together; but as one who buyeth a cloak, takes it first al a
sunder, and beholds every part thereof by it self; so examine the principles
and causes of your book a part. Because the method of judging must be
according to the manner of invention: and if the principles which ye consider
separatly do agree with the rules of that Art, from which they proceed, and
chiefly with the final cause thereof, doubtlesly they will appear far fairer
and better then if ye judged of all the book together. For as the Colossus in
Rhodes was more marvelous lying low upon the ground, then when it stood up, in
respect every finger thereof appeared greater then all the rest of the images: so
does the perfect observation of the principles and causes of any work breed
a great contentment and pleasure unto the reader.

I am so afraid of Poesy, that I dare not counsel you to read much thereof
privately, it is so alluring, that whosoever is not aware, shall be enchanted
by this minister of voluptuousnes, and so intised, that he will have none other
delight, then to lie sleeping in pleasure; use it therefore only as a
recreation after your serious studies, as that famous ancient writer advises
you, fas est carmine remitti, non dico continuo and longo (id enim perfici nisi
in otio non potest) sed hoc arguto and brevi, quod apt quantaslibet occasiones
curasque distinguit.

Of these two is composed the third manner of Elenchticke writing, which
consists in refuting of false doctrine and confirming the truth with
Rhetorical flowers, as Aristotle wrote against his preceptor Plato, after his
own and Socrates example, that wrote against the old Sophists, as Julius
Scaliger has imitated them al three in writing against Cardanus. In such
writings beware to take that which is Ethicke, to be Dogmatical, otherwise ye
may fall into error, as many do, taking Quid pro Quo.

Now for the due consideration in particular of every book, begin in reading
as ye were taught in hearing, at the Compend of the whole book, which is the
Epistle or preface made of purpose and dedicated unto you, to the end ye may
have a general or confused notio^ thereof, as a man has in his mind or table
book of the way, when he goes from London to Edinbourgh, and as he learneth
the way in going and knows every city and town more distinctly then
before, so shall you understand your authors meaning the better and more
plainly.

To judge aright of any man's work, consider his method, and good order, which
well observed is able to turn an abject matter into fine gold as Mercuries rod
did, or to give light unto the wise reader like Tyanaeus his stone called
Pantaura, albeit the ignorant remains in blind darkness and obscurity.

But because it is more easy, (...), to reprove then to imitate, and that the
Poets fable of Momus was never more true, then now, when there can be nothing
done so perfectly but some Zoilus or other will spit out a part of his gale
against it, never taking heed unto the authors intention whom they reprove and
detract, I desire you that are aethaeria^s and should be of a more gentle
nature, never to imitate Homers Lamia, in killing with a Basilisks eye, or
biting with a venomous tongue other men's labors; which vice proceeds of a
weakness in judgment and an uncharitable heart, that is not able to discern
that every man does his best, and that one man's fault is an other man's lesson,
as Aristotle says of the errors amongst the ancient Philosophers, which made
the Musicia^ to send his Scholars to hear the harsh harmony of his neighbor:
Pro captu lectorum, and habent sua fata libelli. Imitate Socrates, whose
censure being required of an unlearned book, answered, that he thought those
things, which he understood not, as good and worthy of commendation as those
which he understood: thus do al wise learned men. And albeit learned men would
reject any book, do ye not so, because they do it, but rather search
curiously to know the reasons why they do so. I reco^me^d this point chiefly
unto your memory and observation, as guilty of mine own weakness, Nec enim
Dij sumus. But especialie speak never in dispraise of dead men's works: for as
Planeus says well in Pliny; nulli nisi laruae cum mortuis colluctantur.

I wish you in reading, for the exercising of your own judgment and confirming
your memory, ever to make some short annotation upon the margent of your
book, and after you have ended the whole book, begin at your first annotation
to write the words of your author into a BOOK OF COMMON PLACES, if the author
be methodicall. But if his work be a Rapsodie, without any coherences of the
parts thereof, as Critical and law books are, coppie out your observation in
your reading. This did Aristotle in his 8. books of Topics, whom Cicero
imitated in making a book of common places unto Trebatius the lawier; and
many learned men have followed both their examples, as Valerius Maximus. A.
Gellius, Macrobius, Alexander ab Alexandro, Adrianus Turnebus in his store
house of al humane learning, called Adversaria, and now every man almost.
Albeit this council appear somewhat paineful, yet the profit thereof is able to
recompe^se the pain a thousand fold. For herafter when ye shall have use of
these Maxims, either in state matters, Policy, or any particular affair,
they are in readiness. Durum nimis est, cum sitis fauces tenet, puteum fodere.

Finally as the Persians always meditated upon every matter of importance, as
in making of wars, peace or truces, in marrying their daughters or any such
like thing, a day before they speak of it: so I council you to meditate
well after ye have Hard, or Read any lesson. For meditation is the fountain
of al good council and wisdom, the rule of al affaiers, the mother of al
learning, and in a word, the engenderer of al virtue.

And after ye have meditated well upon that you have read, confer thereof with
some better scholar the^ your self, who is able to lift up your imaginations,
and by an honest emulation, jealousy, glory and contention of honor will mount
you above your self. To show how profitable this concluding council is, I need
neither allege the ancient Athenian, nor Roman custo^e of this in their
Academies seeing their footsteps remain at this present in Italy which thereby
surpasses us in wisdom and policy.

Wherefore for your better perfection by frequenting such men of merit, I will
lead you out* the best way I know to converse with the world in showing you
your dutiful behavior in all honest companies whersoeuer you shall come.

TO THE TWO MOST VIRTUOUS, and wel-learned young Gentlemen. Mr. FRANCIS
STEWART, Master of Mourray. And to Mr. JOHN STEWART Son to the DVKE of LENNOX
his GRACE.
NOble Sirs whom to can this part of Institution, having Virtue for chief
Object, so rightly appertain, as to either of you two, who are no less
virtuous, then learned? Why then will some say, should I join two so worthy
Gentlemen in one so unworthy a dedication? But why rather think they, that I
should separate the^, who are no ways nearer united in kind, the^ always ever
in kindness? So if I were but to name the one, surely I should intend the other:
but intending this dedication to two, I could not but name both. Adioine then,
I exhort you, these my mean practices unto those good grounds of virtuous
speculations ye have both so happily laid, and continue in your study of
Philosophy (as Cicero said in great commendation of Cato the second) non ita
disputandi causa, sed ita viuendi. In so doing you shall shine in virtue like
the two Cherubims placed respective mutuallie on the top of the propitiatory,
and shall show your selves not mere and ordinary agents, but that ye are worthy
patterns propounded unto others Imitation.

To both your worships humbly devoted I. C.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF NOBLE Institution, containing young Noble men's Duty in
their Civil conversation.
The Summarie
IT is not the disputing that Moral Virtue is in the mind of man by habit, and
not by nature: nor that it is an Act, power, or a Science, as is taught in the
Schools, which is able to make a man Virtuous, and civil in conversation: but
it is practicing that doctrine in freque^ting the world, as Aristotle himself
teaches very Arist. Eth. 8. c. 6*
well. Wherefore propounding for the principal or last end of my pains, that
you, for whose cause I have undertaken this labor, should be as virtuous and
civil in your behavior, as book-learned, I add unto the Theoricke of your
study a particular practice of good ma^ners; without the which all that you can
learn, seems to be no better then a fair and beautiful Image without life
and motion. To proceed with good order in such an unbeaten path I cannot
follow a better guide then the 4. Cardinal Virtues, Prudence, Justice,
Temporance, and Force: for in these four consists the whole Duty of man's
life. Prudence properly is exercised in Affairs, as Justice respects the
Persons in giving every man his due; Temperance and Force are busied about al
good or bad Accidents that can behappen a man. So that in these three,
Affairs, Persons, and Accidents, the whole condition of our life and
conversation is comprised; and they shall make the three principal parts of this
book, after a succinct description of the effects of Virtue and of Vice in
antithesi, that ye may see the difference between well and evil doing.

Chap. 1. A comparison between the effects of virtue, and those of vice.
Virtue which Plato describes Plat. in ^^non.
to be a perpetual harmony of our afections, by reason* is a pearl and a
precious Jewel so rare and excellent, that it can nether be sufficiently
commended, nor worth^ly esteemed: al huma^e things do fail and decai^: virtus
clara aeternaque habetur. Virtue only remains for ever, an honor for youth,
a crown for age, a comfort in prosperity a succor in aduers^^e: delightful
at home, not burdensome abroad. Virtue can never suffer shipwrak or be burnt
into ashes no more then the Roman Syndon; yea not so much, as appears by
Aristippus his shipwreck, and Stilpon's courage at the burning of his City
Megara, by Demetrius.

Virtue is so pleasant to him that has once attained unto her, not only by a
firm hope of life to come, but also in her admirable and glorious effects in
this world: that the pleasure surpasses far the pains, which any man can
endure to search ster her.

A man endued with reason is able to suffer patiently the rack the genne, and
al sorts of torments, and to comfort himself in the midst of his misery,
either by his innocence, or by the displeasure of his offense, for which he
feels himself punished, as is evident not only by Ciceros his doctrine, and
Cleomenes his calling out against Theryclon, who councelled him to stab and
kill himself after his overthrowe by Antigonus (a sentence worthy of
observation) but also by Socrates and Se^ecas his patient suffering of death.
Reason stays the mind to complain, as the hand stops the mouth to cry.

The one lifts up a man's mind in all pureness, innoce^cie and sincerity unto
the heavens, like the true daughter of light, as Empedocles calls her.

There is truly I know not what kind of congratulation, of well doing (which
rejoices us) in our selves, and a generous ^ollitie that accompaneth a good
conscience. It is no small pleasure for one to feel himself preserved from the
contagion of an age so infected as ours, and to say to himself, could a man
enter, and see even unto my soul, yet should he not find me guilty, either
of the aflictio^ and ruin of any body, nor culpable of envy and revenge, nor
of publik offense against the laws, nor tainted with innovation, trouble or
sedition; nor spotted with falsifying my word. I have always lived upon my
own, nor did I ever make use of any poor man's labor without reward. These
testimonies of an unspotted conscience are very pleasing.

PLutarke one the other part, and daily experience teaches us, that vice is
more hidious and ougly, then any man is able to conceive in mind, much less
express with hand: It is an unpleasant walking mate in company every where;
because it is praesumptuous and does nothing but lie. At table it is a glutto^,
as in the bed it is very troublesome, and full of grief, sorrow, and sin,
pricking a man's conscience, and always breaking him of his swetest repose.

Where vice is a perfect worker of iniquity it wrapeth a man into al kind of
miseries, and brings desolatio^ in this life, and privation of life to come,
as it turned Nebuchadnezar, Daniel. 4. Metamor. 4.
who was a man, yea a King into an ox, Therses inan hogg: Acteo^ into a stag
etc

But if vice dwell in place of virtue, ye cannot see or imagine on action in a
man's manners, where this tyrant reigns not absolutely: It is imposible to
keep a furious man that he break not forth into an heap of injuries and
dispites against his persecutor: or Cicer. 5. Tusc. Plu^. in Cl^^^
a Russian to hinder himself from speaking bandily, or aflatterer from making,
false and light promises: insomuch that vice forces the mind more which it
possesses, then compulsion does the body, yea then death it self. D^l^^r^ in
vita Socra^e^.


The other, like the false daughter of darkness, and the diuil, preaches
nothing but the flesh, lust, and the burying of soul and body into an
Epicurean voluptuousnes.

Evil doing leaves as it were an ulcer in the flesh, a repentance in the
soul, which still scratcheth and tormenteth it self: for reason defaceth
other gre^fes and sorrows, but engenders those of repentance: it is the more
irksome, because inward, as the cold, and heat of agues is more offensive
the^ that heat or cold, which comes outward. In a word a mind set one
wickedness, may happily arm it self with security, but she shall never
guerdon her self with this self ioying delight and satisfaction, albeit it
be never so hard lulled a sleep. Therefore I wish you to fly from it and
clean to Virtue in directing your whole thoughts, words, and works, without
al fear trouble, or vexatio^ in mind, unto Gods glory, and your own
salvation.

Chapt. 2. Of Prudence ingenerall.
ALbeit Virtue be ever but one, and always perfectly accomplished in her
self; nevertheless because our imperfection is not able to attain to an
absolute perfection, and that in every good actio^, there appears ever some
particular virtue more eminent, then the rest: so that according to her diverse
proprieties, and different inclinations of the persons, the Philosophers have
divided her into four principal parts, naming them, Prudence, Justice,
Temperance, and Fortitude.

Prudence being the Queen and Sovereign Lady above the rest of the virtues,
with good reason should have the first place, seeing that without her, there is
nothing pleasant, agreeable or well done. She is the salt the seasoning, the
Rule and square of al our actions: She is the eye (as Bias said) that sees al
things past, present, and to come, making her use wisely of all three, in
keeping her self from the snares of her enemy Imprudency, which goes about
craftily to catch her, and to cause her to say shamefully Non putavi.

O dear Prudence, how necessary art thou for our life and conversation! fools
repent that they have not followed thy ways: the miserable are sorry that they
obayed not thy direction; and they who are happy attribute unto thee the virtue
of their co^tentment. It is by thy favor O Prudence (under God) that Kings
reign, that Dominions are established, and Magistrates ordained, and policy
authorized: It was thou that made God give this testimony of the Kingly
Prophet; I have known David the son of Ishai, to be a man according to mine
own heart, in wisdom and magnanimity. Thou 1. Kings. 14. 8. and 15. 3.
causedst this same David to be pleasede with Ionatha^s kindness, and suspicious
of Saul's wickedness. It was thou that placedst Joseph to be a President in
Egypt, Saturnus in Sicilie, Cadmus in Beotia, Triptolemus and Ceres in
Sicilie, Bacehus in the Indies, Ianus in Italy, Pompilius at Rome, and Ulysses
every where. By thy favor Nestor was more esteemed among the Grecians, then the
furious Ajax, yea then the victorious Achilles himself. Contend then al ye
young Nobles to have this Queen for your wife, and a prosperous guide in all
your actions, as well public and common, as particular. She will show you how
to converse abroad in the world, and to behave your selves with your
acquaintance, and familiars at home.

Chapt. 3. Of common behavior toward all sorts of men.
MY first advise and general foundation of all good behavior in conversation
is that you take diligently heed not to make your selves slaves or subject
unto any certain particular humors, which is a token of self love. Whosoever
is thus captive, he must needs suffer much pain. Istud est sapere, qui
vbicunque opus sit, animum possis flectere. It is great wisdom for a man to
accommodate himself and to frame his manners apt and meet for all honest
company, and society of men: as to show himself discreet among the Romans 12.
15. 16.
wise merry with those that are merry: and to mourn with those that mourn, to
yield sound reason in weighty matters, and pleasant conceits in light
trifles. The best wits are most universal, and pliable to al sorts of people.
It is a most rare quality in a Noble man to be common, that makes him imitate
Gods goodness, as it made the Liuius lib. 9.
ancient Cato to be praised, who had a spirit so framed to al things alike, as
if he had only been borne for that, which he went about to do. This makes
those famous captains Epaminondas, Scipio, Laelius, Agesilaus, and Cic. 2. de.
^rator A^lian. varia histor. 12. 15.
the Corypha^s of Sages amongst the heathen to be no less renowned for their
dancing, singing, gathering of cockles, and riding upon a staff with young
children, then for their glorious victories in the wars. This is in some
manner the Phyronian Ataxaxie, the Academicke Neutralitie or Indifferency,
whereof proceeds Pythagoras his sovereign good, and Aristotle's Magna nimitie
to admire or wonder at no thing.

Nil admirari prope res est v^a Numici, Hor. 1. epist. 6.

Solaque quae possit facere and servare beatum.
Is it not a strange thing to see a man that had rather imprison himsele in the
bonds of his own corrupt affections, then to live at liberty, and to be able
to behave himself alike every where. Surely we may cry out more justly then
Tiberius did, O homines ad servitute^ nati! what wonder is this, that a man will
have his body, his goods, and all that he has at liberty except his spirit,
which is only borne to liberty? He will use that which comes out of all the
coasts of the world for the nourishing or adorning his body, but never make
his mind the better; thinking and saying with the ignorant of his own
village, that all the world cannot afford the like.

Hippomachus knew the good wrestlers only by their going through the street, as
Lysippus carved a Lion, seeing but one foot: so many men seeing you pass by
the^, will conceive presently a good or bad opinion of you. Wherefore ye must
take very good heed unto your feet, and consider with what grace and
countenance ye walk, that ye go not softly, tripping like a wanto^ maid,
nor yet striding with great long paces, like those Rhodomonts and Kings in
Stage-plaies. Walk man-like with a grave civil pace, as becomes one of your
birth and age. Away with all affectation, either in hanging down your head, as
Alexander did, or stooping for greater comlines, or bending your body backward.
Many are so monstrous in their manner of going, that they must needs either
be nodding with their head, shaking of their shoulders, playing with their
hands, or capering at every step with their feet, rouling from side to side,
like a Turkey Cock. As they go through the streets, ye shall not see them go
forward one step, without looking down to the rose upon their shoes; or
lifting up their hand to set out their band, as if it were in print; or setting
up the brimme of their hat, or doing some such apish toy: whereof I counsel you
to beware, if you would not be mocked with them.

Be lowly and humble unto al men, and the greater your quality is, the more
honorable shall your humility be unto your self: which advise I recommend so
much the more, because I see so many of our young Nobles deceive themselves
herein, thinking that we are bound to respect and honor them in all devotion
and service, and that they are not tied to any reciprocal courtesy, as if it
were possible that they could stand of themselves, and uphold their Imaginary
and fantastical greatness without us. For my part I can neither honor nor
respect such persons, that think us obliged to their favor, if they answer
the humble affection of a Gentleman, or any other man of merit, with a sign
of their eye, or a nod with their head. The dogs of Corinth barked ever against
the proud and glorious folks, and fawned upon the humble: The Thracians
contemned Lysimachus his pride, and Demetrius his unsupportable vanity. Marcus
Antonius his disdeining of the Romans brought him unto such an end, and was
the chief cause of his ruin. Many there be, who dissemble their disdain
unto a fit occasion to pay you home again with profit, and to render you the
like with advantage. And seeing it is not comely to see a young Gentleman hold
continually his neck stiff, neither turning his head this way or that way
to look upon those who salute him, no more the^ Consta^tius the Emperor did,
who would not once swaie with his coach, I advise you to look upon those who^
ye salute, modestly in the face: for those halfcaps and salutations which you
make for fashion sake, turning your head to the other side, take no effect.

A facil access and a gracious countenance engenders a great favor in every
man's mind toward you: and there is nothing that wins so much with so
little cost, whereas when ye study to mainetaine a counterfeit gravity and a
grimme countenance, as if ye were a Senator of Venice, then every body
flies and fears to have any thing to do with you, more then with so many
Menedemi and Demeae. Therefore study to show your selves Mitiones with a full
persuasion, Terent. Act. i. 4
Facilitate nihil homini esse meltus. It is not thank worthy to have your
door open to admit a man in your chamber and to keep your countenance shut to
receive him: So we see Atticus before the first view between Caesar and
Cicero, did seriously advise Cicero touching the composition, and ordering of
his countenance and gesture.

To conclude this general behavior, me thinks it is a fit and well made
garment of the mind, and should have the conditions of a garment, viz. that it
be made in fashion, that it be not too curious, but shaped so, that it may set
forth any good making of the mind, and hide any deformity: and above al, it
ought not to be too strait by reason of exercise or motion.

Chapt. 4. Of your behavior at Court.
IT is a token there is small courage in a Noble man, when he is neither known
of his Majesty, nor of his Highness by name or person, which moves me to
appropriate the first Chapter of special and limited conversation unto your
behavior here, as the principal, and chiefest private company, that any man
can be in. For I may more properly call it the Epitome of the general, in
respect that a man may learn here within the circuit of their Majesty's
palaces, that which many men wander through the whole world to see.

Your first duty therefore in presenting your self in either of their
presence is, to bow down unto the ground Genesis 18. 2.
in token of subjection and humility, as Abraham the great Patriarch did unto
his three guests* and as that Mark. 10.
man kneeled, who did meet our Lord Jesus. And that the best of you should
not refuse it, look to a Kings 2. King. 2. 19.
own example, who rose from his throne to meet B^thsheba, 1. Sam. 25. 24.
and bowed himself unto her: so did Abigal light of her Ass, and bow her
self to the ground unto David. If example of Kings and other great men will
not humble your heart and your knees: harken how the ancient law Iubemus
commaundes you to do it, verse. L. (...) pr^fess.
Nostram Clementiam adorare iubemus. And in sundry other places the law will
have you adorare, that is, to honor his Majesty, with that submission which
ye use ad orationem, that is, upon the knee. Reason also would teach you this
submission without murmuring. For your life, lands, and goods being subject
unto his power, who should think to refuse kneeling, and chiefly when he
begges or sues for any thing at his Majesty's hands? Aen. 7.


Pars tibi pacis erit dextram tetigisse Tyra^nt. Having thus kissed their
Majesty's hands in all dutiful humility, - gratusque dares cum dulcibus oscula
verbis, J will not council you to sue, to be in their favor, or to creep in to
be a Courtier by flattery as Clesiphon used to do in every thing, so that
when the King had a sore eye, he would put a plaster upon on of his eyes, and
fained to stumble at every bancke, and to halt with K. Philipp; but with
ingenuitie, modest and honest behavior, and diligent attendance. Howsoever
they use you familiarlie, beware of making your selves too homely: contain
your selves within such an uniform respect, and dutiful reverence unto their
sacred person, that they may not judge either by your countenance or actions,
any misbehauiour or vanity; not imitating those, who are ravished and bereft
of their right senses for joy that they have the Kings or Princes ear, gazing
and staring round about them, if any man perceive them to enjoy this
felicity, when they should have their whole mind fixed and bent to hear their
Majesty's, and to bethink themselves of an wise answer. If ye see that you
are in favor and credit with them, and that you have a more free access unto
either of them then others, who perhaps are a good as your selves or better, be
not a whit the more proud and disdaineful, but behave your selves so
discreetlie, that when you find any of them in your way, you pass not by them
with state, but saluting and entertaining them most curtuously, by little and
little, withdraw your selves, as if they took no notice.

I wish you not only to show your selves courteous toward your companions,
but also to every honest man of good deserts. Albeit his coat be not so gay,
nor revenues so great as yours; perpaps his merits are better, and his wisdom
greater, and when occasion is offered, will be more able to discharge a good
piece of service to his Prince and Country: for Fortune is blind, and knows
not upon whom she bestows her goods. If you have on of your nearest friends,
that is a great courtier, bragg not with a disdain of others: labor rather to
gain al their favors and love; otherwise at the change of court (cloak your
pride never so well under a fained and crafty humility) they will reject you
with contempt. Whereby remembering with my self that the Image of Fortune was
made of glass, to represent unto us her fragilitie, and that the favor of
Princes ebbeth and flows; J desire you to behave your selves so modestly,
that nether your advancement may be envied, nor your debasing laughed at. Winn
to your selves the love of al men, while your favors are prosperous; and
chiefly if you be raised by his Majesty, and borne of mean parentage.
Remember Archidamus his answer unto Philip after his triumph at Cheron, that
if he would measure his shadow, he should not find it an ^aires breadth
bigger, or longer then it was before his victory. Read also Crinitus his fable
between the little gourd, and the Crinitus li. 2 de honesta disciplina. c. 14.
lege etiam Guicciar^ de Embl. Alcia^ 124. Li^iu^ 35. Justin.
great pine tree, together with Horace his 4. Epod. unto Maena Pompeius his
freeman. Imitate the Romans according to Scipio's saying: who used, neque si
vincantur animos minui, neque si vi^cant secundis rebus insolescere: Or else
Philip his example, after he had wholly overcome the Athenians: Nec tamen
amicis visusest exultasse (says the Latin historia^) nec inimicis in
sultasse. Jn prosperity and adversity they behaved them selves always alike.
Which a generous and Noble courrage should ever do. For to be dejected and in
little favor with his Prince, should noe more break a corragious and valiant
heart, then those rods hurt the Noble Persians skins, which whipped their
clothes in steed of their bodies. A generous spirit will resist al encounters as
constantly, as the Rocks do the waves of the great and tempestious Ocean: Yea a
virtuous mind is able to draw consolation and contentment out of al these
discontents and miseries, as the Be sucketh honey out of time, which is bitter
unto our taste. J end therefore with that golden sentence of Euripides, so much
used among the Latin Poets* as worthy to be printed in all men's breasts.

Quicquid erit superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. Aen. 5
Chapt. 5. The manner of reverence making.
SAlutation is the first point of courtesy in our private conversation, which
now is become so full of ceremony and vanity, that it is very difficult to
give any advise herein, the world is so blinded with these complements, false
offers, and promises of service, with hyperbolical and hypocritical praises to
every man's knowledge, as well his that hears and receaueth them, as his that
presents them. It is like an agreement made between them, every one to mock
and scoff at an other, and yet to say, I thank you Sir for your courtesy,
when he never believes one word of al, more then the other thinks he does.
This is the wisdom of the world to the hurt of conscience, and oftentimes to
the hurt of health, and hinderance of their business. It is one of the Courtiers
miseries, who are Jdolaters of Ceremony. J confess that you must conform
your selves somewhat unto the world, and that which commonly is used, but J
wish ye performed it in such a generous and free manner, that every man may
know ye can use al these vain complements and ceremonies, but that ye will
not be bound to do them, or make your judgment and will slaves unto such
vanity: that ye omit to do the^, not for ignorance or disdain of others; but
that ye account no more of such vanity then ye should do; that ye are able
to lend your selves so^etime unto the world, but never to give your selves
wholly to it. If my advise could serve any thing at al to amend such abuses,
and those apish toies of bowing down to every man's shoe, with I kiss your
hands Sir, and I am your most humble servant, I would retain either our good
old Scottish shaking of the two right hands together at meeting with an
uncovered head; as we learned first of the ancient Trojans Aeneas, and his
company, as we may read in many places of Virgill.

Accepitque manu, dextramque amplexus inhaesit. Aen 8.
Or else if the French fashion please you better, I wish that ye kept the old
manner also (for we have too many Caesar in morib Gallorum 6.
new French toies) which was thus: adorando totum corpus circumagebant, dextram
ad osculum referebant, genu te^us manu demissa.

The uncovering of the head which is common to the^ both and first to be
observed, signifies that we will obey his commandments, and yield him al
authority over us, we honor him so much. The bowing of the knee declares that
we submit our selves unto him, and that we will not remain equal, but will
humble, and make our selves inferior: for which cause we kiss our hand, and
put it unto his knee, as unto the place of honor, whereupon we place the
affection of our reverence, and also to stay him, as it were, through
courtesy, not to bow himself unto us. But when we join hands together, it
is a token of friendship, as appears by Caius Popilio, who refused Antiochus
hand, and many other Val. Max. 6. 4. Cor. Taci.. Ann. 2. Justin. ^1 Caesar. 2.
and 7. de bello Gal^ic^ Aen. 3.
such examples. When the superior presents his hand unto the inferior, he
gives him an assurance of his good will, and a token of his favor, as Virgil
testifies, -- dextram, haud multa moratus
Dat ^uveni, atque animum presenti pignore firmat.
And the inferior receiving the superiors hand, and offering him his own,
would say thus much unto him, by this little part of my body I make you master
of the whole; as Lawyers in giving an handful of ground put a man in possession
of the whole peace. It is also a sign of childrens affection toward their
father, when they give their hands.

-- dextrae se parnus Iulus
Implicuit, sequiturque patrem non passibus aequis. Aen. 2.

For my part I think that an handful of our old friendship, is worth a whole
armeful now, as we use to embrace in our common salutations: whereof I can
render no other reason, but custom. Howsoever it be I wish you to observe one
of these three manners of salutatio^; yet with diversity, according to the
dignity of the person: for if you omit them al, it is an evident token of
little good will toward your friend or acquaintance, and in place of amity,
enimitie will take possession.

Chapt. 6. Unto whom you should give place of Duty.
OVid in marrying Reverence with Honor, in these Fast. 5.
few verses, Donec Honor, placidoque decens Reuerentia vultu, etc. teaches us,
that the one can never be without the other, no more then a woman can be a
wife without her husband: and that ye should honor those unto whom ye do
Reverence, and by consequence ye shall be honored your selves. For honor is
like a man looking in a glass, or a shadow, that flies from him that
follows it, and follows him that flies from it: so that it is not in his
hand who is honored, but in the hearts and opinion of other men, who either
have seen his merits, or heard of his renown, and good reputation, albeit
they be distant many thousand miles from him. He therefore that would be
honored, let him honor others, as Caesar, who to maintain his own Image,
erected and conserved very curiously that of Pompeius, whom he hated mortallie
(as al men know.)

On the other side, I wish you who are honored, to refuse it modestly, and to
refer it back again unto the honourer: which shall increase your honor the
more. Vterque pari cupiditate diverso itinere ad gloriam conte^det; P lin.
sec^^d^^
alter dum expellet debitos honores, alter (...) ^fferet. Least ye should
pretend some excuse hereafter, by reason of ignorance in these ceremonies; I
desire you to consider well the most honorable places, and unto what persons ye
are bound of duty to give them: Who may rightly challenge them to your
dishonor, as ye dishonor your selves always, when ye take place above your
betters.

I think the first place in all companies the most honorable, according to
Caesar's wish, that desired rather to be first of a Village, then second at
Rome. My reason is, that another man's precedence is troublesome unto us, when
we stand, and hinders our sight, as when we sit we would have elbow room.
But what needs reason, when the holy Scriptures verify, that the first Math
20. Mark 9. Luke 20. 11.
place is most honorable, in condemning a too great desire thereof, among the
Apostles themselves?

Yet I am not so forgetful, but that in Scotland we esteem the midst the most
honorable place, after the old custom of the Medes, when there stands three
or more together; and thereof may be alleged some reason. Because he who is
in the midst, hears the company best, and is best heard of them when he
speaks: and I think it may be accounted also the most honorable place when
we sit at table, if we will believe Virgill, who discharging the duty of a
Master of Ceremonies, placed Dido in the midst of the table, in that feast
which she made unto the Trojans.

-- aulaeis ^am se Regina superbis Aen. 1.

Aurea composuit sponda mediamque locavit.
But to know the first and most honorable place in walking in a chamber or hal,
I think the nearest place to the fire in winter, and the air in summer is the
first so that the door be before his face, whom you would honor. For the
person honored, should see before he be seen, least he be taken unawares as
Maeris was.

Quem lupi videre priores. Virgi^. Eclog. 9
And as in saluting, or meeting with a friend, his right hand lies to your
left: so in a house that place which is at your left hand in your entrance, and
so consequently going through the whole house, is to be accounted the most
honorable place; as we see the like in a coat of arms, or in the leaf of a
book, the heaven, and al other things; their right side is ever toward our
left hand. In like manner in going or standing in the street, the wall is
thought the most honorable place, (if the street be not rigged) as drawing
nerest to the principle of honor, which are the houses. But if there be two in
company, always give the right hand unto him, who^ ye would honor, as
submitting your selves.

Now as for those persons unto whom, (as I said) ye must of duty give these
places of honor, know that a private person is bound to honor those who are
public, and in office, both by Gods law and man's law. Sunt enim vindices
iniquitatis. After this consideration the father should give place unto the
son as Pha^orinus the philosopher says, and the express A. Gell. ff. ad S.
Tr^bel. 13. 14.
law commands: nam quod ad ^us publicum pertinet, no^ inspicitur* patria
potestas. The son should go before his father, and if he do not, thinkinge
to show himself modest, he wrongeth the public, whose authority and person
he represents. Whosoever would be confirmed by example, let him read how
Fabius Maximus his son (who doubtless was well acquainted withal the points
of honor) caused his father to alight of his horse: and consider the old man's
ioieful words, for his son so doing. And Jwish him to read that roial act of
the worthy States man Don. John King of Arragon, father unto Don* Ferdinando
King of Castile: who meeting together at an asse^bly in Victoria, would not
suffer his son to kiss his hand, nor yet to give him the upper hand at their
going through the City; and as he peceaued his son melancholy for the
matter, Son (said he) you who are the chief and Lord of Castile, whereof we
are descended, should accept of us that honor, reverence, and service, which
appertains unto you: in respect that our duty toward you, as our King and
superior, is far above that, of the son unto the father.

Whereby we may gather, that not only a private person, should give place
unto the public, but also, that antiquity is to be observed in precedencie;
for he gave place not only unto his sons superiority, but also unto the
antiquity of his crown, they being both Kings: so that you see that Noble men
of the most ancient house, yet younger of years should go before those of
later standing, albeit the persons themselves be elder of age, otherwise
althings would grow in to a confusion, and disorder; every man thinks
himself as worthy of the first place, as another. I see noe reason, why one
whose predecessors have maintained their Nobility, with virtue and honor, and
have passed through so many encumbrances of fire, sword, wars, and the
changes of Fortune, yea that have stood stoutly and fought against Time (which
consumes and deuoureth al things) keeping ever his ensign in his hand, should
not have precedence and place of honor before him that is but a young
soldier, and has not almost been at one skirmish. Nature sometime forces and
employeth her whole strength in the bringing forth of a rare spirit, who shall
have no brothers or sonns like unto himself. She had lead her rest al at that
time: or else a man might have performd some on generous and valiant act,
whereby he may merit to be made Noble, and al his life time after do nothing
worthy of his* Nobility. As for example Manlius Capitolinus Linius lib. 6.
saved the Capitol, and did a most excellent act, in delivering Rome from the
French fury, but there was al his virtue, as was evident by his fall from the
place of his honor.

Vinite falices* quibus est fortuna peracta
Iam sua; nos alia ex alijs in fat^ vocamur. Aen. 3

Nevertheless I would council you that have the prerogative by right, that you
refuse it ever with modesty. For it is a great wrong to use always the
rigor, and extremity of your right, according to the common sentence in Law
schools, s(...) ius s^mma iniuria: so that you turn your right into a wrong,
if ye accept it always, and that prerogative which ye had before, by
antiquity of race, by vain glory contrary to al honor is changed into an
injury: which oftentimes cannot be satisfied, but by the law of arms.

My last advise in this point is, that ye honor strangers, and those whom ye
invite, or that come to visit you in your houses, if their quality be not
too far inferior to yours: I need no other law or reason to establish this
council, then his Majesty's most wise and skillful example, which may stand
for an infallible rule unto your posterity in the duty of ceremonies. He most
honorably (as ye did al hear or see) entertained the King of Denmark,
always giving him the upper hand, as in that glorious going through the
City of London the last of July. 1606.

Chapt. 7. How a Noble man should speak.
Hitherto I have showed you all the parts and members of courtesy, but as a
dead man, or as a bare Anatomy, consisting of bones and sinews; and therefore
now we must put a spirit and life into them, to move al those parts in co^ly
order, which is speech. Without this al your courtesies and reuere^ces, are but
shadows and pictures. Speech is the image of the mind, and messenger of the
heart, whereby all that is within a man shows it self. Therefore Socrates said
unto the child, Loquere vt te videam* speak that I may know thee. As we judge
of metals by the sound: so do we best discern of a man by his speech* --
sonat vitium percussa maligue
Respondet viridi non cocta fidelia lim^. Pers. 3.

Of all the parts of the body, which appear unto us outwardly, the Tongue is
nearest to the heart by the roots, so speech follows next unto the thought:
for of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. When you have saluted
your friend, I mean not that ye should stand still dombe, admiring his or
your own brave clothes, as the Peacocke does his fair feathers, or to beat
your boots with a rod, bite your nails, chew a tooth-picker, and talk only
of your horses, hounds, of your losses at dice or cards or any such common
place. But I would have you to speak, yet little, and well. I desire you to
speak little, because, as ye shut your eyes, when ye would hit the mark, to
gather and collect together your visual spirits that are dispersed abroad
otherways: so does our mind scatter it self in many words, and by silence
becomes more prudent. For this cause Nature has doubled the organs of the
four other senses, and given us but one tongue, and that enclosed within the
teeth and lips, between the brain and the heart, serving as their trunchman,
having above it the instruments of all the rest of the senses; to the end it put
forth nothing before it take counsel of the said senses; and of the
understanding and reason, placed within the brain. Therefore Homer had good
reason to esteem Menelaus, Nestor and Ulysses: who were slow to speak, to be
the wisest among all the Graecians, as he accounted Thersites their fool for
his babbling.

Your quality being above the common, I wish that your speech were also not
popular; and with foolish affectation and verbal pride, not full of triuial
words, but plain and perspicuous, as flowing from a natural fountain of
eloquence; not Pedantike or full of ink^horne terms: but souldier-like as
Sueton says Caesar's was. Suet. Tranq. in vita Julii.
For the armor that glister for brightness, besides that they hurt as well as
the rustie, they dazell the sight also: so an eloquent speech is understood as
well as the common talk of the village, and pearceth and persuades the heart
of the hearer besides.

-- Veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saeuitque animis ignobile vnlgus: Aen. 1.

Iamque faces and saxa volant: furor arma ministrat.
Tum pietate gravem, ac merit is si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent: arrectisque auribus astant.
Ille regit dict is animos, and pectora mulcet.
Wherefore if Nature have denied you a tunable accent, study to amend it by
art the best ye may: and to put a distinction between your discourses and a
Scythians, a Barbarians, or a Goths. For it is a pity when a Noble man is
better distinguished from a Clown by his golden laces, then by his good
language.

Speak not al alone, nor interrupt not others in their speech: but hear
patiently awaiting your turn. For a man of understanding is cold in spirit,
and there is Prou. 29. 20.
more hope of a fool (as the wise man says) then of a man hasty in his words.

Forasmuch as Speech is only an instrument, whereby we communicate our wills and
thoughts unto others, I desire that it be always true. For as Democritus said,
speech is but a shadow of the effect, as if he would have said, that it
ought simply to follow the plain meaning. And the Divines upon the 32. Psalm
and other places show that the Analogy of this word speak in the Hebrewe
phrase imports a signification both of speaking and thinking; to declare that
we ought not to speak otherways then we think. He that does it betraieth
humane society, and gains for himself never to be believed: which the
Indians perceiving very well, never suffered that man whom they found once to
lie, bear any office amongst them: neither are they worthy to rule in any
commonwealth: seeing when a man lies he loses the form and shape of a man,
and becomes a brut beast, as appears by the image of Pan painted by the
Poets.

Who would not marvel with me to read of those B^hemius hist
men in a South I Will, who had cloauen tongues naturally, whereby as with two
diverse tongues they expressed two diverse conceptions, and would entertain in
speech two men at one time, the one with the right side of the tongue, and the
other with the left: yea answering to the one man's questions, and demanding of
the other, as if the two tongues, had bin in two diverse mouths. But are not
many men in this I Will worse, and more miraculous, that with one tongue will
speak two contrary things? With the upper side of the tongue they will speak
truth, with the lower, lies: with the one part they will profess freindship in
prosperity: with the other hatred in adversity: with the on they flatter,
with the other they calumniate.

I would have you assured and not amazed in your speech, always respecting the
persons with a comely and modest reverence, unto whom you speak. If it be unto
the King or the Prince, then you must double your respect, and have a little
courage, and a firm resolved judgment not to waver in your answers. Call them
al ways by the honorable title of Majesty or Highness, as ye may read that
Abigal called David Lord at every 1. Sam. 25. 24
word: yea fourteen times to gether in that small speech she had with him.

If an ancient grave man speak unto you, or on that is better then your self,
harken unto his words with respect, rather like a Scholar to learn, then to a
companion, whom ye may contradict. But if you speak unto your companion, it
is noe great fault if ye be more familiar, and free in your talk, always
abstaining from mocking and scoffing one at another; which fitteth a fool,
rather then any well nurtred Noble man.

Apply ever your words to the capacity of the^ you speak unto: for I think
he plaieth but the pars of a self conceited fool that shows himself
eloquent to them that understand him not. Sometime a man must seem ignorantt,
hat he may be accounted wise.

Men of quality should never disbase themselves to talk of things done in the
City in the market place, Theoph. Charce
as you may read in Theophrastes, nor speak of trifles and what they have
observed at a play: al these are tokens animi otio abundantis et abutentis.

Be well experienced in things you would speak of: for to talk of wars as
Phormio did in Hanibals presence, or being but a soldier to sound the depth of
Sciences, is always ridiculous. Quite not the honor of a brave Captain to
attain unto the name of a bad Poet as Dionisius did: nor yet being a good
physician seek Plut. in discri. adula^ and amies Aelian. varit hist. 14
not Perianders praise with Archidamus, otherwise you will not be more spared
and free from boys mockes, then Megabisus was in Zeuxes shop.

Nauita de ventis, de ^^uris narret ^rator. Proper. l. 2.

Enumeret miles vulnera, pastor ones.
And so I change words with silence

Chapt. 8 In what things he should keep silence.
ANacharsis the Philosopher considering that a man may utter that which is
unspoken, but cannot call back that which is uttered, ever when he slept held
his right hand upon his mouth, and his left hand upon his privy parts,
thinking that the tongue had need of a stronger stay, and a surer watch then
Nature. Wherefore I think that Pythagoras had good reason to teach his
scholars, first how to be sile^t as Lycurgus commanded the Lacedamonians to
make silence the first lesson for their children. And Epaminondas is Pind.
Is^h. 1.
worthily praised of Pindarus for holding his peace as Zeno did in Athens, and
Damarathus at a great feast. But if you would know how profitable a thing
silence is, and how hurtful prattling has, and ever shall be, read Plutarch his
book of Babbling, his Treatise of Isis and O. siris, his 8. symposiac, prob. 7.
Gell. his 11. book chap. 10 Plin. 3. chap. 5. and 28. together with the 6.
chapt. of Salomons Proverbs, which I leave to your own diligent consideration,
to show you in what matters chiefly you should be silent.

And to begin with Gods own commandment Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain. as commonly Courtiers do tearing and tormenting his
body more grieuouslie in their daily communication then the Jews did in his
passion. They think their speech sauoureth not except it be (as it were)
seasoned with horrible oaths, as by the holy blood of Christ his wounds, his
body, which for our redemption painefully suffered, his glorious Heart as it
were numbles chopped in pieces, and which astonisheth me to write, by Gods
Soul, which is incomprehe^sible and not to be named of any creature without
great reverence. These and such like oaths are their Gunnes wherewith they
thunder out threatening, and terrible menaces, when they are in their fury at
dice, cards or at any other such damnable games. It was not without a mystery
that the rich man's torments are inflicted upon his Luc. 16. Metamor 6
tongue: nether is their any marvel that Prognes tongue was cut out, and
Nicanor's divided in little croomes amongst the birds, and that Senacherib was
cruelly put 2. Kings. 19. Herod. 2. Ephesians. 4. 29. 1. Cor. ^5. 33.
to death by his own children.

Let no corrupted speech proceed out of your mouth nor baudie talk: Evil words
corrupt good manners.

Take heed that you speak not of the state, nor of Statsmen but well to the
purpose, reserving ever more within your breast then you carry upon the the
tip of your tongue. For the contempt of the Magistrate is the Judge. 8.
note of a reprobate. Blaze never any man's secret, nor speak of that which
discretion commands you to conceal, albeit it was not commended to your
silence. And speak never but honorably of those that are dead or abse^t,
albeit many viperous tongues do, like those mastife curre dogs, that are
very keen in tearing a dead boares skine about the gates, which they durst
not look upon when it was alive. Their own deserved commendations are so few,
that they dare not attribute none to any other, but think themselves
disgraced when any is praised. Nether shall you make any report of that which
you hear spoken in any ma^s absence: for the reporter is ever blamed when
there chances any hurt, and often hated by him, whom he thought to have
pleasured by his report; in so much no man desires to hear that which
greeueth him, under whatsoever shadow or appeareance of freindship. Yet if any
word of offense be spoken of purpose, to the end you should advertise your
friend thereof, I advise you to reply presently for him in his absence, and
to defend his quarrel, rather then ye should be a Relator. The best is never
to speak of them that are absent; for sometimes you may praise men without
just desert, or dispraise them, not knowing what they are. As for your self
and your own actions I counsel you never to speak of them, in showing what
dangers, hazardes, and fortunes you have escaped, or what valiant acts you have
performed: for other men perhaps, delight not so much to hear of them, as you
do to talk of Cic. 1. offic.
the^. Deforme est de seip so praedicare, falsa praesertim, and cum irrisione
audientium imitari militem gloriosum. Persius Sa^. 5.


Dicenda tacendaque calls. Chapt. 9. With what company you should converse.
Company changes men's manners, as the fish Li. Plin. 29. 27 Rondelet. 17. 7.
Polypus does her colors, according to the nearest object thereunto. Wherefore
me thinks that Charondas punished justly those for wicked men; whom he found
in bad company. He that touches pitch Eccle. 13. 1.
(says Jesus of Syrach) shall be defiled therewith, and he that keeps company
with the wicked shall hardly escape without blemish, either in life or credit.
Therefore it was not lawful for the Israelits to associate themselves with the
Cananites. And Abraham was commanded Exodus 23. 33.
to depart out of Caldea, Lot and his daughters from Sodom, Genesis 12. Genesis 19.
16.
and the congregation of God from the tents of Corah, Dathan and Abiram. Be
aware then of vicious persons, as pestile^cious creatures: for vices are
plagues whereby vicious persons are infected.

To converse with inferiors, as your conversation breeds contempt, so it
argues a base mind, as though your conceiptes were no better then such
persons deserve to be acquainted withal, except they be endued with some
excellent or rare quality.

Of al men, especially beware of flatterers, as most dangerous and pernicious
to young Noble spirits: for as worms do breed soonest in soft and sweet wood,
so are the most heroical minds soonest abused by these Sycophants and
claw-backs. What marvel is it, since they are more crafty to change themselves
into what they please, then the Egyptian Sophister ever was? They have diverse
manners of baits, so that whosoever can escape their hooks, I hold them to be
wiser, then Plutarchs Sea-mule is crafty. I would to God you could all Plut. in
Indus Anim.
turn your backs against them, as it strikes first the bait with the tail:
Then no Guatho flattering so often with his soothing tongue, no Thraso bragging
so commonly with his brazen face, nor Davus dissembling so continually with his
double heart, could lead you away to your perdition. You would contemn those
Curculions as execrable and odious; these pestilent Parasites and
Platter-friends, should starve for hunger. Consider how dangerous company they
be, by Dionisius example, whom they thrust out of a royal throne to sit in a
base School. Consider how Democlides and Stratocles wracked Demetrius: how
Tarentinus Procudes made Flaminius triumph over K. Phillip: how Andromachus
the flatterer betrayed M. Crassus, and his great army unto the Parthians. Who
doubts but that it was M. Antonius his flattery in stiling Caesar, King, at
the sacrifice of Pan, that gave the first occasion unto Brutus to attempt his
death? A thousand such like examples, which your own observation may afford,
should terrify you from flatterers, who differ thus from a true friend.

Chapt. 10. To know a friend from a flatterer.
When neither the Philosophers profound wisdom Plutarch. Pla^s. Cicero.
could discover, nor the Poets subtle inve^tions find out, or the Orators
eloquence express a flatterers fained, false, and deceiptful counterfeiting of
a friend, I may be condemned of presu^ption, as I am enforced to cry out with
Plautus his Chrysalus: Insanum magnum molior negotium,
Vereorque possim recte vt emolier. Pla^t. in Bach

Their craft, and cunning now a days is so subtle, and ingenious: their
vizards and painted colors are so lively, that it is almost impossible to
discern them before we be deceived. Your flatterer by his countenance, his
behavior, his actions, and words will easily perswad you, that he is your
special and dear friend: he can accommodate, and apply himself wholly to
your pha^tasie, and affection thee will perform unto you many good and
acceptable duties, in endeavoring himself by all appearance to pleasure you,
as any good freinde can do for another* But here are the differences and
disagreeing of his affection from a true freinde his.

Your friend that loves you with a true and faithful affection bears that
same mind toward you in your adversity, that he did in your prosperity: He
is the same man in your sickness, which he was in your good h^alth and always
remains constant.

A freinde follows you not for any respect of lucre or gain.

A friend is like an egg hiding the best in the bottom plus habet in recess^,
qua^ in fro^te g^rit.

Your friend when he is private or in company alone with you or with others is
ever without ceremonies and, goes roundly and squarlie to work, not regarding
whether he have the first or the second room. He cares not so much how to
please you, as how to profit you, referring al his actions and intentions to
your good.

Your friend will ever exhort you to that which is reasonable, honest, and godly.

As the tuner of a Lut will slack some strings, and strain others to make a
sweet harmony, so will your unfeigned friend, praising you in weldoing, not
spareing to reprove you in evil doing: where he sees an Impostume in your
manners, and conversation, he will pearce it, and employ his whole skill to
cure up the wound, which is the esse^tial part of atrue friend, whose bitings
are more tolerable and better then the sweet kisses of a flatterer.

A friend is such in his heart as he appears in action, without al
dissimulation or deceit, loving nothing but honest, faithful, plain, and simple
dealing.

The flatterer will honor, and respect you so long as he sees your fortune in
credit, but when as he perceaueth but the least turning of her wheel, he
staieth no longer, then the swallow does winter, where she had her neast in
summer. He is gone (as we usually speak) as quickly as a mouse from an empty
house.

The flatterer is altogether for his own private commodity and profit.

The flatterer is in shadow and show, and thinks that he has lost his
labor, if he mea^t ever to pleasure you except you know it.

VVher the flatterer shall alwais give you the first place and shall praise you,
studying only how to please your humor without al respect of your profit. Non
imitatur amicitiam sed praeterit. In company he will be jealous if you
entertain any other the^ him self, and ever you shall have him tatling,
something or other in your ear.

The flatterer shall sooth you up in your vain passion and pleasure, and shall
both counsel and lead you to al kind of excess and villainy.

An impudent flatterer will take upon him sometime to perform this duty,
properly appertaining to a true friend he will busy himself to heal the soar,
but only by touching it with the end of his finger, which will canker it, rather
then do it any healpe* He will stumble at a straw (as we say) and leap over a
block, he will tell you of trifles, and small faults, but will dissemble in great
offenses.

Where your flatterer under the appearance of a modest, grave, and holy
countenance, and under the skin of a gentle lamb, shall be full of fraud and
falsehood like the fox. Ill^ nomina mill, mill n^cendi arts.

Wherefore I will only wish you to imitate the Thessalians, who having wone
Melia caused a City named Adulation to be destroyed, hating the very name.

Chapt. 11. How you should love one friend particularly above the rest.
FOr your farther, and greater comfort in this vale of misery, I think it not
sufficient that you can discern a friend from a flatterer, but also I wish you
to elect from amongst the general number of your good friends one especially,
unto whom you may discover and disburthen the most inward griefs of your
mind in time of sorrow: as that you may communicate your pleasure with him in
time of joy, as Alexander did to Ephestion. I would have you to be friends,
non ad aras tantum, as Pericle, was with his familiar, but universally without
al exception, as C. Blosius was unto Val. Max. li. 4.
Tiberius Grac^hus. I wish that ye were so mixed and your minds (as it were)
so melted together, that life, lands, goods, honors, and aduancements were
common unto both, as they were to Damon and Pyth^as: that ye Ibid.
might be two bodies moving, and living by one mind only. As it is hard to
encounter with such a man, (what said I encounter?) naie very hard to find
out such a one after a diligent and curious search; so is it impossible for me
to make you conceive what consolation you shall enioie by his society: there is
no other Phoenix in my conceit. Herein Epicharmus his council is to be
followed, that you shake not hands with every friend in this manner: it is
your self you are seeking, and it is your self, whom you must give away, and
receive. Consider in him, that he be of a peaceable nature, a staide, honest,
discreet, and a free hearted man, before you offer to join friendship with him:
observe also that he be not subject to choler, or passions, inconstant,
suspicious, a great pratler, or a sad minded man. But chiefly be sure that be
a sympathy between your complexions: for where there reigns an antipathie
of manners, the rest is no more able to knit your hearts together, then water is
sufficient to cause lime to stick together without sand.

O how much am I bound to Gods bounty amongst all the rest of his benefits
toward me, in sending me such a friend! (as I wish every on of you to have.)
In the A^n. 5
very first day of our meeting.

-- Quem --
Semper honoratum (si^ Dij voluistis) habeb^,
I found my mind so changed and removed into the place of his, which before
that time was in me. Hitherto I could never excogitate any reason why I
should love him, but Pythagoras his (...), and that he is another my self.
Pers 5.


Non equidem hoc d^bites amborum foedere certo
Consentire dies, and ab vno sidere duci.
It is Gods gracious favor in giving me such a friend, in whom I dare better
trust, and unto whom I dare discover the most secret thoughts of my mind with
greater confidence then I am able to keep them my self. I must confess
ingenuously that as he exceeds me in all virtue and learning, (which the
valiant and wise Lord of Deg^iers knew very well, at our returning from
Dauphine in detaining him against his will) so does he surpass me in love and
affection. Since that day of our parting, my pleasures have augme^ted my
griefs: Nec fas esse vllame voluptate frui
Decrevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps. Terent. Hean. Act. 1.

For we are half in things, and ever shall be Dear B. VVallace! Vt decet, et
certe viuam tibi semper amicus.
Nec tibi qui moritur desinet esse tuus.
Ipse ego quicquid ero cineres interque fauillas,
Tunc quoque non potero non memor esse tui.


Chapt. 12. Of Justice in general.
2 part of duty in co^(...)sation. Xenoph. Cy. 1
CYrus his judgment of the two coats should teach you al to practice Justice
at the Schools, that after, when your authority grows greater, you may
give every man his own, which is the office of this second virtue. If you
learn it in your youth, your tena^ts shall have the greater hope to live
peaceably under you, and that your equity will not commit them unto the mercy
of merciless and unconscionable stewards: that ye will look upon them with
the eye of a pastor and not of a butcher: that your authority shall be their
defense and not their burden: also that you will not mainetaine your servants
or kindred to oppress them. Remember that Astraas head is hid above the
clouds, and not seen with her body, to show you that justice contemplateth
God only without respect of persons.

Chap. 13. How a Nobleman should keep his promise.
THe most disloial, traitorous, and unfaithful men in the world, cannot deny
but that faith is the band of al humane society, and the foundation of al
Justice, and that above al things it should be most religiously kept. N^hil
august^us Fide, qua Just itiae fu^damentum est, nec vlla res vehementius
Rempublica^ co^tinet, and vitam. The authority, puissance, and safty of al
Princes depends upon faith, and promise keepeing. Keep therefore your faith
preciselie, as the only badge, and mark of your honor: for the greater me^
you are, the more are you bound to perform it, in respect your liberty is the
greater in making of it, Wherefore we say that the simple word of a Prince is
as good as a subjects oath.

Many will promise that which they are not able, nor yet willing to perform,
upon hope that something shall happen in the mean time of their delay to excuse
them, or else, when the matter comes to the push, will think to escape by
some bie way* quarunt lat^bras periurio. O deceitful, wicked, and base minded
men, unworthy of the name of Nobles! the cause of many men's wrack to uphold
your false and imaginary credit, and good estimation among men: vox estis
pr^terea nihil, as Lacon said to his Nightingale: Yea worse then enemies in my
conceit. Promise nothing but what you are both willing and able to perform.
For the wise Egyptians used to represent both our speech and justice by the
image of an eye, to signify that our promises and actions should always agree
together. But if you think that you must or would not loose any man's favor in
refusing his request, my next best advise is either to defer your answer unto
another time, that you may have leisure to shun a promise-making; or else, that
you make him one generally in such ambiguous terms, that you be not bound
preciselie and upon your honor to keep it, so that he may take no hold of
your promise, and may imploie some other. Yet I confess, that this is not
nobly, and courageously answered, but such is the merit perhaps of the thing
requested, or else the petitioners impudency and importunity. Howsoever if
you have made promise, for the Lords cause keep it, although it be to your
enemy, as Attillius Regulus, and the Senate of Rome did unto Pyrrhus, who sent
home some prisoners upon the promise of return, and as Pompeius did unto the
Robbers, and Augustus unto Crocotas: yea unto Heretics and enemies of your
religion, not obstant the Jesuits doctrine, Joshua. 9. 20.
and papistical aequiuocation, as Joshua did, showing himself faithful, even
unto the Gabeonits. If the examples of these good men both faithful and heathen
are not sufficient to make you either not promise at al, or else to keep it
after you have promised, the miserable end of such as have broken their
promises should terrefie you, both of Cities and great persons, as the
Cities of Atle, and Carthage, which were razed and dissolved into ashes for
violating their promises. Zachariah 2. Kings. 25. 7.
king of Judah for the like fault was led Captive: and his sons killed before
his face, and his own eyes put out. So Cleomenes and the Pope Adrian, who was
choked Platin.
with a fly after the breaking of his promise. Pope Alexander the sixth, and
Pope Julius the second, who used to say that the promises which he made, were
only to abuse. Adrian, otherwise called Gregory the seventh, had his right
hand cut of, for breaking his promise with the Emperor Henry the fourth. The
fearful examples of these men, and of many others, which I could allege,
should terrify a young Noble man from breaking his promise, who should live
with a resolute heart not fearing any man's favor more then Gods Majesty, whom
he mocketh more then man, in showing himself to fear man, with who^ he
dissembleth more then God, who sees al his most secret thoughts, and one day
will recompense him accordingly. Oh what is there more monstrous, then to
appear stout against God, and a coward before man!

Chapt. 14. How a Noble man should show himself liberal.
GOD, Nature, and Reason, do al incite a Noble man to do well, as to say well.
God by his example, and as the Ethnicks acknowledged: Nulla repropius ad Dei
naturam accedimus quam beneficentia. Nature also takes pleasure to see him,
whom she has pleasured. Reasons are many: for Beatius est dare quam accipere,
and many have refused the gifts of great me^ for fear of hurting their
liberty. To give is the most honorable and proper use of your goods, you cannot
employ Mart. lib. 5.
the^ better. Extra fortunam est quicquid donatur amicis. As Cyrus showed unto
Craesus, by sending for money unto those who had gotten of him before, who not
only sent as much as ever they had gotten of him, and more: but also
recompensed his messengers for their pains. M. Antonius witnessed the like,
when he was brought to his lowest estate, crying out, Hoc ta^tum habeo quod
dedi. For when your money lies in your coffer it may be stolen or spent, or
after your death it may be gone perhaps unto him, which you never saw: but
that which you give, remains for ever, unto your posterities posterity, if
you bestow it aright.

Many such reasons may be alleged, which I omit, to advise you to consider
well, unto whom, how much, in what place or time, and to what end you use your
liberality, otherwise it is but mere prodigality and for no effect when you
have given all that you have. To give unto a fool, a flatterer, or a whore, is
mere prodigality.

Bestow your benefit willingly, and with a good heart: Bis est gratum si vlt
to offeras. That which is obtained by many prayers, and great requests is
very dearly bought, and recompensed before it be obtained and it impaireth
the gift by the half.

And that the receiver may think that it is the heart which gives and not
the hand, bestow it with a cheereful countenance, without delaying. For as
Mimus says, he gives twice, that gives soon: whosoever is long in resolving
to give, appears that he has little will to give at al, as the proverb is,
qui tarde fecit diu noluit: And as Ausonius very acutelie turns Lucian his
Greek disticke to this purpose, Gratia quae tarda est ingrata est gratia:
namque Epigram. 61.

Cum fieri properat gratia, grata magis.
The principal virtue of a good deed is, when freely and without hope of a
better it is bestowed: whosoever gives in hope of a reward, or recompense,
deserves to be served as he that got a turnip of the French King for a fair
horse.

Take not from one to give to another, as to take of your Farmers goods to give
unto a flatterer; this is violence rather and injustice, then liberality. There
is no virtue in robbing Peter to pay Paul, or to tirre the Church, to cover
the Chapel.

Brag not after you have given any thing; for that will make your good deed
contemptible, and a man to wish that he had not received it. If you see an
honest man stand in need of any thing, wherein you would help him, give him
that which you will bestow upon him priuatlie, never speaking one word that it
is to buy this necessary, or that, committing your gift to his own
discretion, otherwise you will make him more ashamed of his indigency; where in
giving him secretly, you shall show your self both liberal and discreet. Many
there be who never give any thing but with intention to preach abroad what a
great liberal act they have done, and would be loath to bestow it in their
closet, they know not that the Goddess of Liberality was painted with her
face away-warde to signify that the Gift should ever be given in secret.

Let never this word be heard of you. I wish I had never pleasured such a man,
albeit that the receiver be never so unthankful. For it is the office of a
Noble heart to continue in well doing, whilst it make the unthankful to
acknowledge his fault and amend.

Vincit malos pertinax bonitas. Every man should consider well his own ability
in giving: for to be liberal toward another man, and thereby to hurt himself,
is a token of want of discretion. A man should first be liberal unto himself,
Genu crure propius Pyth. Symb.
est. I judge him liberal unto himself, who extends his arm no farther then
his sleeue will reach. For when a man spends his twelue-months allowance, and
revenews in four, or five months, whether it be at cards, dice, or in any
orher bad uses, I account him very prodigal, and will assure him, that he shall
have time at leisure to repent himself of that he has done so heedlesly: for
those that helped him to spend it, will not help him to get more.

There is an other kind of liberality, which sometime is better then this we
have spoken of, in helping your friend or the man who^ you affectionat, at al
good occasions, where your assistance and favor may further him. In this do
not like many of our Courtiers, who make the petition and answer with one
mouth: in making a man believe that they have spoken in his behalf, when as
indeed they never thought to speak. It is true that you may be prodigal in
this sort of liberality, as in the other, in importuning his Majesty or your
friends, by which you do good nether to your self, nor to him, for whom you
become suitor. Nevertheless deceive not any man under the color of
freindship, with long delays, in hindering him to seek other men's help in
good time, which he may account as a favor, in that you deal plainly and
freely with him.

Chapt. 15. How a Noble man should show himself thankful.
NOe man can be accused or blamed of a more shamful vice then of
unthankfulness, so contrary to nature, as appears by ravenous and herce
Lions, who showed themselves thankful unto Androdus the Roman slave, and unto
Elpi the Merchant of A. G^l. 5. Alian hist. any. 46. 7.
Samos: yea by the venomous Serpent, which delivered* the boy from the robbers.
Truth it is that every man gives not in hope of requitance; sometime the gift
or good deed is greater then the receauer is able to requite, nevertheless he
should ever have an affection and desire to testify how much he is obliged.
But you that have the power to requite them, shall only look unto the picture
of the Graces to be your guides in ^
this duty. Think that they are painted with a ioiful and Aelian. v^r. his
glad countenance, as Artaxarxes received Sten^tas his handful of water and
Polycrates the little fish: because Qui grate beneficium ^ccepit, prima^ius
pensione solu^^. Their nakedness shows ye should accept of the gift without
dissimulation, and likewise to render thanks. Their middle age betokens that
you should not be too hasty in rendering the like, for that breeds
suspicion that the gift was not well accepted of; neither should you delay too
long as if you had forgotten. But in rendering the like after a short time, the
giver may think, that you do it more to entertain his freindship, then for
any requital. Lastie, two of their faces turned toward the third, which
looks back again upon the^, signify that you must requit a pleasure with a
double. Which if you be not able sufficiently to do in effect; yet show that
you are not deficient in good will. For the will is the very soul both of the
gift and thanksgiving, as appears by the widows mite.

Unto the which picture, I add for subscription, that you never forget to
publish both the gift and the giver: for when he has had both his heart and
hand open to bestow upon you any gift, it is a shame, that you should have
your mouth closed. Iugenui pudoris est profiteri per quos proficerimus. Plin.
secundus.


Chapt. 16. Of Temperance. 3 part of duty in conversation. Sabell. 5. Aen. 1.
Plu. de. vir. ^ul

TEmperance in general is that Bellerophon fained by the Poets to daunt and
overcome all these monstrous Chimeres of our violent affections: this is the
modest Lady, who by her favor subdueth al our unruly passions unto reason:
her presence makes the clouds of our minds clear, and quenches the fire of
our violent lusts, and setleth so good an order in all our actions, that
covetousness, lust, desire, or dishonest love has no place in our affections. Al
is pleasant, agreeable, and in good order where she governs: she is the
pillar of force, the buckler against al excess, and carnal pleasure; leader of
the eyes, the rasar of evil thoughts and the rod of dissolutnes. By her,
Hercules overcame the labors of Euristheus, and at length was crowned with
glory amongst the heathen gods. But as we must consider her here, she is the
rule of al pleasures, that tickles our senses, and natural appetits. Habena
voluptatis inter libidine^, et stupore^ naturae posita, cuius duae parts:
verecundia in fuga turpium, honestas in obseruatione decor^. Her purpose is to
show you particularly how ye should possess your vessel in holiness (as the
Apostle 1. Cor. 9. 18.
says) and behave your self discreetlie in all your actions, ordained both for
the sustentation, and recreation of your body.

Chapt. 17. How a young Noble man should be continent.
What tongue? what hand? what mouth, or pe^ is able to express sufficiently
the shame, and detestatio^ of those me^ who forgetting their quality, their
rank, their Nobility, yea their very name, not only run from on baudie
house to another, and wallow themselves in all sort of filthiness, but also brag
thereof, in cou^ting upon their fingers ends unto their companions where they
have been? Their impudency is such, that they glory not only in their
shamful actions, but also dare brag of that, which they were never, nor never
shall be able to effect, (except in their polluted thoughts) seeking to dishonor
many honorable Ladies by opprobrious reports. How many vaunts of such a
gentle woman's favor, of whom he is not known by eye sight?. To such men I
may justly say as Demosthenes reproached the Athenians, that they never
spoke of peace but in mourning gowns, and after the loss of their parents at
the wars: in like manner these men talk never of Continency, and Chastity
until the time they see the rasor in the chirurgians hands, and that they are
warming themselves between two fires. I exhort you therefore in time Gentlemen
to beware of incontinencie, as the efficient cause of al miseries: it alters,
dries, and marreth the whole body, it weakeneth all the iointes, and members,
making the face blobbed and yealow, shortning the life, deminishing the
memory, the understanding, and the very heart Hosea. 4.
as Hosea says. Gods wrath has never suffered this Number. 25. ^. Kings. 12.
Genesis 19.
sin to escape unpunished, as David's adultery was the death of threscore
thousand Israelits, and Solomon his fault made him loose his son and the
tenth part of his Kingdom. The transgression of this commandment caused the
subversion of Sodom and Gomorrh^, and of many other Cities and towns. It is
Satan's Instrument to the intrapping of souls unto their own destruction; as
Balaam taught Balaac how to cause the Genesis 31.
people of Israel to offend the Lord in committing Idolatry by the fair weeme^
of his la^d. In propha^e Histories, ye may observe, how it has bin the death
of many kings amongst the heathen, as Alcibiade's, Danade's King of Persia,
Deny's the younger. Hieronimu's king of Sicilia, Agamemnon's the rauisher of
Cassandra. So did Amyntas, Aristocrates, Periander, Timocrates king of Cyrene,
Tarquinius, Appius Claudius, and an infinite number of Nobles in our own
Chronicles died miserably through this offense. And I would have such men as
delight in this sin, to tell me where ever the voluptuous man died in peace, and
disposed of his old age? Tiberius complained that he was a Sodomite, M.
Antonius that he was an Adulterer, Heleogabalus that he was both. Possess
then your vessel in cleannes, and abstain from the frequentation of impudent
Faustina's, and unchaste Lay's.

Chapt. 18. Of a young Noble man's diet in eating, and drinking.
AS sobriety is a salutarie preservatiue against incontinencie, Terent. Eun.
Act. 4. sc. 5
according to the Comicke's saying, sine Cerere and Baccho friget venus: So on
the other part, I think Gluttony and Drunkenness the mother of al vices: Which
made the ancient Romans rip out the bowels of their dead bodies, as the chief
causes of al dissolutenes, and unworthy to be buried. What operation can a
mind make, when it is darkened with the thick vapors of the brain? Who can
think that a fair Lute filled full with earth is able to make a sweet
Harmony? Or who can see the bright Sun clearly in an obscure, and clowdy
day? no more is the mind able to exercise any good function, when the
stomach is stuffed with victuals. How ought Noble men then, whose minds are
ordained to shine before others in all virtuous and laudable actions, stop the
abuse of abominable Epicurisme, and as wise Cato said, eat to line, and not
live to eat? You should not be like unto Philoxenus, Apitius, Gallonus,
Albinus, Abron, and such others, who had their hearts amongst their bowels, and
their Soul in place of ^alt, to keep their bodies for a little time from
corruption (as Plinius speaks of his swine.) To preserve then a chaste mind,
and a healthful body, observe these few ordinances of a sober diet.

In primis that ye consider the company, where ye shall dine or sup, before
ye ask what cheer. For the master of all pleasures himself commended Chilon
in that he would not promise to go unto Perianders great feast, before he knew
what other company he had invited.

Next in respect that Play (as Fabius ^aith) shows Instit. lib. 1. 3.
no better the nature of a man, then the table does at dinner and supper: Ye
shall follow his Majesty's prescription in the form of your meat eating Be
neither uncivil like a gross Cynicke, nor affectuatly niggard, like a dainty
Dame, but eat in a manly, round, and honest fashion. Use most to eat of
reasonable gross, and common meats, as well for making your body strong, and
durable for travel at all occasions, either in peace or in war, as that ye
may be the hartier received by your mean friends in their houses, when their
cheer may suffice you. Neither does his Majesty's precept, and good reasons
added thereunto, nor yet his Highness observing thereof, move many men, who
seem to be out of all appetite, and to have lost their stomachs, disdaining
al ordinary and good common cheer, like wives that long. There stomachs must
ever be provoked with some delicacy, like unto a blunt edged knife, that ever
must be in sharpening upon the whetstone. Wherefore they are not able to keep
this next precepte, prescribed both by his Majesty and Seneca. Senec. epist.
96.


Let alyour food be simple without composition of sauces, which are more like
medicines then meat, because they serve only for pleasing of the lust, and not
for satisfying of the necessity of nature; yea they are very hurtful unto the
health, as ye may learn of the Physicians, Hip. Aph. 1. 17 Sat. 2. 1.
who say that simplex ex simplici cansa valetudo, and of Horace in many good
verses. Xenoph. in dictis and factis Socr.


Eat never until ye have an appetite: for then (as Socrates said) fames
condi^e utum optimum est, hunger is the best sauce, as Darius drinking of the
puddle water said, he never tasted of so good a cup of drink; because he never
thirsted before.

Beware of eating excess of meat; for according Hip. 6. Ep^. Sect. 2.
unto the most skilful Physicians opinion, it is the preservation of health not
to be filled with meat; and when a man eats more meat then his stomach is
able to digest he becomes sick.

It is no ways comely to dispatch affairs, or to be pensive at meat. Keep
therefore an open and cheereful countenance, entertain pleasant, quick, but
honest discourses, when there is none at table better then your self,
otherwise it becomes you to hear until the time ye be asked.

Now as for your drinking I will not tie you unto Augustus his law, to drink
but three times at a meal, as Auso^i^^ in Gryph^.
Ausonius commands: but least I should offend against Democritus his rule;
if necessity require, I will not desire you to stay at the fourth cup as
unfortunate; nor will I go so high as the Mystike law, vel toties ternos;
only I wish you never to drink more then nature requires, nor that ye
should urge or importune any man to pledge you. For you know not whether he
will surfeit (as many do) or if he have as great delight to pledge you, as you
have to drink unto him, or whether the constitution of his body will so well
away with it, besides the impairing of both your names, and wounding of your
souls.

As for the drink it self, I think it is best to accustom your self unto
the Country where you are: for all affectatio^ is to be shu^ned, not that I
understand; you should imitate the abuse with many, who are not contented to
drink pure wine or bear, but they must have double bear, march bear,
Spanish wine French wine, and all other wines that can be had for money; yea
wine of it self is not sufficient, but sugar, and sundry sorts of spices must
be drowned therein. But especially I wish you be aware of drunkenness, which
increases with age. It were Hercules labors to show you what damage both
your bodies and minds do receive thereby: The whole body is impaired and
shaken with guts, siatticks, palzies, apoplexies. And seeing our bodies are
earthly, even as when there has been some great dash of rain, the earth is
soaked and resolved into mire, so that no tillage can be made in the same, no
more can the mind of a drunken man, be capable of any good instruction.

And so albeit ordinary times would be kept in (...). Plat. 6. de l^gib
meat and drink, yet use your self sometimes so, that any time of the four
and twenty hours ^ait be alike unto you: that thereby your diet may be
accommodated to your affairs.

Chapt. 19. Of sleep.
Hippocrates speaking of sleep (which is provoked Prog. 3. l. 2. Galen, ibid.
by meat says it is good to sleep according to nature, meaning in the night,
as his Interpretor expounds, and natural reason confirms, and approves.
When can a man awake more naturally then in the day time? His natural heat
being dispersed through his body, which is gathered together in the night, the
light shining and the health requiring: as one the other part the coldness,
drowsinesse, and darkness of the night shows, that it is most proper unto
sleepe^ besides the examples of the Toprobans, who are very barbarous, Pli^.
na^ hist. Lib. 6. c. 22.
and of the bru^e beasts, which follow the instinct of nature. Heginus.


Moreover the very ancient fabls, which feign sleep to be the nights son,
may be a sufficient proof, that Natales C^^es
the night was ordained for man to rest in. Wherefore I can not but pity the
life and custom of many Nobles, Sena. epist. 123.
who like to the Lychnobies, and Heliogabalus, pervert the course of nature;
fearing as I suppose that the sun should behold many of their unruly
actions.

Take the^ your rest at your time appointed by God, yet moderatly. For it goes
much by use; for this cause Aristotle held ever in his hands aboule of brase
over a basin, to the end he might waken, when the boule fell out of his
fingers through a profound sleep.

Cast a way al cares when you go to bed, as your Chalmer thus counceleth you.

Protinus ante meum, quicquid dolet, exue limen. Iunen. 11.
It is better to lie upon your belly then upon your back, both for the
strengthening of the natural heat of your stomach, and bowels, to make a
better digestion, as also because the lying upon the back heateth the raines,
hardens the fleame, which breeds the grauel, and causes many incubies,
and fantasies unto those, who are subject unto bad humors. But the best of al
is to lie down first upon the right side, to fortify Arist. prob. sect. 6. Q.
5 and 6 Scal exer. 289. DD. Conim in l. Arist. de vig. and some. c. 9.
the heat of the liver in the second concoction, and that the heart be not
troubled and charged with the heavy burden of your supper; albeit I know
that a great number of Philosophers are of the contrary opinion, that the
leaft side is the best to be first lien upon.

How soever you lie, take no heed to any of your dreams:
Somnia fallaci ludunt temeraria noctu: Leu. 19. Deuteronomy. 18. Romans 18. Tit. 1.

and al Prophesies, visions, and prophetical dreams are accomplished, and
ceased in Christ; And that error proceeds from ignorance, and is unworthy of
a Christian, who should be assured omnia esse pura puris.

Chap. 20 Of Apparel.
NExt it follows to speak of Raiment, the one (...). 3
putting whereof is the ordinary actio^ after sleep, which is so necessary,
that if it be missing there is nether goodlines of person, beauty of the body,
nor any good fashion of carryage that is able to make a man esteemed. For it
is a lamentable case, when they say such a one would be a proper handsome man,
if he were well arraied. But in this land I should rather wish there were some
Athenian Nomophylackes, and Cic. Pison. 2. l. Clodia. pro. sext
Censures appointed, as at Rome, to see that men should be as moderate in their
raiment, as in their diet. Then doubtless many young gentlemen would have
rents and possessions, which now have none. They have put their lands, which
contained a great circuit, up into a little trunck, and hold it a point of
policy to wear their lands upon their backs, that they may see that noe
wast be done by their Tennants. But alas when they would spread abroad their
gaie clothes again into a long field, or a pleasant park, they are so
short that they cannot reach one ridge length, and so are dubd Sir John
Had-land, knights of Pennilesse bench.

Obey therefore his Majesty's Instruction in being nether too superfluous, like
a deboshed waister, nor yet ouerbasly clad, like a miserable wretch, not
arteficially trimed like a courtisan, nor yet ouersluggishly clothed, like a
cou^treie clown, nor over lightly like a Candy soldier, or a vain young
Courtier, nor yet over gravely, like a Minister. But in your garments be
proper, cleanely, and honest, weareing your clothes in a careless, yet a
comely form. None of you should exceed the bounds of your quality and
revenues: For he makes himself a mocking stock to the world, who shyneth a
far of in his scarlets, and glistering gold lace, like a king of a Stage play,
and when he approaches near, has nether a* suitable company of followers,
nor a living to maintain that bravery, nor yet is of that quality, and rank,
unto which such costly and gorgeous apparel does appertain, nor does the
time or place require. He (like the millars Alcias. Embl. 7.
Ass carrying the Godesse Isis,) thinks that every one who saluteth his
fair clothes, does honor himself: but if a man could look through his gay
coat, to see what were within him, he would be astonished, as one going into
the Temples of Egypt, which were so fair without, having nothing within but a
wild catt, or some such like monstrous beast: thus is the world often times
illuded with the external se^fes.

Make not fools of your selves in wearing long hair or nails, which are but
excrements of nature, and bewray such misvsers of them to be of a vendictiue,
or a vain light nature. For (as the learned Count says) nemo comatus, qui non
sit Cinaedus: whosoever delights Picus Miran. epist. 9.
in his long hair, or makes a vow in keeping thereof, does sacrifice unto the
Goddess Cotys: Wherefore Pherecides meeting with such a young man, covered his
face with his cloak. Does not nature it self teach you, that if a man have
long hair, it is a shame unto him, 1. Cor. 11. 14.
and that he denies his kind? Some cannot be content as God made them, but as
though they were hudled up in have, and sent unto the world not fully finished,
must use drugs, balmes, ointments, paintings, lac virginale, and what not? To
amend the least faults not amiss, but fie upon these frownsing irons, poking
sticks, and brushes, that must ever serve to keep countenance with all, in
company, in stroaking up their mustachoes. Others smell so sweetly, as if they
were new arrived from Arabia, and had brought home some perfumes from Horontia;
but they know not, that they smell best, when they smell least, and that they
stinck in their sweet odors.

Posthume non been olet, qui been semper olet: Mart. lib. 6. Epig. 55.
for my own part, Malo quam been olere, nilolere.

Chapt. 21. Of Riding of great horses, Shooting in a long Bow, Running, and
Leaping, VVrastling and handling of your Armor.
TO allege Plato's and Aristotle's carfulness in making of Laws concerning
the exercises of young men in their own time, and cities, or yet to tell you
of the Olympian, Nemean, Pythean, and Isthmian plays of the Grecians, or the
Lacaedemonian wrestling place, and the Corynthean Craneum, or yet to mention
unto you the relics of the Theaters and Amphitheaters at Rome, it were only
to praise the Athenians amongst themselves, in respect ye can embrace them too
much without commendation. Wherefore I tell you of those exercises, which are
fittest for your quality, and how ye should use them moderatlie for your
recreation only; (not making a craft of them, as if ye were borne only for
sport and play) imitating Virgill for a pattern, who sets the^ down very
orderly thus. Ante vrbem pueri, and primaeuo flore iuventae
Exercentur equis, domitantque in pulvere currus:
Ant acres tendunt arcus, aut lenta lacertis Aen. 7.

Spicula contorquent, cur suque ictuque lace scunt.
Riding, and Shooting were two of the three praises given unto the Noble
Persians, and therefore are worthy of the two first places amongst exercises,
as they were engraven upon Darius tomb: Darius the King lies buried here,
Who in Riding and Shooting had never Peer.


Ye should learn to ride now while the sinews of your thyghes are not fully
co^solidated: and your principal study should be, after that ye have learned
a comely carriage of your body in the saddle, to practice most these things,
which are most requisite at the wars; as to run well at the Tylte, when your
bodies are able; to leap on horseback at every side without styrrop or
other help, and especially while he is going, and being therein expert, then
armed at al points to assaie the same, the commodity whereof needs no
declaration. Also to run at the ring with a comely fashion is as honorable
for a Noble man in all honorable company as it is shame for him, to ru^ his
Lance against the post, turning his face awry, or not to be able to keep his
horse within the rinck. Learn all the marks of a good horse; and be able to
name al sort of hairs, to judge of his age, of his diseases and remedies, not
only that ye may discourse of al things pertinent thereunto, as becomes an
Horseman, but also that you may see them applied for your own private use.

As the Romans speaking of wars, would call it the chief honor, ground and
presetuation of their wealth: (for that through wars they had the greatest
part of the world;) in like manner when occasion is ministered unto us of
Archerie, we Britains may call it the honor of our Country; because this
Realm through that goodly defense has oftentimes won great fame and
victory against our enemies. Therefore al Noble men and Gentlemen, unto whom
chiefly the honor or dishonor of warfaire redoundeth, should entertain
this pastime of Shooting in the next place unto Riding of great horses. I need
not allege the Parthians, nor Cassius answer unto the Arabian Astronomer,
confessing Appian. de bell lo Persico.
that he was more afraid of the Sign Sagittarius, then of Scorpio, when both
his Maiestie's guarde and the French King's are yet called the Archers of the
guarde.

But whosoever would learn the right fashion and order of Shooting, and how
to obtain unto the perfection thereof, let him converse with Master Aschame in
his Toxophilus, where he does teach it, as most profitable to preserve the
health, to encourage the mind, strengthen the sinews, cleanse the pores, to
clear the senses to make good digestion, and to wrestle against a number of
diseases in the body. Where in so doing the love which he did bear unto his
country manifestly appears, and that he tendered the old glory of
Britains, in seeing it decaie, by endeavoring himself to revive it again,
as also that for his singular gifts and great learning he was able to make a
book of a much higher subject.

Epaminondas daily exercised himself in running, to the intent that either he
might overtake his enemy in the chase, or if extreme need required, escape
from him. Semblably did the worthy Achilles before him, who of Homer therefore
is commonly called swift foot. Alexander being a child excelled all his
companions in running. Who being demanded on a time to run at the great game
Olympus, answered wisely, that he would have run very gladly, had there been
any kings.

To Running! add Leaping, and Iumping, omitting the agilitie of valiant
Marius, who being fourscore years of age, and seven times Consul before,
exercised himself in running daily among the young men.

Wrestling is a good exercise, so that it be with one that is equal in
strength, or somewhat weaker, and the place be soft, that in falling your
bodies be not bruised. There be diverse manners of wrestling, but the best,
both for the health of body, and exercise of strength is in laying your hands
mutuallie one over an others neck holding each one other fast by the arm, and
clapsing your legs together, to enforce your selves with strength and agilitie
to throw down each other: undoubtedly it shall be found profitable in wars, in
case ye be constrained to cope with your adversary hand to hand, either of
you having your weapon broken, or lost, and it has been seen that the weaker
person by slight has overthrown the stronger, almost before he could fasten on
the other any violent strokes.

Mars his field where these exercises were solemnized puts me in mind of
Swimming, which recommends it self sufficiently, if you will confider a little
how many both noble Cities, Puissant Armies, and valiant Captains have bin
saved by it, as Rome, which Horatius Cocles, saved from a perpetual servitude
of the proud Tarquin. Lucratius his victory testifies sufficiently, how
profitable swimming was in the first wars between the Romans, and
Carthaginians: Julius Caesar at the battle of Alexandria, and before him
Sertorius that second Hanniball at the battle against the Cimbers escaped by
swimming. The great king Alexander, when he went against the mighty king Porus
was sorry that he had not learned to swim before that day. Wherefore albeit it
be not much used of Noble men, nevertheless if you will consider the hazardes
and dangers of battle, I doubt not but that ye shall think it as necessary as
any exercise I have spoken of hitherto, and will esteem well of me that would
keep nothing from your knowledge, whereby your person may be in every
leopardie preserved.

Handling of Arms (especially of such as may serve in wars or necessity,)
is an exercise worthy to be used* for if it be lawful for a man to defend
himself from violence, it is both lawful and convenient not only to wear a
weapon, but also to use it* He that desires peace, says Ireneus, let him
prepare for war, as we say weapons bode peace. The exercising of them
sowples and strengthens the ioints and members of the body; yet there is a
moderation to be kept, both in times and persons, with whom you exercise them.
It is not fit that you fence with every fellow, or that you keep always a
foil in your hand, and wheresoever you be in company to be pearcing and
running against the walls of the house, or making foiles of your arms, as many
do. Nether would I have you to put your confidence in your skill, as many a
cowardly courage is puffed up unto his own destruction: but think that true
valor is to join near with your enemy and to make him lose his scrime. The
tossing of the pike, the Barriers, the tilt, and such like Martial exercise,
are fitest for your quality. But the Fence (being the beginning of many
quarrels, tumults, blows, and broken faces; yea oftentimes the cause of
blinding of the eyes, and of singular combats) should be forbiden in our common
wealth, as the exercises of cuffing with the fists, taught by Anycus and
Epeius, and of wrestling, by Antaeu^ and Cecyo were discharged in Plato's
commonwealth: because it is no more profitable for the wars then they were.
Plato in reip.


Chapt. 22. Of Hunting, and Haucking.
MAro has not forgotten to recommend unto you by precept, and example in
sundry places the pleasant exercise of hunting so much used by Xenophons Cyrus.
A^n. 9 4


Venatu invigilent pueri Silu^sque fatigent.
It portis i^bare exorto delecta iuventus.
Where it appears by Dilecta Iuuentus, that he understands you young
Nobles, thinking that there is noe exercise so proper unto you as Hunting, with
running hounds, whereby your body is disposed to endure patiently, heat, rain,
wind, cold, hunger, and thirst; your mind made void of al idle and naughty
cogitations, as it appears by the chaste Diana. Hunting forms the Judgment,
and furnishes a thousand inventions unto the Imagination: it makes a man
courageous and valiant, in his enterprises: It teaches him the situation of
mountains, plains, the courses of brooks and rivers. How am I able to reckon,
the surprises, the strategems used for the obtaining of victory, according to
the beasts you do hunt, which all are requisite and employed without
difference at the wars, the hunting of men; for at them both your whole
endeauour^ are to take, or kill. Morouer hunting is so pleasant, that if reason
were not obaied, many could not return from such a exercise more then
Mithridates who remained seven years in the forest.

The things that you are to observe in this exercise (to my skill) are, that you
know the nature of beasts which you are to hunt, their wiles, the time and
season when they should be hunted, the places where they remain in winter, and
where in summer, the winds which they fear and fly from, to find them out,
to know their courses, and whether they be for land or water; to flesh a dog,
uncouple hounds, follow them, keep standing, that ye can blow the morre, the
retraite, the chase, to hollow the time, to hold in time, to let slip in time;
and especially that you can hunt in time and not at all times. For if you
neglect your necessary affaiers, you deserve to be punished with Lycaon, and
Acteon, who were both hunted and killed by their own dogs. I would not have
you ignorant of the proper terms of hunting, that you may discourse thereof,
as well as hunt* yet not so, that you can nether do, say, or think of any thing
besides hunting and dogs, but sparingly, and at fit times.

As for hauking I condemn it not, but I must praise it more sparingly, be an
se it nether rese^bleth the wars so near as hunting does in making a man
hardy, and skillful in riding on all grounds; and is more uncertain, and
subject unto mischances: and (which is worst of al) is thought to be an
extreme stirrer up of Passions. Yet if you delight in it, I would wish it were
moderatly and that your Faulkons may be satisfied with the division of their
pray, as the Faulkons of Thracia were, where Plin. nas. hist. lib. 7.
this pastime was first invented, so that they have no need to devour the
hens, and tame poultrie. Nor I would not have you ignorant how to reclaim an
hawk, to know how many coats she is of, to give her a measurable gorge, to
discern perfect enduing, to know when she is full summed, to know likewise
her diseases, as the Cray, the Fraunces and others; to heal an Hawke, to impe
her, to cope her, and all the rest requisite in a Fawlkoner.

Chapt. 23. How you should play at Tennis, and Dance.
The Te^nis Court, whereby I would have you to recreate your mind, and exercise
your body sometimes, besides pleasure it preserves your health, in so far as
it moves every part of the body. Nevertheless, I approve not those, who are
ever in the Tennis Court like Nackets, and heat themselves so much, that they
rather breed, then expel sickness; nor yet commend I those, who black the
Tennis keepers score, and that have ba^ded away the greatest part of their
wealth, either in playing great and many sets, or else in continuing in
tossing, until they defy the same game. It is both an hurt and a shame for a
Noble man to be so eager in that play. The Pal Maile is also honorable: as for
the French Kyles, the Byas Bowls, the casting of the ston, the Bar, and such
like exercises, they are fitter in my opinion for a Citizens prentice, and a
country Clown, then for any Gentleman.

I will not ascend up amongst the Gods to show you them Dancing to assuage
Saturn's Melancholy; nor will I lead you unto the Curetes, and Curibantes to
seek the first invention thereof; nor will I stay to tell you of Proteus his
Changings, or Gelos his fable; nor will I persuade you to imitate Apollo's
Priests in offering at Delos; nor the Indians in saluting the Sun; nor to
hear the Harmonical motions of the Celestial Spheres with Plato; nor will I
show you to make war in Dansing, as the old Inhabitants of Aethiopia did; nor
to Dance about the City, as the Roman Salij did. neither will I represent
unto you the Majesty of Princes by Eumelia a kind of Dance; nor the wanton
and dissolute motions of base people by Cordax. But as Socrates did unto the
Grecians, and Lycurgus unto the Lacedaemonians, I recommend that form of
Dancing unto you, called by the Ancie^ts, Hormus, which of al others is most
like our sort of Dancing named Numbers, wherein daunced both men and weemen
together: which with our Divines permission (not approving the immoderate
moving of the feet, more then I will describe the proprieties of Honor, of
Singles, of Two in Number, of Reprinse, and Double) I think it one of the best
exercises that a Noble man can learn in his young years, and that fashioneth
the body best. Always I commend mediocritie in all things: for there is
nothing so good, but if it be used with excess will become bad. Wherefore I
praise not those Ordinary Dauncers, who appear to be druncke in their legs,
(as Chrysippus Serving Maid said unto her Master) in shaking always their
feet, singing continually, one-two-three: four; and five. When you go to
Dance in any Honorable company, take heed that your quality, your
Raime^t, and your skill go al three together: if you fail in any of those
three, you will be derided. Imitate not so much the Masters Capers, as to have a
good grace in the carriage of your body: this is the principal, and without
the which all the rest is naught.

These are the Exercises wherein I would have you al well experienced, using
them one after another, and not al together, running from this exercise to
that, neglecting your studies, or things necessary to obtain those mere
shadows in respect of them. The best is, that you learn but one or two of
them at once, not adding your minds more unto one then to another with
Pamphilus.

Horum ille nihil egregie praeter caetera Terent. Andr.

Studebat, and tamen omnia haec mediocriter.
Chapt. 24. Of House games.
HIS Majesty's permission of honest house-games, (...). 3
as Cards, French Cards, called Taraux, Tables, and such like plays, is
sufficient to protect you from the blame of those learned men, who think
Danaeus de Lus. aleae.
them Hazards; as for my self I think it great simplicity and rusticitie in
a Noble man to be ignorant of any of them, when he comes in company: yea I
would wish you to be so perfect in them al, that you may not be deceived, or
cousened at play, always observing his Majesty's three conditional rules.

First, that you play only for your recreation, and to resolve with your selves
to hazard the loss of all that you play for. A caution worthy to be kept of
you al; for it is impossible to free a Noble man from shame, dishonor and
reproach, when he is known and noted to be a gamster, be he winner or looser.

Next for that cause, play for no more, then you care not to cast amongst
Pages. When you cannot loose as patiently as win, your play may be termed
a passion, a fury, or a frenzy: as appears by the tearing of the Cards,
and the throwing away of the Dice, the swelling of your face, the changing of
your color, and many Lunaticke fits, which commonly possess those, who
respect nothing but money. Al men are alike plaie-fellows to such a young man,
and he will be as content of a Tinkers company, or a base foot boys, if he
have money, as of a worshipful Knights: such is the Devils craft rather to
kindle his heart with avarice, then to invent the Cards, who bear all the blame.

And last, play always fair, taking heed preciselie that you come not into
the use of tricking or lying in jest. Otherwise if you cannot keep these
rules, his Majesty's council is that you utterly abstain from these plays:
which I council you to do, rather by reason, then by execrable oaths: For alas
Play oftentimes puts a Castle into a capcase: of old Manners, it builds
new Cottages, it turns fee simple, into fee single, and makes many a
Ge^tlema^ go unto the six pe^nie Ordinary, who has laid three or four
hundred pounds upon a Card, or upon one cast of the Dice, which are utterly
worthy to be forbidden, except at Tables.

Chapt. 25. Of those house-games, from the which a Noble man should abstain.
DIting becomes best deboshed soldiers upon the (...).
head of their drums, being only ruled by hazard, and subject unto knauish
cogging. Dice should be thrown out of Noble men's Castles, which have made
many a rich man die in penury, and some to prevent the course of Nature,
besides the vehement chidings, horrible brawls, and sometime strokes, that
happen now and then between friends. These be the revenues and profits that
this damnable marcha^dize afords, besides the final reward which is more
terrible; so that I think Polidor Virgill might have ascribed the invention of
Dice unto the Devil. For I have never read of the^ approved by the Heathens,
or used without reproof.

Stage plays are degenerated from the vetus Comaedia, which Tully termed the
mirror of man's life, they detract from virtue, and add unto vice, so that they
may be named now the storehouses of al wickedness: for therein is painted a
Sodom of filthiness to be sold; and no thing but tales of carnal love,
Adultery, ribaldrie, Leacherie, murder, rapes, interlarded with a thousand
unclean speeches: there you shall not only have your ma^ners corrupted in
hearing these scandalous, and scurrilous Dialoges, but also in seeing their
gesture. I will not insist to show you how they profane the sacred word of God,
abuse the state, breed slight regard of the magistrates authority.
Nevertheless as his (...). page 127.
Majesty does not banish them all utterly out of his Court, so I would not
condemn you to hear them there, or elsewhere particularly in your own, or
some other friends house, so being that they be first seen and approved by
some godly, wise. and discreet man; that you will apply your own judgment to
detest the vice and imitate the virtue, which you see there represented. As for
the common plaie-houses, which may be called the very sink of the City, I
would never have you resort thither.

Delight not also to be in your own person a plaier upon instruments,
especially upon such as commonly men get their living with: because you may
imploie your time better then so: and for the most part we see that those who
are most given to play upon them, are fantastic and full of humors,
accounting more sometimes of the tuning of their Lute, then of the entertaining
and pleasant Company of their friends.

Eneruant animos cithar ae, cantusque, Lyraeque, Ovid. 1. de: r^m
I may add that oftentimes the holding of the Lute has hurt the breast, and
made many crooked bodies, as also that playing upon instruments does disgrace
more a Noble man then it can grace and honor him in good company, as many
think. For he should rather take his pastime of others, then make pastime
unto them.

Lastly I think the chase (as his Majesty says) is an ouerwise and
philosophical folly: for where al such plays are ordained to free men's
heads for a time from passionat thoughts of their affairs, it does on the
contrary fill and trouble men's brains with as many fashions, and toys of the
play, as before they were filled of their affairs.

Chap. 26. Of Valor.
Valor, which is the inherent propriety, and indiuidual attribute to a Noble
man, and the accomplisher of al virtue praeceding, remains only to be
declared. For albeit a young Noble man be never so learned in Arts, and
Sciences, and perfect in all exercises, yet without this virtue he is not
worthy to be esteemed. And because it is mistaken by many, who think it to
consist only in bragging, beating, threatening, and thundering out of al cruel
menaces, A^n. 12.
Mugitus velnti cum prima in praelta Taurus
Terrificos ciet, atque irasci in cornua tent at.
I wish you to know that it may be described to be an habitud of the mind,
whereby a man is resolved to hazard himself unto al perils and pains for the
good of his Prince, Country, and for his own honor, advisedly.

By this word [ habitude] we may observe that those men are not truly
valiant, who hazard themselves unto danger, through some light disposition, or
passion, as Ajax and Catiline did: nor through despair, as the soldier
Antigonus, who had lost hope to be cured of his impostume: nor yet those, who
inda^ger themselves for their own particular profit, as Spies, Pirates,
Merchants, and hired soldiers do. Sicut non Martyrem poena, sic nec fortem
pugna sed causa facit.

Which habitude not being in the strength of body, (whefore I call it rather
Valor, then Force) but in the [ mind,] shows us that Milo was not to be
accounted valiant, for bea^ing a great Ox, and cleaving an old Oke^ tree with
his hands: nor Tyrius fot breaking down an iron Gate with his shoulders': nor
yet Polyphemus for throwing great rocks into the sea, not such men.

Thirolie Valor requires that you hazard your selves only, [ for the King
the Country, and your own honor.] In such actions show your selves
Captains, when you are not accounted simple soldiers, as Androcidas,
Meleager, Camillus, Dentatus, and that courageous Scaeuola did in delivering
their Countries, and Cities, from the cruelty of the enemies. Yet I wish that
it be [ advisedly,] Non est inconsulta temeritas, nec periculorum amor, nec
formidabilium appetitio, sed diligentissima in tutela sui Fortitudo est. It is
no less Valor, says the wise philosopher, to shun a danger, the^ to run
rashly upon it; as appears by Socrates scorning of Laches, and Homers
commending of Aeneas, and Ulysses for flying, as the Lacedaemonians did at the
battle of Platees, and Iudathorses the king of Scythia from Darius, and the
Turk at this day, who uses commonly to retire himself at the first
skirmish, to scatter the Christian army. Also this condition [ Advisedly]
condemns al swaggerers; they are so indiscreet and rash in quarelling, that
if a man come near their shadow they will make him believe, that he has
iustled them; or if they hear any speak, through malicious ignorance, will
demand a commentary of his words, to understand what he means by this, or
that, to challenge him presently into the field. Oh what a noise and stir is
kept, that such a one is gone to fight! Friends must hunt after him, to know the
matter, which he cannot tell, only he thought such a one had offended him.
Then he consulteth, if he has sustained any wrong, and considers if his
honor has bin aniwais impaired, in remitting it into his friends hands, as
unable to keep it himself. This is all the discretion of many, to dishonor
themselves, and trouble their friends, with single combats, whereof I will give
my advise, seeing they are become so frequent and common.

Chapt. 27. Of the single combat.
Many men are of so little judgment, that they account him most valiant, who
has fought many combats, and that his cause has ever been best, when
there is nothing more uncertain, and oftentimes untrue, seeing every day we
see that dastardly and cowardly fellows triumph over valiant and courageous
soldiers, and sometimes over wise Captains in this pernicious kind of
Combat. In respect these fellows are ever in the Fence school, where if they
ca^ but hold out their rapier, the valiant man runs himself upon it, so
great is his courage that he would join with his adversary. Valor
consists not in this, that a man should be able to keep himself alwais
unbeaten, or unhurt, the^ their should be no valiant man in the world: for who
can hinder one to throw a stone at him or shoot him with a pistole? Nor would
I have men think that Gods assistance and power is ever tied unto their just
cause, they tempt God in urging him every hour to work miracles, for
iustifiing of their innocence, and condemning of the others guiltines, which
the Heathen Aeneas acknowledged very well in saying.

Arma amens capio, nec sat rationis in armis. Aen. 2.
For one time that David triumphed in single Combat against the great Giant,
who fought in an unjust action, we read of a thousand, who have gotten the
victory in defending a bad cause, both for the public and their own
particular. The history of the Kings of Judah and Israel, yea the whole bible
are full of such examples, to teach us (I say) that Gods Almighty hand is not
always tied and subject by any natural bond unto the right of any people, or
of some few persons in particular: but that he works al things both good and
evil by his powerful providence unto his own glory, yea that he draws the
victories, which the wicked have over the good men, and the feeble over the
strong, and the Coward above the Courageous, to the honor of his Divine
Majesty, which is is only permanent and unchangeable. Among the Heathen you
see that one Horatius who was a wicked man of himself, and defended a very
bad cause, killed the honorable and honest Curatians, who were enemis unto the
Roman Tyranie. Likewise the usurper Alexander the great's Cha^pion overcame
Darius his Captain, who defended his Princes lawful right, who is renou^ed in all histories, to have been a good religious Prince, agreeable and beloved of
al men for his upright Judgment: so naked Diosippus the Athenian having only a
club in his hand overcame the Armed Macedonian, having both a pike and a sword
to defend himself in the presence of Alexander; whose soldiers they were both.

Therefore I council you to consider that there is no Valor, or great Courage
to be every day swagring, and running to the field, with little or no regard of
your life, which is the Kings, and which ye should preserve carefully, to
hazard it only for his cause, as your predecessors have done heretofore.
Nothing could move them to draw their swords, which they held of the king for
his defense only, but the common cause. They could not be more offended with
the indiscreet words of any man, then the Light of the Sun can be obscured by
the darkness of the Clouds. As they required words with words only, so would I
have you to do, and to say with Tiberius, let us forget reports and false
bruits, or give them leisure to grow old. For if we be angry, they may be
thought true, if we neglect them, they shall be esteemed false. And truly
reports are like unto smoke, which if it have passage it euanisheth away,
without any ado, but if it be kept in, *it will soon take you by the nose,
and make your eyes to water, or to leave the house.

It is a too gross opinion to think that any Noble man's honor depends upon
an other man's word: for properly no man can be deprived of his honor, but by
himself, in flying from virtue to embrace vice. Nevertheless I will not infer
that ye should suffer your selves to be abused in action, rather then that
should be, J would council a Gentleman to answer a fool, according to his
folly: (Homo sum, nihil humani ame alienum puto.) The Gods themselves are
jealous of their honor, as they confess: Nos quoque tangit honor, templis
ga^demus and aris,
Turb^que caelestes inuidiosa sumus.
Quod si negligimur, magnis iniuria poenis
Soluitur, and i^stum pr^terit ira modum.


Yea as the Doctors of Law cry out in a clear action, L. *Antequ^ ff. de
offic. proc^^s.
Iura clamant: And how can or will he maintain the kings, his Countries, or
another man's honor, that is nether able, or willing to defend his own? There
is no man I think of what quality, estate, condition, or profession soever,
but he would be honored and respected in his own rank, if he be not more
dull and senseless, then a block. If we should suffer our selves to be
dishonored by any whosoever, except it be by his Majesty, who may dispose
of our lives at his pleasure, our state were miserable. No, no* the Italians,
who are of a far baser courage then we* teach us this resolution, rather to
die a thousand times, then to be abused and disgraced by any. Phillip of Maria
the Duke of Millans Kinsman, being angry with a poor gentleman of Berga^e,
named Lucio Pelfieri, kicked him twice with his foot, thinking that he durst
never presume to be reve^ged: but within a short space after the said Pelsieri
beat the Count Philipp in the City of Cremona with his pantofles. Little
Ulysses sound out the means to blind that huge mass of flesh, which
astonished every one with his monstrous greatness. Nature herself shows us
that the little waspe is able to trouble the fu^ious Bull: and the Beetle to
vex the towering Eagle. And among insensible things it is reported that the
little Ila^d of Aegina molested the great City of Athens: and our own Island
has troubled as much the great continent of F^ant and Spain, as ever that of
Sicilia did Italy. Not that I would counsel or encourage any man against that
respect and honor, which he owes unto his betters, but that I wish their
might remain always a mutual respect, between us. Amean gentleman should
always reverence a great man: and a greater man should not think that his
goodly possessions, many followers, and rich revenues, ca^ grante him any
lawful priuelidge to wrong his inferior. The King keeps the counters in his
hand, and lays some for more, some for less, as it pleases his wisdom.

I fear not Eudamidas and Cleomenes scoffing, and that answer which they made
unto the Rhetorician, who discoursed unto them of Valor, to counsel you
against him who has or would dishonor you, to go by degrees in revenging your
quarrel, and not to begin at that, which in all reason should be last, and the
very extremity it self. For I think it rather proceeds of cowardlines then
of courage, that ye go about at the very first to kill your enemy, as
appears by ma(...) men's practice, that tremble for fear so long as they see
him alive, whom they have offended; as if they had been wronged by them.
Every man confesses that it is greater valor to beat his foe, to cause him
to confess his fault and repent, then to (...) him. This is the only way to
be revenged: and therefore we sight nor with a stone when it hurts us,
because it cannot satisfy our revenge. To the end that you may be fully
satisfied of your wrong, the offender must have as great feeling in his
repentance, as you would have pleasure in your revenging: which made Bias to
cry out against that wicked man: I know that sooner or later thou shall repent
thy injury offered unto me, but I am afraid that I shall not see it: so said
the Orchomenians unto Lyciscus who betrayed them. He cannot repent himself
(which should be the principal end of this combat) when he is killed on the
contrary, if you will observe he threatens you rather in his fale, and is so
far from repentance, that he would kill you if he could. Alas! in killing
him, you wrong your self more then him: for you have caused him to die
suddenly and vnsensibly to undo your self and al yours for ever. He is at
rest, but you must runn day and night to escape the Sherifs and other the Kings
Officers hands. Wherefore learn of valiant Caesar to say of your selves, as
he did of himself: My choler makes not me outrageous in seeking revenge,
nor my just wrath to be cruel in exacting punishment.

My next advise is that you never chose to your self a Second, which if you
do, it betokens both little courage and less discretion, that you should
bring your friend in trouble and your self in greater danger. For naturally
al company causes a greater confidence in any danger, then when a man is by
himself alone. How unjust a thing is it, to make a friend partaker of our
misery, and punishment, who is not guilty of our faults? What indiscretion is
it to cause a man to fight for us, that is not offended, and for the most part
knows not his enemy? We request men oftentimes to do that thing for us.
which we would never enterprise for the^. Surely this indiscretion is unjust,
and to be wondered at, that we should charge a man to hazard his life for us,
unto whom we will not give the fourth part of our goods: nor would he lend you
a su^me of money, without sufficient security: notwithstanding, as if he were
instantly metamorphised into you; and ye changed into him, ye charge him, and
he obaieth you, in a matter of far greater importance. How dangerous it is,
ye may easily perceive; for if your Second be overcome any ways, then you
must fight against two: for I know not wherefore an assistant should show any
favor to his fellows enemy, having overcome his own, more then a soldier,
should see his companion set upon in a battle, and not help him; though
there be but on against him. The quarrel is not the Seconds, and therefore he
is not at his own disposition to fight, or leave, until the quarrel be ended:
He can nether be favorable nor sparing, without his prejudice and hatred unto
whom he has lent himself. But because your Combats are not single or double,
but as his Majesty says of you and al your kin, against him and all his: my
wish is that this sort of Combat, were as well smothered in the effect, as the
barbarous name thereof is unknown to any other Nation.

Chapt. 28. Of deadly Feides.
O What a shame is it to have our barbarous and horrible disobedience registered
by the Kings own hand? what discredit is it for us all, that all nations
should read that He and all his kin, against (...). 2
him and all his, bang it out bravely without respect to God, King, or common
weal? What disgrace is it for the whole nation, to hear strangers upbraid us,
according to his Majesty's own hand writ: that ye Nobles will think the King
far in your Common; in case ye agree too grant an assurance for a short space
to keep the peace? Why do ye thus forget your natural duty (if I dare a^ke
you without falling into feide with you) toward, God, your Prince, and
Country, to follow your particular passions? Has not the Lord commanded you
to love your brother as your selves? Has he not cursed them that kill, and
said thou shall do no murder? Has not the Lord commanded you to honor and
obey your Prince? Should ye not obey his Laws and Statuts? Are ye nor
Subjects? Should you not contain your selves in that state, wherein his
Majesty has placed you? Was it not for his own defense only and his State,
that he gave you armor to wear? When ye use the^ in your own particular
quarrel, do ye not deprive the King and State of their due and right? In
killing of your neighbors do ye not cause your Countries overthrow, and your
own death, which are the chief parts of our Politic body? Think you to
escape with your lives more the^ other parricides have ever done heretofore? or
that our country can consist with these internal dissensions more then theirs?
No, no, deceive not your selves: for Truth it self has said it, and it must
be, Regnum Luke 11. 17.
omne divisum desolabitur. The examples of confirmation should terrify you.

Was it not the feid between the Hannonians and Barchienues, that caused
Carthage's destruction? Was it not the dissension of the two Kings of Thracia
that made King Phillip to triumph over them both? Was it not the Prusian and
Venetian feid that troubled Constantinople, and caused forty thousand me^ to be
slain at one time? what shall I say of the Blacks, and VVhites, that overthrew
the flourishing state of Florence? Which of you al does not know that it was
the three or fourscore years feid, which made the English me^ triumph over
France? And to come nearer home, was it not the dissension amongst the Nobles
of England, that made Caesar, first conqueror thereof, (as he says himself)
and then William of Normandy, and the Saxons? who is ignorant of the great
ruins procured by the long feid, between the houses of York and Lancaster?
And which of us does not lament the loss of our friends, by the civil wars
between us and England? O quam meminisse horret what hurt and damage we
receive daily as yet with these barbarous feids!

Wherefore I wish you al to follow Scilurus his counsel, which he gave unto his
80. sons by the faggot of rods, to banish from amongst us, al hatred, feids,
envy, malice, and Iealousies, to be entirely, sincerely, and inseparably
conioined together in all unfeigned peace, love, friendship and concord. Nam vis
vnita fortior. Which we may easily effect in subduing our own affections,
whereby we shall obtain a more glorious victory, then if we placed our
standards in the farthest Senec. epist. 9.
confines of Asia and Africa: our triumph may be more renowned, then if we
overthrew the Medes and Persians. For he that can co^quer self Love, overcome
Ambition, bridle his fury, and subdue the unruly passions of his own mind:
Non ego cum cum summis viris Cic. pro Marcel.
comparo, sed simillimu^ Deo indico. Let us then arm our selves against our
common enemies and consider how we shall get the victory.

Chapt. 29. How ye may overcome Self-love.
Self-love is the greatest disease of the mind, and may truly be called
the plague of man; the capital Plat. 5. de leg
enemy of wisdom, the canker and corruption of the soul: -- Caecus amor sui
Horat. 1. c^^. ode. 18.

Ac tollens vacuum plus nimo gloria verticem.


This passion has not only been the cause of many Narcissus his changing
among you Nobles, but also has bred more diverse sects of Religion, and
Philosophy, then ever the Hydra of Lerna had heads. We should al pray with
the Spaniard, O God keep me from my self: For we are more blind then Thamyra
in our own Faults, and more sharp sighted in our neighbors, then Lynceus. It
is this passion that opens the door to pride, vanity, and flattery.
Wherefore without farther enarratio^ of the infinite mischievous effects, which
Self-love brings forth in general, and particular, I council you al to
beware and fly from it, in trying and examining your selves narrowly with a
serious and faithful search of your own imbecillitie, -- ne cui de te plus
quam tibi credas. Hor. 1. epist. 16
When ye have once found out your own weakness, and are able to judge aright
without al partiality: it is a token of a sound Judgment, of a right will, and
consequently of a ioieful victory.

Chapt. 30. How ye may overcome Ambition.
AMbition, which is an insatiable desire of honor, contends against Self-love
for the first place among the passions, in respect that it far overco^meth all the rest, as appears by Alexanders, Scipio's, and Pompeius his abstine^ce, in
refraining to touch the fairest Dames of the world. This passion causes Noble
minds, and high spirits to tread under foot al Laws, as the ambitious Doctor
witnesses saying, Si ius violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est, in
caeteris pietatem colas. It vilifieth and contemns al Religion, and good
conscience, as Ieroboa^, Mahomet, the Turk, and Pope testify, who tolerate
within their dominions al sorts of Sects and Villainies: and the Heretics
confirm the same; for they had rather be the masters of errors and lies, then
the disciples of truth.

It breaks the bonds of Nature, as is evident by the cruel murders of
Parents, children, husbands, wives, Brothers, and near kinsmen, and the
heinous facts of Absolon, Abimelech, Athalias, Romulus, Sei King of Persia, and
of Soliman the Turk, besides our own daily sight and experience. Ambition in
a word is that vacuum, which cannot be found by the Philosophers; that Ixions
wheel, Phaetons chariot, and Icarus his wings figured by Poetical fictions.
Through Ambition only the three parts of the world could not fill the three
corners of Caesar's and Pompeius hearts: the one Lucan. 1.
would not endure a companion, the other would not acknowledge a superior.

Haec Crassos, haec Pompeios evertit, and illum Iuven. Sat. 10.

Ad sua qui domitos deduxit flagra Quirites.
And as Nero's Arbiter writes elegantlie, the whole Petro* Arbit.
world was not sufficient for their Tombs in these verses, which with the
former I recommende unto your memory: Crassum Parthus habet: Lybico iacet
aequore Magnus:
Tertius ingratam perfudit sanguine Romam.
Et quasi non posset vt tellus far sepulchra,
Divisit cineres: hos gloria reddit honores.
To subdue this affection you must not mount higher the^ your wings will permit.
Limit your aspiring desires and ambitious thoughts within the compass of your
capacity. Let ever your merits march before your pursuits, and think to
attain unto some honorable charge and office of his Majesty through your
own deserts, and not by the favor of your friends, or greatness of your
Pedigree. Aspire ever by honorable and lawful means; otherwise be ye never so
highly exalted and advanced, your honor shall be but small. To betraie your
Prince, to sell your Country, or to co^sult with the Devil to get either honor
or riches; your shame shall ever exceed your Glory: and your punishment be
greater then your recompense before God.

Chapt. 31. A remedy against Love.
OUR third mortal enemy, which we have to fight against, and overcome, is
Carnal Love; a most furious and dangerous passion: these are the three
infernal furies: the three capital enemies of our salvation; the Devil, the
world, and the flesh; these are the three general and universal passions, which
comprehend all that 1 John. 2. 16
is in the world. Quicquid est in mu^do (says the Apostle) est concupi scentia
oculorum, aut carnis* aut superbia vitae. This last foe, which the Courtiers
call simply Love, is common unto man and beast, and turns men into beasts. It
was Circes cup, and that Potion, which metamorphised Ulysses his followers.
This is a strong and puissant enemy; therefore ye had need to come furnished
with complete armor to overthrow him. David could cut of the head of Goliath,
and yet was not able to resist Bathsheba. Sampson could slay the Philistines
with the iawbone of an Ass, and yet was made as^aue to Dalilab. Hercules
performed so many incredible labors, that his Taske-mistres was feign to cry
out, Defessa sum iube^do. and yet for all this was conquered by this enemy, and
made to spin on a Rock by Omphila. Yea the Gods themselves were overcome by
this enemy, who has his quiver full of diverse arrows, some with heads of gold,
and some of silver. You must arm your selus against the shot thus.

Abstain from the company of these impudent Lais, who with their painted
faces, smooth tongues, and glancing eyes study to entrapp young Gentlemen in
their snares; as also from reading of Love Pamphlets, which corrupt a chaste
mind no less then bawdy talk.

Consider that the beauty of a woman is like a flower that withers, and that
many have perished thereby; and it is a glory to triumph over it, in regarding
it noe more then Xenocrates did fair Phrynes inticements.

Away with these diabolical inventions, and unlawful means, which many use
to satisfy their filthy lust, Pin. 1. Pyt^.
as the laying of a wagtaile, or a wrynecke unto your heart; these drugges, and
hot drinks, these inchaunted Song. 7.
rings mentioned by Ariosto.

Beware likewise of these fearful superstitions, as to watch upon S. John's
evening, and the first Tuesdaie in the month of March, to conjure the Moon, to
lie upon your back having your ears stopped with Laurel leaves; and to fall a
sleep, not thinking of God; and such like follies al forged by the infernal
Cyclop's and Plutoe's servants.

Receive not those foolish favors also; as bracletes made of hair, the half
of a ring, Letters written with blood: which bewich oftentimes the chaste minds
of many Noble youths.

Sit procul omne nef as* If your passion be too great, and that your affection
is much inclined to love, break it into sundry desiers, as the Poet teaches
you.

Cum morosa vago singultiet inguine vena,
Conijcito humorem collectum in corpora quaeque. Pers. sa^. 6.

Resist it in time, and shift it in changing place and company, or smoother it
with better thoughts: for a little thing may turn you, if ye would consider
things in themselves, and as they are of their own nature. Plutarck laments,
and bewailes the death of his daughter in remembering only the fopperies of her
childehood; and it was C^sars gown that troubled and disquieted all the City
of Rome, which his death did not. In like manner the remembrance of
loue-tokens, of a kiss at your farwell from her, of some particular actio^, of
a last commendatio^ will afflict and trouble you: yea the very sound of her name.

-- His se stimulis dolor ipse lacessit. L(...). 2.
Al these things are nothing in respect of the essence of the subject, which
moves your passion, and kindles your fury. And seeing the forms of love are
variable and diverse, as ye may learn of the Poets, that it cannot be limited
or bridled by certain rules: my best advise in this Combat shall be the
Apostles precept (which of it self is sufficient) if it were well observed (to
wit,) carnem cum vitijs crucifigamus, that you mortify the Ro^. 8. Gal. 5.
wantonness of your flesh. This is the best amulet, and most sovereign
cou^ter-poison against al Cupids venomous darts: and the allurements of Venus.

Yet lest you should think, I play the Menedemus: I council you not to
abstain from the frequentatio^ of virtuous Ladies: which I think as
profitable to form your Civil behavior, and quicken your wits, as I perswad
you that the haunting of those Calypso's are hurtful both for soul and body.
It belongs to such images as Pigmalion made to be lively and senseless al at
once; for my self, I ever accounted the conversation of honest Dames the
School of honor for a young Gentleman: nevertheless I wish you always to
observe a mediocritie in all your visitations, and that you be ever upon your
guarde, cheiflie amongst those who are fair, of a comlie, gracious, and
alluring behavior. It is folly and lack of discretion, when you suffer your
selves to be lead into an inconsiderate affection. Imitate the Comaedians in
playing your part* only in words, except your suite be unto her for marriage,
which requires in all reason, sound affection, and true love.

But before ever ye invoke Hymen^^, Hymen, or offer any sacrifice unto
I^no, my council is that you travel: as I will serve you for a Guide, the best I
can, in this next book: that in France and other Countries ye may perfect,
and accomplish that perfection, which is requisite in a Noble man. For
traveling is the best way to perform that, as also it is a most excellent and
sovereign preservative against Love, according to Ovid's own commendation in
many places.

Tutantum, quamuis firmis retinebere vinclis,
I procul, and longas carpere perge vias.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT, EARL OF ESSEX And EWE, etc.
Right Honorable According to the common custom observed at the parting, and
farwell of friends, I humbly, like the poor Persian, do present this book for a
little token of my great good will toward your Lordship; praying most heartily
the best Guide of al Travelers to conduct, and preserve you, both in body and
soul, from the cruel den of Cyclops, the venomous cupp of Circes, and from the
entising voice of the Sirens beyound Sea, Et quodcunque mali est. --

Truncoque simillimus Hermae, I point out the way, which I wish your Lordship,
and al other Noble Travelers to keep. So hoping that my affection shall excuse
my presumption herein, and that your Lordship will accept as favorably of my
small offer, as Artaxerxes did Sinaetas his two hand fuls of water, I humbly
take my leave, in signing eternal obedience unto

Your Honors Commandments. I. C.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF NOBLE Institution, showing a young Noblemans Duty in
Travailing.
The Summarie
TRavailing has ever been esteemed and used, as the principal and best means,
whereby a young Noble man, or any other may profit his Prince, his Country,
and himself. It is the true Science of Policy, and the good School of al
government. There are no rules of Moral Philosophy so sure and certain as
those, which we learn by other men's examples. This made Minos and
Rhadamanthus, Solon, and Lycurgus, Plato and Pythagoras enterprise so great
voyages, to frame their Laws out of that knowledge, which they obtained by
observing the manner of foreign governments; in choosing the best Statutes,
and leaving the worse: taking out of one and another, that which they thought
best for their own States. For it is nothing to hear and see many things, if
the Travailer judge not and retain that which serves for his profit and use:
He must weigh and measure al things with the weight and rule of reason.
Wherefore ye young Nobles of great Brittan having formed your judgments by
this discipline premitted and reformed your imagination, to represent al diverse
objects unto your Memory, my last council is, that ye Travail for the
perfecting of your knowledge, if the constitution, ability, and strength of
your body will permit. To this effect, I propose unto your consideration, First
what I think necessary for your preparation, before you take your journey:
Secondly what you should do in your Travail. Thirdly what should be your
behavior after your returning home.

Chapt. 1. Of a young Noble man's Provision for Travailing.
AFter that you are assured and persuaded in mind, that it is with Gods
pleasure, and permission you should travail, and that your Parents have
obtained his Majesty's License for you to travail; My first advise is, that
you take your Tutor with you (who^ I presuppose always to have been a
Trauailer himself) and your honest Purse-bearer, with one Page only; for
changing is not good. A greater train will hinder you from the knowledge of
many secrets, that more privately you may attain unto: and also will make you
to be observed more narrowly by the better sort of Strangers, and scoffed at by
the meaner, not without jealousy and contempt of the basest. I wish you
especially never to go without your Tutor, (who shall be a faithful Achates
unto you) more then Agamemnon would want his Nestor, or Achilles could be
without his Chiron: and as Alexander had always Aristotle with him; and that
great Scipio, who going in Embassage, took Panatius his Tutor, before the
other four, who were reco^mended unto him only by the Senate of Rome: as also
Ulysses had Pallas for his guide, in all his twenty years travailing. Because
you shall not always happen upon a gentle Alcinous, and walk in his fair
gardens full of al harmless pleasures; but shall either fall into the hands of a
cruel Cyclops: or into the lap of some wanton Dame Calypso: and sail
oftentimes between Scylla and Charibdis, yet with Palla's help, and Tiresias
his good council (that is by your Tutors and Purse-bearers prudent advise) you
shall escape al danger. If your parents or friends will allow you, and your
quality require a greater company then your Tutor and two servants: I council
you to choose them in France; where you shall have good store of faithful men
and boys; who will serve you gladly, and be profitable unto you, both in their
natural language, and in buying of sundry necessary things, wherein your
Purse-bearer may be consened, either for lack of the French tongue, or
because he is not so well acquainted with their price and fashion of counting.

Next you must provide for money, which is the soul of Travail, as it is the
Sinews of war. If your Parents or friends be contented with my first advise of
three, in your Train: me thinks two hundred pounds sterling at the least will
be but sufficient to mainetaine you honorably: as I render unto them this
petticount.

Ten french Crowns monthly for your own diet, 8. for your Tutors. 6. for
your man's, and 4. for your Page. and the other four crowns, which remain of
your hundred french francks monthly for keeping you in use of your exercises,
which I suppose you have learned here at home, except you continue in learning
to ride, which will cost you fifteen crowns monthly. As for the other hundred
pounds English, it will be little enough for your clothes, books, traveling,
and sundry extraordinary charges: And so you may add or abate,
proportionablie according to the number of servants, that you will have or put
away.

Remember to take with you four bills of exchange for the whole year, with
letters of advise to be paid quarterlie by aequal portio^s in frech-crowns of
weight, or double pistolets, so you shall not be driven to those shifts whereunto
I have seen diverse of our countriemen put to, by long expecting of letters
from home, which either their friends forgetfulness, or the Carriars negligence,
has caused, nor shall you sustain any loss by the quality of your money in
any country; but in some places both of France and els-where great gain.

I would not have you to trouble your self with too much carriage: for a light
burden fare borne, becomes heavy, and you shall find books, as al other
things at a far better rate there, then here. Also you must fashion your
clothes according to the country, where your residence shall be: unless you
would be mocked and gazed at. Wherefore I recommend only unto you a
Iourney-booke, wherein you should write in good order every night at your going
to bed all that you have seen and heard worthy of particular observation, that
day; as here I will give for an example some few lines to fill up the first page.

Chapt. 2. Some general points to be observed in Traveling.
Ulysses, the pattern of al Travelers, had not only Minerua for his guide,
but also Mercurius for his daily host, who fed him with that sweet herb Moly:
that is, with the love of honesty and hatred of vice, which David more
plainly calls the fear of God, the only remedy against al enchantments
and intisments of sin. Wherefore I council you to attempt nothing without
imploring Gods favorable assistance that al your actions may tend to his
glory, your own salvation; to the service of your gracious Prince, and the
honor of your native country: that your carriage and behavior be nether
scandalous unto others, no^ disgraceful to your self: that you may continue
all ways in his love, fear, and obedience, as you have bin taught at home
here. For the fear of God serves for a curb, to restrain al improuident and
violent courses, that carry men into inconveniences; and for a guide to
instruct them in all things warrantable, honorable, and pleasant in the sight of
God and men. And it is requisite that every day according to your first
institution you consult with him by your hearty prayers.

Next, seeing your chief end in traveling should be to become more
prudent, my advise is that you contemn not, nor misprise any good council,
how base soever the person be that gives it; respect not the speaker, but
that which is spoken, and chiefly if you hear that his life is correspondent
to his words, be he never of so simple or bare a coat. for as Cato* said,
wisme^ ma^e learn more of fools, then fools can do of wisemen: yea there is
nothing so hurtful unto on that would be wise, then to have a good opinion of
his own wit, or else to suffer himself to be wholly guided by one man, whom
he will only believe against all the world.

Trust not, nor mistrust strangers, but keep your self between the two,
without any demonstration of either of them. To be to confident in any man,
it is dangerous: and to show that you mistrust him, is offensive, and makes
him to be your enemy: keep always the bridle raines even in your hand;
nether to slack, nor too straight.

Join the Doves innocent simplicity with the Serpents prudencie: in defending
your selves from other men's subtle deceipts, and cousening tricks: for you must
never deceive, nor be deceived, if you can choose.

Who would show himself wise, must observe both in word and action, the Laws
and customs in things indifferent of that country where he travaileth: in
obeying nobly and freely all magistrates and superiors; as also in examining
all their fashions with the squire of Reason: not considering their strangenes,
rarenes, invention, or any such like accident in them: but truly, naturally
according to their essence and utility, which is oftentimes hid. I studest
sapere, qui vbicunque opus sit, animum possis flectere. For custom (as I have
said) is a second nature, as appears by Darius essaie, who asked of the
Greeks what they would take to eat their disceased fathers, as the Indians
did, and of the Indians, what they would, to imitate the Greeks in burning
their fathers; who abhorred both his motion, and would not do any of them for all the world. It were a wonder to many to see, or hear how in these far
countries, me^ make Reverence like women, women like men: how men in saluting
one another put their finger down to the ground, and then up toward heaven:
how they turn their backs toward whom they salute: and many such other
customs; as never to cut their hair, nor pare their nails: some to cut it on
the one side, and not on the other. But to come nearer home, and to those
parts, where I wish you to travel; I doubt not but that you will marvel to see
how the French me^ are afraid of the Seraine (as they call it) that the Italian
will be sick to lie upon a fetherbed, and an Alman to lie without two; that the
Spaniard cannot drink like a Sueise: nor the Sueise eat like a Spaniard,
(when he paies not for his meat) that we cannot drink the wine when it is
lovv, which is the only sweet and pleasant drink of the Princes of Polonia:
Sic ratione non comp^nimur, sed consuetudine abdue^mur: honestius put amus quod
frequentius: recti apud nos locum tenet, vbi publica facta.

In company hear more willingly then speak, and learn of others rather
then show your self a teacher, albeit your sufficiency perhaps be greater
then theirs, that do speak: for it is many men's fault rather to show
themselves, then to know what other men are, and to unfold their own wares,
rather then to purchase new.

With my consent you shall not enter in dispute and controversy, neither with
those, who are superior in rank, learning, or age, nor with your inferiors
in any wise.

Notwithstanding I would council you to be discreetlie curious in all things,
and with every one, making your profit of all, applying your judgment to
choose that, which is most fitting for your use, and to omit that, which is not.

And to contain this general advise in few words, sit frons aperta, lingua
parca, men's clausa: and more briefly, Vide, audi, iudica. Hear, see, and say
not all.

Chapt. 3. Of some special things to be observed in travailing.
2 Part of duty in travailing. Her. 1. epist. 2.
HOmer (as Horace says)
Vtile propo suit vobis exempl^r Vlyssem,
Qui domitor Troiae multorum providus vrbes,
Et mores hominum inspexit
to imitate in the interim of your travail. Understanding by [ Citties] their
Suburbs, Towns, and Villages, also their situation, their strength either by
sea or land; their quantities, figures and circuits, together with their
Haue^s, Ports, Walls, Gates, Bridges, which ye should mark, where they are
strongest, where weakest; their Churches, Universities, Colleges, Halles,
Schools, Libraries, considering their Monuments, Images, and fair Tombs,
Pyramides and Pillars: of what profession their schools be of: what famous men
of Learning flowrish in them: what number of Students, what company of
strangers; their orders, privileges and such like. Moreover their Arsenals,
Store houses, Citadels, Castles, Towers, and Sconces, numbering their Canons,
their Munition both offensive and defensive, their store of commodities, not
only to nourish the people within the Land, but to help their friends and
neighbors in time of necessity: their streets, public Ambulatories, market
places, and noble men's houses and such like; about discovery whereof, your
Mathematics shall stand you in great steed. And to the intent you may have a
more facil access unto the sight of al these, I would desire you not to spare
some small consideration upon the keepers thereof.

But [ Manners] which are the vital spirits of al these, are much more
difficult to be known, and require Judgment far more, to observe their
Government, whether it be Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or Democraticall.

Knowing this, you should enquire of their first establishing, beginning, and
who was their first King: if it be ruled by one Prince, whether it be by
inheritance, or election, how many races their King has continued; how old
he is; what wisdom and discretion he is of, whether he rules al things by
himself, or by his counsel; or by both together: how he is inclined to war
and peace: what good care he takes to see that every man has justice.
Moreover how many children he has: how, where and after what order they are
brought up, and what hope there is of them; if he have none who is the next
apparent heir to the Crown, either by the Law of the Country, or by the Law
of Nature, or other pretenses. Lastly, what choice of persons the King has
about him for fauorits; whereby you shall easily discover his natural
inclination, ability, or weakness.

If it be a common wealth; Learn who are the Governors, how many, and of
what Quality they be, how long they remain in office, how, and by whom they
are chosen: what is their authority, how many Councils there be; and the
number of every Council, how many Jurisdictions they have, where is the
supreme, and where the subalternate seats of Justice, and which is common to
al sorts of Government, inform your self of their Revenues; whether they be
in Demaine, in Subsidies, Taxations, Customs, Pensions, Tribute, or in
Merchandise and Traffic.

You should know, whether their forces be of themselves, by their friends, or
by both together; whether they are stronger in foot-me^, or in horsemen;
whether by Sea or by Land; how many Ports, Ships, Galleys, or other shipping
they have, which are their strongest harbors, and safest; which the weakest,
and easiest to be surprised: If their strength be well garnished with
soldiers; and whether they are under any other kings protection, or if they
stand by themselves.

Especially learn who are the chief Noble men in all the country; who are
fit for the council table, who are for the field; and who for both; what age
they are of; in what credit with their Prince, and how they are honored and
beloved of the Commons.

Likewise you should inquire of the nature of the people, whether they obey for
fear, or favor; whether they be given to idleness or to pains taking; to
eating, or drinking, or to both: whether they be addicted to war, or to peace:
lastly, what virtues or vices they are most given unto, and quibus modis
temperanter habeatur.

The least of these are of no small moment to be understood: for besides the
particular profit, which you shall reap thereby, you have a copious and fertile
subject to work upon, either to reform evils in your own Country after your
return, or else to move a commotion, or pacification between foreign powers
and nations, as you may be employed in hereafter by his Majesty.

Wherefore my last advise is, that you have ever your Ephemerides in readiness to
write every night, what you have observed that day: and so with Gods grace,
you shall return home again sufficiently instructed in all things pertaining
to the good government of the state. So you see, that I council you not to
employ your whole travail in learning the cinquepas; it is your head that I
wish to go in measure. Nor is it my will, you should consume your time, in
marking the highness of one steeple above another, or the difference of one bell
from another. Nor that you should fix your eyes to admire the fine marble in
Italy, to look upon the Cardinals fair palaces: to read all the Bulls pardons,
and pasquils in Rome: to tire your feet in running from one Ambassadors house
to another: to go from Rome to Venice, and there to be rowed in the Go^dels
from one Curtizan to another, to swagger and fight all the night long in Padua:
and so to spend your time, and money badlie in base and common things, without
respect of al danger, either of body or soul.

Nether is, or ever shall my council be, that you should bestow your long
travel, to learn how to become partial or factious, or to dissemble an injury
for a long time, spying an opportunity to revenge: nor to become arrogant, or
riotous, nor yet to cast your self into a Labarinth of evil thoughts, which
you would essaie after your return, to bring forth in act either against your
Prince, country, nearest neighbor, or your own family: who^ I wish ever that
you might honor, pleasure, and profit, directing your whole enterprises and
endeauours to their good, before your own.

Chapt. 4. A directorie of the ways and Countries, where a young Noble man
should travail, with some particular things pointed out by the way.
Traveling in my judgment is but a lively History, as Simonides called
Poetry a speaking painting. Therefore I will not alter that method, which your
Tutor observed in showing you the dead body. Go on, after you have taken
leave of your Parents and friends to see first this short compendiarie of your
long perigrination. Great Britain is the little abridgment of the great
world: Here you may see in small bounds, which hereafter you may observe
throughout the whole continent: this is the true (...) diffuled about the
terrestial glob, where al things are contained and compacted in a lesser volume.

Come then to see their Majesty's shining like the two great lights above; this
La^d is so pleasant, so populous, so abounding in riches, so fertile in corn, so
rich in money, woods, and waters, the air so clear, and the climate so
temperate, that through your whole Journey you shall see none more.

Make Cambridge and Oxford to be in your way, if you come from Scotland:
their acquaint your selves with the learned Doctors, as I doubt not, but you
have performed that duty at home: frequent their public Lectures, until you
be informed of their orders, better you shall not see, nor find greater
courtesy joined with learning until your return: fail not to see one of the
fairest Libraries in Europe at Oxford, for the rarest, choicest and best
disposed books I think in the world.

After you have taken your leave of his Majesty and the Princes Highness, and
seen the vnco^parable Momuments at Westminster, and other places about
London; delight your self in vewing his Majesty's great Ships at Rochester in
your going to Dover, where you shall see a strong Castle opposed to that of
Calice.

In going to Paris pass by Amians, where you shall see both a strong City,
and one of the finest Churches in France, hanged with costly pictures. For S.
John Baptists head, you may see four of them els-where, as well as there,
therefore I council you rather to see the French Kings Tombs at S. Denis.

When you come to Paris, which is another little world: by my advise you shall
first salute the King of great Brittaine's Ambassador (as in all other
Countries where you go) before you go to the Court: and to the end, that you
may be the more acceptable to his L. I wish you to take some letters of
commendatio^ from your friends to prepare the way, and to give you a more
facil access thereafter.

I think it is a token of little courage in a Noble man of any good sort, if
he make not himself known to the French King, and contracts not acquaintance
with the young Princes and Nobles of his Court; who are both courteous and
humane, as al French men are.

Having seen the fashion of the Kings Court, and that glorious Court of
Parliament at Paris, retire your self to Orleans; where you shall make your
cheeifest reside^ce, or else pass to Poictiers. For I think these, two of the
best Cities in France, in respect of the wholsomenes of the air, the
plesa^tnes of the feilds; the goodness of the French tongue, the commodity of
your exercises, the courtesy of the people; especially at Poictiers, and which
I should have said first of al; for the liberty of your conscience, and most
frequent exercise of your Religion, to gether with your best occasion to learn
the laws, which I think should be your chiefest studies; seeing you have only
to perfect your language, which your Tutor taught you here. In going to
Poictiers, or if you stay at Orleans; it will not repent you to make a Iourneie
of purpose to see my Lord of Plessis, who is one of the bright beams of this
light, which shines (praised be God) more clearelie in this Island, then in
any other Countreie under the Sun. He will recompense your pains with sweet
and comfortable councels flowing from an honest and godly heart, out at a
golden mouth of eloquence, for your better direction and consolation al your
life time after.

Albeit I know that the common course of our Travelers is from Orleans, to
pass through Burgundy, or Burbonie toward Lions; yet I counsel you when you
take your Iourny again, to go through Poictieu, Xaintonge, Gasconie, Languedoc,
Prouence, and to come up the River of Rhone, through Dauphane unto Lions. For
the nearest way is not always the best, and the farther way about, the
nearer way home. In going through Guienne, you shall see 1. the Court of
Parliament of Brittany; the Praesidial Seat of Poictiers. 2. the Court of
Parliament of Bourdeaux. 3. of Nerake, which is for Religion. 4. of Tolouse. 5.
of Aix in Provence, and 6. that honorable Court of Parliament in Grenoble;
with a Chamber of Half party for Religion, where in going any of the other
ways, you can only see the Court of Parliament at Dijon. Moreover in taking
the left hand, you shall see, 16. or 17. great Provinces, al different in
Language, fashions and Laws, as if they were diverse countries: you shall pass
through many great Cities, and the second Rome Auignon. There are many
vvorthie and honorable men, whom I wish you to salute ever in your journey, and
especially that valiant and learned French Hercules, my Right Honorable Lord
of Deguiers in Dauphane, that one day you may say you saw so famous a
Captain, who has honored the French Chronicles so largely by his valiant,
and almost incredible exploits, and as yet (notwithstanding his graie hairs)
defends this side of the Alps with his sword, better then the white snow and
nipping frosts.

Having taken your leave of his L. you may have fresh money upon your letter
of exchange at the bank of Lions, where I would wish you to pass through
Chamberry to see the Court of Parliament of Sauoy, and that imprennable Fort of
Barreau, and the strong Castle of Momillaine; at the Fort you shall nether
co^plain of your bad intertainement, nor loss of your Journey; Brave Barron of
Morges Governor thereof, is so well affectioned both unto our Religion and
Country, that nothing will be hid from your sight.

There are many things worthy observation in that well ruled Common weal of
Geneva, therefore I counsel you to repose yourselfe there some month or more
before you visit the Duke of Savoy at Thurin: of who^ you shall have a fair
cheereful countenance, and gracious enough entertainment: and I dare assure you
of noe less courtesy, at the great Duke of Florence his Court, whose virtues
you will admire: nether Doubt I of any Princes Courtesy in Italy, if you go
to the^; but I will not council you to stay any long time there, after you
have gone from Rome to Venice. That Countreie is so dangerous, that albeit you
could be no more wounded then Achilles, yet the pleasures and diverse
allurements to sin are so frequent, that you cannot escape the poisoned darts
of Paris Alexander, Barbatos licet admoue as mill inde magistros.

It were a fair and worthy voyage, if you shipped at Venice, with some
Ambassador to go unto Constanti rent in faith, manners, apparel, and custom
from al you ever saw before, and doubtless should find many other things
worthy of observation, which are not in this hemisphere, which may serve much
for the bettering of your understanding.

But if you cannot go so far, at least pass the mountain of Trante,
addressing your self toward the Emperors Court, and Camp, through Germany:
when you are in Hungary, mark the Forts; and if the Christian army be in the
field, observe their order and fashion of Martial exploits: enquire for the
Generals, Coronells, and number of soldiers of every nation; spare not to
hazard your self against Gods enemy; for I would have you to be valiant and
wise.

At your return, if you pass not to Polonia, visit all those virtuous Princes
of Germany; and because all their courtesies and promises of friendship are
confirmed with the Cup in hand: I desire you the^ to practice that lesson,
which I wished you to learn before, and despise not their custom in refusing
to pledge the^ more then ordinary, rather then you should loose their
favorable acquaintance, and displease them.

Continue your journey along the River of Rhene, until you come to Flanders,
where you shall not fear to salute the Archduke, and to see his forces,
acquainting your self with his Spanish Captains, ever to learn some good
observation in Martial affairs.

From him come to Holland and Zeland, to do your reverence unto that second
Mars, Prince Morris: there you shall think your self almost at home, among
our Britain army: acquaint your self more familiarlie with these two
Hectors, S. F. and Ho. Veres, and our most noble and courageous Lord Bachleuke.
This is the place where you may learn to be perfect in military discipline;
there you shall be moved by example, and encouragement to be valiant: yet I wish
you not to be too rash in enda^gering your life and reputation, where neither
your death nor wounds can be either honorable, or profitable.

I will not wrong you so much, nor yet mine own Judgment, as to council you to
come home, before you kiss the most Noble King of Denmarkes hands; and to
know in what he will emploie you unto our Kings Majesty. They are the two
Guards of this North Pole; and two Princes that cannot be envied more, then
imitated in all virtue and wisdom. They are not more strai; lie conioined in
alliance, then united in perfection; as you were either an hearing, or seeing
witness, within this twelue-month.

Lastly, if you would go to Spain, I will neither counsel you, nor be your
guide: for there the best natured Nobleman of this Land shall be corrupted:
blasphemy, and contempt of al holiness and Religion are so ordinary and
usual: Yea if the most devout and since^est Papist in the world go thither with
any money in his purse; he is suspected presently, apprehended, and found
guilty by that cruel scourge of Christ's Church the Inquisition house. It is
gain and not conscience: it is the damnation both of body soul, and not the
salvation any ways, which the searchers of that Prodigious superstition seek
after. Therefore come home, where ye may serve God aright, and emploie that
Talent (which you have gathered,) duly, as becomes you.

Chapt. 6. Of a young Noble man's behavior after his returning from beyond Seas.
BEcause it is impossible but both your body and purse must be wearied after
so long a ^ourneie: I think it good you repose and refresh your self some
month, before you come to consecrate unto his Majesty that, which you have
gotten by your Travail. It is his due, and to him and your Country you are
bound to emploie al, as it shall please his wisdom to appoint, and prescribe
you to do. Spartam quam nactus fueris, tam adorna.

While you are kneeling at his feet, admire in his Majesty's countenance al
those rare and singular virtues, and gracious perfections together united;
which you have observed particularly dispersed among the persons of so many
high Princes: advise well with what resolution and truth, you answer his wise
demands.

Remember your duty likewise unto your most Noble Prince Henry, and his
gracious brother, the Duke of York.

So long as you stay at Court, labor by your good behavior to be known of
al men, but frequent ^ew, and only such as you may learn something of; and
not those vain and fantastic persons, who will envy and despise nothing more,
then your worthy deseruings, which dishonor their Rusticity and barbarous
ma^ners

When you go to the Countreie amongst your friends, which I think necessary
that you do once in the year: quia co^tinuus aspectus minus reverendos magnos
homines ipsa satietate facit. and that you may provide before hand for your
charges, I wish you to behave your self modestly toward the Gentlemen, that
are your neighbors, and all others. Think not (with a company of vain
glorious companions) that they are any thing baser or inferior unto you, who
have a fine suit of apparel after a new and strange fashion, when they have
not changed their good ancient belly. This should be one of your best lessons,
which you have learned in Traveling, to judge and esteem of a man by his wit,
discourses, and integrity of life, and not by his habit, the form of his hat
or by the fashion of his breeches. For a fine Diamond, be it never so evil cut,
is better and more precious the^ the best counterfeit, that a goldsmiths ca^put
in a ring. It is ever Platoe's man, to wit, the mind, which I would have you
to respect, and not the exterior parts.

Forget not your old friends for new acquaintance; more then you should change
the good ancient Britain fashion for some fresh toies. These are not the
fruits, which are expected of you by your perigrinatio^, that you should
return home with some Bargamaske salutation, some Tuscane term, or
Spanishpanan. Here the approved civility and Countreie language are more
esteemed then either the Italian huffe with the shoulder, or the Duch puff with
the pot, or the French a pishnesse in ceremo^ies. Nisi sapienti sua non
placent: omnis stultitia laborat fastidio sui.

Finalie he who is A and O, the beginning and ending, the parting and resting
place of our whole Pilgrimage in this world, shall be my first and last advise
unto you al; and to every on of you that you honor, fear, and serve him with
a pure, free, and devout heart for ever, at home and abroad; putting your whole
trust and confidence in him, dealing honestly, plainly, and Sincerlie, in all
simplicity, and aequitie in all your actions, according to the laws and
Statuts of the Countreie: conscientiam suam quisque aperiens, semperque tanquam
in publico viuens, se magis quam alios verens. Be moderate in all your thoughts,
words, and deeds, laying aside all Pomp, glory, and vanity of this world to
lead an happy, and contented life, and after this to possess and enioie life
Eternal.

FINIS.

