THE CONVERTED JEW OR CERTAIN DIALOGVES BETWEE^ MICHEAS A LEARNED JEW.

And others, touching diverse points of Religion, controuerted between the
Catholics and Protestants.

Written by M. JOHN CLARE a Catholic Priest, of the Society of JESUS.

Dedicated to the two Universities of OX^^RD and CAMBRIDGE

The leaf following shows the Interlocutours (...)



Iudaeis nou a lux ^riri visa est.

Hesther. 8. PERMISSV SVPERIORVM. Anno. M. DC. XXX.

The Interlocutours of every Dialogue.
1. In the first Dialogue is disputed; whether the Church of Rome has made any
change in faith and Religion, since the first plantation of it by the Apostles?
It is proved, that it has not.

The Interlocutours are. Cardinal Bellarmyne of worthy memory Michaeas a
learned Jewish Rabine. Doctor Whitakers of Cambridge.

Ad Romanos perfidia non potest habere accessum.

Cyprian. lib. 1. epist. 3.



2. In the second Dialogue, entitled: The second part of the Converted Jew, is
discussed; whether in every age since the Apostles; or rather whether but in
any one Age sin^e that time, till Luthers days, there can be given any
Instances of Professors of Protestancy? It is proved, that no such Instances
can be given.

The Interlocutours. Michaeas, the foresaid Jew. Ochinus, who first planted
Protestancy in England, in King Edward the sixth his reign. Doctor Reynolds of
Oxford. Neuserus, Chief Pastor of Heidelberg, in the Palatinat.

Si dixerint vobis: Ecce in deserto est; nolite exire. Ecce in penetratibus;
nolite credere.

Math. 24.



3. In the third and last Dialogue, styled: The arraingnment of the Converted
Jew. It is discoursed; Whether the Protestants of the Catholics, do stand more
chargeable, with disloyalty to their lawful Princes? It is proved, that the
Protestants stand more chargeable. In this last dialogue, are diverse other
points of Catholic Religion briefly handled.

The Interlocutours. The right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice of England.
Michaeas the former Jew. M. Vicechancelour of Oxford.

Vidi mulierem, ebriam de sanguine Sanctorum.

Apocalyp. 17. THE ARGUMENT OF THE FIRST DIALOGVE.
MICHAEAS (a learned Jewish Rabine) by his diligent comparing of the Prophecies
of the Old Testament, touching JESUS CHRIST, with the exact accomplishment of
them, recorded in the New Testament; forsakes his former Iudaisme, and
imbraceth the Christian Religion. But in observing diverse differences touching
faith among Christians (and particularly among the Catholics and Protestants)
knows not to whether side to range himself. At this time it so faleth out,
that there is a general meeting of many famous learned Men of all Religions,
in the great City of Cosmopolis in Vtopia: among whom Cardinal Bellarmyne,
and Doctor Whitakers are thither comne. Michaeas hastneth thither, and
imparteth to the said Cardinal and Doctor his present state, and opens to
them his uncertainty, whether to embrace the Catholic faith, or Protestancy.
The Cardinal and the Doctor according to the different Principles of each
others religion, propound to him different means of settling his judgment in
points of faith. Michaeas (for some peculiar reasons) forbeareth both their
directions; He reduces the trial of all to this one head: to wit, that
whereas he fyndeth in the New Romans 1. and 15. and 16. Act. 28.
Testament, that the true faith was once planted by the Apostles in Rome; He
says, that if it can be proved, that this faith ever altered since the
Apostles times, he will become a Protestant; if not, he means to be a Roman
Catholic. Hereupon he earnestly entreats the Cardinal and the Doctor, that
they would enter into dispute, touching the change of faith in the Church of
Rome. They both accord to his request, and instantly begin a serious and grave
discourse touching this subject. Cardinal Bellarmyne so presses Doctor
Whitakers with weight of arguments, and by discovering the weakness of the
Doctors answers and Objections, as that in the end the Doctor (entering into
great intemperance of words, against the Church of Rome) abruptly breaks off
his discourse, and suddenly departs. Michaeas, as convinced with the force of
the Cardinals disputation, is resolved to become a Roman Catholic; and so
accordingly receaueth in the end in the Cathedral Church of Cosmopolis, his
Baptism, by the hands of the Cardinal, by whom also in some short time after,
he is made Priest. Thus far concerning the fiction of this first Dialogue.

TO THE TWO MOST FAIR SISTERS THE TWO MOST ILLUSTRIOUS UNIVERSITIES OF OXFORD
AND CAMBRIDG.
MOST remarkable and learned Academians, in whose due praises I could willingly
here insist, were it not, that I loath all show of oylye assentation. You may
be here aduertized, touching the ensuing Treatises, that I have made choice to
set them down rather in method of Dialogues, then in any other form of style:
Because in this any delicate and fastidious age (which is quickly cloyed with
any thing, not accompanied with Variety) it is observed, that interlocutory
Periods, and vicissitude or alternation of turns in speech, are more grateful
and pleasing, then any long, wearisome, continued, and uninterrupted discourse.

Though the subject of these Treatises be several main points and
Controversies in faith (and consequently, Points of Religion and Divinity) yet
I presume, none of you is either so froward, or so ignorant, as to deprave and
calumniate the Method here used; by saying, that we are not to inuulgar the
Mysteryes of sacred Diniuity by way of Poetical fiction of Dialogues, in
forging that to be, which indeed is not. Which aspersion of any such Critic is
easily wyped away, by the warrantable examples in this kind of S. Jerome,
Theodoret, S. Gregory the Great, and others: who were not afraid to treat of
the highest matters of faith, in form of Dialogues. Again, such an
inconsiderate assertion must needs condemn Poetry in general (seeing
Dialogues are a kind of Poetry) which how great an error it were, might easily
appear, in that Poetry is masked Philosophy; Philosophy Natures true History;
Nature Gods serviceable Agent or Handmayd. Besides, I am of judgment that the
Body of any long Discourse (like an unformed Chaos) is best brought into an
Orb of form and Order, by help of interlocutions. And lastly, admit this kind
of Writing were strange and unusual, and chiefly sorting to subjects of lesser
importance; (as indeed, it is not) yet here we must remember, that a
Phantastike often begins a fashion, which grave Men (not to be thought
Phantasticks) are in the end content to follow.

Now to approach nearer the several subjects, handled in all these Dialogues.
In the first is disputed a Controversy, much agitated and tossed between the
Catholics and the Protestants; to wit, touching the change of faith in the
Church of Rome.

The Interlocutours are Cardinal Bellarmyne (that Heresimastix) Michaeas, a
learned Jewish Rabin, and Doctor Whitakers of Cambridg. The place of this
conference I have made to be the great city Cosmopolis in Vtopia; since an
imaginary place best sorteth to an imaginary disputation, in respect of the
persons feigned. The Cardinal iustifyeth the Catholics position; videlicet,
that no change in faith and Religion has been made in the Church of Rome since
the Apostles days: Which Position is indeed the iuncture, without which the
whole frame almost of all other Controversies hang loose. Doctor Whitakers
vndertaks to prove the Contrary; In whom rather, then in any other Protestant,
I have peculiarly (and ex professo) made choice to personate all the speeches
and arguments, used to prove this supposed change in the Church of Rome;
principally, because there is no Protestant writer (that I know) who has so
much prosecuted this presumed change, as Doctor Whitakers has done; as
appears in his Books against the Cardinal himself, against Father Campion
(that blessed Saint) and chiefly against Duraeus, where the Doctor undertakes
to instance diverse examples of this imaginary Revolt. Yet here you are to
conceive, that I have not so dwelled in the only wrytings of Doctor Whitakers,
as that I neglect what other Protestants have also written in maintenance of
this change: for I assure you, I have omitted nothing of Moment, which I could
find in their Books, to be objected in proof thereof; though Doctor
Whitakers is introduced to deliver or speak it. And withal I have made
special references to their Books, where such their sentences or authorities
are to be found; And yet (learned Men) notwithstanding all that, which can be
urged by any of them in this behalf; sooner shall they prove, that the fixed
stars have changed their postures and situations in their Orb, then that Rome
has changed it faith: So true are those words of an ancient Father: Nazianz.
in carmine de vita sua.
Vetus Roma ab antiquis temporibus habere rectam fidem: and semper eam retinet.
What sentences, authorities, or instances of change Doctor Whitakers has used
in any of his Books by me alleged; the same I have set down with citation of
the Books, and in a several Character from that, which he speaks at large,
in the person of a Protestant; and this to the end that the Reader may sever
the Doctors own words, from the words of a Protestant in general: In like
sort, what intemperate speeches (even loaded with malice and rancour) the
Doctor ^seth against the Church of Rome, are not by me forged and fathered
upon him; But are (especially, those which are most virulent) his own words,
yet extant in his Books: and accordingly they are printed in a different
letter, with the Latin words set in the margent: So careful I am not to wrong
the Doctor, by unjustly obtruding upon him, any scurrilous and indecent
Inuectiues, or Pasquills.

The Conclusion consists in retorting that upon our Aduersartes, where with
they here charge the Church of Rome; I mean, in demonstrating, that it is the
Protestant, who has made in faith this change and innovation, from the
ancient faith of the Apostles; And thus by comparing these two contrary fayths
and doctrines together, and the antiquity of the one, and innovation of the
other, you shall find, that error is best known by truth, as death is known
bylife.

Now here your ingenuities are to suppose for the time, that Cardinal
Bellarmine and Doctor Whitakers are at this present living; In like sort, that
the Cardinal has read all books written either in Latin or English, which
are in this Dialogue alleged: Which like supposalls you are also to make in
the other subsequent Dialogues, touching the Persons in them produced; as that
they are now living, and that they all lived at one time etc. All which
imaginations are fully justifiable in the true method of Dialogues; since in
this kind of writing, the Persons (you know) are forged for the matter, and not
the matter for the Persons: And thus much touching the first Dialogue.

Now to descend to the second Dialogue; The subject whereof is to demonstrate,
that the visibility of the Protestant Church cannot be justified from the
Primitive Church, (much less from the Apostles days) till Luthers revolt: And
which is more, that not any one Man, during all that long Period of time (nor
Luther himself) can be truly insisted upon, for a perfect and absolute
Protestant; and such as the present Church of England can, or will acknowledge
to be a member of it. Which point being once euicted, How deadly it wounds
the Protestants, may easily appear; in regard of the ever necessary and
undeniable visibility of Christ's true Church; whose expansion, enlargment, and
vneclypsed radiancy at all times, is much celebrated in Holy writ: Esaias. 60.
(Her sun shall not be set, nor her Moon hid) as will more fully appear
bereafter in it due place.

The interlocutours are the foresaid Michaeas, the Jew; Ochinus, who first (in
King Edward the sixth his days) did diseminate Protestancy at least, sever all
points of Protestancy, here l^ England; Doctor Reynolds of Oxford, and
Neuserus, chief Pastor of Heidelberg in the Palatinate. Why Ochinus and
Neuserus are brought in, as speakers in this Dialogue, the Argument prefixed
thereto will show.

I have presumed to incorporate most of what can be urged for the visibility of
the Protestant Church, in Doctor Reynolds; as a Man, who was best able in his
days to support his own Church from ruin; And sutably herto the supposed
place of this disputation is Oxford. I have in no sort wronged the Doctor,
whom I well know to have been a blazing Comet in your Euang elicall sphere;
and to whom (as being of good temperance in his writings, in respect of his
brother Doctor Whitakers) I am vnwtlling to ascrybe too little; only I wish,
his fauorits had not ascrybed to him too much.

If any of you shall muse, why in these Dialogues all the Protestants (being
otherwise presumed to be most learned) do reply so sparingly either to
Cardinal Bellarmyne or to Michaeas their answers and arguments, as here you
shall find them to do: you are to conceive, that it is agreed in the beginning
of the two first Dialogues among all the Interlocutours, to stand indisputably
to the freqrent Confessions of the learned Protestants, urged in behalf of any
point controuerted. Now both the Cardinal and Michae^s (for the most part) do
avoid the other Interlocutours reasons and instances, by the contrary
acknowledgments of diverse eminent Protestants; as also do produce their own
arguments in defense of their Catholic articles, from the like
acknowledgments of the learned Protestants, speaking in those points against
themselves, and in behalf of the Catholics. Which method being chiefly
houlden throughout these Dialogues, how then can the Protestant Interlocutours
continue any new reply, against the Caidinall, or against Michaeas?

But to reflect upon the subject of this second Dialogue: And here I do avouch,
that to maintain, that Protestancy was ever before the breaking out of Luther
(though even then it was not in it perfection) is no less absurd in reason;
then to maintain, that, the birth of any thing can precede it conception; and
the effect the cause.

True it is, that in diverse former ages there have been some secret (and indeed
blind) Moules, who working under the foundation of the Roman Church, have
labored to cast up some earth of innouations and noueltyes, comparting perhapps
in some one or two points with the sectar^es of these days: But to justify in
those men the visibility of the Protestant Church, or that they were
Protestants) which is at this present the point only issuable) I hold it
impossible; Except we will dream, that those persons did partake of the nature
of the planet Mercury; which ever participateth (as the Astrologers teach) of
all the influences of that other star or planet, with which it is in any sort
in conjunction.

Be it then, that some Innouatours in several Centuryes have contumactously
defended some one or other Theoreme or principle, without which the entyre
frame of Protestancy cannot subsist; Will any of you from hence conclude (and
yet many Protestants do so conclude) that such Men's Religion was perfect
Protestancy? By the like reason you may infer (to insist in similitudes
within your own sphere) that Unity is a Number; a Point, Quantity; and an
Instant, Time: Whereas you know well, that these are only beginnings or Elements
of Number, Quantity, and Time; and without which these later can have no being.
In regard then of such want of visible Protestants, informer times, It is less
wounder, that some Protestant writers have thought good to Ideate and frame in
their mynd^ a certain mathematical and airy Church, within which a number
only of supposed inuisibilities are comprehended. Thus much touching this
second Dialogue; to the which I have thought good to subnect (as an Appendix) a
short view, taken of an Anonymous and froathy Pamphlet entitled: A Treatise of
the perpetual visibility and succession of the true Church, in all Ages;
written some few years since and set forth (as is supposed) by Doctor Featly.

Now in this last place, to come to the third and last Dialogue; The subject
whereof is to manifest, that the Protestants (by many degrees) stand more
justly chargeable, both with the doctrine and practice of disloyalty, against
their lawful Princes, then the Catholics do: And that the Protestants have
therefore small reason (and less policy) to vpbrayde in their pulpits, and
writings (as it is their accustomed Scene to do) the Catholics with any such
hateful crime. In this last Dialogue are also several insertions of some
small Treatises, in defense of diverse Catholic doctrines.)

The Interlocutours in this Dialogue are the right Honorable the Lord Chief
Justice of England (to whom all dutiful comportment is borne throughout this
Discourse) Michaeas, the former Jew, and M. Vice-Chancelour of Oxford. That the
Vice-Chacelour is therein introduced to be partly malignant against Michaeas
(as charged by him besides with other offenses for being a Catholic Priest) is
not strange; considering how splenfull some Vice-Chancelours of that University
have borne themselves, toward certain Priests, there heretofore apprehended.

Thus far particularly of the different subjects of these ensuing Dialogues;
Which point is more largly set down in the Arguments of every one of them.

Now (most illustrious Men) I have presumed (and I hope this my presumption
will in your favorable construction be warrantable) to dedicate this whole
work to your selves; not for your patronage thereof, for that only it own
worth (If any be in it) must effect; but partly because you are best able to
judge of the arguments produced on either side; and partly, in regard I have
selected out of either of your Universities, one of the most pryme and choysest
men in their days to be speakers in these Dialogues; I mean (as above is
said) Doctor Whitakers and Doctor Reynolds. I could wish, you would not
slight it, through a cold severity, proceeding from a forestauled judgment
against the Catholic faith in general; but peruse it indifferently, and weigh
the authorityes and reasons withal Candor and impartiality. Touching my own
sincerity, used throughout this labor; know you, that if I have purposely and
deliberatly detorted from it true meaning, but any one authority here produced
by me; then let my forhead be publikly seared with an indeleble Stigma or print
of shame and Confusion. No. He is not Religious, who handles Religion with
fraud and impostures. And I am so free and guiltles herein, as that I dare
vaunt my self to be in this respect a a dye or any foursquared thing:
Tetragonon; cast me up what way you will, my demeanor (in this case) will
prove eauen and squared.

Do not expect any Oratory here, but what the force of unavoidable
Demonstrations can persuade; And in this sense (I trust, I may, without vanity
say) you shall find Oratory; Since Truth is ever eloquent.

But now (most celebrious Academians) give me leave to turn my pen more
particularly to your selves, and pardon this my boldness; it proceeding solely
out of my charitable affection, and out of my desire of advancing your
spiritual Good: for you are 2. cor 3.
Our Epistle, written in our hearts. Well then, you are learned, and therefore
(if grace assist) the more able to transpierce through any difficulties of
Faith, now questioned. Suffer not then your Judgments to be enthralled to the
judgments of some few men among you, more eminent, then the rest; they being
Byrds, whose Aerie is but in the high Cedars of the pretended revealing Spirit;
since through their assumed privilege thereof, they are not ashamed to reduce
the construction of Scripture, and the weight of all authorityes whatsoever, to
the Tribunal of their own Censure; scornfullly contemning whatsouer passes
not under the fyle of their own approbation.

But to proceed forward. It is a thing wounderfull (and indeed deplorable) to
observe the the exorbitancy of most Scholars proceedings (and perhapps of
diverse of you) in these points; I mean, to see, what labor and toil they
bestow in humane studyes, and how remiss they are in search of true faith. I
assure my self, that many of you have indefatigably spent much time in seeking
to know: Whether the Opinions of Copernicus touching the Motion of the Earth
and standing still of the sunn and Primum Mobile, can be made probable? Whether
a Concentrike Orb with an Epicycle, or an Excentrike Orb alone, can better
salve the Phaynomena and irregular Apparences of the Planetts* Whether each Orb
be moved a Propria Intelligentia, or ab interna forma? Whether, supposing
Infinitum to be in Rerum natura, One Infinitum can be greater, then an other?
Which point some Philosophers exemplify in the infinite reuolutions of the Sun
and the Moon; the Moon performing her course twelve or 13. times in that
space, in which the Sun does but once: And yet both their reuolutions must be
infinite in Number; if one will grant with Aristotle, that the world was ab
aeterno: Whether Corpus Sphaericum tangit planum, only in puncto? What is the
cause, why the Sea keeps a different course in it ebbing and flowing in
different Countries; though to those several Countries the Moon bears one
and the same aspect of it light? Whether, when the loadstone draws iron unto
it, this be effected through a natural Sympathy of these two Bodies, or only
through the proper form of the loadstone? And Whether the turning of the irons
point to the North (being touched with the loadstone) is to be referred to some
huge supposed mountain of loadstone in the uttermost Northparts; or to any one
place of the Heavens near to the Northpole; or to the intrinse call form of
the loadstone it self? Whether Algebra be a distinct Art from Arythmetyke; or
but the same, advanced to it height and perfection? Whether in the miracles of
Christ and S. Peter, exhibited in curing of corporal diseases (and the like
may be demanded of all true miracles of this nature) God did for the time
infuse a Physical quality (for example) in the skirt of our Saviors garment,
and in the shadow of S. Peter, which per potentiam obedientialem (as the
Scholemen speak) did work upon the diseases, and so cure them; Or else God
himself did immediately work these supernatural effects, ad praesentiam
illorum, at the presence of the skirt and shadow, which in their absence
otherwise he would not work? And finally (to omit diverse others such nyce and
abstruse speculations, and but to touch a little upon Divinity) Whether
Communicatio Idiomatum, flowing from the Hypostaticall union in Christ, is
real in respect of the different natures in Christ; or with reference only to
the Hypostasis of both the Natures?

In these (I say) and many such like curiosities (for so I may term them;
this last only excepted) diverse of you have no doubt spent (and perhaps with
great commondation) many hours by perusing with your own eyes several
Authors, and by discussing the arguments brought on all sides to fortify their
different opinions: And yet it mattereth little, on which side the Truth lies
in most of these speculations; But wheresoever it is found in them, we may
equally and indifferently break forth with the three Children in praising of
God, for his Omnipotency and Wisdom, discovered in them; saying, Dan. 3.
Benedicite Omnia opera Domini Domino.

If then you have been so industrious and breathles herein, and so absorpt in
the delight of these less necessary studyes, O with what a spiritual
Leithargy are such of you possessed, who in matters of Religion (the truth or
falsehood whereof concerns your souls interminable and endless happynes or
misery) shall run on headlong, till you come to your graves in an unexamined
and yet resolved opinion against the Catholic faith, with a supine resignation
of your judgments in all points of Religion (without further trial) to the
wrytings (for example) of Calvin and Beza; whose pestiferous Scripts many make
their Catechismes? Men charged (even by their own Calvin is charged with
Sodomy by the public records of the City of Noyon in France, yet extant; And
by Conradus Slussenberg (a Protestant) in Theol. Calvin. printed 1594. l. 2.
fol. 72. Beza is charged with the same crime, by the foresaid Slussenberg, vbi
supra, and l. 1. fo. 93. By Titilmannus Heshutius (a Pretestant) in his book
entitled: Verae and sanae confessionis. And the same is confessed of Beza by
D. Morto^, (though most falsely excused) in his Apolog. Catholica, part. 1. l 2.
c. 21.
Brethren) with the execrable crime of Sodomy: And remember you not, that we
Math. 7.
gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thisles?

But herewith (most excellent Academians) I will end; and crave pardon for this
my fulness of speech, entreating you to call to mind those words: meliora
Proverb. 27.
sunt vulnera diligentis, quam fraudulenta oscula odientis. And thus remitting
you to the perusal of these following Dialogues, I will with my incessant
prayers solicit the Highest, (who is Iac. 1.
Pater luminum; and from whom, Omne datum optimum, and omne bonum perfectum
descendit) so to enlighten your judgments in your studyes and courses; that
after this life, you may be as truly beatifyed with the Intuitiue knowledge of
all things, in the most happy vision of God; As now here upon earth, you labor
to enrich your mynds, mith all commendable Discursiue knowledge.

Yours in Christ Jesus. I. C.

THE CONVERTED JEW. OR A DIALOGVE WHEREIN IS PROOVED, That the Church of ROME
has made no change in Faith, and Religion, since the first Plantation of it by
the Apostles.
INTERLOCVTOVRS, MICHEAS A JEWISH RABBIN, CARDINAL BELLARMINE DOCTOVR
WHITAKERS,
MICHEAS. MOST ILLUSTRIOUS CARDINAL, and most reverend and learned Doctor.
Such is the spreading fame of both your perfections in the sacred knowledge of
Deuinity, as that the report thereof has (I confess) even given wings to my
old age, to hasten my fleight to this noble City of Cosmopolis in Vtopia;
which, as being honored through both your presence, is for the time become the
Rendeuous of all good literature.

Touching my self, know you both, that I am by birth, and (till this present)
also in Religion, a Jew; by name Micheas, who ever have honored the Lord
Psalm. 83.
of Hoasts, the God Exodus 3.
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, and the Lord God of the
Hebrews; believing with your Apostle Paul, God grant with the like happy
success to him in change of my Religion, who by his rising faule, as I may
term it, was no sooner stricken down to the ground, then he began to asce^d
toward Heaven, all Act. 24.
things, that are written in the Law, and the Prophets, and Act. 22.
instructed according to the verity of the, Law, of the Fathers.

Of late I have diligently perused, the writings of your Evangelists (the four
Historigraphers of that Holy Man, whom you Christians call Jesus: I also have
exactly red the Acts of your Apostles; these faithful servants of the said
Jesus, who first sowed the seeds of their Masters heavenly doctrine, and
after did watter them with their own blood: To be short, I have been much
conversant in these Letters Missiues (if so they may be called) I mean, in the
Epistles of the said Apostles, written to diverse Nations, for their better
instruction in the Christian Faith; as also in that most abstruse work of your
Saviors Best-beloued, commonly called the Apocalypse.

I have made most particular reference of all those writings, to the Prophesies
recorded in our own Law: and I do freely confess (and indeed with an
ineffable grief) that, that Holy One, whom my Forefathers (and in them my
self) did put to the most opprobrious death of the Cross, was, and is the
Son of the Highest, and the true Savior of the World; and therefore I think
it the less wounder, that the stony hearts of us Jews (best discovered by such
our cruel proceedings) were figured by the Tables of Stones, wherein the Law
was first given to us. Yea I am so inalterably persuaded herein, that I do
avouch, that all the chief Particularities concerning him, were most
punctually prophesied by the Ancient Fathers of the Jewish Law: Thus (for
example) was his Precursor foretold in Esaias. cap. 40. That he should be borne
of a Virgin Esaias. 7. The place of his birth, Micheas, 5. The death of the
Cheldren at his birth, Ierom. 31. His preaching, Esaias. 61. His four
Eunngelists, Ezechiel. 1. The choosing of his Apostles, Psalm. 8. His riding
upon an Ass into Jerusalem, Esaias. 62. and Zachary. 9, The betraying of him by
him, who dipped his hand in the dish, Psalm. 41. The Jews spittiug in his
Face, and buffeting of him, Esaias. 50. The Jews mocking of him, Psalm. 22. The
dividing of his garments. Psalm. 22. Their giving to him gaul and Vinegar to
drink, Psalm. 69. The manner of his death, by piercing his hands and feet,
Psalm. 22. His staying in the grave three days, Jonas. 2. His Resurrection,
Psalm. 15. and 132. His Asce^ti^n, Psalm. 109. Finally, (to omit diverse other
lesser passages) The descending of the Holy Ghost, Joel. 2. Thus in regard of
their Premis^es, I do fully acknowledge, that in him, and by him* our Law,
(which did serve, but to shadow this time of Grace) is now abrogated; and
therefore my self, as convinced with so many irrefragable demonstratio^s of the
truth of your Chistian Religion, do hereby submit my self to the sweet yoke
of Christ; do confess my self to be in Judgment and belief, a Christian
(though as yet, but an analogicall, and half Christian) and with reference to
the time of the Law, and the time of Grace, and the adumbration of the one in
the other, I think, I may not unfitly style the different state of those two
times: The Evangelical Law, and the Leuiticall Gospel; since the Law is but
the Ghospel Prophesied; the Gohspel, the Law complet, and actually performed.


CARDINAL BELLARMINE LEarned Rabby. I much rejoice at your change in Religion;
and indeed, that precise correspondency, which your self have observed;
between the Old Testament and the New (whereby you may se, the Apostle had just
reason to say: 1. Cor. 10.
Omnia in figura contingebant illis) is of force to corroborate, and strengthen
you in our Christian Faith, against all those Ephis. 6.
spirituales nequitiae, or any other contrary assaults. For now you se, that
the Mask or veil of all your legal Sacrifices, and Ceremonies is taken away,
through the perfect consummation of them in our Lord, and Savior. Therefore
give thanks to God for this your illumination, and confess with the chief
Apostle, That Act. 4.
there is no other name under Heaven (then that of Jesus*) given unto Men,
wherein we may be saved.


D. WHITAKER. It is most true, which my Lord Cardinal has said; for Jesus
Christ is the second person in the most blessed, and indivisible Trinity; who
was made Man to repair the loss of the first Man; who died, to the end, we
should not dye: Christus Hebr. 9.
semel oblatus est ad multorum exhaurtenda peccata* having humbled himself
being made obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. for Philip. 2.
which thing God has exalted him, and has given him a name, which is above
all Names; that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow of things in Heaven,
in Earth, and under the earth: Therefore he is to be your cornerstone, whereupon
you are to build all the spitituall edifice of your Souls Salvation. And
comfort your self (Micheas) with this, that though only the Isralits did put
Christ to death, yet only a true Isralite is a true Christian.


MICHEAS All this I constantly believe. But now at my first embracing of
Christian Religion, one maine difficulty does mightily affrnot me. I se you
Christians, though you do all militate under on supreme Captain; yet through
your many Controversies in Religion, do rest divided amongst your selves (like
so many distracted, and disordered troops, or sqadro^s) not affording
Salvation on to an other: so as from whence I am departed, I do well know, but
what part to follow, I am most uncertain. And though I firmly believe, that
without faith in Christ a man cannot be saved; yet withal I as cnnsta^tly
believe, that on believing only in gross in Christ, shall not be saved.

Now here I se the Catholic to condeme the Protestant, for his destroying,
and taking away many Articles of Christian Religion, to wit, the Doctrine of
Free Will, of Purgatory, of Praying to Saints, of Merit of works, and (to
omit many other controuerted points) the Real Presence in the Eucharist, and
Sacrafice of the Alter; and for such proceeding does anathematize him for an
Heretic. The Protestant (on the other side) for the Catholic his mantaining,
and believing the said points, does style him Superstitious, Idolatrous, and,
as on wholly exempt from all hope of Salvation. And in these matters the
judgments of the Protestant, and the Catholic are so merely contrary (the
one constantly affirming, the other peremptorily denying (as that their
discording beleefes can never be wonn up in any one public confession or
Creed.

Here now my divided Soul (lick the dissressed prisoner, who having broken
the Iaile, knows not what way to fly, for his best refuge) tossed in the
waves of such contrary Doctrines, is ignorant toward what shoore to sail, if
I be a Protestant, I can be no Catholic; If a Catholic, I am no Protestant;
The on I can but be, both I cannot be. That threatens to me the brand of,
Heresy; this of Superstition, and Idolatry: O God, that the fragrant rose of
Christian Religion should be thus beset on all sides, with the sharp pricks of
these unpleasing disagreements. But this forces me to remember those words of
an ancient doctor: Vt in Tertul.
pessimis aliquid boni, sic in optimis nonnihil mali.


CARDINAL BELLARMINE. True it is, that there are many differences in Christian
Religion; and each good man's grief is hereby the greater: for whereas
contention in other things raises the estimation; and value of them;
contention about Faith (in a vulgar eye) lesneth it. But these (you are to
conceive, Micheas) take their course not from the Faith of Christ; (for it is
but one: vna Ephis. 4.
fides, vnum baptisma) but from the Elation and height of private Judgments,
which blush not to advance themselves above all Authorities, both Divine, and
Humane.

Therefore (Micheas) the better to free you from all those laborinths of
opinion, which otherwaise may more easily illaquiate, and entangle you, build
your Faith in all inferior points of Christian Religion, principally upon Gods
sacred Word, as it is propounded, and interpreted by Christ his Church; and to
her repair in all your doubts, since Christ himself has vouchsafed to
warrant this proceeding in these words: dic Math. 18.
Ecclesiae, et Ecclesiam non audieret, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus, et Publicanus.
Reverence Eclesiasticall Traditions, which are derived through a continued hand
of time, even from the Apostles: Id Tertul.
ab initio. quod ab Apostolis: for it is true, that we Catholics do believe
some things without Scripture; but it is as true, that all Sectaries believe
their Errors, against Scripture. Read the General Councels, with whom Christ
is ever present, for he has promised, when but two Maeth. 18.
or three are geathered together in his name (much more when several
hundreds) he well be in the midst with them; and observe the Heresies
condemned in them: Peruse the writings of the Primative Fathers; and remember
that sentence: Interroga Deutro. 4.
de diebus antiquis. assuring your self, that the Doctrine jointly taught by
them, is agreeable to the Faith, first taught by Christ, and his Apostles.

Finally square your Religion according to the uninterrupted practice of Gods
Church, which the Apostle himself (for our greater security) has honored with
the title of Columna, 1. Timoth 3.
et Firmamentum veritatis; And thus you shall forbear to imitate those men,
who think to show their love to the Truth, by their hate to this Pillar, and
Foundation of Truth. Besides, this deportment disculps great Humility; a
Character even of Christ himself: dicite Mat. 12.
a me, quia humilis sum cord. so true it is, that an humble man is like to a
lowly valley, sweetly seated. Thus doing (Micheas) no doubt you will embrace our
Catholic Faith; of which point I am in greater hope; in that it is observed,
that whereas many At David Georg Professor at Basil. Hamelinanus etc.
Protestants have become Jews, yet not any Jew a Protestant.


D. WHITAKER. The Cardinal here has given you to large a scope; since most of
these are but humane, and moral inducements, which stand subject to error,
and falsehood, and you are to call to mind, that to run well out of the right
way, is noe better, then to stand still: D. Whit. so says co^tra Camp. Rat. 8.
Palin dromesan, 'e dramein cacos.

Therefore let your groundworke be next under Christ, only the Holy Scriptures.
These are the only Judges of all Controversies: These are of that worth, as
that they are profitable (as the Apostle 2. Timo. 3.
speaks) To Doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction, which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed in all good
works: of that Clearenes, as that justly they may be called; lucerna Psalm. 18.
pedibus meis: Of that fulness, and amplitude, as we are threatened under pain
of having our names blotted Apocal. vlt.
out of the book of life if we either add, or detract from thence: finally of
that easines, and facility, as that for picking out the true sense, we are to,
receive it by the benefit of our own spirit, instructed by the Holy Ghost:
Joan. 3.
spiritus vbi vult, spirat.


MICHEVS. You both speak learnedly. And first touching your directions (my L.
Card.) I hold them most grave and weighty. Yet seeing I have spent all my time
chiefly in studying the Law, and the Prophets (being heretofore a Rabnie in our
Jewish Sinagogue) and seeing that multiplity of reading, which your method
exacts, (to wit of the Ancient Fathers, the General Councels, Ecclesiastical
Histories) is to great a burden to be imposed now upon the shoulders of my old
age (my self not likely to live so many years, as will be answerable to so
infinite a labor) Therefore I must bethink my self of some other more short,
and abreuiated course, for the perfect settling of my judgment in the Christian
Religion.

Touching your grave advice (M. Doctor) of relying only upon the Written word.
Grant, that the Scripture alone were of it self sufficient to define, and
determine all Controversies in Religion; yet I am so conscious of my own
weakness herein, as that considering the several senses usually given upon one,
and the same text, I should ever rest doubtful (once abandoning the sense,
given by the joint consent of all Ancient Doctors of what construction to make
choice; and the rather seeing the Scripture witnesses of it self, That no
Prophesy 2. Petr. 2.
of the Scriprure is made, by private Intepretation. And sure I am, that if we
Jewish Rabbis should take liberty to interpret the old Testament, according
to every particular conceipte of each of us, we long since should have
begotten many dissentions in Faith among us.

I may add hereto, that I am the more easily thus persuaded, even by both your
speches at this present; seeing both of you do strengthen, and fortify your
different judgments (touching the final determining of Controversies) even
from the Scripture it self. But what? does the Scripture speak different (or
rather contrary things?) Noe. The Scripture is like to the Author of
Scripture; ever the same, and vncha^gable: Ego Malach. 3.
sum dominus, et non mutor. And indeed to speak plainly, when you urge those
words: spiritus vbi vult, spirat. whereby you intimate the gift of the Private
spirit, interpreting the Scripture, I ever disliked this Principle (even before
I believed in Christ) as ready to create in differe^tly any one Religion as
well as an other: so that, that man, who for his Faith, and Religion grounds
himself upon this Revealing Spirit, and consequently is ready to stamp any
Religion, which himself best pleases, is like (in my judgment) to on that
should be immediately made rather of the first Matter, then of the Elements well
tempred together; since he is in possibility, Anything. But to proceed: seeing
the directions of neither of you (in regard of some difficult circumstances
accompaning them) can at this present sort unto my case, I must make election
of some other method, for the se^tling of my fluctuating Conscience in matter
of Faith. And (under both your favors) it shall be this, whereas by seriously
perusing the New Testament (as you Christians call it) I am become with
infinite thanks to the Lord of Hosts, a Christian, though as yet, but a
Christian imperfect, and scarsly initiated: So out of the same divine Records,
I am instructed, that the Church of Rome in those primative times received the
true Christian Faith, incontaminate and free from all error. Now if those
sacred writings be of sufficient force with me, for my relinquishing of my
ancient Jewish faith; then ought they as securely to warrant my Judgment, that
the true Faith of Christ was planted in the Apostles time in Rome.

This last point is confirmed to me by your great Apostle Paul, who in his
Epistle to the Romans, much celebrateth the Faith of Rome, saying: Romans 1.
To all, that be at Rome the beloved of God, called to be Saints, Grace to you.
And again I thank Romans ibid.
my God for you, etc. because your Faith is renowned throughout the whole
world. And yet more: your Romans 16.
obdience is published in every place. finally, the Apostle is so full in
advancing the Faith of the Romans, as that he particularly even in words,
ascribs one, and the same Faith to himself, and them saying: That, Romans 1.
which is common to us both, your Faith, and mine. From all which texts it is
euicted, that Rome in those first times enjoyed a true and perfect Faith. Now
here it comes to be examined, whether Rome, since her first embracing of it,
has changed her Faith; or othirwise she retains without any alteration the
same doctrine, which first the Apostles did plant in her.

This point (most excellent Men) deserus an exact discussing, and may well
seem to be worthy your serious disputs: My own want in your Ecclesiastical
Histories (from whence chiefly this question is to receive it trial) does
plead for my ignorance herein, and makes my humble request (for the better
estableshing of my yet unsettled judgment) to you both, to enter into a grave
skirmish, and feight of disputation herein. Both of you are learned, and
therefore (by urging what can be said on either side) able to accomplish this
my desire: both of you are charitable, (as I must suppose) and therefore (no
doubt) willing (for my confirmation in the Christian Faith) to undertake this
my wished task for Charity (as ever desirous to do good) omnia (...). (...).
13.
sperat, sustinet; and a charitable man partakes of the nature of a glass,
which is as ready to give, as to receive ons favor. My foundation is here the
words of your own Apostle; I humbly entreat, that your learned discourses
would raise the wales, and I shall attend your speeches with a greedy, and
listening ear. Then in the close of all I may be better assured, whether for my
Souls eternal felicity, I should subject my self, as a member to the present
Church of Rome; or otherwise consociate my self with the Protestants; the
presumed Reformers of the said Church.


CARD. BELLARM. Micheas, your judgment has made choice of a most important
subject, and Christian Religion teaches us to be benificiall to all, maxim
Galat 6.
domesticis fidei, within which number, I hope shortly, I may place you. And
therefore my pains (according to my small ability) shall not be wanting to
accomplish your request; and I much commend your desire herein; for who
neglects his own Soul, is not present to himself.


D. WHITAKERS. The Groundworke (Micheas) of this your desired disputation I
acknowledge most firm; and I shall be ready to afford my best furthera^ce thereto,
though in regard of my own small mite of learning, I shall be like (perhapps to
the widow in the Chospel, who gave less, then any other, and yet was more
charitable, then any other.

But touching the Basis, and foundation of this future Discourse, We do D.
Whita. thus says. cont. Camp. Rat. 7
grant, that the Church of Rome was holy, when Paul gave it those foresaid
praises; as also when he further said: without intermission I make mention of
you always in my prayers. When also he D. Whita. vb supra.
said: He would Romans 15.
come to the Romans in abou^dance of the blessing of Christ; and when in
freedom he did preach to them the Ghospel of Christ. Yea which is more: We D.
Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 7.
freely confess, that the Cuhrch of Rome was a famous Church of Christ, when
Clemence did sit in that seat, and when the profane Roman Caesar's did put to
death the Bishops of Rome. But since those times, that most remarkable change
of Faith have violently invaded, and posessed that Church, I will undertake to
prove, neither will I draw back herein, but shall be prepared to manifest to
you, how since the Apostles times, the Roman D. Whit. uses these very words L.
cont. Ca^p. Rat. 7. saying: Haec sunt Ecclesiae vestrae insignia, Superstitio,
Infidelitas, Antichristus, Epicurus.
Wolves have invaded the Church, and ceased not to devour the flock; for the
badges of the Roman Church are superstition, Infidelity, Antichrist, and
Epicurisme.


CARD. BELLARM. How now M. Doctor. Such passion in the beginning? what
Philippicks, and inuectiue declamations are these; the accustomed language of
most of our new illuminated Brethren, not sorting to your presumed gravity?
Therefore either forbear the like hereafter, or let us forbear to enter into
any dispute: for I do not love to converse with those Men, whose tongues are
used to speak nothing but Satyrs.


D. WHITAKERS. My Lord. my fervor to the Ghospel has thus transported me: The
Psalm. 68. et Joan. 2.
zeal of thy house has eaten me up: But pardon (for ever) this my holy
impatience, and I will promise you to proceed hereafter in all serenity, and
mildnes; and will prove the change of Religion in the Church of Rome, not by
conuitiating it with intemperate language, but with weight of argument.


CARD. BELLARM. You say well. And therefore In the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, let us begin.

And here first M. Doctor, you are to remember, that seeing you affirm, that
Religion is changed in the Church of Rome, since that Church was first (as it
were) cultiuated, and tilled therewith by the labor of the Apostles; you are
thereby obliged to prove this your assertion; And I (as houlding the Negative)
am bound only to answer, and to repel your arguments. Nevertheless I will
supererogate with you in method herein, and will undertake to prove
posituely, that Rome since it first being Christian, did never speak of so
much, as any on material, and dogmaticall Article, (which is the point in
question) of her primative Faith.

Now for the greter conuinceing of your contrary position, I mean to
strengthen and fortify the truth herein, even from the testimonies of your
own learned Men: and thus the Protestants penns shall deadly wound the
Protestants Faith. Therefore tell me (M. Doctor) if you will quietly subscribe
in this time of disputation, to the ingenious, and plain Confession of your
own learned, and judicious Brethren.


D. WHITAKERS Most willingly: for D. Whit. cont. Bellar. L. de Eccles.
coutrouers. 2. q. 5. c. 14. says: efficax est Aduersarioru^ ipsoru^ contra
ipsos testimonium etc. et quide^ fateor veritate^ a suis inimici^ Testimoniis
extorquere posse.
the argument must needs be strong, and efficatious, which is taken from the
confession of the Adversaries; and I do freely acknowledge, that the Truth is
able to extorte testimonies even from it Enemies. And this point is further
warranted with all force of reason: for why should learned men confess against
themselves, and in behalf of their Adversaries, were it not that the rack of
an undeniable Truth forces them theirto?


CARD. BELLARM. It is most true, and the matter so stands indeed; and your
speech well sorteth to that sentence of S. Augustine; to wit, That cont. Donat.
post coll. c. 24.
truth is more forcible to wringe out Confession, then any rack or torment.
well then to proceed to the matter. And because things contracted in method,
enter more easily (after a piramic all manner, as I may say) into the eye of
the understanding; Therefore for the more facilitating of this point here
handled, you are to coceiue (M. Doctor) that in any notable change of
Religion, these things following can be demonstrated and pointed out. Bell.
thus says verbal ly in l. 4. de Eccles. c. 5 de Not. Eccles. Nota secu^da.
First, the Author of such a Change. Secondly. the new opinion or doctrine.
Thirdly, the time, in which this new doctrine was first broahed, or preached.
Fourthly, the place, in which it was taught. Fifthly, and lastly, the persons,
who did oppugn, and resist it at the first: All which are found even in the
Church of Christ, which nevertheless was no new Church, but only a certain
mutation or change of the state of the Church, according to the predictions of
the Prophets. For first we know, the author thereof was Christ; The new
Articles of belief were principally, the Articles of the Trinity, and
Incarnation; the time, when this doctrine was first preached, was in the
fifteenth year of Tyberius Caesar; The place Judea; finally the oppugners of
it were the Scribes, and Pharisees. Now whereas we are able to demonstrate all
these points in the beginning of every particular sect, or Heresy; our
Adversaries notwithstanding cannot set down any one of these circumstances
concerning our Church or Faith, ever since the Apostles times.

But because of all these Circumstances, the Time of this supposed change is
chiefly to be weighed, I will begin therewith, remitting diverse of the other
Circumstances to be hereafter discussed by us; and leuing the rest for greater
breuity to some other fitting opertunity. And as touching the Circumstances of
Time, I will first discourse thereof by means of a distribution of three
distinct times since Rome first received the Ghospel of Christ.

First then, we will take into our consideration, how long it is granted by
your Protestants, that Rome did persevere without any alteration in her
prematiue Faith. Secondly we will enquire, and set down the acknowledged
continuance of that time, during all which season the now present Faith of Rome
has continued; That is, how long Papistry (as you commonly term it) has
been publikly professed, and taught throughout all Christendom. Thirdly and
lastly, we will then take a view of the times, between these two former
several times: for these two times being once acknowliged on all sides (to
wit, the time, during which the Church of Rome confessedly kept her first Faith
taught by the Apostles, and the time, during which the present Roman Faith
has continued from this day upward) it ineuitably follows, that this
supposed change of Religion did either happen in the interstitium, and mean
time between the two former Periods of times, or else, that there hapened no
such chang in Religion in the Church of Rome at all. Now concerning the first
of these times, how long (in the Protestants judgments) M. Doctor did the
Church of Rome retain without stain, or alteration in any point of moment, or
Article of belief (for that only is to be enquired) the Faith first
deseminated by the Apostles?


D. WHITAKERS. I will confess in all ingenuity, that diverse of our own
learned Brethren do teach, that Rome retained her purity of Faith without any
such alteration by you intimated, till after the deaths of Optatus, Epiphanius,
and Augustine, which is during the space of four hundred and forty years
after Christ.


CARD. BELLARMINE You say most truly, and I do like your playnesse herein,
since he is truly politic (espetially in matters of Religion, which require
all candor in their menaging) who is not politic. For whereas our Catholic
writers have much insisted, that Tertullian, provoked the Heretics of his
days to the Succession of the Bishops of Rome, your own D. Fulke gives this
reason touching such his provocation, in these words: The D. Fulk. in his
Coful. of Purgat. p. 374.
argument then drawn from Succession was good, because the Church of Rome
retained (by Succession until Tettullians dates) that Faith, which it did
first receive from the Apostles. To whose judgment in this particular reason
your self (M. Doctor) in your book written against me subscribs, thus saying:
from hence D. Whit. co^t. a Bell. l. de Eccles. where he spoketh of certain
Apostol. Churches, and perticulerly of the Church of Rome.
we do understand why Tertullia^ did appeal to those Churches; to wit, because
the Churches did then hold the Apostolical Doctrine by a perpetual
succession.

But to descend further in time, touching the granted preservation of the
Faith of Rome whereas in like manner some Chatholicke Authors have alleged the
same argument, drawn from the Succession of Bishops by the example of
Irenaeus, Cyprian, Optatus, Hierome, Vincentius Lyrinensis, and Augustine, (all
which Fathers most rested in the Succession of the Bishops of Rome, still
continued till their days) your foresaid D. Fulke answers in behalf of the
said Fathers in this sort: That these In his Confutat. of Purgatory page 372.
Fathers especially named the Church of Rome, it was, because the Church of
Rome at that time, as it was founded by the Apostles; so it continued in the
Doctrine of the Apostles. With whom accords D. lewell, saying: As Well
Augustine, as also other godly Fathers rightly yealded reverence to the Sea of
Rome etc. for the purity of Religion, which was there preserved a long time
without spot.

To conclude, Calvin himself (even in the same manner) answers the foresaid
argument of Succession of Bishops in the Church of Rome, insisted upon by
Irenaeus, Tertullian, Origin, In his Reply to D. Ha^ding page 246.
Augustine, Optatus, Epiphanius, and others; for thus Calvin speaks: Cum
extra (...)it. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 3.
controuersiam esset, nihil a principio vsque ad aet^^tem illam mutatum fuisse
in doctrina etc. Seeing it was a Point out of Controversy that nothing in
doctrine, from the beginning to that very age was changed; these holy Fathers
did take that, which they thought sufficient, for the destroying of all new
Errors; (to wit,) the doctrine constantly and with an unanimous consent,
retained even from the Apostles days, till their times. Thus Calvin.

To these fromer I may allege that Sentence: out of D. Fulke, saying: The
Retentiues page 85.
Popish Church etc. departed from the Universal Church of Christ, long since
Augustins departure out of this life; Thus he granting, that till S. Augustins
death, the Church of Rome was the true Church: so evident and clear (we se) it
is, that the Church of Rome never changed her Religion from the Apostles first
Planting of it, until the times of S. Augustine, Epiphanius, Optatus etc. which
was (as is above said) four hundred and forty years after Christ.

Thus far (M. Doctor) concerning the durance of the times (even by the
Protestants frequent confessions) that no change of faith was made in the
Church of Rome; Tonching which point Irefere you (for greater satisfaction) to
certain quoted places of the aforesayed Fathers, to wit, of Fp. ad. Pom(...)
p. ^7. ad. Damas.
Hierome, L. 3. aduer. Haeres. c. 3.
Ire^aeus, Tom. 7. in Psalm. Cent. par^e Do(...) 2. Ep. 165. et Lib. ae vtilit.
Credena^. c. 17.
Augustine, Aduer Haeres. Paulo pos(...)init.
Vincentius Lyr^ne^sis, De obi^. frac^.
Ambrose etc. All which Fathers in their writings do constantly auerre, that
the Faith preached in their days in the Church of Rome was the true Faith; and
consequently, was neither then nor before subject to change or alteration.

Now all this being made thus evident, it follows according to our designed
Method, that we consider the number of those ages, during the lenght of all
which from this day upwards, the present Roman Faith has (by the like
Confession of the Learned Protestants) been generally taught: Seeing how long
the Protestants) been generally taught: Seeing how long the Protestants do
grant, that the Church of Rome has from this day contined in her present
Faith; so long it follows, by their own implicit censures, and most
necessary inferences, that the Church of Rome never altered her Faith: Therefore
(M. Doctor) I would know of you, what your learned Men do generally teach
about the continuance, and antiquity of our present Roman, and Catholic
Religion.


D. WHITAKERS I will not deny but that our Doctors do ascrybe an antiquity to
your Popish Faith, for a thousand years at least; For first D. Humfry (my
worthy So Doct. whit styles D. Clarke in L. con. Camp. Rat. 8. meaning theirby
his Cem^^les et consocius in Doctrina.
sy'mmachos cai symmy'stes) showing what Religion Augustine planted in England,
being sent by Gregory the Great, then Pope of Rome (who lived in the year 590)
thus instanceth in the particular points of the then Roman Religion: In D.
Hum^^y in Iesuitism. part. 2. Rat. 5. Page 5. et Page 627
Ecclesiam vero quid inuexerunt Gregorius et Augustinus? Onus ceremoniarum etc.
what did Gregory and Angustine bring into the Church? They did bring a burden
of Ceremonies; They did bring in the Archiepiscopall Pall, for the
solemnization of the Mass; They did bring in Purgatory etc. the oblation of
the Healthful Oast, and prayer for the dead etc. Relics, Transubstantiation
etc. a new conscecratio^ of Temples etc. from all which what other thing is
effected then the introducing of Indulgences, Monachisme. Papisme, and the rest
of the Chaos of Popish Superstition? all this did Augustine the great Monk
(being instructed herein by Gregory the Monk) bring to the English men. Thus
far D. Humfry.


CARD. BELLARM. Well then, M. Doctor, it clearly appears by this, that at S.
Gregory his sending of Augustine into England (which was about a thousand
years since) our present Roman Religion was then wholly, and publickely
practiced in Rome; and that if the Church of Rome had suffered any change of
Faith from that first taught by the Apostles, that this change should have
been made, not since, but before Gregory's time, and before he had sent
Augustine to plant in England the Faith of Christ. I may add, M. Doctor, in
further confirmation of D. Humfrey his judgment herein, the judgment of your
own Centurists, who in their Index, or Alphabeticall table of the sixth
Century, at the Word: Gregory, set down with particular figures ofreferences,
where every such mentioned opinion may be found as follows Eiusdem Error de
bonis operibus, de Co^fessione, de co^iugio, de Ecclesia, de sanctorum
^nuocatione, do Inferno, de Libero arbitrio, de ^ustificatione, de Purgatorio,
de Paeni^entia, de satisfactione etc. And which is more, your said Ce^turists
Al-Which places following of the Cen ^rists. thus charging Gregory are to be
found in their sixth Century after the first Editio^ there of between Col 369.
and Col. 432.
do further accuse Gregory, out of his own writings with consecration of
Altars, Chalices, and Corporals, with oblatio^ of sacrifice for the dead, with
translation of Reltques, with Monachisme, with Pilgrimages, with consecration
of Churches, with Mass, and spri^kling of holy water, With consecration of the
fort of Baptism, of Chr^^s^^e and Oil, with celibratio of Mass, and finally
With claim of sovereignty over all Churches: All which places of the
Centurists, charging him, are to be found in their sixth Century after the first
edition thereof.

To these former acknowledgme^ts, we may adioin the words of Luke Osiander
(your famous Protestant) which are these: Augustinus In his ep^tom. Hist.
Eccles. Cent. 6. ^ag 289.
Romanos Ritus et consuetudines, Anglicanis Ecclesus obstitit: And then
immediately after he perticulerly sets down several rites, and doctrines,
practiced, and believed at this present by the Church of Rome; which (as he
confesleth) Augustine did plant, and establish in England: a point so evident,
that even your own self, M. Doctor, auertes, D. Whit. Lib. de Eccle. cent.
Bella^. page 144.
that Boniface the third, (who lived anno. 605. and presently after the
foresaid Gregory) and all his successors were Antichrists. Yea you speaking of
the conversion of England, (made by this Gregory) and of other conuersions of
Countries by other Popes after, thus conclude. The Conuersions D, whit. vbi
supra p. 339.
of so many countries were not pure, but corrupt. With you herein Dauaeus (that
remarkable Protestant) conspirech, who thus basely censureth of Gregory's
converting of England: Purgatio illa, quam Gregorius primus fecit etc. fuit
i^ebriatio mer etricis mundo facta, de qua est Apocalips. 17. et 18. Thus
referring our Conversion to Christianity, to the work of Antichrist. And thus,
M Doctor, you here may see, how the Church of God (through an over unkind
perverting, and misconsturing her most motherly, and charitable endeauours)
has reason even to complain, and grieve at those, who vaunt themselves for
her own Children: so the Vine being untimely cut, weeps out its mishap,
through out it own wound.

Now from all these former testimonies of your self, M. Doctor, and other
Protestant writers, we may infallibly conclude, that from this day till we
arrive, at least to the age of the foresaid S. Gregory, the present Roman, and
Catholic Religion was taught in diverse Countries; and consequently (seeing
those Countries received their instruction in Faith from Rome) that it was not
during all this time introduced into the Church of Rome, as an Innovation, and
change of the Faith, before professed by the said Church.

Now it being made evident; first, that the Church of Rome did retain her
purity of Faith, the first four hundred and forty years after Christ; and
also, that for this last thousand years, the present Roman, and Catholic
Faith, has not (at any time thereof) bin first brought into the world; but
during the said thousand years it has bin continually the general taught
doctrine of the Church of Rome: It now follows, that we take into our
consideration the number of years which passed between the first four
hundred, and forty from Christ, and these last thousand years from us. Which
number (seeing it is sixteen hundred years, and some more from Christ to us)
amounts to about one hundred, and sixty years.

Well then if here we can prove that no change of Faith in the Church of Rome,
within the compass of this 160. years; then follows it unavoidably, that
the Church of Rome never to this day, has suffered any alteration in Faith,
and Religion, since its first embracing of the Christian Faith.

That no Change of Faith did happen within the compass of the said 160.
years, I prove several ways, yet all conducing to erect this one maine
truth; like as diverse lesser numbers (though counted after different ways)
make up but one, and the same great number. And first, this assertion of mine
is proved from the doctrine, which was believed, and generally taught at such
time, as Constantine (who was our first Christian Emperor) was converted to
Christianity, which was about the year 320. after Christ, and therefore before
the foresaid 160. years.

That the Faith in his time, was the same, that the Church of Rome professes
at this present, appears from the frequent testimonies of your former
Centurists; who most elaborately, and punctually do record all the particular
Articles of the present Roman Faith, to be believed most constantly by the
said Constantine; and that he did cause to be put in practice all the
Ceremonies, now used in the Church of Rome. And the said Centurists are so
exact, and diligent in their enumeration of all the Catholic Doctrines
believed by Constantine, and of the Catholic Rites, and Ceremo ies observed
in his time; as that they spend several Columns of the fourth Century
touching this point; to wit, from Column. 452. to Column. 497. or thereabout.

Now that not only Constantine himself, but also the whole fourth Age did
generally believe, and profess the now professed Doctrine of the Roman
Church, is in like sort abundantly confessed, and registered by the said
Centurists, they spending most of the leaves of the said Century, in
particularizing the now Catholic Doctrines, and the doctors of that age
believing, and teaching them: and therefore for the greater manifestation of
this point, I remit you, M. Doctor, to the ^^ligent perusal herein of their
fourth Century: touching which particular subject, I am so confident that I
dare auouche, that by the industry of the said Centurists, the true state of
the Church in that age is so painfully, and articulatly (according to my former
speeches registered) as the perfect memory thereof (as being exempt from all
oblivion in future days) is able to turn the sith of time: so certain it is
that even in your own Histories (so long as they shall be extant) the Catholics
shall be ever able to glass the true face of their times.

But, M. Doctor, for the greater euidency of this point, I pray you tell me,
whether it is your judgment, that the Fathers living in the fourth Age; but
especially those who lived before the fourth Age, and consequently, before the
above mentioned 160. years) were Professors of your Protestant, or our Roman
Faith.


D. WHITAKERS. I make no doubt, but all of them professed with a general
consent our Protestant Faith, and knew not the present Doctrine, and Faith of
Rome.


CARD. BELLARM. See how fowly you are mistaken, M. Doctor, And therefore
seeing the discovery of errors is an establishment of the Truth: for the
fuller manifesting of your over sight herein, I will insist (for greater
breuity) only in six chief Articles of the Catholic Faith, for a taste of the
rest; which even by your own Brethrens Confessions, were mantained by the
Fathers living in the fourth age; from whence we may necessarily infer, that
not any change touching those points was, brought into the Church of Rome,
within the compass of the said 160. years.

And first I will begin with the doctrine of the Sacrifice 1.
of the Mass: where (as also in other Articles following I will discerpe here,
and there, out of the great abundance thereof, some few acknowledgments of the
Protestants. Now here you cannot deny, M. Doctor, but that touching Cyprian
(who lived Anno 240. your Centurists thus affirm: Sacerdote^ Cent. 3. c. 4.
col 3.
Cyprianus in quit vice Christi furgi; et Deo Patri Sacrificium offerre; and
for this very point they condemn him of Superstition. In like sort, they thus
reprehend Ambrose: (who lived anno. 370.)

Cent 4 c. 4. col. 295.
Ambrose did use certain speeches etc. as to say Mass, to offer up Sacrifice.
Yea D. Fulke conspireth openly with the former Protestants thus speaking of
these Fathers following: Tertullian, In his Confutation of Purgatory p. 362. et
303. et 393.
Cyprian, Augustine, Hierome, (of which some lived within the said 160. years,
others long before them) do witness, that Sacrifice for il^e dead is a
Tradition of the Apostles. To be short; Sebastianus Francus (no obscure
Protestant among you) thus writes: Epist. d^ abrogand and omnibus statu^is
Ecclesiast.
statim post Apostolo, omnia inuersa surt etc. Caena Domini in Sacrificium
transformata est.

Touching the Primacy of the Bis^op of Rome, your Centurists do reprehend Cent.
4. col. 558. 2.
Nazianzen Cent. 3. col. 94.
Cyprian Cent. 3. cap 84.
Origin, and Cent. 3. col. 85.
Tertullian for their teaching of Peter's Primacy. In like sort Pope Victor (who
lived in the year 160. after Christ) did actually challenge, and practice this
kind of Supremacy, as D. Fulke, In hi^ answer to a Counterfeyt Catholic p. 36
D. Fulke acknowledges.

Concerning prayer for the dead, D. In his Retentiue, page 106.
Fulke thus writes: Prayer for the dead prevailed within three hundred years
after Christ: And another of your own Br^^hren thus confesses: M. Georg
Gifford In his demonstration that Brownists are ^^ll Dona^^s^^ p. 38. 4.
Prayer for the dead was in the Church long before Augustins, days, as
appears in Cyprian, and Tertullian. But D. In his Confutation of Purgatory.
p. 353.
Fulke and In his examen part. 3. p. 110
Kempnitius do confess, that Prayer for the dead is taught in the writings of
Dionysius Areopagita who is Act.
mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles; whose writing (in which Prayer for the
dead is taught) are acknowledged by D. Fulke against the Rhemish. Test. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
supposing them not to be written by the said Dionysius, as some Protestants
are not ashamed to auerre) to be written about thirteen hundred years since.

Touching Invocation of Saints D. D. Fulke in Rhemish Testament. in 2. Petr.
Cap. 1.
Fulke confesses, that in B^^sill, Nazia^zen, and Chrysos^ome is ^nuocatio^ of
Saints. The Centurists Cent. 3. Col 84.
thus write of Cypria^. Cypria^ does not obscurely signify, that Martyrs, and
dead Saints did may for the living. Yea they further charge Origin (Who lived
in no, 2^0) with praying himself to holy Job, saying Cent. 3. col. 83.
O beat Job ora prouobis in seris; They further Cent. 3. col. 75.
charge him with invocation of Angels.

They further thus concluding of that third age after Christ. videas Cent 3. c.
4. col. 83. (5.)
in Doctorum huius seculi scriptis, non obscura vestigta inuocationis Sanctorum,

Touching Free Will. The foresaid Centurists Cent. 2. c. 10. col. 221.
do reprehend Irenaeus (who lived in the second age) in that he admits (as
they say) Free-well in spiritual actions. And Cent. 2. page 56.
Osiander (the Protestant) thus says of iustine (who lived in the age of
Irenaeus) Iustine extolled too much the liberty of man's will, in observing the
Commandments of God. To be short, another Abraham S^ulte^us in his medulla
Theolog. ca Patrum page 379. (6.)
of your brethren does thus couple the ancient Fathers of those ages, saying
Cyprian, Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Iustine. Irenaeus, etc.
erred in the doctrine of Free Will.

Lastly, touching the doctrine of Merit of works, Luther In Galat. cap. 4.
styles Hierome, Ambrose, and Augustine, Iusticiarios Iustice-workers. In like
sort the Centurists thus charge Origin, saying: Origin Cent. 3. col. 265.
made works the Cause of our Justification. To conclude, D. Humfrey thus
confesses of Irenaeus, and Clemens: (the one living in the first age, the
other in the second age after Christ,) D. Humf. In ^esuct (...) Part. 2. page
530.
It may not be denied but that Irenaeus, Clemens, and others (called
Apostolical) have in their writings the opinion of Merit of works.

And thus far (M. Doctor) of some chief points of the present Roman
Religion, taught by the Fathers: of who^ some lived in the fourth age, and so
within the compass of the before mentioned 160. years; though most of them
lived in the first, second, and third age of Christ; from whence we necessarily
euict, that no change of the Faith of Rome, in the said points, was made within
the compass of the said 120. years: which time was above set down between
the confessed period of the Churches Purity, and the acknowledged generally
(...)ceiued doctrine of the now Church of Rome: And here but that I am willing
to avoid all prolixity, I do assure you, I could auerre, and justify the like,
touching all other Catholic doctrines, taught by the Fathers of the former
ages and accordingly believed at this day by the Church of Rome.

Yet before I end this point I will adioyne to the former proofs, this ensuing
consideration, touching the fore said ^60. years. It is this: if we consider
either the plurallity of our Catholiche Articles; or the incompatibility, which
diverse of them bear, partly to the outward sense, and partly to man's natural
propension; or the diversity of Countries, and Nations in Christendom, most
remote one from another; all which cur said Catholic Religion is acknowledged
wholly to possess, at the later end of the sixth Age, or Century; I say if we
consider all these different Circumstances, the time of the said ^60 years
(within which most Protestants do teach this supposed change did happen) is
infinitely too little, and wholly disproportionable; as that within the compass
thereof so great (...) change, and alteration should be wrought; especially in
such an admirable manner, that whereas in the beginning of the said 160.
years, it is auerred by the Protestants, that not any one point of our
Catholic Religion was then taught; yet at the end of the said 160. years, it
should so ouerflow all Christendom with such a violent stream, as that no
spark of Protestancy, (supposing before it were professed) or any other
Religion did remain in any one Country, or other; but that all was wholly
extinct, and (as I may say) annihilated. Such an imaginary change, and
alteration (I say) as this, is more then stupendous, and wonderful; and such,
as since the creation of the world never before happened.

But (M. Doctor) give me leave by the way, to ask of you the second time (for
all the Protestants do not precisely consent herein) how long do you think,
that the Church of Rome, did continue in her Verginall state, and Purity,
without any stayne in her Faith.


D. WHITAKERS. I think, So says D. Whit. (...) de Antichristo cont. Sa^deru^
page 35.
that during the first six hundred years after Christ, the Church was pure,
flourishing; and inuiolably taught, and defended the Faith, delivered by the
Apostles. During all which ages the Church of Christ (in respect of truth in
Faith, and Religion, was (as I may say) in the full assent of the wheel. And
although (to speak by resemblance there are found even many irregularities in
the regular motions of the Heavens; yet I am fully persuaded, that for the
space of the first six hundred years, no annomalous exorbitancies of errors,
or superstition, did accompany the heavenly preaching of the Ghosple in the
Church of Christ.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, indeed part of what you here say, are your own
words in your book against D. Sanders, and you deal more liberally herein,
then diverse of your Breehren, by affording a hundred, and fifty years more to
the true Church, then most of them will allow. Now you granting the purity of
Faith to continue in the Church of Rome, for the space of the first six hundred
years after Christ, do withal implicitly, and inferentially grant; that no
change of Faith was made in that Church, within the compass of the before
mentioned 160. years; seeing the said 160. years are included within the
first six hundred years, as being part of them.

But to proceed further; you are here (M. Doctor) to call to mind, what your
self at other times (and no doubt) at unawares have written. I do find (to
instance only in some two, or three points) that you affirm, that Victor D.
whit. cont. Duraeu l. 7. p. 48.
who lived anno 160. after Christ) was the first, that exercised iurisdicto^
upon foreign Churches. That not Cyprian D. Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 5.
only (who lived anno. 240.) to use your own words, but almost all the most
holy Fathers, of that time, were in error, touching the Doctrine of good
works; as thinking so to pay the pain due to sin, and to satisfy Gods
justice. Finally that D. Whit. cont. Bellar. page 37.
Leo (who was Pope anno. 440. to speak in your own dialect, was a great
Architect of the Antichristian kingdom. Are not all these your assertions, M.
Doctor.


D. WHITTAKERS. I cannot but acknowledge them for mine; since they are extant
to be read in my own books; and loath I am to be so unnatural, as to disauow
or abandon any issue begotten on my own brain.


CARD. BELLARM. Mark well then, M. Doctor, my deduction. If the Chucrh of
Rome remained in her purity of Faith without any change for the first six
hundred years (for your own confession above expressed is, that the Church of
Christ so long continued a chaste and intemerate Spouse) And if (as your own
pen has left it written) the doctrine of the Popes Supremacy was taught by
Victor the first: The doctrine of Merit of Works was mainteyned by Cyprian, and
generally by other Fathers of that age; and to be short, if Leo were a great
Architect of the kingdom of Antichrist, you meaning of our present Roman
Religion (all which said Fathers, to wit, Cyprian, Victor, Leo, and the rest,
did live diverse ages before the sixth age, or Century, to what time you exte^d
the purity of the Faith of the Church of Rome) does it not then ineuitably
result out of your own Premises (if all this be true, as you affirm it is,)
that the doctrine of the Popes Supremacy, the doctrine of merit of works, and
our Catholic Doctrine generally taught by Antichrist, as you term the Pope,
were no innouations; but the same pure doctrines, which the Apostles first
planted in the Church of Rome? Se how your felfe (through your own
inaduerte^cy) has fortified the truth of that doctrine, which your self did
intend to overthrow. And thus far to show, that their never was made any
cha^g of Faith in the Church of Rome, proved from the distribution and
division of those two different times, which by the learned Protestants
acknowledgments, do contain the Periods of the Church of Rome her continuance
in the true Faith, and of the Public and general Profession of our now
present Roman Faith.


D. WHITTAKERS. My L. Cardinal. Whereas you have produced several testimonies
from our own learned Protestants, who teach, that in the second, third, and
fourth age after Christ; such and such an Article of the Papists Religion had
it beginning; It seems in my judgment, that these their authorities do more
prejudice then advantage your cause. Since such testimonies (if so you will
stand to them) do show a beginning (though most ancient) of those doctrines
after the Apostles deaths, and consequently a change of Faith in the Church of
Rome. For if you will admit the authorities of the Protestants, granting the
antiquities of the present Romish Religion in those former times; you are also
(by force of reason) to admit their like authorities in saying; that at such
times (and not before) those Articles were first taught; for seeing both these
points are delivered by the Protestants in one, and the same sentence, or
testimony, why should the one part thereof be urged for true, and the other
rejected as false?


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor. Here with my L. Cardinal, and your own good license. I
am to make bold to put in a word or two. This your reply (M. Doctor) by way
of inference, may seem to lessen the antiqurty of our ancient Jewish Law; and
therefore I hold my self obliged to discover the weakness thereof, though not
out of desire to entertain any contestation with you. Grant then, that some
miscreants, or Heathen Writers (as Enemies to the Law of Moses) affirm, that
the Religion of the Jews had it beginning in the time of Esdras, for example;
This their testimony may justly be alleged to prove that our Jewish Law was
as ancient (at least) as Esdras; but it cannot be alleged to prove, that
our Law took it first beginning at that time only, and not before in the days
of Moses.

Therefore in the Authorities of this Nature, produced from our Adversaries
writings, we are to distinguish, and sever that, which the Adversaries
grants in the behalf of us, from that, which he affirms to his own
advantage. What he gra^teth for us, and against himself, so far we are to
embrace his authority; seeing it may be presumed that, ordinarliy, no learned
man would confess any thing against himself, and his Religion, but what the
euidency of the truth therein enforces him unto, and therefore one So faith
Tertullian. l. de Anima. c. 3.
of the ancient Doctors of your Christian Church (if I do remember his words)
in this respect said well I will strike the Adversaries with their own
weapons. But what the Adversary affirms in favor of his own cause, and
against us; their we are not to stand to his own, authority; since no man is to
be a witness in his own behalf, and it well may be presumed, that such his
sentence proceeds out of his own partiality.

Now this disparity (M. Doctor) you may well apply (in my conceit) to the
before alleged consessions and testimonies of your own Protestants: But if I
have not here answered directly, I submit my self to both your censures, and
will leave it to my L. Cardinal to give fuller satisfaction and answer
thereto.


CARD. BELLARM. Learned Rabby. Your answer is most sufficient and warrantable;
and indeed a solid judgment would easily dispell this smoke of wit; and if you
had not prevented me, I should but have given the same answer, though perhaps
not have instanced it in your example of the Jewish Law. But enough of this
argument, by which we are instructed, that the present Faith of Rome was never
changed since the Apostles days; for it is S. Augustines rule S. Augnstine,
Contrae Donatist. c. 24.
That, that Faith, which has bin believed by the whole visible Church of God,
and whereof no first beginning can be known since the Apostles, is presumed to
have bin first taught by Christ, and his Apostles.

But, M. Doctor, if it please you, we will insist in another Medium; from
whence we will deduce our former affertion; to wit, that during the first six
huudred years after Christ (and indeed during all the time since the Apostles)
the Church of Rome never made any change, or alteration in any one material
point at all. And therefore I do here ask your judgment, whether there must be
(at all times) in Christ's Church Pastors, and Doctors, which must teach the
People, and be ready to withstand all innouations, and false doctrines at
their first appearance?


D. WHITTAKERS. Yes we all do teach, that there must ever be, and without
interruption true Pastors in the church, who shall be ready to impugn all
emergent, and late arrising Errors and Heresies: So true it is, that the
church is the s^and, from whence we strike an Heretic. And this we prove
from the predictio^ of the Apostle, who foretells us that, Ephesians. 4.
Pastors and Doctors, are to be in the Church, to the consummation of Saints,
till we all meet in the unity of Faith; that is, as our own Doctor Fulke
Against the Remish Testa^ment in Ephesians. 4.
interprets: for ever. Which Doctors (as our said D. Fulke further
auerreth) In his answer to a Cou^terfeite Catholic. page 11.
shall always resist all false Opinions, with open reprehension.

Which point is so true and evident, as that I have already taught in my
books, that the preaching of the word of God (within which is necessarely
included the impugning of all false doctrines, first their arrising) is among
the D. Whit. Speaking of the preaching of the Word etc. styles the^:
Essentiales notae Ecclesiae Cont. Duraeu^. l. 3. p. 260.
Essetiall Notes of the Church; As also that the D. Whit. Says: si adest
Ecclesiam co^stituit, tollitsiauferatur Cont. Duraeu^ l. 3. p. 249.
preaching of the Word does constitute a Church; the want of it, does subuerte
it. From whence it necessarely follows, that these Doctors and Preachers are
not to be silent, at the rising of any false Opinion; but are obliged with all
sedulity, and diligence what soever, openly to resist, and beat down all
innouations, and new arrising doctrines in Faith, and Religion. And these
Doctors, and Pastors thus defending the Church of Christ (by impugning of
false doctrines) are those Watchmen and Sentinels, of whom Esaias so long since
prophesied, Esaias c. 62.
Upon thy Walls, o Jerusalem, I have appointed watchmen all the day, and all
the night; for ever they shall not hold their peace. And indeed to speak
sincerely, the Nature of the Church requires, no less: for how can it
continue the true Church, if her Pas^outs do suffer false, and erroneous
doctrine to invade her children, without any co^troule or resistance? And are
not such negligent Pastou^s to be reputed, as Paralyticke, and dead Members of
the Church; since they perform not that office, and function, for which they
were ordained?


CARD. BELLARM. Your Judgment is to be emdraced herein. But now, M. Doctor, I
take your sword out of your own hand, and do turn the point of it into your
own breast. For whereas their are many weighty doctrines (as touching the
Premacy of Peter, the number of the Sacraments, and their efficacy, Free Will,
Merit of works, Praying for the dead, Praying to Saints, Worshipping of
Images, Unmarried lives of Priests, the Real Presence, the Sacrifice of the
Mass, and (to omit diverse others) the adoration of Christin the Sacrament,
which are believed by the present Church of Rome; and which (as you Protestants
do teach) were introduced into the Church, as Novelties, and Innouations, since
the Faith of Christ was first planted in the Church of Rome, by the Apostles:

Now here, M. Doctor, I provoke you, and all the Protestants living, according
to your own former doctrine of Pastors, ever resisting new and false
doctrines, to name any one Pastor, Doctor, or Father of the Church, who ever
resisted any of the former Catholic doctrines, as new doctrines; or did once
charge the Church of Rome with chang, and innovation in any one point, from
their former received Faith by the Apostles. Read over all the ancient
Fathers, and Doctors of the Primative Church, and later times: Peruse the
first approved General Counsels: Go over all the ancient Catalogues of
Condemned Heresies; and even study all Ecclesiastical Historyes of those
former times; and find in all these but only any one of the former Catholic,
and now Roman doctrines, or any other point co^trouerted at this day between
you and us, to be condemned for a Nouelty, and as dissenting from the general
received Faith of those times, and I promise you, I will cast off my Cardinals
Hat, and turn Protestant.

Can any reasonable Man then think, that, whereas you teach, the Papists
Religion came in by degrees, and at several times, that all the Pastors, and
Fathers of those several times were a sleep, when the said doctrines were
first braoched; or that they observing their entrance, yet not any of them
would vouchsafe to make resistance, or at least some mention, of any such
innovation in doctrine? does not this mainly cross the fore-alleadged Prophesy
of the Apostle? Or can this stand with any possibility; especially if we
consider the nature of our former Catholic doctrines, auerred by you to be
introduced, as Nouelisms? since they are, as above is intimated, many in
number; diverse of them of the greatest consequence, that may be; as the virtue
of the Sacraments, the Manner of our Justification, to wit, whether by works,
or by Faith only; others of them most repugnant to man's sense, and common
reason, as the Real Presence: Some adverse to Man's natural Propension, as the
doctrine of Virginity, Poverty, and Obedience; most of them consisting not only
in an internal belief, but even in an external action and operation; And
therefore the first Orige^ and entrance of the^ are thereby become most
discernable: Such are our doctrines of Praying to Saints, Praying for the
dead, Pilgrimages, Single life in the Clergy, and to omit diverse others, all
Monachisme. And lastly some, supposing their doctrine to be false, subject to
external Idolatry; as the worshipping of Christ with supreme honor in the
Eucharist. Therefore if any of our grave and learned Adversaries should affirm
(for there are some curious wits, who will seem to err, eue^ out of
judgment) that these doctrines could stealingly creep into Gods Church,
without all resistance of it Pastors, Doctors, and Fathers, I bouldly auerte,
that these men not only give the lie openly to the holy Scripture, in several
places witnessing the contrary, but they with all cease to be Men, by loosing
wholly the natural light of all humane discourse and Reason.

But, M. Doctor, to press the force of this argument further. Have you not
read, that in the Primative Church there were the Heresies of the Valentinians,
Tationists Maniches, Arians, and diverse others, all which did embroile the
Church of Christ, even before the first four hundred years were expyred?


D. WHITTAKERS. Yea. I have read all these; and I do find them recorded in the
writings and Catalogues of Heresies, composed by Irenaeus, Epiphanius,
Augustine, and others; who with their learned Penns openly impugned these, and
diuets other Heretics, which Heretics for the time troubled the waters of
the Church, more then after they could, at their pleasure calm them.


CARD. BLLARM. Have you not also read of the Heresies, of the Nestroians,
Pelagians, Donatists, Minothelits? (All which had their beginnings within the
compass of the 160. years, above mentioned) which was between the first
four hundred and forty years next after Christ, and the thousand years from
us; within which compass of years (by the Protestants own writings) the
Church of Rome did suffer this supposed, and imaginary change in Religion.


D. WHITTAKERS. I have also read of these latter Heresies, and do find the
first three amply recorded, and written against, by S. Lib. de Haeresib. Haeris.
88. 89. et Haeres. 692.
Augustine; and the fourth (to omit our own Cent. 6. Col. 312.
Centurists regestring those Heriticks) by the sixth Council of Constantinople;
for I have ever observed in my reading, that the arising Heresies in every age,
were the Marks, whereat the Canons of the Church, and Counceles, and the
learned writers of the ancient Orthodoxall Fathers, did shoot.


CDRD. BELLARM. To decend lower. Have you not also seen the records of many
Heresies rising in every several age, after the first six hundred years. And
(to leap over diverse ages) the-Herisies of Berengarius, Waldo, Wicleffe etc,
if so you will acknowledge them for Heresies?


D. WHITTAKERS. All this I must, and do confess; for I find the Heresies of
every several age to be registered (out of the Fathers writings of every such
age) by our own Centurists, in the fifth Chapter of every several Century, by
Osiander in his Centuries, and by Pantaleon the Protestant in his Chronology.
And for the doctrines of Berengarius, Waldo, Wicleffe, etc. I acknowledge them
not for Heresies; Yet I must confess, I find them to this day extant in
diverse Books: As of Berengarius, in the writings of Langfrancus, Guitmundus,
and Algerus; Of Waldo, I read in Illiricus, In his Catalogue testium veritatis.
as also in Osiander; In epito^. Historiae Eccles.
Of Wicleffe in his own writings; as also in M. Fox his Monuments, and M. Stow
his Annalls of England.


CAD. BELLARM. Well then. Thus I compound these Simples; I mean thus I infer,
and collect out of your former granted Premises. Seeing it is manifest, that
the Heresies rising within the first four hundred years; The Heresies within
the next two hundred years; the Heresies hatched in every age during these
last thousand years, are most largly recorded, partly in the writings of the
ancient Fathers in particular, and set tracts against them, partly in the
Canons of general Counsels condemning them; partly by the observing
diligence of Ecclesiastical Historiographers (whose desined labor is, to
transmit, and commend over to after ages the true state, and face of Christ's
Church in former ages; since History is the life of Memory, and Ambassador of
antiquity) and partly, by the Protestants like endeauours, who have written
several long Volumes of this very subject. Seeing, I say, all this is manifest;
and that not only the inundation, and flux, but even the Ebb, and reflux of
every Heresy, was precisely noted by the Pilots of Gods Church, can it enter
into any brain, but to ween, that so many Articles of the present Roman
Religion, being in number far more, then all above rehearsed, in weight, and
consequently greatly exceeding them, for diversity of Countries, and Nations
far further deuulged, and spread, then either all, or any of the former
Here^ies ever were, most of these other being restrained only to one Contry, or
Nation, could ever so vnespiedly infect the whole Church of Christ with their
contagion, and work a more notorious chang therein, then ever yet was wrought
by all the Heretic, since Christ's time put together; and yet not one Father, or
Doctor of those times, either to take notice of any of those supposed
Heretics, or knowing them, not to impugn their first assaults by preaching,
or writing; neither any one Ecclesiastical History but to mention in their
Histories any one of the said Articles, as Innouations in Faith. Can this be
imagined? or can it be in the power of man; thus to create at his pleasure a
new Religion, without control, or discovery? If this can be dreamed, then may
we with all dream, that Impossibilities can have a true, and real existence;
and that the Scripture it self (for want of due performance of its
predictions) is most false: Into such a depth of absurdities, M. Doctor, these
your very supposals, and imaginary speculations, do precipitate, and cast all
those, who give any credit unto them.


MICHEAS. My L. Cardinal, and you M. Doctor, I must ingenuously confess to
you both, that the former Arguments are much preuayling: the one drawn from
the distribution of times; (whreby every age since the Apostles, is by the
Protestants own acknowledgme^ts, cleared from all change in Faith.) The other
from the silence, both of the Fathes, and Doctors of Christ's Church, in not
^^pugning the supposed introducing of the Catholic Articles; as also of all
Ecclesiastical Historiographers, in not so much, as intimating, or but
glancing at any one (Article as innouated) of the Church of Rome.

And to pattern these times of Grace with the times of the Old Law: If any
frontlesse, and bold Man (and some such perhaps may easily, and without labor
be found, since we need not to plough for weeds, they freely growing of
themselves) should affirm, that the Moysaicall Law had suffered great
changes, and alterations, between the times of its being first promulgated by
Moses, and the coming of the Messiah, I should hold it a most choking, and
full demonstration for the overthrowing the falsehoode of such an assertion; if
neither instances of any times (among so many ages, passed from Moses to
Christ) wherein such a forged Innovation should happen, could be given; neither
could it be showed, that any of the Prophets, or Jewish Rabbines did openly
gaynsay, or contradict the said imaginary new arising Opinions, (who no doubt,
would have maintained the Law with sheading of their blood, before any
Nouelisme in Faith should have invaded the Synagogue; imitating herein the
resolution of Sampson, who conquered his enemies by his own death.) Neither
lastly, if not any historiographer of the Jewish times, did in their works,
and writings, give the least touch thereof. But pardon me (both of you) for this
my interrupting, and I would entreat you, to proceed further in this your
learned discourse.


CARD. BELLARM. I will satisfy your request; but before I descend to any other
argument, I will annex to my former demonstration (for I can term it no
less) drawn from the silence of Doctors in contradicting, and
Historiographers, in relating any presumed innouations in the Church of Rome,
these ensuing Considerations.

(1) First, we find, that the less justifiable lives, and conversation in
manners, of some few Popes, were precisely So Eugenius 4. is noted by the
Council of Basil; Benedictus 3. By the Council of Constance. Gregory the 7.
By Benno. etc.
regestred, and recorded to all Posterity, with intention, perhaps, to disgrace
all Popes; as if all Popes were to be represented in some one, or other less
virtuous Pope, as all men are in Adam. Now then this being most true, can we
probably think, that the Historians of those ages (being ever ready, and
prepared to tax the Personal vices of the Popes themselves who as you see
were forced by this means to pass the Red sea of shame, disgrace, and
obloquy) all of them would be wholly silent in relating the greatest change in
Religion, that ever happened, if any such chang had truly and really bin
effected?

(2) Secondly, we all know, that the Greek Church has bin for many ages
emulous of the Church of Rome; and therefore if the present Church of Rome had
anciently made any Division, or Scissure from the true Church of Christ, the
Grecians no doubt (who then stood ever upon the hight of En^^y, the better
presently to espy any arising advantage against the church of Rome) would have
been most apt to recommend the memory of such a change in our church to all
after ages, in their Histories. But no such records we find in any of their
writings. Yea the Grecians are so far from that, as that (on the contrary side)
the present Church of Rome is able to specify, and note (out of most ancient,
and approved Authors) the very times, when the Grecians first introduced
those particular Opinions, wherein at this day they dessint from our Roman, and
catholic church.

I will insist (for breuity) in some few chief examples. First, their denial
of Obedience to the Sea of Rome, was begun by John of Constantinople, and was
noted, and written against, by Li. 4. Ep. 34. ci 36.
Gregory the Great, and Pelagius In his Epi. vniuersis Episcopis.
. Their denial of the proceedings of the Holy Ghost, from the Father, and the
Son, took it beginning (and at it first rising was As Kekermannus the
Protestant witneseth in syste^ Theolog. page 68.
gainsaid, and contradicted) about the year 764. Their denial of prayer for
the dead, was begun by Arius, and impugned by Epiphanius, (l) and Haers. 53.
Augustine. Their bringing in of leauened bread, by the Grecians in the
celeberation of the Eucharist, was first begun about the year 1053. as
appears out of the, writings of Leo In Epist. ad Michaelem Episcop.
Consta^tinop. (...). 5.
the nynth, and the Cent. 11 c. 8.
Centurists. Now (^) Haeres. 75.
can it be imagined that those, being few in number, could so precisely be
contradicted, written against, and left regest^ed to all posterity; and yet this
supposed change of the church of Rome: consists in bringing in of far more
Articles in number, and of as great consequence, should never be noted, nor
impunged by any one Doctor, or Father, nor recorded, nor observed by any one
Historiographer; the said Doctors, Fathers, and Historiographers living in the
very same ages, wherein this supposed alteration is said to have happened? By the
same ground might Pyth^goras well maintain, (as in his books he attempted to
do) that the earth being in special motion of 24: hours; our selves, because
we are carried together with this revolution, cannot observe, that any such
motion of the earth is.

(3) Thirdy, we may call to mind, that whereas the Ceremonies in the
celeberation of the Mass, were successively and at several times added, and
first brought in by several Popes; So we find accordingly, that the
Adversaries The book entitled: The Relics of Rome, written by Tho. Beacon.
The Anatomy of the Mass, by Anthony de Adamo, printed. 1556. Hospinia^ hist
Sacrament. l. 2. c. 4. 5. 6. 7. printed 1591. besides diverse others.
of the present Church of Rome, as willing to discover our innouations, though
in the smalest matters, (for Malice is glade to take hold of the least
advantage) and but in points of indifferency, have most diligently, and
painfully recorded them in their several books, written of this very subject,
with all due circumstances, both of the Popes introducing them and the times,
when they were introduced.

Here now I urge. If the Enemies of the present Church of Rome, being thus
diligent and sollicitous in noting the beginning of eich Ceremony of the Mass
(all such Ceremonies being merely accidental to the Mass, and without which
the Mass may as truly and effectually be celebrated, as with them) If they (I
say) could have discovered any innovation in the maine Doctrine it self of the
Mass (as in the Doctrine of the Real Presence, the Sacrifice of Christ's body
there offered up, our Adoration of the Sacrament, the Priests enjoined chastity
for such his celebration) would they have bin silent therein? or rather would
they not have loaded their books with the relation of all such innouations;
they consisting not in small ceremonies, but in most sublime, and high
dogmaticall points of Christian Religion? If otherwise; then belike our
Adversaries would have us to think, that herin they resemble the Sun, which
reuealeth the Terrestrial Globe, being but of a litte quantity; but concealeth
the Celestial, which is of a far more spacious greatness.

But to proceed; and to conclude the force of this argument, drawn from the
impugning, and recording of innouations in doctrine: if this precise course (by
our Adversaries acknowledgments) has ever bin kept, during all precedent ages,
without intermission, in all matters confessed, and out of controversy between
us, and the Protestants; shall we dream, that it was so wholly neglected, and
forgotten, touching the supposed innovation of our Catholic Doctrines; as
that such our chief doctrines, though, first really brought in, in those
former times, were neither at there first beginning impugned by any Doctors,
or Fathers of those ages; nor recorded, or mentioned by any one Ecclesiastical
Historiographer (among so many) of the same, or later times?

But now to undertake, according to your desire, (Micheas) an other argument.
You Protestants, M. Doctor, do affirm, that this our present Roman Religion
is Antichristian (for so commonly most of you in your charitable language do
style it) and that the Pope is the true Antichrist, deciphered by the Apostle,
for his first introducing and defending of the said Religion; and upon this
ground you teach, that Papistry first came in, when Antichrist first came in.


D. WHITAKERS. We do so teach indeed. For seeing our main assertion is, that
your Religion is Antichristian, we cannot (even by the nature of Relatiues)
sever, and divide (so indissoluble companions they are) the one from the other;
I mean Papistrie from Antichrist; he being the Man, who first did disseminate
it; and now the head, who chiefly, principally, and with all wicked molitions,
and machinations whatsoever, maintayns it.


CARD. BELLARM. You are, M. Doctor, it seems, full gorged against the Pope,
as presumed by you to be Antichrist. But let that for the time pass. Do all
you Protestants, M. Doctor, agree together, touching the time of Antichrists
first coming, and consequently, touching the supposed change in Faith, wrought
by Antichrist his coming.


D. VVHITAKERS. No. For I hold with our reverent Man Beza Co^fess. general.
^7. Sect. 12.
Beza, who teaches, that Leo (who was Pope anno Domi. 440.) did clearly
breath forth the arrogance of the Antichristian Sea: And therefore my constant
Tenet is, that So says D. Whit. in his book co^^. Bellarm. page 37.
Leo was a great Architect of the Antichristian kingdom: But some few other
Protestants hold several ways hereof.


CARD. BELLARM. Some few, M. Doctor, not so; but very many of them maintain
different, and contrary Opinions touching the time of Antichrist his first
coming. And first So is Mela^ct^on alleged by M. Haruey in Theolog.
discourse page 102.
Mela^cthon, and In his Libri psalm. quinque psalm. 22. fol. 146. 147.
Bucer free the Pope from being Antichrist; and do teach that the Turk is (as
Bucer speaks) ipsissimus Antichristus; with whom in judgment herin conspireth
M. Act. Mo^. of An. 1576 page 539.
Fox.

Iunius upon the Revelations, in C. 20.
(that remarkable Protestant) teaches, that Hildebrand (who was Pope anno.
1074.) was the first Antichrist, with whom D. In his Treatise concerning
Antichrist. page 110.
Downham seems to agree in these words: Gregory the seventh, alias Hildeb
and, was the first of the Popes, who was openly acknowledged to be Antichrist.
Bullinger affirms he came in anno. 763. he therefore tearming that year: the
upon the Apocalypse sermon. 16. page 198. and in his preface to the Apocalypse.
fa* all year. D. In his answer to a Couterf^yte Catholic. p. 36.
Fulke and D. In his Synops. p. 160.
Willi^ place his coming in Anno, 607. And make Boniface the third to be the
first Antichrist; with whom in judgment herein your self, M. Doctor,
forgetting, as it should seem; what elsewhere you have taught touching Leo,
conspire in these words: Gregory D. Whitakers de Ecclesia co^ra Bella^m.
controuers. 2. quaest. 4. p. 141. Thus writes: D cunus Gregorium Magnum fuisse
v(...)mum veru^ et p^um ill us Ecclesiae Eps^op^^ etc. q(...)m secuti sunt,
fuerunt very Antichrist etc. Et quia certum aliquod tempus a nobis quaer^ni et
pestulant, hoc tempus illis design^mus.
the Great was the last true, and holy Bishop of that Church etc. And therefore
because our Adversaries demand of us the time, when Antichrist first came in,
we design, and set down to them, the very time of his coming, But M. Napper
upon the Reuela^^os, p. 66.
ascends higher, affirming Antichrist to have first comme in Anno Domini.
313. He teathing that Siluester the Pope, was the first Antichrist. Yet the
Reformed Churches of Transiluania So says M. Hookerin his Ecclesiastical
po^cy.
give a greater antiquity of Antichrists first coming, placing it in the
year. 200.

But Sebastianus Francus (no obscure Protestant) outstrippeth all his former
Brethren; for he ascribes Antichrists coming to the times immediately following
the Apostles. thus writing, for In Epist. de abrogadis in vniuersum omnibus
siatu it is Ecclesiast.
certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church, together with
the Faith, and Sacraments, vanished away presently after the Apostles
departure. See how this high swelling river of Heresy (for I do hold this
sentence, that the Pope is Antichrist, to be no less then Heretical) is fed
with the small streams of eich man's particular and different opinions, which
opinions though mainly dissenting in themselves; yet most of them proceed from
one general source of the Protestants malice, and hatred against the Pope, and
Church of Rome; and therefore their judgments herein must be more imperfect,
and deceaueable: for as the eye sees not a^ight, except the species, and
forms of the thing seen, do fall upon the eye, ad angulos rectos; (as the
Optists do speak.) So here man's understanding cannot apprehend any thing
truly, as long as is wants it own natural rectitude, and straightnes, which
is ever free from all obliquity of prejudice, and Passion.


MICHEAS. The variety of doctrine touching the coming of Antichrist, is most
wounderfull, and far greater by many degrees then the diversity of opinions
among us Jews, who was husband to Esther, or at what time Judith did live.
And indeed I ever promised to my self before this time, to have found a far
greater concordance of judgment in this point, among the Protestants, then now
I do find.


D. WHITTAKERS I am D. Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 5. says: An mihi erit dicta
singula, quae quisqua^ protulit aliqua^do praestare aut defendere?
not to defend eich Man's different opinions herein; and I grant, if any of
these be true, all the rest are false: But it is sufficient to prove, that
antichrist is come; and that by his coming this great change in Faith, and
Religion was first then wrought in the Church of Rome; and as, touching the
difficulty of proouing the circumstances of his first coming, it imports
little; seeing here we are to remember (to speak by allusion) that it is easy
to prove, that we see; but hard to prove, how we see.


CARD. BELLARM. I do not look, M. Doctor, that you should make good all the
former contraric opinions; for it is impossible to justify, but any one of
them. Nevertheless it is a weak kind of proof, to say only in gross, that
Antichrist is already come, and with his coming, this so great a presumed
chang in Faith was first brought in; where you have no more reason to allow of
the particular time of his coming, by your self designed, then your former
Brethren have, for the fortifying of eich ones several judgment therein. Only
the disparity, which I find between them, and you, is this: That every one of
them do set down one only particular time of Antichrist his coming, and
content themselves therewith; whereas you, M. Doctor, imitating herin the
skillful Pilot, who constantly changes his sails, with the unconstant winds,
for your best advantage, and as it most fittingly sorts to your purpose in
hand, sometimes will have his coming to be in Pope Leo, to wit, in the year
440. at other times, in Boniface the third, which is in anno 607. So you making
a great Parenthesis (as I may say) of a hundred and fifty years at least,
between your two different sentences of Antichrist his coming.

But to return to the force of this my argument, drawn from the Protestants
different, and contrary Opinions, touching the first reign of Antichrist. Here
then, I say, seeing there are among the Protestants so many contrary, and
irreco^cileable sentences of Antichrist his first entrance, (at what time, this
supposed chang of Faith in the Church of Rome is said to have bin effected.)
And seeing, that not any one of these different judgments have more warrant,
and authority for its supporting, then any other of the^ has: Therefore by
force of all reason we may conclude, that all there sentences herin are false,
and that Antichrist is not yet come; and thus out of falsehood, we may extract
truth; and so consequently we may deduce, that no chang of Faith has bin yet
wrought in the Church of Rome, by the said Antichrist. Therefore I will conclude
this argument with the more retired, dispassionate, and wary judgments of some
other of your learned Protestants, to wit, of that eminent Protestant In Epist.
Pauli. Coloss. et Thessal p. 246.
Zanchius, of Franciscus In his Prognosticin. finis Mundi. page 74.
Lambertus (no ordinary Man among you) and of some others; who Peremptorily
affirm against all their former Brethren, that Antichrist is not yet come.


MICHEAS For my part, I must needs confess, that I do believe that Antichrist
is not yet come. For, besides diverse other reasons, urged by us Jews in proof
thereof those words of Daniell concerniug Antichrist his continuance, (to wit c.
7.
tempus, tempora, and dimidium temporis) were ever by all learned Jewish
Rabbis interpreted literally, and plainly, to signify three years and a
half, which short compass of time cannot in any sort be applied to the Bishop
of Reme, as Antichrist teaching the present Roman Religion; seeing he has
continued preaching the said Doctrine, and Religion (even by the Protestants
confessions (as now I see) many hundred of years. But good my Lord Cardinal,
if there be any other reasons behind. to impugn this said change, I would
entreat your Lordship to descend to them; for in matters of great importance
variety seldom breeds satiety.


CARD. BELLARM. I am willing thereto. And for the further prosecution thereof, I
am to put you in mind, M. Doctor, partly according to my former Method, set
down in the beginning; that whereas the Professors of the Church of Rome, were
in the Apostles days the true Church of Christ (as is above on all sides
confessed) and consequently, the most ancient Church, since God is more
ancient, then the Devil, and therefore truth more ancient the^ falsehood.
truth is ever more ancient, then falsehoode, and Errors. It therefore
follows, that all Heretics whatsoever, who make choice of any new doctrine
in Faith, do make a revolt, and separation from that Church of the Apostles,
according to those words of S. John: John. 2.
exierunt a nobis: they went out of us; and answerably to that other text: Act.
15
certain that went forth from us: which very words do contain a Brande, or
Note upon the Author of every Heresy. Since the Apostle, and the Evangelist do
mean hereby, that ever first Heretic goes out from a more aucient society
of Christians, then by him is chosen. So as to go out of a precedent Church, or
society of Christians, is not only an infallible note of Heresy in the judgment
of Vincentius Lyrinensis Aduers. haeres.
(quis vnquam Haereses instituit, nisi qui prius ab Ecclesiae C^^boli ae Vniuer
sitatis, and antiqnitatis consensione discre^^it?) but even by your own
Brethren; for we find Osiander (among others) thus to write: Epitem. Have.
Cent. 1. l. 3. c. 1. p. 78.
Nota; Haeretici ex Ecclesia progrediuntur.

Thus do Heretics ever forsake the general, and most ancient company of
Christians, as small Brooks do often leave the common channel of the main
River. Now here I dema^d of you, M. Doctor, to show, from what company, or
society of Christians, (more ancient) did we Catholics in those former times
(when first, you say, this change of Faith was made) depart? or from what
Church, before in being, went we out? The euidency of this Note is manifested in
Calvin, Luther, the Waldenses, the Wicliffians, and all other ancient
acknowledged Sectaries; of whom it is confessed, that all of them were
originally Members of our Catholic Church; and by their making choice of
particular Doctrines (so Judas the Apostle, who departing from the company of
the Apostls after became Judas the Traitor) did go, and depart out of the
present Roman Church, and thereby became Heretics. The like, M. Doctor, I do
here expect, that you should prove, by authority of Ecclesiastical Histories,
of the present Catholic, and Roman Church; which if you cannot, then is the
inference most strong; that the present Church of Rome never made any such
revolt from, or departing out of that Church, which was established by the
Apostles at Rome; and consequently, that the present Church of Rome never
suffered any change in Faith, since it first being a Church.


D. WHITAKERS. Your Church has departed from that Faith, which the Apostles
first preached in Rome; and I hope this departure, and going out (without other
proofs) is sufficient enough. And here I answer with M. Newstub^ (one of our
learned Brethren) In his answer to certain assertions, te^ding to ma^tayne
the Church of Rome p. 35
That when you require, who were they, that did note your going out etc. This
question (I say) is vnvecessary etc. we have taken you with the manner; that is
to say, with the Doctrine, diverse from the Aposties: and therefore neither Law,
nor Conficience can force us to examen them who were witnesses of you first
departing. Thus my Brother M. Newstubs. And my Lord, as it is far better for
one to have a clear sight, then to enjoy the best helps for curing a bad
sight; so we here prefer the truth of the Doctrine, first preached at Rome by
the Apostles, and manifested unto us by the perspicuity of the scripture,
before all humane reasons, and arguments, directed to the discovery of Romes
after embraced Innovation.


CARD. BELLARM. What strange Logic is this? and how poor a Circulation do you
make. The main question between us, is, whether the present Church of Rome
has changed it Faith, or no, since the Apostles days? To prove, that it has
not, Iverge that the professors thereof did never go out of any more ancient
Church, and consequently ever retained without change it former Faith: Now you
in answer hereto (as not being able to instance the persons, by whom, or the
times when, any such departing, or going out was made by the Professors of our
Religion) reply, that it Doctrine is different from the Doctrine of the
Apostles; and therefore the Church of Rome has changed it Religion since the
Apostles times: and this sophism (you know) is but Petitio Principij, or a
beginning of the matter in question, and is nothing else but (without answering
to any of my premises) the denial of my Conclusion; which kind of answenng, I
am sure, impugneth all Logic, and therefore all Reason; since Logic is but
Reason sublimated and refined.

But to proceed further. In every introduction of a new Religion, or broaching
of any innovation in Doctrine, the Professors thereof receive a new
denomination, or name, for the most part, from the first author of the new
doctrine, and sometimes from the Doctrine its self; like unto a running river,
which commonly takes the name of that river, into which it falls. Thus the
Arians, the Valentinians, Marcionists Manicheans from Arius, Valentinus,
Marcian, and Manicheus etc. or from the doctrine it self, as the Heretics
Monothelites, Agnoitae, Theopaschitae etc. though this more seldom.

This Note, or Mark, of imposing a new name of the Professors of every
arrising Heresy, may be exemplified in all Heresies without exception,
engendered since the Apostles times, even to this day: a point so exempt from
all doubt, as that your learned Man M. Doctor Field thus writes: In his
Treatise of the Church l. 2. c. 9.
Surely it is not to be denied, but that the naming after the names of Men, was
in the time of the Primative Church, peculiar, and proper to Heretics and
Schismatics; with whom agrees M. In his Apology, vnderthe title of querulous,
motions.
Parks; both of them borrowing it from the ancient Lenaeus l. 2. c. 20.
Athanas. s^rm-2. contra Arium. Ierom. Cont. Lucif. in fine.
Fathers and particulerly from Chrysostom, who thus says: hom. 33. in Act.
Apost.
Prout Haeresiarchae nomen, it a Secta vocatur.

Well then, this being thus acknowledged on all sides; If the present Church of
Rome has made a change from her first Primative Faith, then the Professors
thereof by introducing of new Heresies, and Opinions, became Heretics, and
consequently they have taken (according to our former ground) some name,
either from the first broachers of these new Doctrines, or from the doctrines
themselves. But you cannot, M. Doctor, show any such name to be imposed upon
us, except the name, Catholics, which was even in the Primative Church, the
surname of all Christians, according to that; Pacianus epist. ad Simphronianum.
Christianus mihi nomen est, Catholicus vero cagnomen: Illud me nuncupat; istud
me oste^dit, though the contrary we can show of you, who have the names given
to you of Lutherans, Caluenits, Besits, etc. Therefore it clearly follows,
that the Professors of the present Roman Church have never changed their
Faith, first planted by the Apostles.


D. WHITAKERS. Now my L. Cardinal, you are foiled with your own argument. For
have you not the name of Papists peculiarly appropriated to your selves, to
distinguish you from the true professors of the ghospel? In like sort, are not
some of your religious Men called Bernardins, others Franciscans, Benedictins,
Augustins etc. so taking their appellation from particular Men; and thus your
own argument rebutteth upon your self with great disadvantage: Therefore my
Lord be not so confident aforehand in the force of your alleged reason but
remember, that: D. Whit. contra Camp Rat. 5.
Thra^y's pro'erysou,'ec pollou cacos: who is ever bold before the work is
attempted, is commonly indiscreete.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, You so seriously here trifle, as that I even blush
in your behalf, to observe how you wrong yourfollowers, and Proselits with
such weak transparency of reasons. For you are here to understand, that the
Surnames of Peculiar Heretics (as the Arians, Eutichians, Maniches, and of all
others) were imposed upon the Professors of these Heresies, even at the first
beginning, and rising of the said Heresies, and were invented out of necessity,
to distinguish their Heresies from all other Doctrines: but now the word,
Papist, M. Doctor, was coined but lately by Luther himself against us, and
this not out of necessity, but of reproach: our Faith, and Doctrine being
acknowledged, above by your leaned Brethren, to have bin in the world, many
hundred years before Luthers days.

Again, the Word, Papist, is not restrained to any one Pope, or any peculiar
Doctrine, taught by the present Church of Rome, but it is indifferently
extended to all Popes, and all doctrines taught by the said Popes: so fowly, M.
Doctor, are you mistaken in alleging the name Papist against us: and so much
do you, and other Protestants wrong us, even for that very name; we undergoing
herein by your Brethrens calumnies the like misfortune, which Collatinus
Tarquinius suffered, who was deprived of his honors, and subject to disgrace,
and reproach by the Romans, only for the hateful name of Tarquinius.

Touching those names of Franciscans, Bernardins, Benedictans, etc. It is so
clear, that these names are not imposed for change of Faith, but only for
institution of several degrees of a virtuous, and religious life, as that I
will answer you in your former Brother, D. Field Of the Church. l. 2. c. 9.
page 58.
his words, who thus solueth this your objection: We must observe, that they,
who profess the Faith of Christ, have bin sometimes in these later ages of the
Church, called after the special names of such Men, as were the Authors,
beginners, and deuisers of such courses of Monastical Profession, as they made
choice to follow; as Benedictans and such like. Thus D. Field.


MICHEAS. I think, M. Doctor, (under yonr favor) that these your instances
of names, taken from the first institutours of several religious Orders in the
Church of Christ, do not imply any change of Faith made by them; and therefore
the force of my L. Cardinal his argument, borrowed from new imposed
appellations, is not weakened, but rather fartified by this your reply. My
Reason is this: in our Jewish Law we read, that there were some called Hierom.
35.
Rechabits, and others, Numb. 6.
Nazarites; both professing a more strict course of life, then the vulgar, and
common people did. In like sort Josephus Antiquitat. Iudaic. l. 18. c. 2.
and Philo De vita contemplat.
report much of the austerity of the Essenes, among us Jews; who in regard of
such their peculiar Profession were called: Essenes; and to whom God vouchsafed
many spiritual, favors, and consolations. Happy men: since he is most fit to
walk upon the hight of celestial contemplation; who lives in the vale of a
voluntary humility, retyrednes, and mortification; In whom the fire of the
spirit does ever extinguish the fire of the flesh and sensuality; thus the
greater hear putting forth the less heat.

Now shall any man think, that these men instituted a Faith, and Religion,
different from that, of Moses? It is both absurd to entertayne such a thought,
and withal it is a wrong, and dishonor to the Law of Moses. And in my
judgment, both these instances of the Old Testament produced by me, and those
other of the Franciscans etc. objected by you, M. Doctor, in a true, and eauen
libration of the^ do prove that, which my L. Cardinal first endeavored to
prove from the imposition of new Names. For they manifest the several changes,
and alterations, which were made both in the old Testament, and the new,
touching a more austere profession of a virtuous life, which was the subject of
those changes; as these other new imposed names of Arians, Nestorians,
Maniches, and the rest above specified, do necessarily euict a change first
made in Doctrine, by Arius, Nestorius, Manicheus etc. But my L. Cardinal, if
you will enlarge your self no further upon this point, I humbly entreat you to
proceed to some other argument.


CARD. BELLARM. Learned Micheas. I will proceed to that, which at this instant
shall be my last, though for weight, and force, it might well take the first
place. And it shall be taken, M. Doctor, from the first plantatio^ of
Christianity in your own Country. which though immediately, it concerns but
one Nation, yet potentially, it proves, that there was no change of Faith at
all, made in the Church of Christ, in any former times, by the Professors of
the present Roman Religion. But here, M. Doctor, I am to demand your judgment,
touching the times in which, and the Person, by whom the Britons of Wales were
first converted to the Christian Faith?


D. WHITAKERS. All we Protestants agree, that the Britons of Wales whre
converted in the Apostles time, by Joseph of Aramathia; and this we prove, not
only form the authority of Saint Bid, who did write the history thereof in the
year, 724. but also from the authority of our Principal Historiographers, for
thus M. Cambden (our learned Countryman) writes: In his Britan. page 40.
Certum est Brit(...) in ipsa Ecclesiae infantia Christian^m Religionem
imbibisse, It is Certain, that the Britons received the Christian, Religion,
even in the infancy of the Church. Who thus further discourses of this Point:
In his Britania. p. 157.
In hac floruit Monasterium Glastenburie^sis etc. Here flourished the Monastery
of Glaste^bury, which takes it ancient beginning from Joseph of Aramathia etc.
for this is witnessed by the most ancient Monuments of this Monastery etc.
nether is there any reason, Why we should doubt thereof Thus far, M. Cambden,
with whom conspire all other Chroniclers; as Harrison Annexed to Holinshead his
great Chronicle, volum. 1. p. 23
in his description of Britanny, and others. Yea of us Ministers of the ghospel
In his book against Heskins, Sand. p. 561
D. Fulke, In his pageant of Popes.
D. Jewel, and M. In his sovereign remedy against Sch^m^ p. 24
Henoch Clapham, do jointly teach the same; neither did I ever read any one
authentical writer to deny it.


CARD. BELLARM. How long, M. Doctor, do your writers confess, that the
Britons did preserve their Faith received in the Apostles times, free from all
change, or mixture of innouatio^s.


D. VVHITAKERS. We do confess, that they preserved it pure, and not stained
with any Errors, til Augustine his coming into England, who was sent by Pope
Gregory, to plant his religion among us English: for first thus I find D.
Jewel to aver: In his pageant of Popes.
The Britons being converted by Joseph of Aramathia, held that Faith at
Augustins coming; as also D. Fulke saying: Against the Rhemish Testament. in
2. cor. 12.
The Catholic Britans, with whom Christian Religion had continued in
succession from the Apostles times, would not receive Augustine. To these we
may adioyne the like words of M. Fox: Act. Mon. printed, 1576. p. 463.
The Britons after the receiving of the Faith, never forsook it, for any
manner of false preaching, nor for torments: and finally, that acknowledgment
of D. Humfrey: In Iesuitism. par. 2. (...) 3. p. 304.
Habuerunt Britanni templa sibi, non Romany etc. The Britons had temples, and
Churches peculiar to themselves, not common with the Romans; they not
subiecting themselves to the yoke of the Romans.


CARD. BLLARM. Well, M. Doctor, you deal with integrity, and playnes
hitherto; openly discovering, what your reading and judgment are able to
deli^er herein. And your Praise in so doing is the greater; since there are
some men, so cautelous in their proceedings, and speeches, and of such an
impenetrable closenes of disposition, as that we can never know their mind by
their words; the one, for the most part, standing neutrall to the other, or
rather the Aspect of a Diametricall Opposition. But, M. Doctor, let me enquire
further of you. You know, that there was an interuiew of meeting, between this
Augustine, and the Bishops of Britanny, or Walls, for the conferring of their
Religions together, at a place called in S. Bid Beda hist. 2. c. 2.
his time: Augustineizat; which point is further recorded by your In his great
Chronic. of the last edition volu^. l. 5. c. 21. page 102.
Holinshead, M. Fox, Act. Mo^. printed 1576 page 120.
and diverse others. Now here I would entreat you sincerely to set down, the
greatest differences of Faith, and Religon, which at that meeting were found to
be between the Briton Bishops, and the foresaid Augustine.


D. WHITAKERS. I will and my tongue shall truly subscribe to all that, which of
this point I have heretofore read. And first S. Bid will fully determine this
point; who relating, how Augustine answered the Briton Bishops, sets his
answer down in th^se words: Beda l. 2. c. 2.
Si in tribus his obtemperare mihi vultis, vt Pascha suo tempore celebretis; vt
Ministerium Baptizandi (quo Deo renascimur) iuxta morem Romanae and Apostolicae
Ecclesiae compleatis; vt Genti Anglorum vna nobiscum praedicetis verbum Domini,
cetera, quae agitis. (quamuis moribus nostris contraria) eaquanimiter cuncta
toller abimus: that is, If you Briton Bishops) will obey me in these three
things; to wit, in celebrating ^aster day in it due time; in conferring of
Baptism, (by the which we are reborne to God) according to the Rites of the
Roman, and Apostolical Church, and in helping us to preach to the English; all
other matters, which you do (though contrary to our manners,) we will tolerate,
and suffer. Thus far S. Bid. But to what end, my Lord Cardinal, do you make
so many demands touching this matter of the Britons? Since I cannot see your
project herein; they neither preiudicing us Protestants, nor aduantaginge you
Papists.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, you shall quickly discover the drift of these my
several demands, which resemble a Torrent, stopped for a time, that it may in
the end ouerflow with greater violence. Now to your former acknowledgme^ts we
may add (touching only the three former differences) the like Confessions of
Volum. 1. p. 103
Holinshead, In his Catalogue of the Bishops p. 6.
M. Goodwin, and the Protestant Author of the History of great Briton whose
words are these: Printed anno. 1606. l. 3. c. 13. p. 133.
The Briton Bishops conformed themselves to the Doctrine, and Ceremonies of the
Church of Rome, without difference in any thing specially remembered, save only
in the celebration of the feast of Easter etc.

Now, M. Doctor, in this last place, I would have you call to mind, what is
above related, touching the Faith, planted by Augustine, of D. Humfrey, the
Centurists, and Osiander. D. Humfrey his words herin (though the iteration of
them may perhaps seem unpleasing) I will once more repeat, for greater weight
of our ensuing argument; who speaking of Augustins Religion planted in England,
thus writes: In Iesuitisin. part. 2. Rat. 5. page 5. and 627.
In Ecclesiam vere quid inuexerunt Gregorius and Augustinus? onus Caeremoniarum
etc. intulerunt Pallium Episcopale ad sola Missarum solemnia, Purgatorium, etc,
Oblationem salutaris hostiae, and Preces pro demortuis etc. reliquias etc.
Transubstantiationem etc. nouas templorum consecrationes etc. Ex quibus
omnibus, quid aliud quaesitum est, quam vt Indulgentiae, Monacha^us, Paptus,
reliquu^que Pontificiae superstitionis Chaos extruatur? Haec autem Augustinus
Magnus Monachus (a Gregorio Monacho edoctus) importauit Anglis: Thus D.
Humfrey. Are not these his own words? And are not the In the Alphabetical
table of the sixth Century after the first Edition thereof, at the word: Gregory.
Centurists and Epitom. histor. Eccles. cent. 6. page 289.
Osiander (above cited) most clear, that Augustine at his coming into
England, preached the present Roman Religion, in all chief points to you
English?


D. WHITAKERS. It cannot be denied, but that all the foresaid Protestants (as
also all Histories discoursing of this point) do co^fidently auerre the same.
Which said Gregory, as he brought in some true, and wholesome points of
Christian Faith; so did he mingle them, with diverse poisonous superstitions,
worthily to be avoided by all good Christians: D. ^hit. Cont. Camp. Rat. 10.
Pharmaca polla men(...) esthla memiemena, polla de lyera. for it is most
clear, that Augustine in this his plantation of Religion in England, did
greatly labor D. Whit. vbi supra.
'ar' 'rostia quadam dianoias, with an infirmity or sickness of judgment.


CARD. BELLARM. Well, M. Doctor, touching the venom, you spit out against
Augustines Religion, I hold it, but as foam, and froth of a distempered
stomach, and therefore I pass it over: but to return to my argument. Here now
I will be serviceable unto you, and by the mixture of all these former
Ingredients, I will present you with a wholesome Electuary, compounded of them
all: for indeed I hold the demonstration issuing out of the premises, so
unavoidable, as that it precludeth, and forestalleth the adversary of all show
of Reply.

First then it is granted, that the Britons were converted to the Faith of
Christ by Joseph of Aramathia; who as he had the honor to interre our Savior,
and lay his sacred Body in a new monument, cut out of a rock (as the Math. 27.
Evangelist speaks) so enjoyed he the happiness to bury al former infidelity
in the Britons, and to cloth, or infolde their (before stony, and rocky) hearts,
within the clean Syndon of a pure Faith in our Savior:

But to proceed. Secondly, it is confessed, that the Britons retained this
their first Faith, spotles, and without change, till Augustins coming into
England: Thirdly, it is proved, that at the time of the conference between
Augustine, and the Briton Bishops, the greatest difference in matters of Faith,
and Religion, (whereupon they stood) were but two points, chiefly consisting in
Ceremony; to wit, the keeping of Easter day in it usual time, and the form of
Baptizing, according to the rites of Rome. Fourthly, and lastly, it is
granted, that Augustine here planted, and preached to the English all
Articles, and points of the present Roman Religion, or Papistry, as you
Protestants do usually style it.

Now, M. Doctor, what other resultancy can here be made out of all these
Premises, but this? To wit, that the Church of Rome in Augustins time teaching
Papistry, was wholly agreeable (the two points, or Ceremonies of keeping Easter
day, and of baptising with the Rites of Rome, only excepted) with the Faith,
and Religion, which was planted among the Britons by Joseph of Aramathia in the
Apostles days: and consequently, that the Church of Rome teaching Papistry,
did never suffer any change in her Faith, and Religion since the Apostles
departed. This is the Argument, wherein (I grant) I partly insult; it is
inauoidable; it is a demonstration: And pryse it Micheas as a strong Aries,
beating down, and bearing before it, whatsoever may seem to withstand the
Truth in this point controuerted.


MICHEAS. In deed, my Lord, it seems to me very forcible, and you did well to
reserve it to the last place; that so (like sweetmeats) it might pleasingly
close up the taste of our judgments. Nevertheless the consideration of it does
not diminish with me the force of your other former arguments; for though
Better be better, yet follows it not, but that Good is good.


D. WHITAKERS. My Lord, This your argument is tied together with many links,
and break but one of them, all the rest are loosed. And indeed it is but an
argument drawn from Authority, Negatiuely, and by Omission only; which you
know is little valued in the schools. For the hinge (as I may say) or weight
of it only consists in this. That at the meeting of Augustine, and the Briton
Bishops, dissented from Augustine. But of other greater points we read no
mention made among them; and therefore for any thing we know, the Britons might
as well disagree from Augustine in all other Articles passed over in silence, as
agree with them.


CARD. BELLARM. How improbable, how absurd, how impossible is this, you say?
And take heed, M. Doctor, that this your answer be not controuled by your
own secret conscience; and beware of much practicing the like hereafter; since
the Character of any bad course, impressed by a long habit, at length becoms
indelible. But to the point: Consider all the Circumstances of the business at
that time handled, and then deliver an impartial, and even censure. The
meeting was occasioned only for comparing their Faiths together; Augustine
imitating therein S. Paul, Gal. 2.
vt conferat cum illis Euangelium, quod praedicat in Gentibus. The Britons
(even by the acknowledgment of M. Act. Mo^. printed. 1576. page 120.
Fox) did bear themselves at the first against Augustine, with great
pertinacy, and stubbernes; and therefore the less probable it is, that they
would yield to him in any point of moment, more then was agreeable to their
own Religion. The differences between them after much disquisition, and
search, are recorded to be only about the two former points of Ceremonies, and
seeming indifferency. The Recorder of this great Passage, was principally S.
Bid; who (ex professo) did write most elaborately, and punctually, the
Ecclesiastical History of England in those times; and therein was obliged (by
his designed method) not to register the smallest occurrents, and wholly to omit
the greatest.

Now then can we dream, that the Doctrines touching the Real Presence; the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Praying to Saints. Purgatory, Free Will, Justification
by works, Images, Monachisme, the Primacy of Peter, and some others (all being
Articles of greatest importance, and particulerly taught by S. Augustine) were,
either not mentioned, and not once spoken of in that serious discourse between
Augustine, and the Briton Bishops; or they being then painfully discussed, and
ventilated, the Britons being so refractory, and stiff with Augustine in the
smalest points, would quietly, and without resistance, embrace all these high
doctrines, as Innouations, and repugnant to their Faith, first planted by
Joseph of Aramathia? Or if the Bri^on Bishops ve^lded not their assent to these
supreme points of Faith of Rome, would not such their reluctation, and dislike
have bin recorded by S. Bid, and other writers of those times, who would not
omit to relate the Britons stifnes, and coldness in the least matters of this
History? It is great weakness, but to suppose such impossibilities; It is
madness, and lunacy to believe them.

Therefore my absolute, and last resolution here is, that the Faith of
Augustine, was then one, and the same in all Articles with the Faith of the
Britons, first preached to them in the Apostles days, (the Ceremonies of
Baptising, and of keeping Easter day chiefly excepted) which lesser errors, S.
Augustine (observing the Britons stiffnes) thought perhaps, would sooner be
recalled by a patient sufferance of them for a time, then by any violent means
used at the first to the contrary; like to some diseases, which are best cured,
by continuing the diseases.

Now for the fuller close of this point, to wit, touching the agreement of the
Doctrine taught by S. Augustine, with the then Doctrine, and Faith of the
Briton Bishops, I will add the acknowledgement of the Briton Bishops
themselves, of whom S. Bid thus relates: Lib. 2. c. 2.
Britones quidem confitentur intellexisse se veram esse viam iustitiae, quam
praedicaret Augustinus: so unanimous (we see) were the Britons and Augustine in
their Faith, and Religion: and therefore it was not strange, that at the last
(as D. Fulke affirms) In his Co^futation of Purgatory, p. 335.
Augustine did obtain the aid of the British Bishops, to the conversion of the
Saxons.

And thus far of this argument, the which shall serve as the Catastrophe, or
end of this my Scene; wherein I have undertaken (though more, then by rigor of
method I was tied unto) to prove by positive arguments, and reasons, that the
Church of Rome has never suffered any change in her Faith, and religion, since
the Apostles days; my chief allectiue (Miche^s) inducing me thereto, being
only your satisfaction in this your imposed Subject, or Question.


MICHEAS. My L. Cardinal. I render you humble thanks, and I must say that
these your former arguments produced, seem to me very moving; and except M.
Doctor be able to repel them with other more forcible arguments, they will (I
confess) impell my Judgment to give it free, and full consent, to the
believing of that point, for the proof whereof, they are by your Lordship
alleged.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor. Seeing there is no truth so illustrious, and
radiant, but that in an undiscerning eye, it may seem to be clowded for the
time, with the interposition of some weak Objections; Therefore I would now
wish you, to proceed to your proofs, and to alleadg such arguments against
our former Conclusion, as your own reading has at any time best ministered
unto you.

Do not rest only in generally saying, that the Church of Rome has altered her
Religion; except withal you insist in the particular instances, when that
Church embraced such, and such a Doctrine, as an innovation, and repugnant to
the Faith planted by the Apostles. And remember, that the Truth, or falsehood of
generalities in speech do receive their best illustration from a curious, and
precise dissecting of the Particulars.

This office now is particularly incumbent upon you; for seeing you maintain,
that the Church of Rome has changed its Faith since the Apostles times, you
are obliged to insist in the particular Doctrines, supposed to be changed, in
the Person, and Popes, by whom this change was made, in the time, in which
these alterations are presumed to have happened, and the like; as above I
intimated in the beginning of this discourse. Therefore, M. Doctor, begin, and
I will reply to your Objections, as far as my own reading, and judgment will
afford.


D. WHITAKERS My Lord I willingly take hold of your prescribed Method; and
will give many instances of several Doctrines, even of the greatest moment,
now in question between you, and us, when they were first introduced into the
Church, and by what Popes they were so brought in; and I hope that a due, and
mature ponderation of them will be able to shake, and disioynt (or rather to
lay level to the ground) the whole Systima, and frame of your former large
discourse.

Well then, the first Instance of this undoubted Change, which I will allege,
shall be Pope So says D. hi^. cont. Duraeum, lib. 7. page 480.
Siritius, who was the first, that annexed Perpetual Chastity to the ministers
of the word. And I hope, that it is to be accounted no small change, to bar
our Clergy of their Christian liberty in so great a matter; since we are taught
by him, who in these later times first taught us Protestantcy that, nothing In
Proverb. 13. where he so says in dutcz, as is here ^nglished.
is more swee^e or loving upon earth, then is the love of a Woman if a Man can
obtain it. And Luther Tom. 7. in Epist. ad Wophangu^. fol. 505.
that he who resolves to be without a Woman let him lay aside from him the
name of a man, making himself a plain Angel, or Spirit.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, before I come to apply particular answers to your
particular instances following; I must tell you, that the force of all such
your insta^ces is already overthrown, by what is delivered above. For if it be
already demonstrated, that no change of faith has bin made at any time in the
church of Rome, partly by freeing every age of the Church, since Christ's time
from any change in Religion, even by the acknowledgment of the learned
Protestants; partly by manifesting, that neither the Church of Christ, never
made any resistance against the first supposed change (as both in duty it was
bound to do, and as the holy Scripture prophesies, that it should ever do, at
the innouatio^ of any new Doctrine) neither does any Historiographer record in
his History any such change; partly by discovering the uncertain judgments of
your own Brethren touching Antichrists first coming; at what time this so
much pressed Innovation of Faith is taught to have happened; and finally,
partly by diverse other reasons above discussed, and disputed: I say, if all
this has bin above proved (as I hope it is) then does it follow, that all
pretended Instances, and Examples (upon which you may hereafter seem in an
ignorant eye to insist) are impertinent, frivolous, and wholly by you mistaken.
Nevertheless, for the fuller content of this our Learned Jew, I will with
peculiar answers refell every one of your peculiar Examples. And first, to
your first. Where it seems, that the Doctrine of vowed Chastity in Clergy Men
touches you near, in regard of your Ministers conjugal lives, seeing you
begin there with. And here by the way, I must make bold to say, that you
Protestants (God be thanked) cannot justly be charged with being reputed
superstitious Votaries, and wilful Eunuchs, (as Catholic Priests are styled
by some of your Brethren to be) so careful you are of your own reputation
herein: but the less marvel, since the very Body of Protestancy is
Sensuality (pardon me, M. Doctor, for speaking that, which Experience, and
your own Theorems depose to be true) as the soul of it is an assumed height
of mind, and control of all Authority.

But now to your example, whereof you produce no authority of any ancient Father
affirming so much, but only your own naked assertion. This of Siricius is
wrongfully alleged for several respects: first, in that we find S. Hierome
(who lived before Siricius) to write of this point in this sort: In Apolo. ad
Pa^mach. cap. 3.
If married men like not of this (meaning of the single life of the Clergy)
let them not be angry with me, but with the holy Scriptures, with all Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons; who know, they cannot offer up Sacrifice, if they use the
act of Marryage. Thus (we see) S. Hierome reduces this point of Priests not
marrying, even to the Scripture it self. Which Father in further proof
thereof, appealeth to the general Practice of the whole Church therein saying:
contra Vigilant. cap. 1.
quid faciunt Orientis Ecclesiae, quid Egypti, and Sedis Apostolicae? quae aut
Virgins Clericos accipiunt, aut cominentes, aut si vxores habuerint, mariti
esse desinunt. With Hierome (to omit other Fathers) Epiphanius (ancient to
Hierome) conspireth, who reprehending the abuse of some Deacons, and
Subdeacons, for accompanying their Wives, whom they had espoused before their
Orders taken, concludes thus: Haeres. 59
At hoc non est iuxta Canonem; This is against the Canion; So he implying, that
there, was a former Canon against the marriage of Priests. To conclude Origin,
who lived before these other Fathers, thus writes hereof: In Number. homil. 23.
Mihi videtur, quod illius est solius offerre Sacrificium indesinens, qui
indesinenti, and perpetuae se deuouerit castitati: I am of judgment, that, that
man only, is to offer up perpetual Sacrifice, who has devoted himself to
perpetual Chastity.

This point is so evident, that your own In E^am. Council. Trident. p. 50. and
62.
Ke^pnitius does reprehe^d the foresaid Hierome, Epiphanius, Origin, as also
Ambrose, for their impugning the supposed lawfulnes of Priests marriage. We may
add (for close hereof) the Counsel of Carthage. whereat S. Augustine was
present: the Counsel in express words says thus: Council. Carth. 2. Can. 2.
Omnibus placet vt, Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi etc. ab vxoribus se
abstineant: It is allowed by all, that Bishops, Priests, and Deacons do
abstain from having wives. And then immediately after the Counsel gives the
reason thereof in these words: Vt quod Apostoli docuerunt, and ipsa seruauit
antiquitas, nos custodiamus: to the end that we may keep, what the Apostles
have ordained herein, and antiquity observed. Now I refer to any Man's
indifferent judgment, with what color, M. Doctor, you can auerre, that
Siricius was the first, who imposed single life upon Priests, and the Clergy.


MICHEAS. I do not know, in what age each of these Fathers did live, I being
more conversant in the Genealogies of our ancient Prophets, and Jews, then in
the Centuries, or ages of the Fathers of Christ's Church. Nevertheless Reason,
and true discourse informs me, that grau^ting all, or most of these former
alleged Fathers to have lived before Siricius, (as you, my Lord, do avouch,
and M. Doctor, does not deny) then in regard of their former produced
testimonies against the Marriage of Priests, it cannot be conceived, how
Siricius was the first, who annexed perpetual chastity to Priesthood. But if
it please you, M. Doctor, proceed to other insta^ces.


D. WHITAKERS. The first Council of Nice Can. 3.
forbids Marriage of Priests in these words: Priests are not to have
dwelling with them any Woman, other then their Mother, Sister, their Fathers
Sister, their Mothers Sister. Now these words show an Innovation of this
Doctrine touching Priests not marrying, different from the former liberty left
to them by Christ.


CARD. BELLARM. I will not much insist, how this instance overthrows the
former instance of Siricius; Seeing it is impossible, that both the Council,
and Siricius (they being in different times) should be the first impugners of
Priests Marriage. But to come to your example. The Cannon of Nice here
alleged, does not bring in any Innovation of Priests not marrying; but only
in regard of some negligence before used, by some of the Clergy, in not
precisely observing the Apostles Doctrine herein, does for the greater caution,
Decree, that the said Women (and no others) should live in the howses with
Priests. Now that the Doctrine of Priests single life was more ancient, then
the Decree, appears from the words of Paphnutius, then present at the
Council; who, though, perhaps, he was persuaded, that Priesthood did not
dissolve Marriage before contracted, yet he This is acknowledged by Socrates
lib. 1. c. 8. by Sozom. l. 1 c. 22. by the Centurists, cent. 4. c. 9. and by M.
D. Fulke against the Rhemish Testament in Math. 8.
says plainly: Those, who are made Priests before they are married, cannot
after marry. And this the said Paphnutius calls: Veteram Ecclesiae
traditionem: so far Paphnutius was from ascribing it to the Nicene Council,
as to the first author thereof. But proceed on forward, M. Doctor.


D. WHITAKERS. It is manifest, that he D. Whit. contra Duraeum. l. 7. p. 480
who first delivered Purgatory, for a certain Doctrine was Gregory the Great.
And this my own reading assures me.


MICHEAS M. Doctor. Here I must make bold to interpose my judgment. And
truly, I can hardly be induced to think prayer for the dead (which
necessarily resulteth out of the Doctrine of Purgatory) to be an Innovation;
much less the Doctrine thereof to be first invented by the Father, whom you
style Gregory the Great; who, and at what time he lived, I know not. My reason
is this: I am assured, both by my own practice, and perusing of our Jewish
books, that prayer for the dead was ever used in our Synagogues, and is
practiced by us Jews even to this day. And here, supposing, that the Book of
the Machabees be but Apocriphall, yet it is acknowledged by all, that the
Histories there recorded, are true Histories. Now there we read, that Judas
Machabeus (the vndowbted servant of God) commanded prayers, and sacrifices to
be made for the dead Soldiers, upon which Act, it is there said: So Lib. 2. a.
achab. c. 2.
he made a reconciliation for the dead, that they might be delivered from sin

This Doctrine with us Jews was so general, as that (to omit all other
ancient Rabbis, teaching the same) Rabby Simeon (a learned Jew, and who lived
before Christ) thus writes of those, who are temporally punished after this
life: In. l. Zoar. in c. 18. Genesis
After they are purged from the filth of their sins, then does God cause them
to ascend out of that place. But pardon me, for inserting my sentence herein.


CARD. BELLARM. Worthy Rabby. You have spoken truly; and indeed; as the
ancient practice of the Jews, does free the Doctrine, and use of praying for
the dead, from the stain of Nouelty in the new Testament; so these
Authorities, and acknowledgme^ts following, do wholly subvert the former
Instance of Gregory the Great.

And first, we find S. Augustine (who lived long before Gregory) thus to say:
De Verb. Apost. Sermon. 34
Non est dubit andum etc. It is not to be doubted, but that the dead are much
helped by the healthful Sacrifice of the Holy Church, and by alms given for
their sonles; and that by these means God does deal more mercifully with
them, then their sins have deserved. And in another place the said Father:
Neque Agust. in Encheri^. c. 110.
negaudum est defunctorum animas pietate suorum viuentium releuari, cum pro
illis sacrificium mediatoris offertur; It cannot be dented, but that the souls
of the dead, are relieved, through the pyety of their living friends, when the
Sacrifice of the Mediator is offered up for them.


D. WHITAKERS. Many learned Protestants do hold, that Augustine did rest
doubtful of the being of a Purgatory; among who^ D. Against the Rhemish
Testament. in 1. Cor. 3.
Fulke (that learned man) does so write.


CARD. BELLARM. They do ascribe a doubtful hesitation to Augustine in this
Article, only for the better defense of their contrary Doctrine, Therefore for
the greater evidence herein, observe the free acknowledgme^ts of the learned
Protestants themselves passed, not only upon Augustine, but upon other ancient
Fathers. Thus, M. Doctor, you shall be herein deadly wounded by the penns of
your own Brethren: and thus may our Saviors words be verified in you: Math.
10.
man's Enemies shall be they of his own household.

And first D. Fulke himself (howsoever you allege him to the contrary)
speaking of Aerius, thus s^ieth: Aerius In his answer to a counterfeit
Catholic. p. 44
taught, that prayer for the dead was unprofitable, as witness Epiphanius, and
Augustine. Also the said Doctor confesses more liberally of this point, thus
writing: In his co^futation of Purgatory, p. 2. vid. 303. et 393.
Tertullian, Augustine, Cyprian, Herome, and a great many more do witness, that
Sacrifice for the dead is the tradition of the Apostles. Which point, M.
Doctor, being granted, and admitting there were no express Scripture for
this Doctrine, but only warranted by tradition, yet may the conscience of every
good Christian, be secured herein,

Finally Calvin thus writes of the former point touching the antiquity of
prayer for the dead: Iustit (...). c. 5. sect 10.
ante trecentos annos vsu receptum fuit, vt praecationes fierent pro mortuis
etc. sed fateor in errorem arrepti fuerunt: Within three hundred years after
Christ, it was in use to procure prayers to be made for the dead etc. But the
performers thereof were led into an error. Thus much touching Augustine, and
the times before him. Now from the perusal of these Confessions, I much wonder,
M. Doctor, how you blushed not, to obtrude the beginning of prayer for the
dead, upon Gregory the Great, who lived diverse hundred ages after all the
former Fathers were dead.


D. WHITAKERS. Howsoever, my L. Card. you seek to avoid my former Instances,
yet, what answer can you make touching Pope Victor. So says D. Whit. cont
Duraeutin. l. 7. p. 480.
who was the first, that exercized jurisdiction upon foraine Churches? which
sentence of mine, is also approved by my former learned Brother D. In his
answer to a Coterfait Catholic. p. 36.
Fulke; from which example I gather, that Victor (out of his elation, and
pride) first challenged that Primacy to him over all churches, which your Popes,
at this day still vsurp, and retain: This Pope Victor being one of those, who
covet: D. Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 4.
'aiem 'aristcucin cai 'yperochon 'emmenai 'allon; to advance himself as the
best, and chiefest, above all other Bishops.


CARD. BELLARM. You do much disadvantage your self in alleging this example,
considering the time, wherein Victor lived; to wit, in the year 198. An age,
during the which, your self has hertofore confessed, that the church ^f Rome
did suffer no alteration in her Religion. Now, M. Doctor, whereas you cast an
aspersion of pride upon this most ancient, and reverend Pope, I wish you take
heed that you do not incur the censure passed upon Diogenes, who is said to
have reproved Plato his pride, with greater pride.


D. WHITAKERS. It is certain, that many churches, and Fathrs were offended
with Victors proceeding therein; and particulerly that ancient, and pious
Father Irenaeus? which is an infallible argument of Victors usurpation. For if
Victor had true power to excommunicate the churches of Asia (as it is granted
he actually had) why should Irenaeus; and those churches be offended: or
reprehend him, for putting only in execution his lawful Authority.


CARD. BELLARM. You must call to mind here, M. Doctor, the reason, why Victor
did excommunicate the Churches of Asia, which was, because the Bishops of Asia
were unwilling to conform themselves to the Church of Rome, in keeping of
Easter day, to wit, to keep it only upon Sunday; whereas they would needs
continue the keeping of it upon the 14. of the Moon, according to the custom
of the Jews: Now for this their reluctation herein against the Church of
Christ, Victor did excommunicate them.

But when this seemed (as being but a Ceremony, and for a time tolerated,
through the weakness of the Jews) in the judgment of diverse, too small an
occasion to excommunicate, and cut off so many famous Churches, therefore Victor
was censured by diverse, to be over severe in prosecuting with so great a
punishment, so small a seeming fault. From which, their thus censuring of
Victor, we may rather gather his Primacy above other Churches, then otherwise:
and the reason hereof is, because we do not find any of the said Bishops to
charge Victor with any Innovation, in unduly assuming to himself this
Authority over other Churches (which doubtlesly they would have done, if Victor
had first taken this privilege to himself, they being so justly provoked
thereto) but they did only rebuke, (as is said) his overmuch rigid severity,
in punishing (as they thought) so rigorously, so small a disobedience in the
Bishops of Asia.

Yea which is more, that Irenaeus, who was most forward in taxinge Victor with
his sharp proceeding, ascribes to Victor a soueraignety over all Churches. For
besides, that Irenae^s is reprehended by the Cent. c. 4. col. 64. l. 2.
Centurists, for acknow ledging the Primacy of the Roman Sea, Eusebius thus
writes of Irenaeus touching this point: histor. l. 5. c. 24.
Irenaeus admonishes Victor by letters, that he would not (for the observation
of a Tradition so long used) quite cut of so many Churches from the body of the
Universal Church.

Thus Eusebius. Now I here demand, why should Irenaens dissuade Victor from
exco^municating those Churches, but that he was persuaded, that Victor had
power to excommunicate them. And thus far of this instance; which may be of
force (perhaps) to prove, that Victor was over severe, but not that he had not
true power over other Churches; for which point it is by you, M. Doctor,
urged. But I pray you pass to other instances; only here by the way, I will
put you in mind, that careless, and obstinate Christians, (and such it well may
be, some of those Asian Christians were) have in some respect small reason to
fear the excommunication of the Pope, since these men, through such their
disobediency, do commonly excommunicate themselves.


D. WHITAKERS. It is clear, that Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus, D. Whit.
instanceth in these three Popes. l. 7. Co^l. Durae um page 480.
(all Bishops of Rome, did challenge superiority over other Bishops, by forging
of a Canon of the Nicene Council; Which proceeding manifests the then
usurped Authority of those Popes, to be contrary to the institution of Christ.
Thus these your Popes thirsted after all domination, and Power, though at other
times, rhey made show (by styling themselves: Serui Seruorum, and by their
other affected Humility) to contemn all honors and eminency. Tertul.
Cur vultis esse in mundo, qui extra mundum estis?


CARD. BELLARM. It is most strange to see how inconsiderately, you proceed. For
here you say, that these Popes first introduced this innouatios of the
Superiority of the Bishop of Rome, over other Churches; and immediately before
(and with all one breath) you ascribe the beginning thereof to Victor, who
lived two hundred years before any of these three Popes. If these later Popes
brought it in, then Victor did not? If Victor did begin it, then those Popes
could not? See how irreconciliable these your two Assertions are. From the
actions of all which Popes, you can truly gather, that they only practiced an
Authority, which the Church of Rome ever had; but not, that they assumed any
sovereignty to them, (which point is only in q(...)estion) which before that
Church had not.


D. WHITAKERS. M. D. Fulke, conspireth with me in alleging the foresaid
examples; and he was a man well conversant in Ecclesiastical Histories: his
words are these: Zozimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus did challeng In his
answer to a co^terfeyt^ tho. lick p. 37.
prerogative over the Bishop of Afrik, by forging a false Cano^ of the Nicene
Counsel. And this Doctors indgmen^ I much pryze, in matters of controuersyes.


CARD. BELLARM. Both, D. Fulke, his judgment, (how learned soever you repute
him) and your own also, must of necessity yeald to the truth herein: seeing the
example of Victor (before infisted upon by you) does vindicate, and free these
three later Popes, from all innovation in this point. And as touching the
supposed forging of a Canon of the Nicene Council, for the erection of the
Primacy of Rome; It is most false, for even your own writers, to wit, Lib. 4
Instit. cap. 7 Sect. 9.
Calvin himself, and Peter In his Common places in English part. 4. p. 39
Martyr, do mention the said Canon, as truly made: Only they say, that the
Popes did misalleadge this decree, as made by the Council of Nice, which was
made by the Council of Sardis. And so their Error (admitting that they did
err) consists only in mistaking, by whether Council the said Canon was
decreed.


D. WHITAKER. What say you of Boniface the third? So says D. Whit^kcr cen^ra
Duraeuml. p. 48
It is certain that this Boniface the third, was then the first that entitled
the Roman Church to be caput omnium Ecclesiarum: the Head of all Churches.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor you weary me, by idly diuerberating the air with
these impertinent Examples, and force me to entertayne them with a fastidious
neglect. For do not the former Examples of Victor, Zozimus, Bonifacius, (the
first of that name) and Celestiuus, (all more ancient, then this Boniface the
third take away the weight of this your instance? And therefore I refer you to
my answers touching the^ above specified. Yet because this verbal Instance,
consists chiefly in the phrase of: Caput omnium Ecclesiarum; you shall
therefore (for your fuller satr^saction) know, that this very Title, of being
Head of the Church, is acknowledged, and given to the Church of Rome, by many
both Latin, and Greek Farhers, who lived diverse hundred of years before this
Boniface the third, who reigned about the year 507.

And first Vincentius Lyrinensis (who was almost three hundred years before
this Boniface) calls the Bishop of Rome; adners Haeres. uersus finem
Caput Orbis; the Head of the Christian World. S. Hierome In 1. Timoth.
says, that Damasus (then Bishop of Rome) est Rector domus Dei quae est
Ecclesia eins, Damasus is the Reciour or governor of the house of God which is
his Church. But if Damasus was the gonernour of the Church, then was he the
head of the Church. Finally for greater contraction of this point, in the
Council of Chalcedon (consisting of many reverend Doctors and Bishops, and
celebrated an hundred and fifty years before this Bonif^ce his time) we thus
read: Act. 1.
Papae Vrbis Romae, quae est Caput omnium Ecclesiarum precept a habemus. See
the like phrase used, and given to the Pope, and the Church of Rome, by the
Emperor Justinian, Cod. de Summa Trinitate leg. 4.
Prosper de Ingratis c. 2.
Victor, de Persecut. Wandal.
Vticensis, and (to pretermit others) by S. Epist. 48. ad Anastasiu^
Leo. So fowly M. Doctor, you were deceived, in alleging this Bonifacius,
and the phrase of Caput Ecclesiarum.


D. WHITAKERS. Who knows not. D. (...) hit cont. Camp. Rat. 6. thus writes:
G(...)g. Magnus paru^ ne tuu Poifice^ perstringit, quado quisquis se Universal
Episcopu^ vocat, cu^ Antichristi praecursore procul dubio appellat?
Ioh of Constantinople first challenged to himfelfe, the name of Vniuersnll
Bishop? But Gregory the Great (then Bishop of Rome) eigrauissime, and
conflantissime restitit quousque vixit; most gravely, and consta^tly resifled
him, as long as he lived; affirming him to be the Precursor of Antichrist, who
should arrogate this title of Universal Bishop, to himself

But now (my Lord) every Pope since Gregory's time styleth himself Universal
Bishop; and therefore every such Pope (in the judgment of the said Gregory) is
the Precursor of Antichrist: and consequently, every such Pope has made no
small change in this main point, from the Faith first planted by Christ: for
what commerce, and association in Faith can there be, between Christ, and
Antichrist?


CARD. BELLARM. Yet M. Doctor, more of these froathy Instances? Who has not
read or heard, that Gregory the Great lived in the year 590. and therefore
some thousand years since or more? whereas the former alleged Victor,
Zozimus, Benifacius the first, Celestinus, and Bonifacius the third lived many
years before him; and some of them several hundred of years, were his
ancients; How the^ could they assume a Suprea^e Authority over all Churches,
(as you before have urged) and have the title of Head of the Church given them,
if John of Constantinople were, either the first, that took this title to
himfelfe, or that Gregory the Great did dislike it, in that sense, wherein you
insist; Therefore what censorious temerity is this in you M. Doctor, and how
hardly can you vindicate your name (by this your comportment) from all just
blemish, and disreputation?

But suppose this reprehension given by S. Gregory were true, this only argues
a change to have bin in John of Constantinople, but not in the Bishop of Rome,
which is the only point here questioned. Again, I cannot, but observe, how in
this place, for your advantage, you can commend Gregory for his humility, and
virtue, whom at other times you are not afraid to term Antichrist, and whose
first Conversion of you English to Christianity, you have elsewhere styled: D.
Whit. l. de Eccles. cont Bollar. p. 336.
Corrupt, and Impure: see how ready, you protestants are to turn the sails of
of your speech to every wind.


D. WHITAKERS. Will you deny, that John of Constantinopee did take this title
of Universal Bishop to himself; or that Gregory the Great did not reprehend
him for the same? There are ancient Histories recording no less.


CARD BELLARM. No. I do not deny it. But I say, the deceit lies in the
equivocation of the word: Universal Bishop. This word lies open to a double
acceptance: either to signify, that he who is the Universal Bishop, is sole
Bishop; so as it excludes all others, from being Bishops; in which sense S.
Gregory did term it sacrtlegious, profane, and Antichristian: Or else to
signify one, who has the chief care, and government of the Universal Church;
by which signification others are not excluded from being Bishops.

That in the first sense Gregory did take the word: Universal Bishop, is most
evident, even out of Gregoryes own works; for thus he writes hereof: Lib. 7.
epist 69 ad Eusebius. saying: Si vnus est vutuersalis, restat, vt uos Episeopi non
sitis.
If one be Universal Bishop, it remains, that you be no Bishops. And again:
If Lib. 4 Epist. ad Eulogium: Si vnus Patriarcha vniuersalis dicitur,
Patria^charnm n^men ^aeteris der ogatu^r.
one be called the Universal Patriarch, the name of Patriarch is taken away
from the rest. In this sense did Gregory take the word, and in this sense did
John of Constantinople labor to have the word applied to himself,
endeavoring to be thought the chief Bishop of the world (to use your own
Lib. of the Church page 62.
D. Feilds words) because his City was the chief City of the world.

Thus you see, M. Doctor, how weakly (or rather, how so Phistically) you argue
from the ambiguous acceptance of the phrase of Universal Bishop. But your
fault is here the greater, since you being a scholar) are not ignorant, that
Sophistry is only by incidency, and for caution to be known, but not to be
practiced: so Physicians know (for greater warines) the venomous nature of
certain herbs, or druggs.


D. WHITAKERS. Howsoever Gregory might take this word, in your former
restrained sense; yet seeing he did forbear to exercise that foueraignty over
other Bishops, and Churches, which now the Bishops of Rome do practice; it
follows therefore, that he wholly disliked this swollen domination, and
Primacy, so much thirsted after by your Popes.


CARD. BELLARM. It seems, M. Doctor, you are a stranger in your own supposed
Israel, I mean, you are not acquainted with your own learned Brethrens
writings: for what poynr of Primacy, and Sovereignty over other Churches, and
Bishops is there, which Gregory the Great did not exercise, and this by the
acknowledgment of your own Ceeturists? For though he was a most religious
Pope, and so great an Enemy to Pride, as that he might be truly said, to have
bin even ambitious of Humility, yet in respect of his Papal Jurisdiction, it
is thus written of him: So write the C^turists of Gregory Cent. 6. col. 462.
He challenged to himself power to command Arcbishops; to ordain or depose
Bishops at his pleasure. Cent. 6. col. 427.
He took upon him right to cite Arcbishops that they should declare their
cause before him, when they were by any accused, vbi supra col. 428.
He placed in other Bishops Provinces, Legates to konw, and end the causes of
those, who made their appeal ta Rome He usurped power of calling Synods in the
provinces of other Bishops. Thus do the Centurists write of Gregory, collecting
the Premises out of his own writings. To be short, they further in general
thus write of him, saying; Cent. 6. col. 425.
Gregorius dicit sedem Romana^ speculationem suam toti orbi indicere; Gregory
says that the Roman Sea appoynteth her watches over the whole world.

Now by all this here delivered, M. Doctor, you may see, whether or no,
Gregory did practice the Authority of an Universal Bishop, as the word is
taken in a sober (and in the Latter above mentioned) construction? And thus
much of the Example of John of Constantinople and of Gregory the Great; which
is so often enforced, and urged, though with extreme wilful (or at least
ignorant) mistaking by many of your Protestant doctors.


MICHEAS. Our Law of Moses ever enjoyed one Supreme Priest; and therefore,
seeing the time of the new Testament, is much superior to the time of the Law,
I do not see, but now in theiyme of Grace, there should be one Supreme Bishop
over the whole Church of Christ; and consequently the acknowledgme^t of such an
Universal Bishop should not be reputed any Innovation in Religion, or change
made from the first Institution of such a Pastor by Christ himself.


CARD. BELLARM. Michaeas, you speak according to the Truth, and no more then
certain Puritan protestants do teach, who write thus thereof: In their
Treatise entitled English. Puritanisme printed anno 190 (...). p. 16.
The (high Priest of the Jews was typically, and in a figure, the supreme
head of the whole Catholyke Church; with whom as other Protestant thus
iumpeth, saying: Penry in his supplication to the high Court or Parliament
That form of government, which makes our Savior Christ inferio^r to Mo^ses
is an impious, ungodly, and unlawful government, contrary to the Word. etc. But
(M. D.) proceed on further.


D. VVHITAKERS. Our best Controuersists, which (as I may term them) a^ the
Infantaria of our Protestant Churches Soldiers, do teach, that touching so
says D. whitakers coutra Du^^um l. 7. p. 490.
your Sacrament of Confession, Innocentius the Third was the first, that
instituted auricular Confession for necessary. Now this Innocentius lived not
past some four hundred years since: so late, and fresh, (you fee) your
Doctrine of Auricular Confession is. And admitting this yonr Article, touching
Confession, were not so new, but for more ancient; yet this Circumstance here
avails little; since we are to call to mind, that Haereses non^am Nouitas,
quam veritas reuincit.


CARD. BELLARM. I grant willingly, that many of your Controuersists (among
whom I also ra^ge yourfelfe) are accounted me^ of learning; And therefore I
rest the more amazed, to see you here (perhaps with resolved willfullnes
against the Truth) object this example to us for Nouelty. But I fear your, and
their learning is chiefly in obtruding errors, and misstakings, for
warrantable Truths; and such a knowledge is not to be preferred before simple
Ignorance.

But to clear this Innocentius from all innovation herein, and not to oppress
you with multitude of Authorities: We find S. Bernard (who lived before
Innocentius the third) thus to write of this point: Sed Ini Meditat. c. 9.
dicis, sufficit mihi soli Deo confiteri etc. But thou say, it is sufficient
for me to confess my sins only un to God, because a Priest without him,
cannot absolve me from my sins: To Which thy argument not I, but S. James
answers: Confess your sins one to an other. But to ascend higher; S. Leo.
(who lived anno 440.) describing the use of the Latin Church in this point,
thus says: Epict. 91. ad Theodoru^ foro Iulii Episcop.
Christus hanc Ecclesiae Prepositis tradidit potestatem etc. Christ did deliver
this power to the Prelates of his Church, that they should impose penance upon
them, that confessed their sins; that so they being purged through a
healthful satisfaction, might be admitted, by Way of reconciliation, to the
communion of the Sacraments.

In like sort S. Basil. (S. Leo his ancient) discoursing of the use of the
Greek Church herein, and teaching, that a Ghostly Father in tymeof Confession,
is an other from himself thus writes: Necessario In question breuioribus in
terogat. 288
peccata eis aperiri debe^t etc. Our sins are necessarily, (see here the
Necessity of Confession) to be opened to those to who^ the dispensation of the
Mysteries of Christ are given; for indeed we find, that all the Ancie^ts did
follow this course in Penance. To be breife, Cypryan and Tertullian (of so
great antiquity is Auricular Confession) are charged by your own Cent. 3. c.
6. col. 127.
Centurists to teach private Confession; and this even of thoughts, and lesser
sins; and that such Confession was then commanded; and thought necessary.
Thus far of this point, Where, by the way I must tell you, that since
protesta^cy had it first source from sense, and sensuality, the less wounder
it is, that Confession of sins made to a priest (being so ungrateful to man's
nature) should be so unpleasing to all protestants, and so basely esteemed of,
for we all know, that the water will ascend no higher, then is the level of
its first spring.


MICHNS I must acknowledge, that our Ancient Jews did use particular Confession
of sins to a Priest, De Arcanis Catholicae. Veritatis l. 10. c. 3.
Galatinus (who has collecteda summary of our Jewish Religion) shows in
diverse parts of his Writings, our continual practice thereof. Add hereto, that
the prefiguration of Auricular Confession is not wanting in Leuiticus; Lens^.
2. 3. etc. and ^5. 6. etc.
for seeing there were then appovnted different Sacrifices, to be offered up by
the Priest for different sins, and offenses; how could the Priest know, what
kind of Sacrifice he were to offer, except he knew the particular sin, for
which it is to be offered? Now then in regard of our Jewish practice hereof,
and seeing there is no reason, why now in the New Testament, it should be wholly
abrogated, I cannot be induced to think, that the use thereof is to be accounted
as an innovation, and change, different from the doctrine first planted in Rome
by the Apostles.


D. WHITAKERS. Your doctrine D. Whit. cont. Duraeum p. 480. says: qni
Transubstantiatione primus excogitauit, is suit Innocentius tertius. in
Lateranenst Concilio.
of Transubstantiatinn was first, invented by Innocentius the third in the
Council of Lateran: for before that time, not any one of the ancient Fathers
did hold it: for where ever in any of their writings was made any mention of
Transubstantiation?


CARD. BELLARM. Good God, how poor, and needy in proof are you, M. Doctor?
For indeed you greatly wrong your self and this presence, in suggesting such
unwarrantable Assertions True it it is, that if you insist in the word:
Transubstantiation we grant, that it was first invented, and imposed upon the
Doctrine of the Real Presence, in the council of Lateran. But then this is
but a verbal litigation of you: for though the Word was then first formed to
express the Doctrine of the Church therein; yet the doctrine it self was
generally believed in all ages before. And still you allow, M. Doctor, by
rese^blance this illation, as good, and necessary? The Word 'omousios or
Consubstantialis, was first invented in the Council of Nice, to express the
Doctrine of the Church touching the Trinity. Ergo the Doctrine of the Trinity
was not believed before the Council of Nice. Idly and inconsequently
concluded. Therefore, M. Doctor. let your judgment herein draw equally with
your learning.

But to come particulerly to the doctrine it self: and to omit, that S.
Augustine says: Tract 2^ in Ioani^em.
vocatur caro, quod non capit caro: And in another place: Lib. 6. contra
Parmenianum.
quid gratius offerri, aut suscipi possit, quam caro Sacrificii nostri corpus
effectum Sacerdotis nostri? We are here to remember, that this Council of
Lateran was holden in the year, Crispinus in his book of the state of the
Church page 345.
1215. In which were assembled the Patriarchs of Jerusalem, and Constantinople,
70 Metropolitan Bishops, 400. Bishops, and 800. Conuentuall Priours. Now can it
enter into any brain to think, that all these learned Men, being gathered
together from all the several places of the world, and many of them never
seeing diverse of the rest, till they were there met, should all jointly embrace
(as an innovation, and before never heard of) a doctrine, so contrary to sense,
and fleshly understanding? It is incompatible with common reason to believe,
that such a general Error could so suddenly invade, and possess the
judgments of so many learned Prelates.

But to demonstrate the antiquity of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation: in
which sacred Mystery the eye of Faith sees things invisible (It is confessed,
by M. Fox Act. and Mon. print. 1576 p. 1121
that about the year of our Lord, 1060. the denying of Transubstantiation
began to be accoumpted an Heresy and the professors thereof Heretics and in
that number was first one Berengarius who lived about the year 1060. Now then
if the denying of the doctrine of Transubstantiation was accoumpted an Heresy,
more then a hundred years before the Counsel of Lateran was assembled; how
could the doctrine of Transubsta^tiation take it first beginning at that
Council? Who sees not the impossibility hereof? Again, how could that
doctrine (in the times set down by M. Fox) be denied, and impugned, except it
were then, and before believed, and maintained?

But to proceed to higher times. Does not D. Humfrey confess, that Gregory
the Great (who lived five hundred years, and more, before the Council of
Lateran) first brought into England the Doctrine of Transubstantiation saying;
In In I^suitis^. part. 2. Rat. 5. p. 628.
Ecclesiam voro quid inuexerunt Gregorius, and Augustinus? in^ulerunt etc.
Transubstantiationem

Again, your own Centurists thus speak of Eusebius Emissenus (an ancient
Father:) Eusebius Emissenus Cent. 4. c. 10 Col. 985.
p^rum commode de Transubstantiatione dixit. And of Chrysostom your foresaid
Brethren thus write: Chrysostomus Transubstantiationem videtur confirmare:
Chrysostom does seem Centurist. Cent. 4. c. 4. Co^. 496.
to confirm Transubstantiation. The Antiquity of which Doctrine is so great,
that Adamus Francisci (a learned Protestant) thus acknowledges:
Transubstantiation In Margarit. Theol. page 256.
did enter early into the Church. Now, M. Doctor, how do all these liberal
confessions of so many eminent Protestants stand with your assertion, to wit,
that the doctrine of Transubstantiation was first invented in the Later an
Council? And consequently that the Church of Christ suffered (at that time) a
most remarkable change, and alteration in so sublime an Article.


MICHEAS. The Doctrine of the Real Presence taught by the Church of Rome (in
respect of the Sacrifice there performed) is most conformable to the Prophesies
of the ancient Jews: for to omit the Sacrifice of Melchisadech, which many did
teach to prefigure the Sacrifice, which was to be exhibited after the coming
of the Messiah, we find most of our ancient Rabbis to be of this mind.
Accordingly hereto we read, that Rabby Judas We find the testimonies of these
Rabbis here produced, to be alled^ed by Galatinus de, Arcanis Catholicae
Veritatis l. 1. c. 3. Se Rab by Judas in c. 24. Exo d. and Rabby Simeon in l.
entitled: Reuelatio se^retorum.
thus writes: The bread shall be changed, when it shall be sacrificed, from the
substance of bread, into the sacrifice of the body of the Messiah, which shall
descend from Heaven, and himself shall be the sacrifice. With Which Rabby (to
omit diverse others) Rabby Symeon agrees in these words: The Sacrifice, which
after the Messiah his coming, Priests shall make etc. they shall make it of
bread and wine etc. And that sacrifice, which shall be so celebrated on the
Altar, shall be turned into the Body of the Messiah: So conspiringly, M. Doctor,
we see, did our ancient Jews before Christ's birth, (by way of Predictio^)
teach with the prsent Roman Church, touching the Real Presence, and the
sacrifice performed therein. And therefore it is the more strange to me, that the
Doctrine of the Real Presence, and of the Sacrifice should be reputed by you,
as an ^nnouatio^ lately brought into the Church of Rome; for I must needs
think that Christ himself did first institute the same. And thus I believe,
that though in our Law, Isaac was externally offered, up though not Sacrificed;
Yet now in the New Testament the Messiah is daily Sacrificed; though not
externally offered up.


D. WHITAKERS. My Lord Cardinal. To pass from the Doctrine it self, of the
Real Presence, or Transubsta^tiation; Yet how can you excuse from Nouelisine
those phrases, touching the Sacrament of the Eucharist, first invented by Pope
Nicolaus the second, to wit, that D. Whit. Cont. Duraeu^. l. 7. p. 480. Says
qui primus docuit corpus Christi ^esualiter tractari, frangi et dentil^
(...)ri, suit Nicola^s sec^dus.
the body of Christ is sensibly handled, broken, and chewed with the teeth? So
grossly do you Romanists teach herein, as to maintain a Doctrine, which has
nothing to plead for it, but only some few hundreds of years.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor. You now carry your self like a cowardly Masti^ie
(pardon this my homely similitude) which not being able to take any strong, and
firm hold at the head of his enemy, is glad in the end to catch at the flanck,
or other the hindermost parts: So you, seeing you cannot truly charge the
Doctrine it self, of the Real presence with innovation; are content to
quarrel, and snatch at certain phrases, and words used (by some Doctors)
about the said Doctrine. But to your objection: Which (once granting the truth
of the Real Presence) is merely verbal. Therefore I say, that these phrases
are taken in a sober, and restiained construction: That is, they are immediately
to be referred to the forms of Bread, and Wine, under which the body, and
blood of Christ do lie. Now that these phrases were not first coined by this
Pope Nicolaus (as you auerre) it is evident out of the writings of S.
Chrysostom, who lived many ages before this Pope Nicolaus. This Father in one
place thus writes: Chrysist. in. 1. Cor. Hom. 24.
Christ suffered fraction or breaking in the oblation, which he would not
suffer upon the Cross. And in an other place more fully, saying: Chrysostom. in
Mat. hom. 83
ipsum vides, ipsum targis, ipsum comedis: And yet more expressly: Non Chrysostom.
in Joan hem. 45.
se tantum videir permittit desider antibus; sed et tangi, et manancari, et
denies carni suae infigi; Christ does not only permit himself to be scene of
those, who desired to see him; but also to be touched, and eaten by them, and
their teeth to be fastened in his flesh. Thus we see, that S. Chrysostom was
not afraid to use the foresaid phrases in a reserved sense, which you make so
capital, and heinous. We may adioyne hereto, that Iacobus Andreas (a famous
Protestant, but a Lutheran) answers this very objection which you father upon
Pope Nicolaus (as the first inuentor of the former phrazes) and thus concludes
thereof, saying: In consut. disputa^t. Ioa^nis Gr^naei; p. 214 215.
This objection taken from Pope Nicolaus, nihil, continet, quod inscriptis
Orthodoxorum Patrum (Chysostomi in primis^) non continetur.


D. WHITAKERS. I will not be long in reciting Innouations of strange Doctrins,
introduced into the Church of Rome, since the Apostles times. Therefore I will
end with the Instance of the fast of Quatuor So says D. Whit. cont. Duraeum l.
(...). c. 480.
Temporum, which was first ordained by Pope Calixtus.


CARD. BELLARM. The Vessel, M. Doctor, from whence you draw these Instances,
seems to run very low, and nere the dreggs; Seeing for want of examples, for
change in dogmaticall points of faith, you are forced at the last to descend to
the Institution of set times of fasts. For what is this to the alteration of
Faith, and Religion in the Church of Rome, in any dogmaticall Article, which is
the point only to be insisted upon by you? Has not the Church of Christ
authority to appoint fasting days? The Act. 15.
Apostles (you know) did lawfully command all men to forbear from eating of
blood, and of things strangled; and may not the Church succeeding them, as
lawfully command, that (at certain times of the year, and for some few days)
the Christians shall for bear from eating of fleash, and use a more moderate
diet? But it seems, you love not to feed upon superstitious, and Popish fish,
since many of you accoumpt it so.

Now as touching the antiquity of this fast of Quatuor Temporu^. Where you say,
it was first ordained by Calixius; you grant hereby, that it is above fourteen
hundred years, since it first institution: for Calixtus was the next
successor (but one) to Pope Victor; which Victor lived in the year of our
Lord, and Savior, one hundred and sixty. Thus you are more preiudized, then
aduantaged by prostituting this your sily supposed Innovation. I will annex
hereto, that whereas, M. Doctor, you do not produce any ancient author
charging Calixtus, with the first beginning of this Fast, we (on the contrary
side) can allege S. Leo ascribing it to proceed from the Doctrine of the
Holy Ghost; his words are these following: Sermon. 8.
Ecclesiastica ieiunia ex doctrina Sancti Spiritus, ita per totius anni
circulum distribura sunt. And thus much touching the Antiquity, and lawfulnes
of the Past of Quatuor Temporum; whereof you see, M. Doctor, your own bare
assertion excepted, no certain beginning can be known, since the Apostles
days. But (Sir) proceed further in other instances, if so you can.


D. WHITAKERS. Touching further multiplicity of examples I will not much
labor. The time is already spent; And I hope my former examples
(notwithstanding your subtle euading of them) are able to sway with all such,
who are truly illuminated with the spirit of the Lord.


CARD. BELLARM. I believe you well. You will not labor further therein; the
true reason being, because you cannot. For I have perused your books, written
against Duraeus (wherein you chiefly insta^ce, touching the change of the faith
of Rome;) and your other Books against Father Campian (that blessed Martyr) as
also your writings against my self; and I can find no other instances of this
imaginary change, insisted by you, then these alleged. Yea, when the said
Father Campian) as most confident of no change of Faith in the Church of Rome,)
did most earnestly provoke you Protestants, to name the time and other
circumstances (accompanying this supposed change) in those his vehement, and
enforcing Interrogations: Rat. 10. Edm. Campiani. Rat. 7.
Qua^do hanc fide^tant opore celebratum Roma perdidit? quardo esse desi^t, quod
antefuit? quo tempore, quo Pontifice, qua via, qua vi, quibus incrementis
Vrbem, et Orbem Relgio peruasit aliena? quas voces, quas turbes, quae lamenta
progenuit? Omnes orb reliquo sopiti sunt, dum Roma (Roma inqua^) noua
Sacramenta, nonum Sacrificium, nouum Religionis dogma procuderet? You, (though
thus a wakened, yet) in your answer hereto, only dwells in your former example
of Pope Siricius (above refuted) touching the single life of Priests; and in
place of further satisfaction, you thus reply to the said Father Campian: D.
Whit. So says, Cont. Camp. in Rat. 7.
Tuvero si dubitas, an desierit (meaning, whether Rome had changed it Religion)
potes etiam, si vis dubitare, ansul meridie splendeat. Can any man (not blinded
with prejudice) think, that if you had any material proofs for it change
(being a point of the greatest consequence, that is between you, and us) but
that you (being thus extremely import^ned) would have particularly iusisted in
them, and would have enlarged such your reply, with all reading, wit, and
learning possible? And as for your former Instances, they are most impertinent,
and in themselves most false (as is above demonstrated) they being w^res (I
presume) wholly wrought in the shop of your own brain; like the spiders web,
which is spinned out of her own Bowels.


MICHEAS. M. Doctonr, you must give me leave to tell you, that your Instances
(above urged) do not much sway my judgment; first, because they are not in
number, past some nine or ten in all; of which four do concern only the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and two the doctrine of the Real Presence (so
as it may be justly coniectured, that you Produced several instances for one
doctrine, purposely thereby to make show (in this your so great a scarcity) of
greater number of Examples) The rest concern Priests nor marying, Purgatory,
auricular Confession, and the fast of Quauor Temporum. Which doctrines are few
in respect of the many controuerted points (as I am informed) between the
Church of Rome, and the Protestants. Therefore I must presume, that no instances
can be, but suggested, or imagined to be given of the change of the Church of
Rome, touching the doctrines of the Visibility of the Church, of Praying to
Saints, of Free Will, Merit of works, Works of supererogation, Indulgences,
Monachisme, Lymbus patru^, Images, the Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament,
Communion only under one kind, Vninersallity of Grace, the Necessuy, and virtue
of the Sacraments, Inherent justice, the knowledge of Christ, a man, His being
God of God, and diverse others. Secondly, in that touching your former
Instances, some of the said doctrines are so agreeable to the practice of our
Jewish Synagogue, and the judgments of our learned Rabbyes (as I have showed)
as that I can hardly repute them, as Innouations.


D. WHITAKERS. The unanimous agreement of the Church of Rome with you Jews, in
some of the former doctrines, is of small force; seeing you well know (Micheas)
that the Law was to be abrogated, at the coming of the Messiah.


MICHEAS. It is granted, that our Law at the coming of the Savior of the
world, was to be disanulled; so far forth, as concern either sacrifices, or
other Ceremonies, which did prefigure the coming of the Messiah? yet seeing
many dogmaticall points of faith believed by the Jews, have no reference to
his coming; (as the foresaid doctrines of Purgatory, Confession of sins etc.)
therefore there can be no reason alleged, why the belief of them in the time
of the Law, should not be a strong argument for their like belief now in the
time of Grace. We may add hereto, that if every thing which was taught, and
commanded by the Law, should now be abrogated; then the ten Commandments
should in no sort belong to you Christians; And consequently the coming of the
Messiah should be a sufficient warrant for your breach of the said
Commandments; then which to grant, nothing can be excogitated more absurd, or
more derogating from the honor of Christ. But (good M. Doctor) if you have
any more, that can be produced for proof of change of Faith, made by the
Church of Rome, I would entreat you to persevere in your discourse.


D. WHITAKERS. Though I should grant some insufficiency, and defect in my
former instances, and that we could not insist at all in any particulars of
that nature; nevertheless we are not endangered thereby: So says D. Whit.
contra Duraeis p. 277.
For we are not bound to answer, in what age superstition crept into the
Church. And to grant more fully herein: D. Whit. contra Ca^p. Rat. 7. Thus
says of this point De tempore non est sacile respondere; neque id necessariu^
est vt temporu^ momenta prodantur
Of the times of this change, it is not easi to answer; neither is it
necessary, that the times of all such changes be set down. Briefly, I auerre,
So D. Whitak. contra duraeum page 277.
It is not needful in us, to search out in histories the beginning of this
change. And with me in judgment herein agree many learned Protestants; As for
example (to omit others) Bucanus thus writes: Bucanus In loc com. page 466.
Non est nostrum designare, quo temporis momento caeperit Ecclesia deficere. As
also M. Powell, saying: We M. Powl In his consideration of the Popists
supplication Page 43.
cannot tell, neither by who, or at what time, the Enemy did sow it etc.
neither indeed do we know, who was the first author of every one of your
blasphemous opinions.


CARD. BELLARM. O Jesus. What strange and conscious tergiuersatio^s are these?
And how mortally do they wou^d your cause, and Religion, wholly discovering your
despair, and diffidence therein? For do not these Confessions overthrow your
former instances? If your supposed Examples be true, then did you know the
times of such a change: if you do not know the times of the change (as here
you confess, you do not) why then would you allege the foresaid Examples?
How can you extricate your self, M. Doctor, out of this maze, or how can you
decline this forked Delemma?

Furthermore, if it cannot be known, when any change of Faith was made (as
here you, and your Brethren confess, it cannot) why should we believe there
was made any change at all? He is weak, who enthralleth his judgment to the
belief of any such thing, if so he wants the necessary, and co^ducing
Circu^sta^ces, for the fortifying of such his belief. But belike you will
finally say with Ioannes Rhegius (a Protestant) who not being able to exemplify
any change in the Church of Rome, arrived to that height of impudency, as thus
to write: Sed denique licet verum esset, Romanam Ecclesiam in sua Religione
nihil mutasse, an propterea mox sequetur, eam esse veram Ecclesiam? Non opinor.
Thus this Protestant.


D. WHITAKERS. Not so, my Lord Cardinal, for I grant a change; and the chang
of Faith made in the Church of Rome, may well resemble D. Whitakers for proose
of the change of the faith of Rome. alleges this similitude saying: Pili non
subito omnes ea^escu^t nec quicquam repente^ habet suam maturitate^. Contra
Ca^p Rat. 7.
the change in color, which heirs do make, in being become gray; nothing
having it maturity upon the sudden. In like sort it may aptly resemble the
changes in D Whit contra Camp. Rat. 7. thus says in Ecclesia Romana accidit,
quead modum in magno aedificio videmus euenire etc. quod ruinas aliquo loco in
cipit agere etc. Ita Romana Ecclesia leporum successione etc.
Edifices, and houses occasioned by their ruins, and decaies. We see by
experience, these changes are true, and real; and yet cannot any man set down
punctually the time, when either the heirs are become gray, or the buildings
are made ruinous. The like may be said touching the change of Faith in the
Roman Church: certain it is, that such a change is already made; but when, by
whom, and in what manner, it is most uncertain.


MICHEAS. What, M. Doctor, do your greatest proofs for the change of Religion
finally end in these similitudes? If so, then I may say, I do carry about me,
my best instructours herein, must these gray hairs of this my hoary head, and
beard (my self being 60. years of age, and more) and the decays of this my
old body (for the same reason there is here of a ruinous body, which is of a
ruinous house) teach me, what Religion among you Christians, I am to embrace?
Have my wearied members taken so great a journey of so many hundred miles to
this place, only to take advise of my beard, and my own feeble limms; which,
sitting at the sire side at home, I could with far more ease, and with as
much certainty have performed? o the misery of man, who lies open (in matters
of greatest weight, and importance) to the deceit of such rotten foundations;
they being as weak for proof of what they are urged as the things, from which
these resembla^ces are taken, are weak in their own nature.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, I do assure you in all sincerity, I do much condole
the state of ignorant Lay Protestants, to see how their eyes are sealed up by
the learneder sort of you: who in your Pulpits, and writings are often
accustomed to inueighe in great acerbity of style: and tragical exclamations,
against the Church of Rome, for having altered (as you bear your followers in
hand) her Primitive Faith; But you being pressed to prove this imaginary
change, are forced for the warranting thereof, to take your last and best
proofs from some few gray hayres, and sl^fters in an old rotten wall.

But because these similitudes, and resemblances are most urged, not only by
your self, but also by many other Protestants of Note, and have much swayd
with vulgar judgments, not in respect of any force in them, but in regard of
the eminency of their first Inuentors (so the water heateth, not because it is
water but by reason of it borrowed heat elsewhere: Therefore I will examine
them narrowly, and will show the great disparity between them, and the change,
which is at any time made in Religion.

1 First then, the first small decay in any building, and the (first show of
whitenes in hairs is imperceptible, and not to be discerned; whereas every
change in faith (though but in one point, or article) is most markeable, and
subject to observation.

2 Secondly, the whitenes of the hairs of the head, and the ruins of a house
do not happen, but by degrees; and therefore at the first cannot be observed;
whereas every Opinion in doctrine is at the first either true, or false; and
therefore is for such at the first to be apprehended by the understanding.

(3) Thirdly, not any have the charge, or care imposed upon them, to observe
the changes in these petty matters; but in the Church of Christ there are ever
appointed Pastors, and Doctors, whose office is to mark the first beginning
of any innovation in doctrine, and accordingly to labor to suppress the same.

(4) Fourthly, these similitudes, and deceitful resemblances (being truly
urged) do recoyle back with disadvantage to the Protestants. For although we
cannot show, when the first hair began to be white, or the first slifter in a
house begun to be a slifter; yet any notable degrees of the said whitenes in
the hairs, or of the slifters in a house are easily discerned: and therefore
the Protestants are obliged (even from the nature of these their own
similitudes) to tell us, at what times some sensible degrees, and increase of
this supposed change did happen; and the manifestatio^ of these degrees is to
be made, by naming the time, and person, when, and by who^ such, and such a
particular point, or article of our present Roman Religion, was first sensibly
introduced into the Church of Rome. The which not any Protestant
(notwithstanding all his exquisite and precise search of Ecclesiastical
Histories) has bin able yet to perform. And thus far, M. Doctor, of these
your similitudes; which (you see) in a true ballancing of them, do become
rather hurtful then beneficial to your Cause; and therefore they had been
better forborne by you then urged.


D. WHITAKERS. Indeed I grant, that there are no Histories, or Records at this
day, out of which we can certainly collect the change of Religion in the Roman
Church. But (no doubt) such Records there were, though now wholly extinguished,
and made away, by the vigilance, and carefulnes of former P^pes, who to
preserve the honor of their Church (as free, and exe^pt from all change, and
innovation) did deliberately, and purposely cause all Coppies of such writings,
and narrations, to be for ever suppressed, and buried in oblivion, either by
fire, or otherwise.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, this is a meare groundles Fantasy. If you have
any grave testimonies warranting a general suppression of all such records;
then all of them were not extinguished since the testimonies, which affirm so
much, are yet extant. If you produce no authority witnessing so much, then why
should we believe your bare, and naked affirmation herein? But to examine more
punctually this poor refuge. And first, whereas you teach, that this change of
Faith in the Roman Church came in by degrees, now by innouating one point of
the ancient true Faith, now another: supposing for the time this to be true,
how can it be conceived, that all the Coppies of such particular changes in
Faith, already dispersed throughout all Christendom in the hands of infinite
Protestants (as you ma^taine, though untruly that in those times they were)
could be gathered, and suppressed without any remembrance thereof to all
posterity? It is most absurd, but to furmise such an impossibility.

Furthermore do we not see, that the lives of such Popes, which can be less
warranted, were recorded in histories, yet extant to this very hour (as else
where is intimated:) Neither the narrations of them either were, or could ever
be suppressed? How then can we be persuaded, that the memory of this supposed
great chang could by any such means be cancelled in a perpetual forgetfulness?
Since certain it is, that the Popes (if possible they could) would have caused
all narrations, touching the personal faults of their Predecessors to have
been utterly extinguished; considering, that such their less justifiable
lives might be reputed by many to be no small blemisne to the Church of Rome:
Such an improbability this your evasion, M. Doctor, inuolues in its self.


D. WHITAKERS. My Lord, It seems you are very dexterous in warding all our
instances, and other arguments (above produced) to prove the former presumed
change. But imagine for the time, that we cannot allege out of any now extant
authorized history, examples of any known innovation: imagine also, that we
cannot show, at what particular time, and season, the parcels of these changes
did happen: imagine lastly, that there were never any records, testimonies, or
writings, in which these changes were registered; yet how are you able to put by
the sharp-poynted weapon of Scripture, wherewith your religion is mortally
foiled? We know that the Faith of the present Roman Religion is repugnant to
the holy Scriptures; to which only we appeal; and whose D. Whit. cont. Camp.
says: ^utarc^^a scripturarum defend mu^ Ra^. 1.
^autarceia, and all sufficiency is defended by us Protestants; the sacred
Scripture being to us more then D. Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 10.
decaples* apologia, a tenfould shield of our faith: This (I say) we know, and
consequently we further know, that the faith of the Romish Church is not the
same, which was planted in Rome by the Apostles. Here is our fortress, here is
our strength, and this place to you Romanists is maccessible. Here we have D.
Whit. cont. Comp. Rat. 2.
To reton, the Word; and *epi ten dianeian tour etou, to the true meaning of
the Word all Controversies are to be referred: And with this Word we are able
to inflict D. Whit. vbi supra Rat. 9.
Cairian p^eten, deadly to wound your popish Religion. And we are so truly
impatronized of the holy Scripture, as that we dare pronounce with the
Apostle: If an Galat. c. 1
Angel reach any other Ghosple unto you, then that which we have preached,
let him be Anathema. For D. ^hit. cont. Duraeu^. l. 7. p. 478. says: nobis
sufficit etc. ex Pontificioru dogmati^ et scripturaru^ collatione, discrimen et
dissimultudine agnoscere Histo^ (...) liberum relixquimus, scribere qui^velint.
to us it is sufficient, by comparing the Popish Opinious with the Scripture to
discover the disparity of Faith between them, and us; and as for
Historiographers, We give them liberty to write what they will? seeing this D.
Whit. cont. Camp. Rat. 5.
aplous logos tes 'aletheias this simple Word of truth is able to refute any
thing brought to the contrary. And therf^re my Lord Cardinal, I must say to
you here with Archidamus: D. Whit. haleth in this sentence, in Rat. (...).
cont. Camp.
'et e^ dynamei prostheis 'e tou phronematos 'ypheis, either ma^taine your
Religion with the force of Scripture, or else wisely cease from the further
defense thereof.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, before I come to balance this your last argument,
you must pardon me, if I smile to my selle to observe, how affectedly, and
ambitiously you have rioted in your Greek throughout this whole discourse; and
especially in this your last close, besprinkling diverse passages thereof (as it
were) with some Greek word or other. Which in my judgment (bear with me if I
misconster your meaning) is but to bear your ignorant followers in hand, what
jolly men, and great Clerks you Protestants are. And according hereto we
commonly find, the books written either by English, French, or German
Protestants, even to swell with Greek phrases, or sentences. But who sees
not, how forced this is? it being a point of ostentation, and vanity, thus to
brave it forth in a froath of strange words.

We all know, the tongues are but the porters of learning (in which the
Catholics, though with more cession, and modesty, are most skillful) and that
he, who is a learned man indeed, is ever presumed before hand to be expert in
them, as being means conducing to the perfection of learning: Thus the want of
Greek is a great defect; the enjoying of it but a necessary furniture of a
scholar. Therefore who vanteth hereof or is become fond of a few greek words
(being commonly ignorant of the riches contained in that tongue, as many
Protestants are) is like to that man, who takes delight in a little Mother of
Pearl, he reioiceth; he having no interest to the Pearl within contained. I
speak not this, but that it is lawful sometime to make use of Greek phrases,
and sentences; but this chiefly, when the Question is touching translations out
of that tongue, and that we are to recurre to the Greek (being the original)
for the clearing of that point: Or when the Greek word, or phrase carries with
it a greater grace, emphecy, and force, then the same in Latin, or English will
bear. But this I ever auerre, that to be ready upon every little occasion to
prostitute, or staule forth ones Greek (a diste^perature peculiar to
Protestants) as if he took a pride, in that he is skillful in coniugating of
typto: This man (I say) deserves to be verberated throughout all the moodes,
and tences of the word, for such his folly: This course being among all grave,
and learned men, justly censured for an exploded vanity.

But now, M. Doctor, to descend to your reason touched above, and drawn from
the authority of the holy Scripture. Here I say, you have taken your last
Sanctuary; not in that the Scripture makes for you, and against us; but that
by this means you may the better reject all other authorities, though never so
forcible, and reduce the trial of all controversies to your own private
Judgments? since you will acknowledge no other se^ce of the scripture, the^
what the Genius of Protesta^cy does vouchsafe to impose upon the Letter. and
thus by your fair pretended Gloss of the Scripture in this your last
extremity, you Protestants well rese^ble that Man, who being ready to fall,
thinks not how to prevent the fall, but how to fall in the fairest, and
easiest place. The like (I say) you do under the privilege of the revealing
spirit, interpreting the Scripture; the vain, and fluctuating uncertainty of
which Spirit, to discover (though this place be not capable thereof) were indeed
to cut in sunder the chief Artery, which gives life to the huge Body of
Heresy? since once take away this Private Spirit, Heresy is but like a dying
la^pe, which has no oil to feed it: Only I will here pronounce, that as some
have thus left written. That must be good, which Nero persecuteth; so here I do
justify by the contrary, that it must be evil, and false, which the Private
Spirit affects, and manteineth. But let us proceed herein further, and
dissect the vein of this your last, and most despayring tergiuersation.

First then, we are to call to mind, that it has ever been the very
countenance, and eye of all innovation in religion, to seek to support it
self by misapplyed, and racked Texts of Scripture; a practice so anciently
used (though in these later days it has received more full groath) as that it
was observed by Contra Maximinu^ Arianum E p c p. l. 1.
Augustine, Ep st. ad Paulinum.
Hierome, De praes^r. aduers. Haeres. see c. 19. 30. 35. 36.
Tertullian, and finally by old Vincentius Vincent. aduers. Haeres.
Lyrinensis who thus expressly writes, not only of his own times, but even
(in a presaging spirit) of our times: An Haeretici diuinis Scripturae
testimoniis vtantur? Viuntur plane, and vehementer quidem; Sed tanto magis
cauendi su^^. Now this being so, you are forced, M. Doctor, for your last
retire, and refuge, to compart in practice with all ancient, and modern
Heretics

Secondly, the Scripture cannot prove it self to be scripture, and
consequently it is not able to decide all controversies; which assertion of
mine is warranted by your prime men M. Hooker, thus teaching: In his Eccles.
policy Sect. 14. p. 86.
Of things necessary the very chiefest is, to know what books we are bound to
esteem holy; which point is confessed impossible, for the scripture it self
to teach. And according hereto, you Protestants do not agree, which Books be
Canonical Scripture, which Apocriphall. For does not Luther Luther in titul.
de libris veteris et ncui Testamenti; as also in his Prolego^a. to diverse of
the books of the new Testament.
and diverse of the Lutherans recite (as apocriphall) the book of Job,
Ecclesiastes, the Epistle of S. James, the Epistle of Jude, the second Epistle
of Peter, the second, and third of John, and finally the Apocalipes? All which
books are nevertheless acknowledged by Calvin, and the Caluenists for
canonical Scripture.

Thirdly, even of those books, which all Protestants jointly receive as
Canonical Scripture, the Protestants do condemn (as most false, and corrupt)
not only the present originals, but also all Translations of the said books,
whether they be made in Greek, Latin, or English; as apeareth from the
reciprocal condemnations of one another Translation: for the more full
discovery of which point, I refer you, M. Doctor, to the perusing of a book
some few years since written, by a Catholic Priest, and Doctor of divinity,
entitled: The Sea seaue^ of the first chapters of the second part of that
book; all of them being spent in displaying the Protestants condenation of all
orginals, and Tra^slations of Scripture.
Pseudoscripturists.

Fourthly, the very text, and letter of such books, as you all acknowledge for
Canonical Scripture, are more clear for our Catholic Faith, and in that
sense are expounded by the ancient Fathers; then any the Countertexts are,
which you produce to impunge our doctrine. For some taste I will exemplify the
perspicuity of the letter in some few points. And first, for the Primacy of
Peter we allege: Math. 16
Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church etc. expounded With
v^by In Psab^contra part Donali
Augustine, In c. 16 Math.
Hierome, In Epist. ad Quintu.
Cyprian, and others.

For the Real Presence, we insist in our Saviors words: Recorded by all the
Evangelists.
This is my Body, this is my Blood; taken in our sense by Theoph. in hunc locu^.
Theophilact, Chrysosti^ hunc locu^.
Chrysostom, the Cyril Hierosol. cat. 4. mystag. Cyril. Alexa^d. epist ad
Calosiriu^.
Cyrils, Lib. de sacrame^tis c. 5.
Ambrose, and indeed by all the ancient Fathers, without exception.

For Priests remitting of sins, we urge that: whose Joan. 20.
sins you shall renut, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins you
shall retain, are retained; which passage is interpreted in our Catholic
sense, by Epist. ad Heliodorum
Hierome, Lib. de sacerdotio.
Chrysostom, Joan. 3.
Augustine, and others.

For Necessity of Baptism: Except (a) a Man be borne again of water, and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Of which our Catholic
exposition see In hunc locum.
Augustine, In hunc locum.
Chrysostom, L b. de spiritu Sancto c. 11.
Ambrose, In c. 16. Ezech.
Hierome, L b. 3. ad Quirinum.
Cyprian etc.

For Justification by works: Iac. c. 2.
Do you see, because of works a man is Iustisied, and not by Faith only?
expounded with us (to omit all others for breuity, by L. de fide ct oper. c. 14.
Augustine.

Lastly (to avoid prolixitie) for unwritten Traditions, we usually allege
those words of the Apostle, Therefore (e) Lib. 20. de Ciuilate Dei
These. c. 2.
Brethren, hold the Traditions, which you have received, either by steach, or
by Epistle; interpreted with us Catholics by L. De side cap. 17.
Dam^scene, De spirit. sauct. c. 29.
Basil, In hunc locum
Chrysostom etc.

Thus far for a ^ast herein; in which Texts, and diverse others omitted, you
are to note, M. Doctor, first, that the Texts themselves are so plain, and
literal, that the very Thesis, or Conclusion it self mantained by us, is
contained in the Words of the said Texts; and therefore you Protestants are
forced (by way of answer) commonly to expound those texts figuratively.
Secondly, you are to be advertised here, that as we can produce many Fathers,
expounding these, and other like places in our Catholic sense; so you are not
able to allege any one approved Father (among so many) interpreting, but any
one of the said passages of scripture in your Protestant Construction. Thirdly,
and lastly, you are to observe, that such texts, as the Protestants urge
against these, and other Catholic Articles defended by us, are nothing so
literal, plain, and natural for their purpose; but for the most part are
urged by them, by way of inference, and deduction; which kind of proofs is
often false, and sometimes, but probable. Neither can you, or they allege any
one Orthodoxall Father of the Primitive Church (a circumstance much to be
considered, and insisted upon) interpreting such your testimonies in your
construction. And thus far of this point; where, for greater expedition, I do
but skimme the matter over.


D. WHITAKERS. I do not much prize the authorities of the ancient Fathers, in
interpreting the Scripture. And furthermore, you are to conceive, that D. Whit.
De sacra script. p. 521. says: Nam qua^do scriptura non habetviua^ vocem, qua^
aud^amus; vte^dum est quibus^lam mediis, quibus inuestigamus quissit ses^s quae
meas scripturari^.
seeing the scripture has not vi^am vocem, which we may hear; Therefore we are
to use certain means, by the which we may find out which is the sense, and
construction of the scripture. For to seek it without means, is merely So
says D. Whit. l. de Eccles. co^trauers. 2. quaest. 2. p. 221.
'enthysiasticon, et Anabaptisticum. Now the means (according to my judgment,
and M. Doctor Reinolds) D. Reynolds In his Conference p. 83. 84. 92. 98.
are these following: The reading of the scriptures, the conference of places,
the weighing of the circumstances of the Text, Skill in tongues, diligence,
prayer, and the like. And who has these, and accordingly practices them, is
assured of finding the true, and undoubted meaning of the most difficult
passages of the scripture; and thereby is able to determine any controversies
in Religion.


CARD. BELLARM. I do grant, that these are good humane means, for the
searching out of the intended sense of the scripture. But I will never yield
them to be infallible, as here you intimate the^ to be; since this is not only
impugned by experience of Luther, and Calvin, who would (no doubt) equally
vaunt of their enjoying these means, (and yet irreconcileably differ in the
construction of the words of our Savior, touching the Sacrament of the
Eucharist,) but also it is most contrary to your own assertion delivered in
one of your books even against my self; where you write of the uncertainty,
and (perhaps falsehood) of these Means, in this manner: D. Whit. cotra Bellar.
de Eccles. co^trauers. 2. quaesi. 2. page 221. thus writes. qualia illa media
sunt, tale ipsa interpretatione esse necesse est: At media interpretadi leca
obscura sunt, incerta, dubia, et ambigua; Ergo fieri non potest, quin et ipsa
interpretat. o. incerta sit; si incerta; tunc esse potest falsa.
observe what the means are, such of necessity must the interprteation be; but
the means of interpreting obscure places of scripture are uncertain,
doubtful, and ambiguous; therefore it cannot otherwise fall out, but that the
interpretation must be uncertain; and if uncertain, then may it be false.
Thus you, M. Doctonr, and if I have in any sort depraved your words, then here
challenge me for the same. Now what say you to this? Can it possible be, that
your self should thus cross your self? Or may it be imagined, that your
pen at unawares did drop down so foul a blot of contradictio^? O, God
forbid. The oversight were too great. Therefore we will charitably reconcile
all, and say; that D. Whitakers Bellarmines adversary in writing) has only
contradicted the learned D. Whitakers, chief ornament of Cambridge. But enough
of this point; from whence the weakness, of this your last refuge to only
scripture, is sufficiently laid open.


MICHEAS. I grant, I am not conversant in the authorities of the New Testament,
as they have reference to the controuerted points of these days; since my
chief labor has been employed in diligently reading the Law, and the
Prophets: nevertheless I am acertayned, M. Doctor, that several passages of
the said Law, and Prophets, (in a plain, and ingenuous construction) do
greatly fortify some Opinions, defended by the Church of Rome. I will insist
(for greater compendiousnes) in two opinions, taught (as I am informed) by the
said Church: within which two, many other controversies (if not all) are
implicitl infolded. The first is touching the ever Visibility of the Church in
the time of the Messi^s. Now what can be more irrefragably proved, then this
article out of those words of the Psalmist? He Psalm. 18.
placed his Tabernacle in the Sun. As also out of that passage of Daniell:
Dan. 2.
Akingdome which shall not be dissipated for ever; and his kingdom shall not
be delivered to an other people. Again, out of the Prophet Esaias A Esaias 2.
Mountain prepared in the top of Mountains, and exalted above Hills; And
finally, more out of Esaias: Her Esaias 60.
Sun shall not be set, nor her Moon hid. In all which predictions, by the
words: Tabernacle, a Kingdom, a Mountain, her Sun is understood the Church
in the time of the Messiah, according to the expositions of all our learned
Jews, and Rabbis, interpreting, and commenting the said Prophesies.

The second article, may be the Controversy touching Free Will, which (I
hear) is maintained by the Church of Rome, but denied by the Protestants;
within which question diverse others (to wit, of Predestination, Reprobation,
the keeping of the Commandments, Works etc.) are potentially included.

Now how evidently is Free Will proved out of the writings of the Old
Testament? And first may occur that of Ecclesiasticus: He Cap. 15. 16. 17.
has set Water, and fire before thee; stretch forth thy hand to whether thou will. Before man is life, and death: good, and evil, what likes him, shall be
given him, what more conuincing.


D. WHITAKERS. Micheas. D. whit. contra Camprat. 3. thus says de loco
Ecclesiastici pa^um laboro; nec Arbitrii libertate^ credam, qua^tumuis hic
centies affirmet: Coram hominibus esse vitam, et mortem.
I make small accoumpt of that place of Ecclesiasticus; neither will I believe
the freedom of Man's will; although he should affirm it a hundred times over,
that before man were life, and death.


MICHEAS I did not expect, M. Doctor, that you should expunge out of the Canon
of Scripture any part of the Old Testament, but since you discanon this book;
I will allege other places which were ever acknowledged for the sacred word
of God by us Jews, and to pretermit that text in Genefis Cap. 4.
of Caine, having liberty over sin (as a place strangely detorted by some)
and diverse other texts in the old Testament, proouing the same; What say you of
the like passage in Deuteronomy? Cap. 30.
I call heaven, and earth in record this day against you, that I have set
before you life, and death etc. choose therefore life. Where you see the very
point, of which you are so diffide^t, is ingeminated, and reinforced. Thus, M.
Doctor, you see how much these sacred Testimonies do wound you herein, as also
do diverse other passages by me here omitted (euicting Man's Free Will) though
all of them have been accordingly interpreted by all ancient Jews, and Rabbis,
as more fully you may see in Galatinus.


D. VVHITAKERS. Touching your testimonies, produced out of the old Testament,
and interpreted in the Papists sense by your own Jewish Rabbis, as witnesses
Galatinus take this for my answer: I do D. Whit l. 9. contra Duraeum p. 818.
thus says of this point: Tuu^ in hac causa Petrum Galatinum minime prostcto
desideramus, nec Haebreorum testimoniis illis indigemus.
not regard or need your Galatinns; neither do I rely, upon the testimonies of
the Hebrews. And further know you both, that it is as clear, that the
scripture makes for us, who are the Professors of the Ghosple; as it is
clear, that the Sun shines in his brightest Meridian: Since we Protestants
are (d) the little flock: we 1. Joan. 2.
have the unction from the Holy one, and can cry Romans 8. et Galat. 4.
Abba Pater; from all which the Papists are wholly excluded: And this is
sufficient to overthrow the proudest Romanist breathing.


CARD. BELLARM. Sweet Jesus, that things sacred should be thus profaned; and
that the words of the scripture should be thus detorted, from the intended
sense of the scripture, when all proofs whatsoever, from the uninterrupted
practice of Gods ((...)) Luke 12.
Church, from the joint, and most frequent testimonies of the Primitive
Fathers, from Ecclestasticall Histories, and from your own more moderate, and
learned Brethrens acknowledgments, are drawn out against you, (like so many
sorts of Artilery, to batter down the walls of Heresy) and you not daring,
(and indeed not able) to endure the assaults of any of these, then are you at
the last forced to flee to the bare letter of the scripture, interpreted
(contrary to all the former authorities) by your own most partial private
spirit.

And the better to lay some pleasing, and fair colors upon the rugged grain
of this your assumed priuile dge, you are not afraid peculiarly to apply to
your selves (as though you were the sole partage of God) these former words, of
the Flock, the Unction, and Abba Pater. Neither do you rest here, but many of
your Coat (as may be observed, both out of their sermons, and writings) much
solace, and delight themselves in these following phrases of the scripture;
ever having them in their mouths, and using them (with the help of the casting
up the white of the eye) as spells to enchant the simple: Spiritus [(...)] vbi
vult spirat? Gal 3. et 2. Col. 2.
Christ crucified; Math. et Mark. 5.
saving (g) Joan. 3.
faith? the 1 Cor. 2.
spiritual Maniudgeth allthings,, and is judged of none; 1. Cor. 2.
Animalis homo non percipit ea, quae sunt spiritus Dei; the 1. Pet. 2.
sanctisication of the spirit; the 1. Petr. 2. vt supra.
revealing says; finally, (to omit many such others) that Joan. 3.
which is borne of the spirit, is of the spirit. Thus, as if your selves were
wholly spiritualized, and enjoyed certain Rapts, Visio^s or Enthusiasnes, you
vendicate to your selves most ambitiously the former passages of Gods sacred
Writ; only to blanch hereby the deformity of your Cause, and to bleere the
undiscerning eyes of your ignorant, and credulous followers: Such men breath
herein an insufferable elation, and height of mind; I will not say, pride,
imposture, and Hipocrisy.


D. WHITAKERS. My Lord, these are but your iniust aspertions, cast upon the
Innocence of the Professors of the Ghosple; whose words, not for forme-sake
(as you wrongfully suggest) but even out of pure conscience are ever concordant
to the illuminations of the spirit, descending from the Lord. But to turn my
speeches more particularly to you Micheas. It seems by many ouerturnes by you
already given, that you intend to turn Papist. And indeed I much wonder, why
your judgment should rather propend to the Romish faith, then to the
cleerelight of the Ghosple. Since in treading your intended course (besides all
other arguments here omitted.) It seems you little prise the authority of so
many worthy Protestant doctors, both in my own nation of England, and (to omit
other places throughout the most spacious Country of Germany; Men of
extraordinary eminency for learning; and whose V^tuersities are celebrious
throughout all Christendom; and in their place, you are content to enthrall
your judgment to the absurd, and senseless Positions of the obscure, and
illiterated Italians, and Spaniards; who are not by nature made so maniable,
(as I may say) as to menage the high Mysteries of Christian Religion; and whose
blind credulity suffers their minds, to enterta ine any superstition, or
error whatsoever.

And you must here remember (Micheas) that it is much learning, which conduces
a scholar to the Port of a true faith; whereas a superficial measure rather
endangereth him, then otherwise; whose state herein is like to ship-wracke or
loss by Sea; which is often caused through want of Sea, or water, but seldom
through abundance thereof: thus the store of that, which occasioneth the hurt,
or damage, being had, would prevent the hurt, or damage it self. The like I
say) is a scholars case herein. Therefore Micheas, be wary now at the first,
with whether side you consociate your self, least otherwise your resolution be
atteted hereafter with a fruitless Repentance: And though the knowledge of
things to come be ouercast with the darkness, or Uncertainty; yet, God grant,
I prove not a true Sybill, deuining of your future misfortune.


MICHEAS. M. Doctor. I take your admonition charitably; yet I mustneeds say,
you deal strangely herein; for whereas Man only is capable of Religion, you
nevertheless would have me cease to be a man, in the choice of my Religion.
Since you implicitly will me to reject, and abandon (so far forth, as
concerns my election of faith) all prudence, judgment, and Reason it self; and
to rest upon the bare letter of the Scripture, interpreted (contrary to all
antiquity) by my own private (and perhaps erroneous spirit. And is not this (I
pray you) to extinguish all light of Reason by which we differ from other
Creatures, and agree with immateriall Spirits Since not to use reason at all,
is the property of a beast; to use it well, of a celestial Angel.

Now touching the Parallel, which you make between the Protestant, and
Catholic Countries, I must confess plainly, I do not conspire with you in
judgment therein, your English Protestant Doctors, I purposely pass over in
silence, and do repute them learned.

Touching the Germans. It is true, that they have been, and still are diverse
grave scholars of Germany, some Protestants, and other Catholics; and
infinitely far more Catholics, then Protestants, by how much longer time
Germany has bin Catholic, then Protestant; against whose honor, and due
reputation, far be it from me to speak. Nevertheless if we do with a steady
hand, balance that Nation, and the custom of it, with Italy, and Spain, (to
speak nothing of France, which being almost wholly Catholic, some few places
excepted, has, and does daily bring forth men of great worth for learning.) We
shall then easily discover the disproportion, and inequality.

And to give a little touch of the nature of them all: who knows not, that in
diverse parts of Germany, the Inhabitants are but certain liuelesse, and great
Colosses, or Statuaes of flesh, and bones; who make their bodies, but conduits,
or strayners for bear, and wine to pass through; belching out their
discourses of Religion in full carouses? a maine cloud, which darkneth the
light of the understanding. Again, who can be persuaded, that Fleame, and
Hair (the predominant complexion of that country) and a loathsome bespitled
stoue, ca^ contest in matters of eruditio^, with the ingenuous mela^choly of
the Italians, and Spaniards, and their most famous schools, and Academies? By
the help of which active humor in them (for I speak not of that gross, and
dull Melancholy, whereby a Man thinks, and walks away his days) the pure,
and vnfettred Soul, disorganized, (as it were) and vnbodyed for the time, does
by an inward reflex glasle it self in it own essence; and so transcending it
accustomed limits, through an internal working of it own Powers, does
penetrate the most difficult, and abstruse mysteries in learning, and religion;
fanning away points, which in their own properties are to be severed, and
casting, or fagoting together things of one Nature.

But to return back to Germany, (which I will ever acknowledge has brought
forth many most famous, and worthy Men for Learning, Virtue, and Piety,) your
former assertion in ascribing the Protest ant faith to all that Country, cannot
be justified. For though I grant, it is on most sides obsest (as I may say)
with Protestancy; yet it is certain, that diverse principal parts thereof are
not Protestant, but Catholic in Religion: As half of Switzerland, a part of
the Grisons, Voltolyne, the whole Country of Bauaria, the Territories of all
the Bishops Electours, the kingdom of Bohemia, besides many Imperial Cities,
and states. Again, as other parts thereof do jointly, and particulerly
disclaim from the Roman Religion; so (though they all do challenge to
themselves the name of Protestants, yet) do they manteine many irreconcilable
differences of Religion enen of the greatest importance; like several ways,
and Tracts meeting in one common place, and then instantly divided one from
another. This appears (as I am informed) most clear, and evident from the
authority of In his his^oria Sacramentariae part. altera.
Hospinian, a learned German Protestant; who has diligently set down the
names of many scores of Books, written in great acerbity of style, by one
Ger^a^ Protestant against another German Protestant; and according nereto it
is, that we find so many kinds of Sectaries, and Heretics in Germany; as the
Caluinists, the Lutherans, the Anabaptists, the Antitrinitarians, and some
others; though they all be linked, and tied together in the common, and maine
knot of Protestancy.

And thus far, M. Doctor, of this point, where you see, I have small reason
to embrace the Protestant Religion, before the Catholic; because that is
professed throughout Germany, (as you pretend) this chiefly restrained to
Italy, Spain, and France.

But let us return back to the general subject of this your disoutation with
my Lord Cardinal I would entreat you M. Doctor, to allege some stronger
arguments for the change off yeh in the Church of Rome, then hitherto you have
given; which if you do not, then what by reason of the weakness of your said
arguments (at least in my apprehension,) and what in respect, that I do not see
the proofs Produced by my Lord Cardinal to be sufficiently by you refuted; I
must tell you aforehand, I will embrace the Catholic Roman Religion, and
disauow all Protestancy.


CARD. BLLARM. M. Doctor, if you can support this your position of Romes
change with other more forcing reasons, I would entreat you now to insist
further in them. You see I am prepared to give my best answer to what you can
object. If you do not, I must presume, all your forces are already spent; they
indeed being but weak, and rese^bling that of S. Jude: Cap. 1.
Clouds without water, carried about with winds.


MICHEAS I pray you M. Doctor, forbear not to grant to this my desire; since
otherwise I must rest assured, that no more can be said (on your part) touching
this subject.


CARD. BELLARM. Yield, M. Doctor, to this Learned Jews importunity: you know,
he has undertaken a journey of many hundred miles to this City, only to be
resolved in this one Point; therefore both in charity, and for the preserving
of your own honor, and reputation, you stand obliged to give all satisfaction
unto him.


D. WHITAKERS. Tush, you are both over vpbrayding with me; and seeing I intend
no further dispute with men of so irre^ragable dispositions, I first (for a
close) say to you (Micheas) that where you intend to become a Papist; your
change is this, that you leave that, which was ouce good, (though now bad) to
embrace that, which is ever bad; I mean, you leave Iudaisme, to entertain
Papisme; and thus you become a new Proselyte, or rather Neophyte, in the
school of Superstition, and Idolatry.

Now as for you (Cardinal) whose name is so celebrious, and so much advanced
in the ears, and mouths a fall men; know you, that touching the subject of
this our discourse, I doubt not, but that my arguments, reasons, and Instances
above alleged, do in the judgment of such, as the Lord has illuminated with
the truth of the Ghosple, sufficiently prove the great changes made of Faith,
and Religion in the Church of Rome, since it first received it Faith in the
Apostles days. And if the truth hereof be hid from any, I may then say with
the 2. Cor. 4.
Apostle: It is hid from them, that perish, and are lost. Therefore my
irreuocable conclusion is this, that the Church of Rome, was once the true
Church, and in faith pure, and incontaminate, (as before I acknowledged) but at
this present it is: D. whit. co^tra Camp. rat. 3. caleth the Church of Rome
thus: Ecclesia Romae est meretrix Babi^anica; palms a ^^a v(...) res^ctus;
speluca latro^um, via ampla ad interitu^ perducens; regnum infe^or^^; Corpus
Antichristi; E^rori^^^lluu es; maier ^^gna scortationum; Ecclesia Impiorum, a
qua excedere Christianum quemqne ^portel; quam Christus misere perdet aliqud
lo, eique sceleru omnium meritas penas imponet. Thus D. Whit.
The Whore of Babylon, a branch cut from the true Vine; adenne of thieves; the
large way leading to destruction; the kingdom of Hell; the Body of Antichrist;
a heap, or mass of errors; a great Mother of whoring; the Church of the
wicked; out of the which it behoucth every christian to depart, and which
Christ in the end will miserably destroy, and inflict due punishments for all
it impieties: and with this, as unwilling to have further intercourse, or
dispute with any, that subject themselves to this profane Church, I end, and
bid you both farewell.


CARD. BELLARM. M. Doctor, I much greiue, to see you thus transported with
passion, and to inueigh with such acerbity of words against Christ's intemerate
spouse; but I the more easily pardon you, since it is hard (upon the sodame) to
cast of a habit which has been often engrained in diverse tinctures of many
operations: so spleenfull a ^^slike you have against the Church of Rome; and
indeed it seems you labor with the disease of those, whose spitle being
enuenomed, make them to think, that every thing they take in their mouths,
does taste of venom.

But since it is your mind to break off so suddenly with us, I recommend you
to the tuition of him, who in an instant is able to turn the most stony heart,
into Cor 3. Reg. 3.
docile, and Cor Paraip. 34.
emolitum; and my prayers shall be, that before the time of your death you may
have the grace to implant your self, as a branch of that Church, the
profession of whose faith may be available to the saving of your soul.


MICHEAS. I am beholden unto you, M. Doctor, for your Pains, and labor taken
in this disputation; howbeit I must confess, I did expect to have heard more
said for the proof of the Church of Rome her change in Religion, then as yet
is delivered; where I see, that your fair promised mountains (in the
beginning) do but turn to snow, and after resolve into water; and that by your
final appealing to the written word alone, you endeavor to set the best face
upon your overthrow in this your dispute; bearing your self herein like to
soldiers, who are forced to yield up their hold, and yet covet to depart with
such ceremonies, as are not competent to such, as yield. Nevertheless I
commend you, to the protection of the God of Israel, and will pray, that you
may (after this life) enjoy the blessings which are already granted to Abraham,
Isa^ck, Jacob, and their Seed.


D. VVHITAKERS. Well, well. Once more I bid you both farewell.


MICHEAS. My Lord, the doctor (you see) is gone; and indeed I much dislike his
bitter eiaculation of reproachful words against the Church of Rome, little
sorting to the presumed gravity of a christian Doctor; but the matter is not
great, since obloquy is but baseness, and the skumme of malice; and that tongue,
which knows not to honor, cannot dishonor.

But now touching your learned dispute, it has (I humbly thank the Lord of
Hoasts, and your charitable endeavor) wrought in me so much, as that I well
know toward what shore I may anchor, and stay my heretofore floating, and
unsettled judgment.

I see it is already acknowledged, even by her enemies, that the Church of Rome
enjoyed in her primitive times, a true, perfect, and incorrupt faith, as the
Apostle does fully assure us: I see, that your self (my Lord) partly by
handling the Subject in gross; partly by distribution of times, in which this
supposed change is dremed; to have happened; partly by displaying the diversity
of the Protestants Opinions, touching the first coming of Antichrist, who is
said to have been the first, who wrought this change; and partly by other
forcible arguments, have demonstratiuely, and irrepliably euicted, that since
the Apostles, there has been no change of faith, made at all in the Church of
Rome. Finally, I see, that the examples of this imaginary change, instanced by
the Doctor (who, as I am advertised, has more labored in the search of this
subject, then any other Protestant) were so defective, and maimed, as that they
receive their full answer, and encounter, both from your former discussed
heads; as also from your Lordship, proouing a greater confessed antiquity of
the said Articles, then the instances do urge; and lostly, even from the
Doctors liberal acknowledgment; who plainly confesses, that he knows not
the time, when this his change received it beginning.

Since then all these points are made so evident, and undeniable, I grant they
have swaighed, and ouer-ballanced my judgment, indifferently heretofore to
either side enclining; and have enduced me indubiously to believe, that the
faith of the Church of Rome at this day is, as at the first it was; to wit,
pure, spotless, and inchangeable But now seeing no man can be a perfect
Christian, except he actually enjoy the Sacrament of Baptism, which is the
first door (as you Christians teach) that leads a man to the mysteries of
your Religion; therefore (most illustrious Cardinal) I renouncing my former
Iudaisme, and wholly rendering my self a true disciple, and servant of Christ
Jesus, (as acknowledging, that the Redemption of Israel is in him come) do
here prostrate my self in desire, to receive this Sacrament even from you;
that as your tongue is the chief instrument (under the highest) for my belief
of the Catholic faith, so your hand may be the like instrument, for the
conferring upon me the benefit of that sacred Mystery, where by a man is first
incorporated, and (as it were) matriculated in the bosom of the Catholic
Church.


CARD. BELLARM. Worthy Micheas. I much joy, that our discourse has wrought so
happy a resolution in you, as to embrace the Catholic, and Roman faith, and
give sole thanks to him therefore, who is higher then the highest Heaven, and
yet as low as the Center of the earth, who thus has vouchsafed (by his grace)
to descend to the bottom of your heart; and let the remembeance of your
precedent stain in Iudaisme, be a spur for your greater perfection in the
Christian Religion: So shall you resemble that body, which receives it greater
health, from it former sickness. And be sure, that every day you increase more,
and more in Christian virtues: nulla dies sine linea. And takeheed, that you
grow not lukewarm in this your resolution, or come to a stand of your present
fervor: But remember, that such motions of the soul of this nature, which are
stationary, are therein become Retrograde, since here not to go forward, is to
go backward.

And as touching the precedent subject of our discourse, rest you assured, that
the faith of Christ first preached in Rome was never yet (in any one
dogmaticall point) altered since it first plantation. The Church of Rome was
(and doubtlesly is) the true Church of Christ; which Church is so far from
broaching change, and innovation, by her intertayning, but any one Error, as
that therefore it is most truly prophesied of it Esaias 2. Micheas 4.
that it is a Mountain prepared in the top of Mountains, exalted about Hills.
It being indeed seated of such a hight, as that neither the thundering fragors
of the persecutours cruelty, nor the winds of Heretics speeches, and
endeauours, were ever able to reach so high, as by introducing nouelty in faith
to disioynt the settled frame thereof: so true is the saying of that holy father
(whose fire of zeal brought him to the flames of Martyrdom) Cy^^ l. de V^^a^^
Ecclesiae posi (...)ilium.
adulterari non potest sponsa Christi incorrupta est, et pudica. Now touching
your baptizing Micheas we will take such present course therein, as shall give
you all full satisfaction.


MICHEAS I humbly thank your Lordship. But I am further here to advertise your
Lordship, that if so it might be thought lawful, and convenient, that he, who
heretofore denied Christ, might after be permitted to be a dispenser of the
Mysteries, and treasure of Christ; I could then greatly wish, that after I have
received the Sacrament of Baptism at your hands, I might be advanced to the
holy Order of Preisthood; that so now (in the last scene of my old age) my
endeauours of this nature (hereafter to be attempted in the Catholic Church)
might partly redeem my former misspent labors in the Jewish Synagogue: My
single course of life, and unmarried state best sorteth thereto, and my own
desire is most vehement, and forcing. And indeed I am persuaded, that the
profitable talents of a good Christian ought) in part to resemble the
engendring riches of an usurer, who breeds upon silver, and whose Toco^ in
greek si^nifieth Usury, coming of the verb Ticto parto; because silver (put to
usury) b^etteth silver.
Tocos, or interest money is no sooner begotten, then it begets: So should
it fare with a man of sufficiency, devoted to Christ his service; who being
become of late his adopted son, should himself instantly labor to be a
parent (under Christ) of other such like sons. O how ineffable a comfort it
is, when a man may truly (yet modestly) say through his spiritual travel,
fruitfully employed toward others (as your Lordship may now of me). 1. Cor. 4.
In Christo ^esu per Euangelium vos genui? And how truly honorable is that
profession of life, which consists in the negotiation, and trafiking (as I
may say) of salvation of souls? Zach. 14.
Et ero mercator in domo Domini Exercituum.


CARD. BELLARM. I Commend much your great fervor herein: But yet, I hold it
more secure to pause for a time, to see, whether this your resolution touching
Priest hood (being, but the Primitiae of your spirit) be steady, and permanent,
or whether hereafter it may alter, and waver. And if so; then would it follow,
that your present taking of that course, would be attended on with an over late
repentance.

And you must know, that the wings of a new converted soul to Christ, do
commonly at the first perform their speediest flight: Psalm. 54
Quis dabit mihi pennas, sicut Columbae, et volabo? Which for the most part
after (through some default, or other) do begin to lagg, and to make certain
plains. For though these first Motions of the soul in the service of God, be
neither Natural, nor Violent (since they descend only from him, to whom by
prayer we ascend) yet they partake much of that Motion, which is violent; they
being ordinarily more strong, and feruerous in the beginning, and more remiss
toward the end: and indeed experience teaches us, that a Precipitious, and
over hasty devotion, is sometimes dangerous. But if this your good desire do
hereafter persevere, and continue, I shall be ready (within convenient time) to
give you my best assistance therein.


MICHEAS My Lord, I make small doubt, that this my resolution (through the aid
of him, who first did inspire it into my soul) will remain stable, and
unchangeable. Therefore your Lordship may further hereby take notice, that my
intention is to spend his short remnant of my years, in diligently studying
the Controversies between the Catholics, and the Protestants, to attempt (as
before I intimated) to plant that relilgion in others, which you have already
planted in me.

I further am resolved, to take a view (if my aged and feeble body will suffer
me) of the most famous Catholic, and Protestant Universities in Christendom;
and particularly I have (I confess) a thirsting desire to see the two (so much
celebrated) Universities of England (of the one of which, I here D. Whitakers
is a member) places, of which Fame her self has sounded her trumpet, in the
highest Note. Now (my good Lord) in regard of these my determinations, and of
my late embracing of the present Roman Roligion, (the noise, and brute whereof
will, no doubt, spread it self at large.) I do probably presage, that I shall
meet with diverse Protestants, who hearing of my election of Religion, will
perhaps earnestly solicit me, for my change to them; and making many violent
incursions, upon my yet weak, and unfortified judgment, will endeavor to
demollish, and lay level with the ground, whatsoever your Lordspip (by your
former learned discourse) has already built in my soul.

Therefore, that I may sit close, and immooueable in this my choice of faith
now made, I would entreat your Lordship to instruct me, how I may best guide
occasion in discourse with such Men; that so they may not be able to win
ground upon my weakness. For though I can (in part) discern the sufficiency
of other men; yet reflecting upon my own imbecility, I with all discover the
want of their like sufficiency in my self: I herein resembling the outward
sense, which as well judges of the absence, as of the presence of it Object.
Therefore (good my Lord) initiate me a little, in this Mystery.


CARD. BELLARM. Mieheas, I like well of this your Promethian, and forecasting
wisdom. And I will to my best ability and power, satisfy this your desire.
And whereas you say, you determine to see the Universities of England, I
approve well thereof; for I have often heard, that (speaking of the Materials
of an University) they are the goodliest in all Christendom; I mean for
magnificence, and statelines of their Colleges; for op^lency, and great
revenues belonging to them; and for their pleasing, and sweet scituations.

If you go to Oxford, you shall (in all likelihood) fall in acquaintance with
one D. Reynolds; a Man (as I am informed) not of a harsh, and fiery (as his
Brother D. Whitakers is) but of a temperate comportment; one, of whom the whole
University does highly preiudge; and indeed not undeservedly, he being (his
Religion excepted) endued with many good parts of literature; and who has
heretofore been my D. R^ynl. did write against Card. Bellurmine in the
Controversy of Images
Antagonist in some of his Books, written against some parcels of my
Controversies. But now to descend to your last request to me, seeing then you
are not, as yet, conversant in Points of faith, controuerted between the
Catholic, and Protestant; My maine, and first advise is, that in all points
of faith (of which any dispute may hereafter occur between you, and any
Protestant) you finally do rest in the authority of Christ's visible Church, and
the chief head thereof; assuring your self, that although Simon the fisher,
was not able to determine matters of faith; yet that Simon Peter, and his
successors (assisted with competency of means) have ever an impeachable
sovereignty granted to them, and a delegated authority from Christ himself,
for the absolute discussing, and deciding of all Articles in faith, and
Religion: Math. 16.
Tues Petrus, et super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, et portae Inferi
non praeualebunt aduersus eam.

Expect to meet with men, who are witty, and of good talents, and who well
know, how to spread their Netts to catch the unprovided. And whose stream of
discourse (for diverse of them are of great elocution) for the most part
runs, in their accustomed channels of pleasing insinuations, persuading to
their faith, and a violent ouercharge of gauleful words, against the present
Roman faith.

Touching their allegation of authorities (either divine or humane) credit them
no further, then your own eyes will give you leave; for diverse of them use
strange impostures therein, though they warrant such their proceedings with
great co^fidency of earnest asseuerations: Jeremy 5.
quod si etiam viuit Dominus, dixerint, et hoc falso iurabunt.

Make choice (if so it lies in your power) rather to dispute with Protestant
Doctors, and Ministers, who are unmarried, then married; since the secret
judgments of these later may well be overcome by force of argument; but to
persuade the wills to follow their judgments (in regard of their clog of wife,
children, and worldly preferments) is more then a Herculean labor. And indeed,
I confess, I do much commiserate the state of diverse of them, who (being
otherwise of great wits, and might have been much serviceable in the Church of
God) by being enchanted with a little Redd, and White, and a well proportioned
face, do in their younger days tie themselves (by marriage) to the world, and
to the attending afflictions thereof: o that the soul of man (not subject to
dimension) should be thus enthralled to Creatures, for their having a pleasing
dimension. But to proceed

You shall find many of them of great reading; yet of reading sorting rather
to contradict, and quarrel, then to instruct: but diverse of their coat are
content (through their own want) to retaile, by help of Indexes, and such
other means, their own more learned Brethrens writings, and labors. And many
of these (through their own ignorance) think they do well, and that they
profess a true faith; whereas the more learned of them (through their reading,
and study) must (in their own souls) of necessity be conscious, and guilty of
the falsehood of their own Cause; though the present, and temporary respects
of riches, and preferments are so potent, and forcible with them, as that they
c^nnot (or at least they will not) be induced to follow the Dictamen, and
resolution of their own Judgments.

If the subject of your discourse be about the abstruse Mysteries of the
Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist, or of some other such sublime points; you
shall hardly draw them to relinquish natural reason (so deeply are they
immersed therein,) it being indeed their Pillar of Non plus vltra: Thus, where
other Christians enjoy two eyes; the one of Faith, the other of Nature: These
Polyphemi (shutting that of Faith) do look upon the Articles of Religion, only
with this of Nature.

Choose rather to dispute, touching matter of fact (with in which may be
included the proof of the truth, or falsehood of the Protestant Religion) then
touching any dogmaticall point of faith, and doctrine, as receiving it proof
from the scripture. This I speak not, but that the scripture makes most
clearly for the Catholics, and against, the Protestants: But because your
adversary in dispute will ever cavil at your exposition of Scripture; reducing
it in the end (against all antiquity of Fathers, and tradition of the Church)
to the interpretation of his own private, and revealing spirit; and so your
labor would prove, commonly, to be lost thereby. Now in matter of fact, your
Adversary is forced to stand to the authorities, deduced from Ecclesiastical
Histories, and other such humane proofs; and therefore he must either shape a
pro babble (if not a sufficient) answer to them, which he never can do; they
wholly making against him, even by his own learned brethrens Confessions; or
else he must rest silent. And this is the reason, why the Protestants are so
loath to dispute of the Church; since this Question comprehends in it self,
diverse points of fact; as of it continual Visibility, Antiquity, Succession,
Ordination, and Mission of Pastors etc. All which Questions receive their
proofs from particular Instances, warranted by showing the particular times,
persons, and other circumstances, concerning matter of fact.

An other reason of this your choice of your subject of dispute may be; in that
few Men (and those only scholars) can truly censure of the exposition of
scripture; whereas almost every illiterate man (enjoying but a reasonable
capacity) is able sufficiently to judge of the testimonies, produced to prove,
or disprooue matter of fact. And here I would wish you, that in your dispute
you labor, to have some Catholics present; for where all the Auditory are
Protestants, certain it is, that they will voice it against you, howsoever the
disputation may otherwise go. But because these obseruatio^s are over general;
I will give you here some more particular; since most of them may be restrained
to certain particular passages, which may occur between you, and your
disputant Adversary.

1. First then, let the true state of the Question (discussed of) be set down,
and acknowledged on both sides; in regard of the often wilfully mistaken
doctrine of the Catholics. That done, reduce the question disputed of, to as
few branches as you can; since multiplicity of Points is more subject to
confusion, and forgetfulness, and gives greater liberty to extrauagant
digressions. And will your Adversary to avoid all such speeches, but what are
pertinent to the point handled. And if he will needs wander in his discourses,
then you may reduce the force of them (by way of Enthimem, or syllogism) to
the point disputed of; that so both your Adversary, and the Auditory may see,
how roueingly these his speeches were used, and how lowsely they, and the
question then handled do hang together.

2. If your Adversary undertake the part of the Answerer, suffer not him to
oppose; though he labor to do so, to free himself from answering, when he
shall see himself plunged. In like sort, if he undergo the part of the
Opponent, tie him precisely ever to oppose; which Scene perhaps (he being
brought to a Non plus) would sleyly transfer upon you. And thus be sure. that
eich of you keep your chosen station.

3. If your disputant will vaunt, that he will prove all by scripture only
(as most of them give it out, they will) then force him to draw all his
premises (I mean, both his Propositions, if so they should be reduced to a
form of argument) from the scripture alone; of which Method (within two, or
three arguments) he is most certain to fail. And if he take either of his
Propositions from humane authority, or from Natural Reason; you may tell him,
he leaves his undertaken Task; to wit, to prove from Scripture alone, and
consequently, you may deny the force of his argument, though otherwise logical
if it were reduced to form.

4. In your proofs drawn from Scripture, labor to be much practiced in the
Protestants Translations of it; of which infinite places make for the
Catholics Cause, even as the Scripture is translated by the Protestants. This
course far gauleth them more, then if you insisted in the Catholic
translation.

5. If you dispute with any by writing, or enterchange of letters (this being
but a mute Advocate of the mind) write nothing but matter, and with as much
compendiousnes as the subject will bear, without any verbal excursions, or
digressions; since this proceeding will force your Adversary to reply (if he
will reply at all) to the matter. For otherwise leaving the point, which is
chiefly to be handled, he will shape a reply to other less necessary stuff
delivered by you; and then his Reply must pass abroad (by the help of many
partial tongues) for a full answer to your whole discourse.

6. In like sort, if you attempt to charge a Protestant Author with lies, or
Corruptions in their writings (with which many of their books are even loaded)
rather insist in a few, (and those manifest, and vnanswereable) then in a
greater number; seeing if your Adversary can make show, to salve but three, or
four of a greater number (which the more easily he may do, by how much the
number of the instanced falsifications is greater) the supposed answereing of
the^ (chosen, and picked out by him) must seem to disgrace all the rest urged
by you.

7. If you intend to bring, and object any wicked, and unwarrantable sayings,
especially out of Luther, either against the Blessed Trinity, or about his
acknowledged lust, and sensuality, be careful to note the Editions of the
Book, wherein such his sayings are to be found. For in the later Editions of
his works, many such sentences are for very shame left out, and unprinted. And
hereupon there are diverse Protestants, who utterly deny, that ever any such
words were written by him.

8. Be skillful in discovering (though not in practicing) Sophistry, that so
you may the better loose, and untie e^^e Protestants knots of deceipte; diverse
of them being most expert in all kinds of Paralogisme. And particulerly
takeheede of that gross, and vulger slight (unworthy a scholar) drawn from
the particular to the Universal, much practiced by our Adversaries. For
according hereto, if they can find any Father, or any modern Catholic
Author, to mantaine (though therein contradicted by other Fathers, and
Catholics) but one, or two Points of Protestancy; they blush not to auerre,
that the said Father, or Catholic writer, are entire Protestants in all
points.

9. If your Adversary should produce some supposed disagreements in doctrine
among Catholics; you may reply, that their differences rest only in some
Circumstances of a Catholic, Conclusion, and not in the Conclusion it self.
And if he produce any presumed Catholic denying the Conclusion it self of
the doctrine; then are you to tell him that such a man cease by this his
denial (unless ignorance, or inconsideration excuse) to be a member of the
Catholic Church; and therefore, this his denial does not prejudice the
Catholic Faith; this being contrary to the Protestants proceeding; who
wittingly mantaining contrary conclusions of Faith, do remain nevertheless
(by the judgments of many of them) good brethren, and true Professors of the
Ghosple.

10. If your Adversary contest, that all the writings, and memory of
Protestants in former ages were extinguished by the Popes of the said, and
after succeeding ages; you may show, how absurd this assertion is. And the
reason hereof is, in that the Popes of those times could not presage, that
Protestancy should (on these our times) sway more, then any other Heresies
condemned in their very times; which other Heresies remain yet registered even
to this day, by the acknowledgment of of the Protestants; And therefore by the
same reason, Protestancy (supposing it to be professed in those former times,)
should also have remained recorded, either in the writings of the Protestants
themselves, (if ever any such were or else by the censure, and condemnation of
them, by the Popes of those days.

11. Whereas you may allege diverse acknowledged Heresies, both in the
judgment of Protestant, and Catholic; out of the books concerning diverse
persons, who believed some few points of Protestancy, recorded in the said
books; (here I speak of VValdo, VVicliff, etc.) Now if here your Adversary
disputant does avouch (as many Protestants do) that these Heresies were falsely
obtruded upon the then said Protestants by their Enemies; you may here reply,
that to affirm this, is against the force of all reason. For seeing the said
books do indifferently make mention both of the Protestant Opinions, and of
the other Heresies defended by the same men; either the said Books are to be
believed in both, or to be rejected in both: If the first, then it is certain,
that those men believed those acknowledged Heresies, and then they can not be
instanced for perfect Protestants: If the later; then the said Books are not
of any sufficient authority to prove, that there were any Protestants in those
ages.

12. There is great disparity between Protestants confessing some points,
which do advantage the Catholic faith (as for examples, that the Primitive
Fathers were Papists in all chief Articles of Papistry, as the Adversary use
to term it) and other Protestants, impugning the said Confessions. Seeing the
first men speak against themselves, and their Cause; which (they being
learned) would never do, but as convinced with the euidency of the truth
therein; whereas these other do deny the Confessions of their own Brethren, in
behalf of their own Religion; and so such their denialls are to be reputed
more partial. In like sort, there is great difference to be made, between
Protestants speaking against themselves, and yet believing the Protestant
doctrine, and conclusion, touching some Circumstances, whereof their said
Confessions are; and between some others, who before were Catholics, and
after do defend some one point, or other of Protestancy. Since these later men
do not speak against themselves, but in defense of such their Protestant
doctrine, then newly entertained by them, and consequently, in defense of their
own opinions: and therefore such their authorities are not to balance
equally, with the Confessions of the former Protestants.

13. If your Adversary does produce any authorities; either from the Popes
Decrees, or from General Councels; (by the which the Antiquity of some
Catholic Article may be impugned). Be careful, 1. That particular Councels,
or Councels Scismaticall (not warranted by the Popes authority) be not obtruded
upon you, for true General Counsels.

2. That the point urged out of the Council does concern Doctrine of faith,
and not matter of fact; touching which later point, it is granted a Council
may alter it Decrees, upon better, and later informations. 3. That the Canon,
or Decree poduced out of the Council, do immediately concern the doctrine it
self of some Article of faith, (then supposed to be brought in) and not the
name only to be imposed upon the said doctrine before believed; as it happened
in the Council of Lateran, touching the word Transubstantiation.

4. That the Decree of the Pope, or Council, delivered only touching the
better execution of some Catholic point, before partly neglected (as for
example, touching Confession, the unmarried life of the Clergy, or keeping set
times of fasting, and the like) be not fraudulently extended (by your
Adversary) to the first institution of the said doctrine; he so suggesting a
more reformed execution, or practice of the Catholic doctrine, for the first
institution of it.

14. If your Adversary produce the ancient Fathers in defense of Protestancy,
first ask him, if he will inappealeably stand to their judgments? If he will;
then urge the Protestants (whose books are most plentiful in such like
accusations) charging them, as Patrons of Papistry. If he will not stand to
their authority; then demand; to what end he does alleadg them? And further let
him know, that it is the joint consent of Fathers (without contradiction of
other Orthodoxall Fathers) which the Catholics do admit. Where some
Protestants object, that diverse points of the Cathoclike Religion were
condemned in some Heretics, by the Orthodoxall Fathers of the Primitive
Church; you may truly reply hereto, that the Article, or conclusion it self,
of any Catholic point, was not condemned by them; but only some absurd, and
wicked Circumstance (annexed by the said Heretics to the Article) was
condemned by the Fathers. Thus the Catholics are charged by D. Fulke. and
others, to borrow the praying to Saints, and Angels from certain old
Heretics, condemned by Epiphanius for this doctrine. Whereas those Heretics
prayed both, to good, and bad Angels, and to those, who were falsely termed
Angels; accou^pting them as Patrons of their wickedness. And for these
Circumstances only Epiphanius registreth the^ for Heretics. This slight is
much practiced by diverse Protestants in certain points of the Catholic
Religion. Therefore be sure to see the words of the Fathers so condemning them,
in the Fathers own books; which if you do, you shall discover wonderful
forgery, and deprauation of the said Fathers writings, used by the Protestants.

16. If it be urged, that the denial of Free Will (for example, and so of
other Articles of Protestancy) was taught by Manichaeus; and consequently, that
the Protestant faith is as ancient, as those primitive times. Reply, that this
particular Heretic, or that particular Sectary did teach, but one, or other
Protestant Article, and were instantly written against for such their
Innovation, the said Men being Catholic in other points. And therefore you
may truly auerre, that the urging of such Examples are wholly impertinent,
either for the proof of the antiquity of Protestancy, or for the visibility of
the Protestant Church in those days.

17. When you produce the ancient Fathers against the Protestants, their common
shift is to make an opposition between the Scripture, and the Fathers;
mantaining that to follow the Fathers judgment in faith, is to reject, and
abandon the Scripture; and that themselves are to be pardoned for preferring
the Scripture before the Fathers. But to this you may answer, that seeing the
Fathers do admit, and reverence the scripture in as high a degree, as the
Protestants do; The maine question, and doubt here is only, whether the
Fathers, or the Protestants do more truly expound the Scripture.

18. When a Catholic does allege the Fathers, the Protestants do seek to
lessen their authorities several ways, as by obiecting either another Father,
or the said Father in another place against himself, so falsely traducing him,
as a mantainer of contrary Doctrines. In like sort, by obiecting some confessed
error of the Father produced by the Catholic; which chiefly houldeth in
Origin, Tertullian, and Cyprian. But to this last point, you may answer; that
you produce the Fathers in such Catholic Points, touching the which, they
were not written against by any other Father; and therefore their authority
therein is of force; since it is presumed hereby, that all the other Fathers
(and consequently all the Church of God) agreed with them therein; whereas
their confessed errors were impugned by Augustine, Hierom, Epiphanius, and
others.

19. Do not admit this, as good: some Fathers do interpret this, or that text
of scripture figuratively; therefore the said Fathers teach, that it is not to
be expounded literally. This is a mere sophisme; for seeing diverse texts of
scripture are capable (besides the literal) of allegorical senses (as all the
learned Catholics, and Protestants do acknowledge) therefore the figurative
sense does not exclude, but rather often presupposes, and admits the
literal. According hereto, S. Augustine passing over (as presumed, and
granted) the literal sense of those words: qui bibit meum Sanguinem etc.
allegorically expounds in this sort; Joan. 6.
bibere Sanguinem Christi; est crederein Christum.

20. You are here also to conceive, that diverse Protestants do call our
Catholic Doctrines, as they are defended by us, Superstition, Idolatry,
Blasphemies; but as they are taught by the ancient Fathers, they mildly style
the very same Doctrines, Errors, Scarrs, Blemishes. The reason of the
different appellation of them in the Fathers is, in that they would not seem
to break with the Fathers, or to be of a several Church from them; whereas
they call the same Doctrines in us, by the former aggravating terms; to imply
to their followers, that we Catholics (as supposed by them to profess
Superstition, Idolatry, Blasphemies, etc.) are not of the true Church of
Christ. By this you may discern the Protestants, both Malice, and Subtilty.

21. You must be wary to observe, and distinguish, when a Father writes
doctrinally, and sententially (ex professo) of any subject, from that, which he
writes Antagonistice, and in heat of dispute with his Adversary, touching the
said subject: since in the first kind his positive, and true judgment is
clearly set down, and for such his authority (thence deduced) is to be
embraced: Whereas in this later kind, he often disputes, ad personam; and so
sometimes (either through vehemence, or for his greater present advantage)
writes more loosely, and not so reseruedly, as the Catholic doctrine in that
point requires. According hereto, some of the ancient Fathers, writing against
Pelagius, and his sect (who ascribed over much to Free Will) did not (perhaps)
so fully dispute in defense of the Catholic Doctrine of Free Will, as they
might have done. This course they took (of which the Protestants make
advantage) that thereby they might the more easily convince their Adversaries
Heresy, resting so much on the contrary side.

22. In like sort, the Fathers sometimes perhaps in a Rhetorical, and
amplifying manner, do use certain transcendent speeches (as also some more
modern Catholics have done) in praise of our Blessed Lady, or in honor of
the Cross, or the like; then being taken literally, can well be justified. But
they were the more bold to do, because they (as then having no Adversaries to
their Catholic Doctrines in those points) might rest assured, that their
words would be taken in that pious sense (and no other) wherein they delivered
them. But if they had foreknowne, that there would have come in after times
such sectaries, who would so rigidly, and literally insist in all such their
sentences, perusing every word, and syllable of them, and racking them to the
worst construction (as now the Protestants do) they would) no doubt) have
written more reseruedly, and cautelously of those points. But little did they
think, that any succeeding Men, (professing themselves to be Christians) would
ever so uncharitably) have detorted their words, from their intended sense.

23. Touching the Notes of the Church of Christ, prescribed by the Protestants;
which are the true preaching of the Word, and a right administration of the
Sacraments; you must here know, that these Notes are set down by them for two
respects, and with great subtilty: The one is, to avoid our Catholic Notes of
Antiquity, Visibility, Succession etc. which notes they foresee, cannot be
justified of their own Protestant Church: The second, and more principal
reason of this their proceeding is, that here by they may reduce the proouing,
which is the true Church, to their own private spirit, and judgment; because
themselves will be Vmpiers, and Judges (not admitting any other men's censures
therein) when, and where the Word is truly preached, and the Sacraments
rightly administered: So subtle (you see) is Nouelisme in Faith for the
patronage of it self.

24. Strive to be more conversant, and ready (if so your opportunity, and
occasions will not suffer you, to be ready in all) in such Controversies, which
cons^^ in practice; as about Praying to Saints, Indulgences, Worshipping of
Images, Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament, Communion under one kind etc. then
in others, which rest only in belief, and speculation. Seeing the vulgar
Protestant with whom you are (in likelihood) much to converse, soonest takes
exception against those former, and will expect greater satisfaction in them;
because they being subicct to the sense, (in regard of their daily practice)
come nearest within their Capacity; and are by them often charged (through the
calumny of their chief Masters, abusing their credulity) with many supposed
abuses.

25. Touching those Articles, or Controversies, which chiefly rest in
speculation, be well traueled in the question touching the Infallibility of
Gods Chureh, ^s also in that other question, that the Scripture (without the
Churches attestation) cannot prove it self to be scripture; and that all
points of belief do not receive their proof from scripture alone; seeing that
these two pote^tially include in themselves most of all other Controversies.
Also be most ready in the question touching the continual Visibility of the
Protestants Church (seeing the Protestants must grant their Church to have
been ever visible, if they will auerre it to be the true Church of Christ,)
and, Micheas, if ever you dispute with any Protestant, I could wish, if so the
liberty of choicely on your part, and that you aforehand well furnish, and
arm your self to that end; that you would make election to dispute of this
point; for if you be well experienced therein, you shall mightily confound your
Adversary; he not being able (even by his own Brethrens confessions) to
instance (for many Centuries, and ages together) so much, as the being of one
Protestant.

Thus far (Micheas) of such observations briefly and plainly delivered,
without applying most of them to any particular subject; wherewith it is
convenient you should be instructed, before you enter into any conflict with
any Protestant, diverse others may be adjoined to these, but that I am afraid, I
should tire you with a wearisome repetitio^ of them; and your own experience
hereafter will best direct you in such animaduersions.


MICHEAS My Lord Cardinal I do much prise these your instructions; most of
them serving, as so many loopeholes, through which we may espy the subtle
approach of the Enemy; or rather as so many Counter-murs to withstand his
secret molitions (b) Vi^g. A^nea^.
and attempts: (i) Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirat? And though these
your premonitions (or rather premunitions, since by them I may be fore-armed
against the assault of the adversary) be now but generally set down, without
any particular application (as your Lordship says) yet hereafter I will
incorporate them in such points, or passages of dispute, as just opportunity,
and occasion may present.

And here according to your Lordships desire, I will labor in those
Controversies, consisting chiefly in practice, by you specified; and I will
also most painefully, and elaborately furnish my self with reading, touching
the question of the visibility of the Protestants Church. The which question, I
do promise your Lordship (according as you wished me) shall be the subject of my
next discourse, whenever my fortune shall be to contest with any learned
Protestant; for this point being well, and thoroughly prosecuted, I hold it most
choking, and mortal to the adversary, as your Lordship above did affirm.

But now my Lord, the time is far spent, and I fear, I have detained you
over long in these your learned discourses. And now I confess, I think it
long, till I have received the Sacrament of Baptism, which shall Wash away in
me all spots, and filth, both of Original, and Actual sin; referring my
taking of Priesthood to such opportunity, and season, as you in your own
wisdom shall hold convenient.


CARD. BELLARM. Micheas, as concerning your intended implanting in Christ's
Church by Baptism, your desire thereof I much commend; seeing in things of
this nature, to will to do well, is a doing well. For your actual Baptising
(whereby you shall cease to be descended, from the loins of your first Parent)
know you, that we are at this present in that Holy-weeke, in which the Redeemer
of the world was by the Jews crucified; a time (among some other seasons of
the year) appointed by the Catholic Church, for the baptising of such Jews,
as through Gods infinite Grace are converted to the Faith of Christ. If
therefore it please you, to morrow to repair to the Cathedral Church of this
City, you shall find me there, prepared to minister to you (according to your
request) the Sacrament of Baptism, with all it Christian rites, and
Ceremonies. And after in convenient, and fitting time, I will confer upon you
the holy Order of Priesthood.


MICHEAS. My Lord Cardinal, till then I will take leave of you, acknowledging
my self to be your Lordships in all obseruancy; and will be ready (with the
assistance of the highest) at the place appointed, to expect that happy hour.


FINIS.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
THE CONCLUSION
HEre (Learned Academians) ends our first Dialogue; where you are to suppose,
that according to their former intended meetinge the next day, Micheas is
Baptized by the Cardinal (who being thereby, in Tertullia^ de Pudicitia
Christum tinctus, induit Christum) and within some short time after, he
receives the holy function of Priesthood, by the imposition of the hands of
the said Cardinal. What is feigned to have happened to Micheas after his
departure from the Cardinal, the two subsequent Dialogues will discover

Touching the precedent subject of this first Dialogue if it please you but to
fan, and sever away, what is fictitious, and imaginary therein, from what is
true, and warranted with many proofs, you shall find, (I hope) that the
arguments produced, are of sufficient weight, to sway any man's judgments, (not
drunken with prejudice of Opinion) to acknowledge that to this day, there was
never any change yet made in the Church of Rome, so much, as in one dogmaticall
Article of Faith, or point of importance, (which is the matter here in
question) and that therefore the Protestants inconsiderate malignity is hereby
the more discovered; who so freque^tly traduce, and conuiciate that Church, as
the whore of Babylon; which we Catholics do undertake (even with an expugnable
confidence) to Prove, that she is the intemerate, and chaste spouse of Christ:
so certain it is, that these Men Act. 13.
cease not to pervert the straight ways of the Lord.

Now my Conclusion (Worthy Men) shall chiefly rest in a true, and real
retorting of that upon our Adversaries which doctor VVhitakers, and other
Protestants do falsely obtrude upon our Church: so shall the accuser rest
chargeable with the accusation, and the accused become assoiled, and freed. My
meaning is, I will briefly here show, that it is the Protestant Faith, and
Religion, which has made a manifest change, and alteration from that Faith,
and Religion, which the Church of Rome sucked from the breasts of her first
instructours; howsoever the Protestants labor (by all wit, and other means)
to cloth their Innouations in the fair attire of a reverend and regardable
Priority of being.

I will insist in the chiefest articles mantained at this present by the
Protestants, and will set down the maine circumstances, necessarily attending
(as above is made plain) every change in Religion: To wit, the Doctrine, which
is newly broached; the Person, by whom it was first taught; the Imposition of a
new name (for the most part) upon the believers of that doctrine, drawn from
the first Author; in who^ all his followers were originally contained, as the
branches of a tree are vertually in the root: The time, when every such
Protestant Article was first anciently introduced: The Persons by who^ those
Articles were at their first beginning impugned: And finally the Church, or
visible society of Christians, out of which (as more ancient) those sectaries
(by their first forging of their said points of Protestancy) did depart, and go
from.

And to begin. The Doctrine of the Churches Inuisibility was first taught by
Donatus, and of him his followers were called Donatists. This Heresy at it
first rising, was written against, and impugned by S. Lib. de vnitate Ecclesiae
c. 12.
Augustine. In like sort, the Donatists, were the first, who did overthrow
Altars, and cast out holy Oil; but contradicted herein by Lib. 2. et 6. contra
Pa(...).
Optatus and Lib. 2 contra Petilia^^ rat. 51. et 61.
Augustine. The denial of prayer for the dead (and consequently the denial of
the doctrine of Purgatory) as also the abrogation of all set Fasts, were first
brought in by Aerius: his followers, for such his doctrines styled: Aeriani.
These his false doctrines were recorded, and contradicted, by S. Haeres. c. 33.
Augustine. The denial of Free Will was set on foot by Manicheus; from him
are descended the Manichees. His doctrine herein was written against by In
^raesat. dialogorum contra Pelagianos.
S. Hierome, and Haeres. cap. 46.
S. Augustine.

The denial of single, and unmarried life was first taught by Vigilantius. He
also taught, that the prayers of the dead are not heard for the living; and
consequently he taught, that we ought not to pray to Saints. His scholars
termed Vigilantinians. His doctrines impugned by Lib. contra Vigilanti^^ c. 2.
Hierome.

Equallity of Works was first taught by Iouinian; He also broached the Heresy,
that our Blessed Lady in the birth of our Savior lost her Virginity. His
followers, Iouiniani. His Heresies exploded by Lib. 1. et 2. contra Iouinianum.
Hierome, and Lib. de haeres. c. 82.
Augustine.

The doctrine, that all Sins are mortal, was first stamped by Pelagius. He
further taught, that the Baptism of children was not necessary. The firsts of
these his doctrines was written against by Lib. 2. cotra Pelagianum.
S. Hierome; the second by In Re scripto ad M^l^ui^^^^^ Concilium post (...).
Innocentius, and Hae^^ 88.
S. Augustine, his followers Pelagiani.

The denial of all worship due to the Images of Christ, and his Saints, was
first introduced by Zena^as Persa; who is therefore recorded, and contradicted
by Lib. 26. cap. 27.
Nic^phorus.

The doctrine that God is the author of Sin (which necessarily follows, by
taking away Free Will from Man) was first sowed by Simon Magus; but impugned by
Aduers. haeres. post med.
Vincentius ^yrinensis.

The denial of enjoined times of Penance was first taught by the Heretics
called Audiani, and contradicted by L. 4. ^^er. (...).
Theodoret. The denial of the Possibility of keeping the Commendeme^s was
first broached by certain Heretics in S. Hieroms time and impugned by In
explanat. symboli ad Damasu^.
Hierom and De temporeserm. 91
Augusti^^.

The denial of all reverent estimation particulerly to the Cross, or Crucifix
of Christ, was first invented by Probianus; and he recorded, and reprehended
therefore, in Lib 2. cap. 19.
the Tripartite History.

The denial of the Real Presence was first mantained, by certain Heretics
in S. Ignatius his time, as Dialog. 3.
Theodoret relates, and condemns them for the same.

The denial of Priests having power to remit sins, was first justified by
Nouatus; his scholars were called Nouatiani; his Heresy recorded, and
condemned by Lib. 3. de Haereti^. fabulis.
Theodoret, and Lib. 6. histor. c. 33.
Eusebius.

Finally, to omit diverse other Protestant doctrines, for greater breuity; the
doctrine teaching, that sin could not hurt a man, if so he had faith (a
Paradox revived by Lut^. In his sermons en^lished. p. 147. et 276. etc.
Luther) was first invented by Eunomius, but impugned by Lib. de Haeres. c. 54.
S. Augustine: his scholars styled Eunomiani.

Thus far of Protestant doctrines broached by certain impious Heretics in
those former times; who though they be long since departed this world; yet
their misery is, that their end cannot be reputed their end, nor their death;
since in regard of this their change of faith, and innouations introduced by
them into Gods Church, they doubtlesly live (if they had not a final
repentance) in a perpetuity of insufferable torments.

Now concerning the times, when all these former points of Protestancy did
first take their being; this Circumstance (for the most part) may be taken from
the times, wherein the Fathers (who did impugn, and write against the said
doctrines) did live; seeing no sooner any of the said doctrines began to rise,
and get on wing; but presently one Father, or other was ready (by his pen) to
suppress, and beat down the same. And thus we find that sentence most true;
to wit, To Vincent. Lyrinensis co^tra haeres.
reduce an Heresy to it beginning, is a confutation of the said Heresy.

That all these former prime Heretics did depart, and go out of a more ancient
society of Christians, then themselves (to wit, out of the then visible, and
known society of us Catholics, in those times) according to those words of S.
John exierunt 1. Joan* 2.
ex nobis; and consequently, that it was those Heretics (who by drawing to
themselves, the impurity of the former errors, became the channels (as I may
say) of the Church, cleansing, and freeing her, from all filth, and ordure of
I(...)ouation) who made the change, and alteration, is p^ooued several ways.
First, because it appears from the above alleged Confessions of the learned
Protestants, that our Catholic Faith was the only faith in those ages,
generally believed, and that the Protestant Church (supposing that before it had
been in Being) was as then by their like Confessions, wholly extinct, and
invisible.

Secondly, the foresaid points of the former Heretics departing from a more
ancient community of Christians; is further euicted, from the Fathers
particular charging this, or that Heretic, with this, or that particular
Heresy only, for if either any, or all of them had jointly taught all the
Articles of protestancy (at this present believed) then no doubt all the said
Articles of protestancy, as then mantained by one man, had been impugned, and
written against by the said Fathers, as well, as the particular Heresies of
this, or that particular Heretic are by them contradicted.

Thirdly, in that the Fathers, who condemned the foresa^d Heretics, were ever
reputed most Orthodoxall, and pious Doctors, neither were they reprehended by
any other Father, of Gods Church, for such their proceeding against those
Heretics, which consideration demonstrateth, that the whole Church of God did
in those times agree in faith, and Religion with those Fathers, and against the
above condemned, and nouelizing Heretics: from whence we may further conclude,
that the whole Church of Christ (which has authority to discern, both true,
and false doctrine; as a straight line me sureth both a right, and crooked
line) did by the former Fathers (as by her instruments) condemn those Men for
broaching such their Heresies. Fourthly, and lastly, (for accession of more
reasons) the former point appears, from the consideration of the Nature of
the former Heresies; which seeing they, for the most part consist in Negations,
(as the denial of Free Will, denial of Purgatory, denial of the Real
Presence etc.) do therefore presuppose a preexistency of the Affirmative
doctrines, whereof they are merely Negations: I mean they preadmit a former
belief of the said doctrines of Free Will, of Purgatory, of the Real Presence
etc. For why should any Sectarie in those days, rise up to deny any of the
said doctrines, if those doctrines had not been before believed? From which it
evidently follows, that the Professors of the affirmative doctrines were
that society of Christians, out of which (as more ancient) the former Heretics
originally departed, and went out. And with this (most remarkable Men) I end,
remitting to your own clear eyed judgments (now after the perusing of this
small Treatise) whether it was the present Church of Rome, or the Protestant
Church, which has made this so much inculcated change, and alteration from
that Faith, which first was preached, and taught in the said Church of Rome, by
the Apostles.

Laus Deo et Beatae Virgini Mariae.
THE SECOND PART OF THE CONVERTED JEW OR THE SECOND DIALOGVE OF MICHAEAS THE
JEW

Between. Michaeas the former Converted Jew. Ochinus, who first planted
Protestancy in England, in King Edward the sixth his raygne. Doctor Reynolds of
Oxford. Neuserus chief Pastor of Heidelberge, in the Palatinate.


The Contents hereof the Argument following will show.

Here is adjoined an Appendix, wherein is taken a short Survey (containing a
full Answer) of a Pamphlet entitled: A Treatise of the Visibility, and
Succession of the True Church in all ages. Printed Anno. 1624.

Si dixerint vobis: Ecce in deserto est nolite exire; Ecce in Penetralibus;
no^^^e credere.

Math. 24.

PERMISSV SVPERIORVM. Anno. M. DC. XXX.

THE ARGUMENT.
MICHAEAS, after the Disputation had between Cardinal Bellarmine, and D.
Whitakers, touching Romes chang in Religion; (through which he was first made
Catholic and in short time after made Priest.) trauelleth into many
Countries, to see their Universities, and places of learning. At the length he
arriueth in England; where from visiting of Cambridg, he comes to Oxford. Then
he finds D. Reynolds, Ochinus, and Neuserus. They move him to become
Protestant. He answers, that the want of performace of the Prophecies,
touching the Visibility of Christ's Church, in the Protestant Church, induces
him besides other reasons to continue Catholic. Hereupon they all begin a
Disputation touching the Visibility of the Protestant Church, for former ages;
prefixing thereto (by mutual consent) a short Discourse of the Necessity of a
continual Visibility of the true Church. Michaeas so fully displayeth the
insufficiency of the pretended Instances of Protestants, and of all other
Arguments urged for proof thereof, That instead, of Michaeas being to be made
a Protestant by this Disputation; Ochinus, and Neuserus, as not acknowledging
the present Roman Church to be the true Church, and seeing the Prophecies, not
to be fulfilled in the Protestant Church, do finally come to this point, to
wit, absolutely, and openly to affirm, that the Church of Christ (as not
having the Prophecies accomplished in it, which were foretold to be performed
in the true Church of God touching it Visibilitie) is a false Church, and that
our Savior Christ was a Seducer. Hereupon they both protest, that, from that
time forward they do renounce the Christian faith, and do embrace the Jewish
Religion; and so teaching Circumcision, and reviving the Old law, they do turn
blasphemous Jews or Turks. Michaeas and D. Reynolds do use vehement
persuasions to them, to the contrary; but their words prevail not; and so the
disputation breaks off. What courses Ochinus and Neuserus do after take for
their spreading of Iudaisme, is hereafter set down: And all the passages of
their Revolt are manifested, partly out of their own wrytings, and partly from
the acknowledgment of diverse learned Protestants: so as their Apostasy is not
feigned, but true and real.

THE SECOND PART OF THE CONVERTED JEW WHEREIN IS DEMONSTRATED; that the
Protestant Church has ever remained Invisible; or rather has not been in
Being, since the Apostles days, till Luthers revolt.
DOCTOVR REYNOLDS. MICHAEAS, God save you, I much rejoice to see you here in
England; And I congratulate your coming to this our University of Oxford: I
have often heard of you through occasion of your former intercourse of disputes
with my Brother D. Whitakers; though it was never my fortune to see you before
this present.


MICHAEAS. I greatly thank you M. Doctor, for this your kindness touching my
coming hither; you may know, that since my last seeing of D. Whitakers, I have
passed through diverse Countries, and Nations, moved thereunto (notwithstanding
my great age) through my own innate desire of seeing places and Vniuersitis
of erudition, and learning. Now at the last, I am arrived in England, and am
immediately comne from visiting the University of Cambridge: a place in my
judgment, much exceeding all praises heretofore delivered of it. But may I make
bold to enquire of you, who those two gentlemen here present, are; whose
external comportments do even depose, that their minds are fayrely enriched
with many Intellectual good parts; for it is certain, that a man's outward
cariadge is commonly the true shadow of the mind, cast by the light of the
inward soul.


DOCTOVR REYNOLDS You have coniectured aright. For both these are men of great
emine^cy for learuing. The elder of the^ is called Ochinus, who being
accompained with the learned Peter Martyr, did in King Edward the sixts time
first Osiander Cet. 16. l. 2. c. 67. p. 423. Hoc tempore, Ecclesiae in Anglia
ad forma^ Call(...)sticam, opera Petri Martyris Florentini, and Bernardi Ochini
Senensis reforma^ae sunt. And Symlerus (a Protestant) in his book de vita and
obit. Petri Martyris fol. 13. Petrus Martyr ab Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi de
voluntate Regis vocatus est; itaque Argentina in Angliam discessit, comitante
eum Bernardo Ochino, qui and ipse ab eodem Archiepiscopo vocatus est,
plant in England the doctrine of Calvin, after the Romish Religion was once
abolished: One, whose presence in those days made England happy, whose after
Bale in praesat. in Act. Romans Pontif. printed 1558 says of Ochinus and Peter
Martyr: Faelix Anglia dum haec paria habuit; misera dum amisit.
absence made it Unfortunate; and whom all So says Calvin of Ochinus in these
words: quos Itali Bernardino Ochi^o and Petro Vermilio opponent? l. de
scandalis (extant) in his tract. Theolog. printed 1597. page 111.
Italy (for he is an Italian) could not equal. This other is Neuserus, the
chief Pastor Con^adus Slussenberge in Theolog. Calvin. l. 1. Art. 2 calls
Neuserus, He(...)ergensis Ecclesiae primarius Pastor.
of Heidelberge in the Palatinate: a man who^ Nature, and his own Industry
have not placed in any lower room of knowledge; for he is transcendently
learned, and has much labored in dilating the Ghospel of Christ. Both these
men are reciding here for the time, by reason of some late emergent occations,
and business, tending to the advancement of Christ's Church. I could wish
Michaeas, you were acquainted with them.


MICHAEAS. Gentlemen. I greet you both in the salutation of the chief
Apostle: 1. Petri. 1.
gratia vobis, and pax multiplicetur. And I am glad, that I am comne to that
place, where the very walls, and streets (in regard of such men's presence) do
even Echo forth learning and all good literature.


OCHINVS. Worthy Michaeas (for so I hear you called) I willingly entertayne
your acquaintance; for learning I prize highly in any man, as holding it the
chiefest riches (next to true Religion) wherewith the understanding is endowed.


NEVSERVS. And I as happily do congratulate your arrival here; for what
company of men are more to be esteemed, then the Society of learned Men, where
themselves (though few in number) are a sufficient Auditory to themselves;
Satis magnum alteri alter theatrum: they interchangeably giving, and receiving
all content by their leatned discourses?


DOCTOVR REYNOLDS. Have you had (Michaeas) a full sight of our University, and
Colleges? If not; we are ready to accompany you, throughout all the chief
places thereof.


MICHAEAS. I have already seen them all; and particularly your late erected
schools, (wherein are daily ventilated all questions, worthy the iudiceous
ears of Scholars) and your spacious liberary the very treasury, or storehouse
of the Muses. And I must confess, that during my long travel, and
perlustration of all Christendom, my eyes never beheld such two fair places
designed for Nurses of learning, as Oxford and Cambridge are; the very honor,
and glory of your Nation. For where are thete such healthful, and pleasant
seats for Universities both being placed in a Triangle from the chief City
of the realm? Such magnificent, and stately buildings, and Colleges fitting
to be palaces to so many Princes? Such opulency of reuenews, and rich
endowments, appropriated unto them for the education of poor scholars?
Finally such pious statutes, Ordinances, and Decrees, left by their Founders
for the advancement of virtue, and learning? All this is not to be matched (I
assure my self) throughout the whole Circumference of the earth. Only the
defect, and grief is, that the Universities, and their livings, being first
instituted, and given by Catholic Founders, and for the propagation of the
Catholic Religion) for; from them, as from two main sources, and welsprings,
by the conduits of particular Men's labors, the whole land (touching says) did
receive its watering) are now most repugnantly from the first Erectors
intention, turned to the depressing, and overthrow of the said Catholic
Religion: matter to be delivered in Threnes, or Elegyes, and Accents of
lamentation, and complaint. And such as the Universities are, so are the
students; many of them (even by my own trial) of elevated wits; of
transpearcing judgments; most skillful in the learned tongues; fraught with all
choysnes of good letters; and finally of a candide ingenuity in their
comportments.


D. REYNOLDS. Though reports do often multiply, and become greater in their
own agitation; yet your praises of our Academies I take for no amplification
of speeches, but (if credit may be given to many great travelers) for
positive, and measured truths. They both are two Sisters, linked in the bond of
so inviolable a friendship, and association, as that they may be well termed:
Oxonium Cantabrigiense, and Cantabrigia Oxoniensis. Yet the elder of these two
is Oxford; And since I am a Son of her, I could have wished, I had met with
you before your Conference had with D. Whitakers, a Branch of Cambridge, and
otherwise a Man of great talents, and parts. For I should have hoped, that as
Oxford is the elder Sister, so from a member of the elder Sister, you should
have received greater satisfaction in the light of the Gospel; then both by
relation of others, and now by your own ouertures, you have.

That Oxford is the elder Sister (and therein has her preeminence of her
primogeniture) we easily prove; for we deduce the first occasion of our
University (though not the plantation) even from the time Se Polidor Virgil,
and Leyland his Annotations upon Polidor Virgil.
of Brutus; who, when he came into this Island, was accompanied with diverse
learned Greek Philosophers, who made choice of a place near to Oxford, to
seat themselves in, as a place most pleasant, and fitting for speculation, and
study. After which times, Alphredus (youngest Son of Ethelwolpe King of the
West Saxons, about the year of the Incarnation. 873. (himself being after
King) did translate those schools of the greek Philosophers (which before had
suffered dishonor, and contempt) to Oxford; And then with Immunityes, livings,
and buildings, he gave the first foundation to our University.


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor. I am no Herald to discuss or proclayme Antiquityes.
And I know not whether of these two Sisters be more ancient; yet in that I will
not be ungrateful unto Cambridge, for my late kind entertaynment, I will not
conceal, what my Memory can truly yield unto, concerning the Antiquity of
Cambridge, discoursed off by some of that University. They Vide authorem
Genealogiae principum Cambroru^, Brilannicorum and Saxonicorum. As also
Cadnaeus de aduent^ lulij Caesaris.
said, that Cantaber, who was Son of one of the Kings of Spain, coming into
England before the Incarnation of our Lord and Savior, 394. years, and
marying a daughter of Gurguntius, King of the Britons, gave first plantation,
and Name to their University; and caused it to be frequented with Philosophers,
and other learned men. Now of what credit both your Antiquities are, I know
not; if the one has the prerogative in Antiquity: the other enjoys it in
stateliness of buyldings. But howsoever these matters be, they are both most
celebrious, and renowned Seminaryes of learning, and not drouping Academyes, as
some are in other Countries. Seeing it is your pleasure (M. Doctor) thus to
entertayne discourse touching these famous places, I will acquaint you with two
things, which since my first seeing of them I have observed. One is, that not
only every College in it library, but diverse Studens in each College, have in
their studyes many Catholic writers and particulerly the so much much
celebrated works of Bellarmyne, fayrely bound up, and well stringed: But I
fear, they are there placed rather for a complete furnishing of their
Libraryes, then for any great use of reading them; And so the benefit by them
is no more then if a patient sending for pills to the Physician, should never
take them, but let them lie in his chamber window.


D. REYNOLDS. It is far otherwise; for all those books mentioned, are much
read by many of us: And Bellarmynes arguments are refuted in our weekly
Sermons, as occasion is incidently ministered from the Text. And my self
particulerly have publicly read in yonder great Divinity School, that you
see, as also have written against him.


MICHAEAS. I know your self are learned, and withal I know you have not only
written, but also read in confuting of him; as a near acquaintance of mine, who
was an earewitnesse of your lectures, has told me. But as for others, who in
their Sermons (even obtorto collo) will needs hale Bellarmyne in, I am half
persuaded, they do it with the like policy, which some men living about great
Towns, and willing to get the reputation of valor, are accustomed to do; that
is, they purposely quarrel (thereby to be spoken of for their courage) with
some one, or other chief professed Hacster, or Swashbukler.


D. REYNOLDS. O Michaeas. Your censure is over uncharitable. It is the desire
of having, the Truth tried, which prouokes our Deuynes in their Sermons to
trace Bellarmyne; that so the scholars (their Auditors) may more easily
declyne the obliquity of his paths.


MICHAEAS. I can not much blame you, to set the best glass upon your Brethrens
actions: But this I must say, that those Scholars of your Vniuersiryes, which
are of clear understandings, not forestauled by badly preiudging of Catholic
Religion; but above all, having sufficiency of temporal means, to support
their states, and not expecting to rise by Ecclesiastical livings (the most
dangerous Bayte of these times) must in all moral certainty favor in their
private judgment the Catholic party, if so with diligence they peruse the
Cardinals works, and other Catholic writers But otherwise; it is a death,
when a Man of ripe age, and well furnished with learning, is brought through
want of means to say: O how must I live? The Roman Religion (I see) threatens
poverty, disgrace, and perhapps the rope too; the Protestant promises
reputation, honor, and riches. Then the Understanding, and the Will do easily
partake together, to the betraying of the Soul, by entertaining an erroneous
Religion; privileged with authority, seconded with the stream of the times,
and aduantaged through means of preferring: and here then that Sentence
houldeth it force: As gold is tried by the stone, so man by gold. But let me
stay my self, I fear, I have spoken ouerlowde, and the Scholars ouerhearing
me out of their College windows (being so near to us) may much blame this my
Censure.

The second thing I note (but pardon me (most flourishing Academies,) I protest,
I speak with the Apostle, in 2. Cor. 6.
charitate non ficta, and not in any vpbrayding sense) is, that feminine
Seruitours, as employed for seruyle uses, have an ouerfree access into the
Colleges; a sight most strange in Catholic universities and (as Iam
informed) much disliked by your own Protestants. O where vigor of youth,
Mansinnate propension, the present inuiting object, and the priuatnes of the
place, do all conspire together, what dangerous effects of this Nature, may
they produce? And we all see, how apt the fire is to take hold of any near
combustible matter. But I had almost forgotten my self therefore leaving these
points, as merely Pererea, or impertine^cyes, let vsdescend to some more
serious discourse. Touching my present faith, whereat you glance, I grant, I
was a Jew, both by birth, and Religion, till by the infinite mercy of the
Highest, and the charitable endeavor of that most Illustrious, and learned
Cardinal in his disputes with D. Whitakers, even through weight of argument, I
was forced to embrace the Catholic Faith; My Judgment being till then, but
as Plato his Basatabula, propending indifferently to Catholic, and
Protestant; and ready to receive the writing, and Impression of that Religion
(whichsoeuer it should be) that came presented to mine eyes in the fair attire
of venerable Antiquity.


OCHINVS. I do much grieve (Michaeas) to see your candor, and integrity thus
distayned with the aspersion of superstition, and glad I should be, to lend a
hand for the pulling you out of the mire of your present errors.


NEVSERVS. Doubtlesly (Michaeas) your choice of Religion has proceeded from an
indigested, and raw censure, which you have made of the passages of the former
disputation, by you mentioned: And therefore if you had gone with greater
leisure therein, your success had been the more fortunate: But yet (h) Joan.
11.
your sickness is not unto death; fot there is time for your cure: And since
Grace, and Temptation are the seeds of the Holy Ghost, and the Devil; embrace
that offered unto you by God, by showing you the light of his Gospel; and
overcome this, being the bayte of Antichrist; and my seruiseable labor shall
no way be wanting to further so happy a change. And the more I commiserate your
present estate; you erring out of Ignorance, not out of malice: for we see,
Salvation of your soul is the Circumference, within which all your thoughts
are bounded.


MICHAEAS. Gentlemen, I thank you all, and do interpret your words in the same
language, in which you did deliver them; I mean, in the Dialect of your
Charity, And I see, how ready your zeal is to take fire upon the least
occasion of discourse. Therefore assure your selves, I am not ashamed of my
faith. I am a Roman Catholic at least, and through the grace of God (that
working, and efficatious Grace, I mean, which is the stone, set in the Ring of
Nature) I am resolved so to live, and dye. My resolution is so inalterable
herein, as that I trust through him, who for his own glory, and in his own
Cause, is ever ready to fortify the weak, that your strongest assaults in
dispute (for I see, thither your speeches tend) shall not be able to beat me
off the Station of my present Profession: And I am the more confident, in that
with God, causes are heard to speak, not Persons.

And further you may rest certifyed, that since the worthy Cardinals dispute,
with D. Whitakers, I have spent my whole time in the study of the Controversies
between the Catholics, and the Protestants; and have found diverse other most
forcible inducements for my continuance in that faith, of which already I have
made election: so certain it is, that the great Motion of Religion (as it is
newly entertained by the judgment) turns upon many wheels; one still moving
and seconding another.


D. REYNOLDS. May we entreat of you, to show what Reasons are most preuayling,
for your not incorporating your self within our Protestant Church?


MICHEAS. M. Doctor I will. Besides the Argument handled between the
Cardinal and D. Whitakers, touching the supposed change of the faith of Rome
(which to me still remaynes an unavoidable Demonstration) many other Reasons
are, and among the rest, this oue: I find by my perusal of Ecclesiastical
Historyes, that the Protestant Church had it first being, and (as I may say) it
Creation in the days of Luther (or rather after) then (and not before) coming
out of an Abyss of Nothing Now what, warrant can I have (after my leaving of
the Jewish faith, which is confessed to be the true faith for several thousand
years) to implant my self in that Society of Christians, whose Church (my
own age being almost 70.) is not thirty years elder, then I am? The truth of
which point is euicted, in that you are not able to instance the being of
Protestants in any former Age. Now it is an inexpugnable verity, that the
Church of Christ is ever, and in all ages to be most visible in her members.
Whereas on the contrary part some Protestants, well discerning the want in
their Church of this so necessary a Visibility, have been forced to forge in
their minds, a certain imaginary, and Invisible Church; and teaching that it
is not necessary, that the Church of Christ should be at all times Visible; but
that it may, and often has been, not only inconspicuous, and inglorious, but
wholly latent, and unknown. But I fear I have made an unpleasing, and over
deep incision in so dangerous a wound of your Church.


D. REYNOLDS. See, how the ambushment of your own Passions (I mean of
prejudice and dislike) betray your Judgment. And see, how foulely even in the
beginning you are deceived; and how one error in your words inuolues in it
self a second error. For first we are ready, and prepared at all times, to
prove by particular, and most warrantable Instances, that there have been men
in every age since the Apostles, professing our Protestant Religion: So far
off we are from acknowledging, that the rivers of our faith first issued out of
Luthers fountain. Secondly, it is your mistaking, to think that the learned
Protestants (for what any Anonymous, and illiterate scribler may blot his paper
with, by defending the contrary doctrine, we regard not) as acknowledging such
a defect of Protestants, do teach an inuisibility of the Church of Christ,
especially after the times of the coming of the Messiah. For all we
concurrently maintain, that the Professors of the true faith must at all
times, without the least interruption, be made known, and discernable; And we
further justify, that a want of such a Visibility destroys, and annihila^eth
the Church of God.


MICHAEAS. But will these two learned Men conspire with you (M. Doctor) in
defending this ever necessary Visibility of the Church; and this without any
retyring back herein, or lessening, and mincing the point, once before granted?


OCHINVS. I speak for my self. I am so confident therein, as that I am ready
at this instant, to maintain it against any; and this from the prophecyes of
Gods sacred writ, wherein the palm, and victorious state of the Church (in
subiugating to it the Gentiles) is at large soretould to be in these after
times, ever most illustrious, and radiant.


NEVSERVS. And I as confidently do auerre the same, even from the said former
divine Oracles; and am prepared (if need should require) to solue all such
texts of Scripture, which in an ignorant, and mistaking eye, may seem to
import an Inuisibility of the Church at any time.


MICHAEAS. You all answer me to my full content, and above my expectation.
Well then, let us eauen, and plain the way of our ensuing dispute, by resting
upon some one granted ground on all sides. Which ground is the establishment of
the Churches Visibility. For it being once presumed, that the true Church of
God must at all times enjoy this Visibility; it then most consequently
follows, that you are obliged, either to produce examples of Protestant
Professors, for every age since Christ; or else to grant, that the Protestant
Church is not the true Church, but a late erected Conuenticle. Therefore in
regard hereof, I hold it fitting, that all of us should join our forces
together, for the proof of this chief, and head principle of the Churches
Visibility: you then Ochinus (if it shall please you) may according to your
former proffer, undertake the probation of it from the Scripture. Neuserus will
(he says) recconcile all such chief seeming passages of the Scripture, as may
make show to euict the contrary. And I will entreat of you (M. Doctor) to
fortify the said Verity, from the learned Monuments of the ancient fathers (in
whose wrytings (no doubt) you have been much conversant) as also from force of
Reason. My self will lastly reuet, and warrant the same point, from the often
ingeminated acknowledgments of the most markable, and learned Protestants. In
whose books (I confess) I have much traveled, since my conversion from
Iudaisme; And whose authorities I shall have often occasion to produce
throughout this conference. For now you may take notice, that I have cast off
all my former outward comportment of a Jew, and am not only in faith, but also
in my studyes, my Idiome of speech, and every way else, wholly Christian.


D. REYNOLDS. I like well your method here intended; and indeed it is that,
which the Philosophers call: Ordo Naturae. For by this means, we first handle
the Thesis to wit, whether the Church of God is to be visible, or no. That
done, we next descend to the Hypothesis; Which is, if the Protestants Church
has ever enjoyed this Visibility, or not. Neither can any judicious man hold
this first part, as but certain Prolegomena, tending only to the better
unfolding of the second Part; for it is indeed a primary essential, and
radical point, and first in all necessity to be discussed. For what avails
it to prove, that there have been Professors of Protestancy in all ages since
Christ, if it rest doubtful, whether the Church of Christ exacteth such a
necessity of it Professors in all ages, or no? Therefore (Michaeas) for my
part I w^llingly undergo the task desired by you.


OCHINVS. We all join hands herein; Thus we see, that each of us is prepared to
carry a stone, to the building of this fort; which being once erected, will be
able to endure the shot of her greatest Enemies.


NEVSERVS. I am most ready to perform my former assumed Scene: therefore delay
no time, but begin.


OCHINVS. Well then, seeing the proofs drawn from the sacred Scripture, are
worthily ever to have the first place; and seeing I have voluntarily imposed
this labor upon my self, I will first begin. Now for the confirmation of this
supreme Verity of the Churches Visibility, we will produce our first proofs
from those Prophecyes, which foretell, that the Church after the coming of the
Messiah shall be miraculously multiplied. Which extraordinary multiplicity of
Professors must needs imply a Visibility of them. As where it is said of the
Church: The Isles Esaias. 60.
shall wait for thee. Their Kings shall miuister unto thee; and thy gates
shall be continually open; Neither day nor night shall they be shut; that men may
bring to thee the riches of the gentills. And again: Kings Esaias. 49.
shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens thy mothers. And yet more: I will
Psalm.
give thee the Heathens for thy inheritance, and the end of the earth for thy
Possession. And lastly (to omit diverse others such predictions of the Churches
increase, and amplitude, it is said: enlarge Esaias. 54. See here of the contents
of the English Bible upon that chapter.
the places of thy tents, spread out the curtaynes of thy habitation; for thou
shall increase on the right hand, and on the left; thy seed shall possess the
Gentills; and inhabit the desolate Cities.

Now how can these Prophecyes, touching the enlargement of the Church, be truly
applied to that Church, which shall consist of so few, as that it shall be
sometimes absolutely Invisible? Or how shall it gates be continually open, and
shut neither day nor night (as above is prophesied of it) if it shall remain
at any time, in a night of Latency?

In this next place, I will allege such texts of holy Scripture, wherein we
find the word: Ecclesia or Church; In all which (without exception) by the
word: Church, is signified a visible congregation of Men. The places (among
others, for breuity omitted) may be these: Numbers 20. Why have you brought the
Church of the Lord into solitude? But this Church was the known, and visible
people of Israel, which came out of Egypt. In like sort, it is said. 3. Kings
8. The King turned his face, and blessed all the Church of Israel; for all the
Church of Israel did stand etc. Math 18. Tell the Church, and if he will not
hear the Church, let him be as an Heathen or Publican But how can we be
commanded to tell the Church, if we do not know which is the Church? And if in
all our spiritual necessities, we are commanded to repair, to the Church,
then follows it, that the Church at all times must be visible. Act. 20. Take
heed to your selves, and to the whole flock, wherein the Holy Ghost has
placed you Bishops, regere Ecclesiam Det, to govern the Church of God. But how
could they govern the Church of God, if they knew it not? Act. 15. They being
brought on the way by the Church, passed through Ph^enice and Samaria. And
again there: They were received of the Church, and the Apostles. Act. 18.
Paul went up, and saluted the Church. Now how can these texts be possibly
applied to any Invisible congregation or company of men. Furthermore, S. Paul
speaks of himself, that he persecuted the Church of God, as in 1. Cor. 15.
Galat. 1. Philipp. 3. In all which places the word: Church, is used: But it is
well known, whom S. Paul did persecute. And in 1. Timoth. 3. It is said how to
converse indomo Dei, quae est Ecclesia Dei, in the house of the living God,
which is the Church of God. But how could Timothee know, how to converse in the
house of God, except he did know, which was this house? To all which former
texts of Scripture, I annex this one note (a point much to be considered) that
not any one place of Scripture can be produced, wherein the word: Church, is
named, but that a Visible, and external company of men is necessarily
understood thereby.

To the former Scriptures may be added certain descriptions of the Church in
other passages thereof; as in Esaias. 2. Daniel. 3. Michaeas 4. the Church is
compared to a conspicuous mountain, which cannot be unseen, according to the
expositions of Ierom, In hu^c locum.
Austin, ^ranct. 1. in epist. Ioannis.
and the Protestants. See the marginall notes of the English bibles of anno.
1576. In Esaias. 2.
In like sort in Psalm. 18. those words: He placed his tabernacle in the Sun:
are thus paraphrazed by S. Tract. 2. in epist in Joan.
Austin: In manifesto posuit Ecclesiam suam etc. He placed his tabernacle in an
open place; his tabernacle is his Church, which is placed in the Sun, not in
the night, but in the day. Thus Austin.

Another most illustrious and conuincing passag of the Scripture for the
Churches Visibility, is that in the Epistle to the Ephesians c. 4. where it is
said of Christ: He gave Pastors, and Doctors to the consummation of Saints,
unto the work of the Ministry, till we all meet in the Unity of Faith; that
is (as D. Against the Rhemish Test. in Ephesians. 4.
Fulke interprets) for ever. These words necessarily import, that the Church
of Christ must at all times, and seasons (and this without any interruption)
have Pastors to administer the Sacraments, and preach the word. Which
exposition being granted, implies necessarily an ever Visibility of the
Church. For how can those Doctors, and Pastors preach at all times, and upon
all occasions the word of God, and administer the Sacraments, if they be
concealed, and lie in secret? Or how can the persons, to whom the Word is
preached, and the Sacraments dispensed, become unknown or Invisible?

That this is the true interpretation of the former text of the Ephesians, is
generally taught by our own learned men: For according hereto, D. Whitakers
teaches, the preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments,
to be so necessary to the Church, that he thus says: Contra Duraeum l. 3. p.
249.
Si adsunt, Ecclesiam constituunt; and tollunt, si aufer antur. With whom
conspireth D. Willet, thus saying of the administration of the Word, and
Sacraments: These In Synops. Papisin. p. 71.
marks cannot be absent from the Church, and it is no longer a true Church then
it has these Marks. And hence it is, that D. Whitakers further says, that
the preaching of the word, and the administration of the Sacraments are:
Ecclesiae Contra Duraeum l. 3. p. 260.
proprietates essentiales; essential propr^etyes of the Church: And that D.
Fulke thus affirms: Christ Against Heskins, Sanders etc p. 569.
will suffer no particular Church to continue without a servant to ouersee it:
And that, Fulke vbisupra p. 536.
Pastors, and Doctors must be in the Church, till the end of the World, even
from Christ's time to Luthers age, yea our said D. Fulke further affirms, that
these (b) Pastors, and Doctors must resist all In his answer to a
contersayte Catholic p. 11.
false opinions, with open reprehension. Unto our former brethren accord other
Protestant Deuines, thus writing: The Propositions and principles disputed in
the vniuer^ily of Geneua p. 845.
ministry is an ossentiall Mark of the true Church. Finally Calvin comparteth
with us all herein: saying: the Church can never want Pastors, and Doctors:
So truly do we Protestants interpret the words of Esaias: Upon thy C. 72.
walls o Jerusalem, I have set watchmen, all the day, and all the night for
ever: they shall not be silent. Now from these premises we demonstraciuely
prove the ever, and uninterrupted visibility of the Church: a point so evident,
that our own learned Protestants do (according to the former doctrine) defyne
a visible Church in these words: A Jacob in his reasons taken out of Gods word
p. 2^.
visible Church is a congregation of the faithful people, where the word is
preached, and the Sacraments ministered; Which definition is also allowed by
Doctor In his Synops. p. 54.
Willet; and which even in reason it self is warrantable; since the Church, as
enjoying the administration of the Word, and Sacraments, must (even in that
respect) become visible, as we said above. And thus far of this prophecy of
the Apostle, in the explication whereof I have stayed the longer, in that it
irrefragably conuinceth the point now handled. And here I end, touching the
necessary Visibility of Gods Church, proved out of the sacred Scriptures.


NEVSERVS. You might have added (Ochinus) to the former Propheeyes, that it is
in another place foretold of the Church of the new Testament, that it Pastors
Ierem. 33.
shall be daily multiplied, to minister unto God; And this (not with any
interruption herein, but) even Esaias. 66.
from month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath. That all this is to be
understood of the Church of the Messiah, appears from the Annotations of the
English Bibles, upon the Chapters here cited, printed 1576. You also might
further have insisted in that other Prophecy; that the Kingdom Daniel. 2.
of Christ shall not be given over to an other People, but shall stand for
ever; And that, it Esaias. ^0.
shall be an eternal glory, and joy from generation to generation. All which
passages to be meant of the Church, is acknowledged by all learned Protestants.
Now how untowardly, and vnapt^y these passages (with the former by you
alleged) sort to a company of Professors, shut up in so secret a manner; as
that no man can take notice of them, I refer to any man's judgment, not wholly
blinded with partiality, and prejudice. But I fear (Ochinus) I have wronged
you, in undertaking part of your assumed task: therefore I will cease, and
descend (as before I promised) to answer such chief places of the Scripture,
as are by some urged in their sily wrytings (the impostumous swelling of their
froathy pen) for the supporting of the Churches imaginary Inuisibility.


D. REYNOLDS. I pray you (Neuserus) proceed therein; since obscure passages in
any kind of learning not explayned, do often suggest tacit objections,
perplexing, and intricating the judgments of the weak, and ignorant.


NEVSERVS. I will. And first for example, are usually objected those of Elias,
when he said: relictus Reg. (...).
sum solus, I am left alone. As also, that sentence of the Prophet: deficiet
Daniel. 9.
hostia, and sacrificium, the Oast, and sacrifice spall cease. And again, that
of the Apostle: Nisi 2. Th^ss. 2.
venerit discessio primum etc. Except there come first a departure etc. And
finally that of the Apocalypse: The 12.
woman must fly into the wilderness etc. All which places are strangely
de^orted by some few iniudicious men, to the defense of the Churches
Inuisibility.

And to the first, against these Inuisibilists, I say, touching those former
words of Elias; first admitting the Jewish Synagogue to have been then
invisible; yet is this example defectiuely alleged, as applied to the Church
of Christ; since the predictions, and promises made to Christ his Church,
(whose Hebr^. 4^. 8.
Testament is established in better promises) are far greater, and more
worthy, then those of the Jewish Synagogue. Again, the foresaid example does
not extend to the whole Church of God before Christ; but only to the Jewish
Synagogue, being only, but a part, or member thereof. For besides the Jews,
there were diverse others faithful; as Melchisadech, Cornelius, the Eunuch to
the Queen of Caudace etc. Secondly, I say, this example makes wholly against
the alleadgers of it; since the words of Elias were spoken not generally of all
the Jewish People, but only in regard of the Country of Israel; and
accordingly God answered the complaint of Elias with restraint to that only
Country, the texts saying: I have left to me in Israel seven thousands, which
have not bowed unto Ba^l. Add hereto, that in those very times, the Church did
greatly flourish in the adjoining Country of Judah, and was to Elias then
known, and Visible, under the reign of Asa, and Iosaphat. And thus is this
objection answered even by Melancthon, In corpore doctrinae p. 530.
and Enoch Clapham. In his sovereign remedy p. 17.
Lastly, admitting these seven thousands were unknown to Elias; yet follows
it not, that they were unknown to all others of the same time; Much less then
is this Example of force to prove, that the Church of God may be Latent, and
Invisible for many hundred years together (as some of our ignorant brethren do
teach) not to one Elias only; but to the whole World: And thus far of this so
much urged example of Elias.

To the second. Those words of the Prophet: The Oast, and sacrifice shall cease
etc. Are to be referred to the overthrow of Jerusalem, and the ceasing of the
Jewish sacrifices, even by the exposition of In 24. M^chae^.
Chrysostom, Vbi Chrysostom.
Jerome, Epist. 88. ad Esichium.
Austin, and others. Neither can the words be properly extended to the times of
Antichrist; since we teach, that Antichrist is already comne; and yet we see,
that sacrifices do still remain.

To the third. By the word departure, mentioned by the Apostle, is understood,
either Antichrist himself by the figure Metonymia; because he shall be the
cause, why many shall depart from Christ, as Chrysostom, and Theodoret upon
this place do expound, as also Austin: l. 20. de ciuitat. Deu^. 19.
Or rather is understood a departure, and defection from the Roman Empire, as
Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius, and diverse Protestants Bullenle^ger in his
preface to his Sermons upon the Apocalypse; As also the Protestant Sc^lio in his
book of the second coming of Christ. fol. 21.
do expound this Text.

To the fourth. I answer, that by the Woman flying into Wilderness, S. John
means not any local or corporal flight out of the knowledge, and notice of
the world; but only a spiritual retiring in heart, from the allurements, and
pleasures of the World, to penance, mortification, and contemplation of
celestial matters: And in this very sense Bullenger interprets the Churches
flight from Babylon.

To the former texts I may add (though not above mentioned) that passage in S
John. C. 4.
Venit hora and nunc est etc. The hour comes, and now is, when the true
adorers, shall adore the Father in spirit, and truth. To this I answer, that
our Lord here teaches, that the chief worship of God, which shall be exhibited
in his Church, consists in an internal worship of him; but from hence
therefore it follows not, that the Church is Invisible, or that all external
worship is prohibited; for our Lord here speaks not of the place, where God
shall be worshipped; but of the manner, and rite of worshipping. Chrysostom,
Cyrill, and Euthimius upon this place, do oppose those words: in spirit, to the
ceremonies of the Jews, as they are corporal; and those other words: in
truth, to the said Ceremonies, as they are figures of things to come.

Now because diverse of the former passages of Scripture are objected to prove,
that the Church of Christ shall be Invisible (at the least) in the time of
Antichrist; I do reply further hereto, saying; first, That the former place of
the Apostle to the Ephesians (alleged by Ochinus) touching an incessant, and
vndiscontinued, being of Pastors, and Doctors in the Church, to remain even
to the end of the world (omitting other texts above cited by him) as also the
Protestants confessions of the Churches ever Visibility (hereafter to be
delivered by Michaeas) do fully answer, and satisfy the supposed doubts
suggested in the former texts, touching the Churches Inuisibility in the time
of Antichrist. Secondly I reply, that diverse learned brethren of ours
(punctually, and purposely, with reference to that time) do teach, that the
Church shall remain then Visible. And to give some taste hereof, D. Pulke thus
writes: In Against the Rhemish Testament, in 2. Thessal, 2.
the time of Antichrist, the Church was not driven into any corner of the
world; but was, is, and shall be dispersed in many Nations. And again he thus
writes: The Vbi supra.
true Church (though obscured, and driven into wilderness by Antichrist) yet
shall continue dispersed over the world.

Bullenger says, the Church in the time of Antichrist shall be right Upon the
Apocal. sol. 200.
famous: But if it shall be then right famous, it must of necessity be then
Visible. To be short, Szegedine (a learned Protestant) thus writes: The
ministers of Gods word shall preach all the time, in which Antichrist shall
tread underfoot the holy (d) In ^a^. analyt. p. 368.
City. Thus far in solution of all such chief passages of Scripture,
usually objected against the perpetual Visibility of the Church. But now (M.
Doctor) I think it is your turn, to warrant the former truth, from the
wrytings of the ancient fathers, and from arguments of Credibility, which the
force of reason it self does minister.


DOCTOVR REYNOLDS I am prepared thereto. And I will not press your memoryes
with a needles ouercharge of their sentences: Some few (and those pertinent)
shall serve; though otherwise they are most luxuriant, and plentiful herein.
And first thus Origin writes: Ecclesia Homil. 30. ^in Math^eum.
est plaena fulgore, ab orient vsque ad Occidentem, the Church is full of
fulgour, or brightness, from the East even to the West. Cyprian discourses
thus: Ecclesia L. de vnitate Eccle.
Dom. etc. The Church of our Lord, being replenished with light, casts forth
it beams throughout the whole earth. Chrysostom Homil. 4. in cap. 6. Joan.
says: facilius est solemn extingui, quam Ecclesiam obscurari; It is more easy
for the Sun to be extinguished, then the Church to be obscured, or darkened.
Finally (for greater conpendiousnesse) S. Austin is so full in this point, as
that he makes the Visibility of the Church, a Mark for the ignorant to
discern the true Church of Christ, from all false Conuenticles, thus writing:
Propter hoc enim motus etc. Contra faustum Manich. lib. 1.
By reason of the temptations of those, who are weak, and may be seduced by
some, from acknowledging the Churches brightness; our Lord even foreseeing so
much, says: A City, that is built upon a hill cannot be hidd. And further S.
Augustine thus enlarges himself: Ecclesia Contra lit Precil. (...). 2. c. 32.
vera nemiem latet, the true Church is hidd, or concealed from no man. And yet
more: Tract. 1. in epist. Ioannis.
numquid digito etc. Do we not point our fingar to the Church? it does she not
lie open to all? And lastly he exaggerateth this point further in these words:
Tract. 2. in epist. Ioannis.
Quid amplius diccturus sum etc. What may I more say, then account them blind,
who cannot see so great a mountain who do shult their eyes against a candel,
placed in a candelstich? Thus S. Austin. And thus far of the Fathers, from
whence we may easily conjecture, how much different ware the judgments of the
ancient, and primative Fathers, from their conceits, who labor by their
speeches to turn the fair stream of the Churches Resplendency, into the
shallow current of her supposed Obscurity.

1. In this next place, I will descend to arguments drawn from analogy of
reason. And first, from the comparison, made between the old Testament, and the
New Testament. Certain it is, that the Jews ever since Ghrists days
retained, and kept a known profession of their Religion, (though under some
restraint) and their Synagogues have ever since been extarnally visible (though
disperced) as in Greece, Spain, Italy, Germany, France, England etc. And this
point Peter Peter Martyr in Com. place in English. part. 2. page 594. says:
The Jews, though they be kept in so great adversity etc. yet they hold still
their Religion
Martyr, and others Se hereof Caelius Secundus Curio l. de amplit. regn^ Dei.
l. 1. p. 65. and the Century: writers in the 4. chapter of every Century.
do acknowledge, and your self (Michaeas) can well justify the same. Now then
if the Church of the new Testament should want a continual Visibility, then
should it be inferior in honor, and dignity to the Jewish Synagogue; even
then, when the Gospel is prophesied to be most flourishing, and the Synagogue
to be in it greatest decay, and ruin: a reasonable to ouerbalance all reasons,
brought to the contrary.

2. The foresaid Conclusion of the Churches Visibility is also proved, from the
beginning, and progress of the Church. For first durnig the old Testament the
Church was then so Visible, as that the Professors thereof did bear even in
their flesh, the Visible, and markable sign of Circumcision, as a badg of the
Church. Again, in the new Testament, the whole Church of Christ was in it
infancy, and beginning in Christ's Apostles, and Disciples; Who were so Visible,
as that the Holy Ghost did Visibly descend upon them, upon the feast of
Penticost. Furthermore, We read in the Acts. c 2. 3. 4. that on one day three
thousands; on an other, five thousands were adjoined to the former, by their
confession of faith, and Baptism. And so after they (and only they) were
reputed, as membrs of Christ's Church, who did adioyne themselue to the former
Christians, by their external confession of faith, and by Baptism.

3. An other argument may be taken from the great necessity imposed upon
Christians; who are obliged under pain of eternal damnation, to range
themselves unto the true Church of Christ, and to persevere in the same; as
appareth not only from the testimonies of lib. ^de simplicit. Praelat.
Cyprian, Epist. 1. ad Damasum de nomine Hypostasis.
Jerome, and Austin: l. 4. de Baptism. c. 2.
but even from reason it self. Since no man can reign with Christ, who is not
a member of Christ. But how can this be performed, if the Church of Christ be
Invisible? Or how can God be excused from cruelty, by threatening to us eternal
perdition for our not performing such conditions, the which (supposing the
Church not to be Visible) is not in our power to accomplish?

4. Furthermore the Inuisibility of the Church impugneth the marks of the
Church, given by us Protestants; which are the true preaching of the Word, and
the administration of the Sacraments; seeing there matters cannot be put in
practice, but among a Visible Society of men; and such a Society, as that one
of it is known to an other.

5. Again, the Inuisibillity of the Church mainly crosses the end, for which
the Church of God was instituted. Which end was to prosecute God with that
entier and perfect worship, which man can give to him; that is worship him not
only with his Soul, but also externally with his body, and works, or deeds
(seeing Man consists of soul, and body) But an Invisible Church performs
it worship to God, only in heart, and mind: And with this I end, referring the
last point to you (Michaeas) who is next to enter (as I may say) upon the stage.


MICHAEAS. Most willingly I come. For if we peruse the writings (and especially
of such, who have been of the chiefest note, in the Protestant (Church) it is a
world to see, how riotous, (as it were) and abounding they have been in their
works, for proof of the Churches Visibility at all times, and in respect of
all men; and this even in the Conclusion it self, without any borrowed sequels,
though never so necessary. And first we find Calvin (the half Arche of the
Protestant Church) thus to say: Instit^ 4. 1. sect. 4.
Nunc de Visibili Ecclesia etc. Now we determine to dispute of the Visible
Church etc. extracuius gremium, nulla est speranda peccatorum remissio, out of
whose bosom we cannot expect any remission of sins. Neither is Melancton
less full herein, who thus acknowledges: in council. Theol. part. 2.
Necesse est fateri esse Visibilem Ecclesiam etc. it is necessary to confess
the Church to be Visible; Whither tends then haec portentosa oration, this
monstrous opinion, which denies the Church to be Visible? Melancthon Further
thus says: in loc. com. edit. 1561. c. de Ecclesia.
Whenever we think of the Church, let us behold the company of such men, as
are gathered together, which is the Visible Church: Neither let us dream, that
the Elect of God are to be found in any other place, then in this Visible
Society etc. neither let us imagine of any other Invisible Church. Briefly the
said Melancthon urging diverse texts of Scripture in proof of the Churches
Visibility, thus concludes: Hi and Melan. vbi supra.
similes loci etc. These, and such like places (of Scripture) non de Idea
Platonica, sed de Ecclesia visibili loquuntur; do not speak of Plato his Idea,
but of the Visible Church* this Melancthon. The Learned Hunnius gives his
sentence in these words: God in his Treatise of freewill. p.
in all times has placed his Church, in a high place, and has exalted it in
the sight of all Prople, and Nations. Iacobus Andreas (that famous Protestant)
thus ^umpeth with his brethren herein: We in his book against Hosius p. 210.
are not ignorant, that the Church must be a Visible company of teachers, and
hearers. The eminet Dan^us ^oth thus second the rest: Who in his book of the
visible Church.
denies the true Church of God (and that Visible) to have been from the
beginning of the world; he without doubt shows himself to be ignorant in
holy Schripture. M. Hooker (your Countriman) thus writes of this point: God in
his book of Ecclesiast. policy. p. 126.
has had ever shall have some Church Visible upon earth.

Peter Martyr (once your Companion, Ochinus) confesses the truth herein in
these words: We do in his Epist. annexed to his Common. places printed in
English. p. 153.
not appoint an Innisible Church; but do define the Church to be a Congregation
unto which the faithful may know, that they may safely adioyne themselves.

D. Field conspireth with all the former Protestants, thus saying: l. 1. of the
Church. c. 10. p. 19.
The persons of them of whom the Church consists are Visible; their
profession known even to the profane, and wiched of the world; And in this
sort the Church cannot be Invisible. Thus this Doctor preuenteth the answer
of those who say the Church is Visible, but to the Elect only. The said D.
Field thus reprehendeth Cardinal Bellarmine touching this point, saying: vbi
supra. p. 21.
It is true, that Bellarmine laboreth in vain in proouing, that there is, and
always has been a Visible Church; and that, not consisting of some few
scattered Christians, without Order of Ministry or use of Sacraments; for all
this we do most willingly yield unto; how soever perhaps some few have been
otherwise of Opinion.

But for great breuity, and ommitting the like confessions herein of other
remarkable Protestants, D. Humfrey shall close up this scene, who enthereth
into heat, and passion with his Adversaries for needelesly proving the
Churches ever Visibility. For thus he writes: Cur ergo anxie and curiose
probant, quod est a nobis numquam negatum? Why do they (meaning the Catholics)
so painfully and curiously prove Iesuitis in part. 2. c. 3.
that, which we never denied? And then after the said Doctor: Non enim
clancularij secessus and conuocationes sunt Christianae, the society of
Christians are not secret meetings. And then there again, speaking of the
Church militant: Oportet Ecclesiam esse conspicuam Conclusio est clarissima, It
is a manifest Conclusion, that the Church is to be conspicuous, and Visible.
And thus far (Gentlemen) of your own Brethren confessing with us Catholics,
the ever Visibility of the Church of God; And this in so full a manner, as that
the wicked (as D. Fyeld above speaks) shall take full notice, and sight of
it; by force of which clear testimonies, those few, and ignorant Protestants
(who confess the Church to be Visible, but not in so full a manner) are
prevented of their poor refuge, saying: The Church is Visible, but not at all
times (as if the Church, like the Sea, enjoyed a flux, and reflux of it
Visibility) known, but known only to the Elect, and faithful: phantastically
spoken without al color of proof, and mainly crossing, not only their own
more learned Brethren; but also most repugnant to the formery mentioned
Propheces of Gods sacred word, and other passages thereof; to the grave
authority of the Primative Fathers, and finally to al force of reason it self.


D. REYNOLDS. We see (Michaeas) you are very conversant in our own Writers;
And now I hope this first point is perfected, Whereupon the force of the future
discourse is to rely; And though the^ be some difficulty to cry down an
error or false opinion in doctrine, once advanced; Nevertheless I trust, no
learned, judicious Man, perusing the former authorities at large, will ever
dream of an Invisible Church; being in it self a mere intentional Notion,
and having no subsistence, or being.


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor, you say truly. But now seeing it is in this next place
properly incumbent upon you, and these two grave men, to instance in
Protestants for all ages since Christ (for the Church of Christ by your own
former doctrine, necessarily exacteth such a Visibility (I hold it convenient
to put you al in mind of two or three points; the due consideration of which
may much induce to the discovery of the weakness of such Instances, which as my
thoughts presage, will be hereafter insisteth upon, by you.


NEVSERVS. You do well (Michaeas) to set down those premonitions; for we
desire, that if there shall be any defect in the future examples, it may be
fully displayed. Therefore proceed in your Method.


MICHAEAS. The first then of these any maduersions, may be to observe the
wounderful reluctation, and backwardness in some Protestants (a manifest sign
of their own guilty defectiuenesse herein) when this Catholics press them,
to give instances of Protestancy, and of the administration of the word, and
Sacrements: For, seeing they will bear men in hand, that their Church has ever
continued Visible; they are therefore in reasons it self bound (as mantayning
the affirmative part) to undertake the proose thereof. Now answearably to my
former Assertion, I find D Wutton In his answer to a Popish Pamphlet. p. 11.
(speaking to his Catholic Adversary) thus to write: you wilt say, show us,
where the faith, and Religion, you profess, where held. Nay, prove you, that
they were held no where etc. And what if it could not beshewed? yet we know by
the articles of our Creed, that there has been always a Church, in which we
say, this religion, we profess, must of necessity be held etc. This stands
upon you to disprove, which when you do by particular Records, you shall have
particular answer. Then which what can be spoken, first more absurdly, as
expecting records of things, which never were in being? He furthermore
transferring the part of proving upon Catholics to which himself, and his
fellows only stand obliged. Secondly, what can discover more their
vnablenessein guing examples of Protestancy during the former ages? The like
dispairing Answer D Fulke, D. Fulkde successione Eccles. p. 89.
uses upon the same point, saying to his Adversary: Proferre me iubes teto
orb latitantes, vah quam iniquum postulas? Thou willest me to produce, and
name those, which did lie secret through out the World; how iniust a thing do
thou here demand?

The second Observation. Seeing the Church of God is at al times, and seasons
(without the least discontinuance thereof) to be Visibile, and to enjoy a
public administration of the Word, and Sacraments (as above we al have proved)
That therefore such Instances of Protestancy, which may be given by you
hereafter (supposing them to be true) do but justify Visibility of your Church,
only for so long (and no longer) as the said Protestants did live. And
therefore except you be able to produce examples of Protestancy, for all ages
since Christ (and if you do fail herein, but for any one only age) it
necessarily follows; that Church of the Protestants (as wanting this
uninterrupted Visibility) is not the Church of Christ, described in the old
Testament, and their prophesied of, in so many different places

The third, and last Observation. That one may truly, and justly be called a
Protestant, two things (among others) must necessatily concur: The one, that
he do mantayne all the chiefest points of Protestancy; Thus he is not to hold
only some few points of Protestancy; and in the rest (being more in number, and
of greater importance) to partake with the Catholics: seeing such a Man is
rather (as beleiuing more Articles of Catholic Religion, then of Protestancy)
to be reputed a Catholic, then a Protestant; for his denomination is to be
given him rather according to the greater, and weightier number of Articles
believed by him, there otherwise; though to speak the truth, such a Man so
believing, is formally neither Catholic not Protestant.

The second thing necessary to the being of a Protestant, is, that he does not
hold pertinaciously any main Heresies, or Paradoxes wholly impugned, gainsaid,
and contradicted, both by Protestant, and Catholic. For this Man in this
respect, is to be styled rather an open Heretic, then a Protestant, even in
the censure of the Protestants themselves. Therefore to conclude this last
observation; Even as when beasts of several Kinds (or species) do coople
together, that which is engendered, is of a third Kind, diverse from them both:
So here, that Religion or faith, which is (as it were) propagated from the
mixture of contrary Religions, must be a belief, different from them al. These
things being premised, now M. Doctor or either of you two, may begin to
instance in Protestant Professors for every age; And I shall reply thereto, as
my judgment, and reading will best enable me.


OCHINVS. I do like well of these your animaduertions; and they are able in a
clear judgment to fan away imperfect, and faulty instances, from such as be
true, and perfect.


MICHAEAS. Before any of you begin your discourse of Instancing, I must demand
of you al (as Cardinal Bellarmyne did in his late discourse with D. Whitakers)
whether you will be content to stand to the authority of your own learned
Brethren, in all the following passages between us?


D. REYNOLDS. I here answer for us al We will indisputably stand to our own
men's learned judgments. And if you can convince either our future examples, or
our cause in general, from our Protestants penns we yeald you the victory. For
I do hold with Osiander the Protestant; that in Epist. Euchar.
the Confession and testimony of an Adversary, is of greatest authority. And
therefore Peter Martyr truly says: surely loc. tit. de Iudaeis. col. 390.
among other testimonies, that is of greatest weight, which is given by the
Enemies. And D. Bancrofs (to omit al other Protestants in this point)
confirms the same, thus writing: Let In his survey c. (...)
us take hold of that, which they have granted you may be bold to build
thereupon, for a truth, that they are so constrained to yield unto. Which kind
of proof is no less warranted by the Ancient Fathers; for Ireneus says: It
is an unanswerable Lib. 4. c. 14.
proof, which brings attestation from the Adversaries themselves. And
Nazianzen pronounces thus hereof: It is the Orat. de S. Basil.
greatest cunning and wisdom of speech, to bynd the Adversary with his own
words: So full you see (Michaeas) I am in this point. But now let us come to
the maine matter. To produce instances of Protestancy shall be my peculiar Scene.
And that I may the better marshal, and incampe (as it were) my examples,
thereby the more forcibly to invade your judgment, I will begin with the later
times of the Church, and so ascend upwards And first, for these last threescore
years, the Gospel of Christ has enjoyed here in England) to forbear all
other Countries) it Visibility, in it full Orb; all writers of these days
and other Nations acknowledging no less. Again in K. Edward the sixth his
time, this worthy Man Ochinus here present (backed with the like endeauours of
the learned Peter Martyr) did so plant our Protestant faith in our Nation, as
that infinite most remarkable Professors thereof did instantly grown (like
roses after a long cold, or tempest, blooming forth through the heat of the
Sun) with refe^erence of which Professors, Ochinus may justly apply to
himself, the words of Aenias: Vir(...)
Quorum pars magna fui.


MICHAEAS. Concerning the Professors of Protestancy here in England, since
Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, I easily grant they have been most Visible
(as I gather out of your English Chronicles) And thus I freely confess, that
Protestancy has continued in England some threescore and seven years: But
where you say, that Protestancy (I mean, as it comprehends all the Articles
taught, at this day for Protestancy, and which necessarily concur to the
making of a perfect, and complete Protestant) was fully taught, and believed in
K. Edward his days, I absolutely deny.


OCHINVS. Will you deny (Michaeas) so manifest a verity, whereas myself was
not only an eyewitness in those times; but (If I may speak in modesty) a
great Cause thereof? What will you not deny, if you deny, such illustrious
Trueths? and what hope can we have of your bettering, by this our disputation?


MICHAEAS. Good Ochinus, bear me not down with astreame of vaunting words
(the refuse of speech) but if you can, with force of argument. I peremptorily
deny the former point; and for justifying this my denial, I will recurre to the
Communion Book, set out in K. Edwards time with the approbation, and allowance
(as D. Dove, a Protestant affirms) of Peter Martyr, your Cooperatour. Which
Book we must presume in all reason, was made according to the public faith of
the King and the Realm, established in those times; and the rather
considering, that the said Communion Book (for it greater authority) was
warranted in the Kings time, by Act of Parliament. Now this Communion Book, or
public Lyturgy of the faith of England in those days, being printed in folio
by Edward Whit-church anno 1549. pertaketh in many points, with our Roman
Religion. For it makes special defense for Ceremonies; sol. 156.
and prescribes, that the Eucharist shall be consecrated with the sign of the
Cross. It commands sol. 132.
consecration of the Water of Baptism, with the sign of the Cross. It
allows of Chrisme; fol. 132.
as also of the Child's annoynting fol. 128.
and Exorcisme. In that book mention is made of prayer 116.
for the dead; and intercession, and fol. 117.
offering up of our Prayers by Angels. It deffendeth Baptism given by
Laypersons, so. 1^9.
in time of necessity; and the grace ibidem
of that Sacrament; as also Confirmation fo. 132.
of children, and strength given them thereby It mentions (according to the
custom used in time at Mass at this very day) the Priests turning sometimes
to the Altar; fol. 115.
and sometimes to the People. fol. 117.
It ordayneth that answerably yet to our Catholic custom) fol. 4.
Alleluya should be said, from Easter to Trinity sunday. It prescribes the
Priest blessing of the fol. 138 and 139.
Bryde, and brydegroome, with the sign of the Cross. It allows the Priests
absolution of the sick Penetent, with these particular words: By fol. 14^.
the authority committed unto me. I absolute thee of all thy sins. It
mentions a special Confession fol. 142.
of the sick Penitent; And lastly it commands the fol. 14^
annoynting of the sick Person, which we Catholics call the Sacrament of
Extreme Unction. So little reason [Ocbinus] you see, you have to affirm, that
the Protestancy of the present Church of England is the same, which was
mantained, and publicly established by King Edward.


OCHINVS. Indeed I grant, the Communion book was then made by the consent of
the Parliament, but I instructed those, with whom I conuersed, to reject those
superstitions their confirmed.


D. REYNOLDS. Well let that pass. It avails not much, whether Protestancy
was here in England at those days, or no; since it is certain, it was then
most fully dilated in many other Countries, by the late before raising up of
Luther; who was miraculously sent by the Holy Ghost, to illuminate the world
with the Truth of the Gospel, and to discipate the clouds of the former
Romish Errors. And I am assured, [Michaeas] you will acknowledge Luther for a
perfect Protestant in all points; and consequently that the Protestant Church
was in Luther, and his followers, most conspicuous, and Visible.


MICHAEAS. I know, most of our new Ghospellers travail with you [M. D.] on
this child; to wit, that Luther did erect a perfect form of Protestancy. By
the which we may learn, that Affection, is not only blind but also deaf; so
loath you Protestants are either to see or hear any thing against Luther
herein. Nevertheless I here auerre, it is impossible to justify Luther for a
true Protestant. I know also, that himself thus vaunteth Luther epist. ad
Argentinenses.
Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audemus gloriari; where we may see, it is an
accustomed blemish of most Innouatours, to become their own Parasites.


NEVSERVS. Strange Luther not a Protestant? does the Sun shine? Is the fire
hot? Does the Sea ebb, and flow? As certain, as any of these so certain,
Luther was a perfect, and true Protestant. He was the Sun, that did dispel in
those days the mists of Antichristian darkness. From his preaching, and
writings, a ^ier of Christian zeal was inkindled in thousands of men's souls,
for the embrasing of the Gospel of Christ; And never did the torrent, and
inundation of superstition, and Idolatry suffer a greater reflux a greater
reflux and Ebb, then in his life time.


MICHAEAS. Rhetorically amplifyed, Neuserus. But it is the weight of Reason,
not a froath of empty words, which sway the judicious. I grant that Luther did
derogatize more articles of Innovation, and Nouelisme, now taught by
Protestants, then any one Man before him, did since the first plantation of
Christianity: yet that Luther was a perfect, and articulate Protestant, and
such, as the present Protestant Church (with relation to the doctrine now
taught by that Church) may justly, and truly acknowledge for a member thereof,
I eternally deny, and do justify my denial out of his own books; so shall
Touching the sentences alleged in this passage out of Luthers writings, the
Reader is to observe percisly, the editions of his books here quored; seeing
in some later editions, diverse of his said testimonies are for very shame wholly
omitted and left out.
Luther prove, that Luther was no Protestant. Now this I euict, (according to
my former premonitions, and cautions) first, because Luther did ever hold
(even after his revolt from the Church of Rome) diverse Catholic opinions, or
doctrines, then, and still now taught by the said Church. Secondly, in that
Luther after his departure from the Church of Rome, did mantayne diverse gross
errors, or rather Heresies, or rather blasphemies; and for such at this day
condemned, both by Catholics, and Protestants: So evident it will appear,
that Luther was too weak a bulk, to give nurrishment to all those different
plants, which now do style themselves Protestants. And first touching several
Catholic points, ever believed, and defended by Luther, even to his last day,
these following may serve, as Instances.

1. First he ever maintained the Real Presence in the Blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist (as the world knows). And his followers for their peculiar defense
of this doctrine, are styled Lutherans by Swinglins, Calvin, and their party;
impugning the foresaid doctrine.

2. Luther also defended Prayer to Saints, of which point he thus writes:
Luther in purgat. quoru^dam. A^ticul. and in episi. ad Georgium spalatinu^.
De intercessione diuorum, cum tota Ecclesia Christiana sentio, and iudico
sanctos a nobis honorandos esse atque inuocandos.

3. He also taught the doctrine of Evangelical Counsels; to wit, that a man
might do more, then he is commanded, as appears out of his Book: de Art. 30.
assertionibus.

4. The Doctrine of Purgatory, he taught; of which see tom. (...). Conclus. 15.
and in disput. Lipsica cum Echio.
Wittenberg. in resolut. de Indulgentijs. And answerably to this ground he is
confessed by Vrbanus Regius In 1. part. operum formula ca^te loquenda^ cap. de
Sanct. cultu^
[a Protestant] to defend prayer for the Dead.

5. Luther further taught, and approved the use of Images, as Beza In resp. ad
art. Colloq. Montis^. part. alt. in prefat.
witnesses.

6. The indifferency of communion under one, or both kinds (contrary to the
doctrine of the Protestants, who place a necessity in both) is allowed by
Luther, in these words: quamuis Luther in epist. ad ad Bohemos
pulcrum sit etc. Although it were very seemly, to use both the species, or
forms in the blessed Eucharist; and though Christ commanded nothing herein, as
necessary; yet it were better to follow peace etc. then to contend about the
forms.

7. Touching the making of the sign of the Cross, upon our foreheads;
Johannes Creuelius (a Lutheran) thus witnesses: Cum imus cubitum, ^iue
surgimus electo, cruce nos iuxta Lutheri In his refutation Caeremoniarum
Missae, printed Magd^^. 1603. p. 118.
and aliorum piorum^^ institutionem, signamus: When we go to bed, or rise from
thence, we do sign our selves with the sign of the Cross, according to the
advice of Luther and other pious men. And Johannes Maulius Loc. 7. com. page
^^6.
(Luthers scholar) thus writes of Luther: respondet Lutherus, signo crucis
facto, Deus me tuetitur: Luther answers, at the making of the sign of the
Cross, God defend me.

8. Finally, to omit diverse other points, (wherein Luther never dissented from
the Church of Rome) Luther ever mantained, that the government of the Church is
Monarchical and neither Aristocratical, nor Popular: of which point Luther thus
writes: Cum In loc. ^om. class. 1. c. 37. p. 107.
Deus voluerit etc. Seeing God would have one Catholic Church, throughout the
whole World: it was needful, that one people, imo vnum aliquem patrem istius
vnius populi elegi, yea some one father of this one people should be choosen,
ad quem, and suos posteros spectant totus orbis, to whose care, and his
successors the whole World should belong. And thus far [Gentlemen] touching
some taste, to show, that Luther, even after his forsaking of the Catholic,
and Roman Church, did nevertheless still retain, and believe, diverse
Catholic doctrines: and consequently was no no entire, and perfect Protestant.


D. REYNOLDS. I confess indeed, that Luther (as appears by his own
writings) did not reveal to the new World (as I may term it) all the
Euangelical Truth: the fuller discovery of some parts thereof, being reserved
for our later days. And though his own Religion was not (through want of
belief of some Trueths) perfectly good; yet I am assured, It is not by his
pesitiuely mantayning of any one error (then in what he was nuzled by the
Church of Rome) in any sort evil.


MICHAEAS. This your reply is impertinent: for here the Question is only,
whether Luther in respest of his faith, was such an absolute Protestant, as at
this day our Gospellers repute for a good, and sound Protestant. Yet that you
may see your own error otherwise, in over highly preiudging of Luthers
Religion. I will here particularize out of his own writings, and other
Protestants relations, certain Heresies and blasphemies; never by him after
recaled, and incompatible with salvation, (for modicum (...). Cor. ^.
firmentum totam massam corrumpit) which he did egurgitate out of his impure
stomak. From whence we may infer, that with less reason he may be urged for
a Protestant.

1. And First, I will here alleadg his impious doctrine (wherein he labored to
cut, and wound Christian Religion, even in it maister-veine) touching the most
Blessed Trinity, concerning which he thus speaks: The Sorelateth Zwinglius of
Luther tom. 2. in respons. ad confut. Lutheri f^ 474.
Divinity is threefould, as the three Persons be etc. And from hence the reason
may well be, why Luther Luth. in encherid. praecum. anni 1543.
expungeth out of the Litany, this verse: Holy Trinity, one very God, have
mercy upon us. And hereupon he is not afraid to say, that the word. Trinity,
Luth. in postill. maiori Basili(...) apud Heruagium in enarrat. Euang.
Dominicae Trinit.
is but an humane invention, and sounds coldly. And finally, he concludes,
that his soul hates the word: Homousion, or Consubstantiale; For thus he
writes: Anima Contra Iacobum Latomum, tom. 2. Wittenberg. latin edit. anno.
1551.
me a odit Homousion, and Optime exigerunt Ariani, ne vocem illam prophanam and
nouam regulis fidei statu^ liceret. My very soul ha^eth the word: Homousion,
or Consubstantiale; And the Arians, not without reason, required, that it
should not be lawful to put this profane, and new Word (meaning, Homousios or
consubstantialis) among the rules of faith. Luthers blasphemy against the B.
Trinity was such, and so odious, that even Zwinglius tom. 2. in respons. ad
Confess. Lutheri.
Zwinglius did purposely write against Luther touching this very point.

2. Touching the event of things, Luther houldeth (contrary to all Christian
faith) that all things come to pass, through a certain Stoical, and Fatal
necessity; for he defending this Heresy thus writes: Nullius In assert.
damnat. per Leonem, art. 36.
est in manu etc. It is in no man's power, to think good, or evil: but al
things (as Wicleffs article, condemned at Constance, did rightly teach) proceed
from absolute Necessity. And again: Luth. deseruo arbitrio c. 32.
fateor articulum etc. I do confess Wicleffs article of all things, coming to
pass by Necessi(...)* to have (...) falsely condemned, in the conuenticle of
Constance.

3. To the dishonor of Christ his Passion (who was clothed with Essential
Majesty and as intimating the insufficiency of it, for the redemption of
mankind; he teaches, that Christ not only suffered in body, but also his
Divinity suffered: for thus he writes Cum Luther in Confess. Maiore in Caena
Domini.
credo, quod sola humana Natura pro me passa est, Christus vilis, noc magni
praetij saluator est etc. If I believe, that only the Humane Nature of Christ
suffered for me; then is Christ a Savior, but of a base, and small worth; and
himself needs a Savior. And Luther speaking of this point in an other place,
thus reprehendeth the Zwinglians: The Vide Council. part. 2.
Zwinglians did contend against me most pertinaciously, that the Divinity of
Christ could not suffer: A doctrine, so blasphemous, as that it was not refuted
only by the Zwinglians in Luthers days (as himself confesses) but also even
by Beza In epist. theology epist. 60.
such chains you see of blasphemies (one still following an other) are wouen in
Luthers faith, and Religion.

4. Touching the Administration of the Word, and Sacraments; Luther teaches,
that al men (and women also) have authority, and power to administer them:
These be his own words: The first Luth. tom. 2. l. de ministris Eccles.
institue(...)lis fol. 368. 369. ^id. l. de abrog. Missa priuata tom. 2. fol.
249. and lib. de captiuit. Babylon. c. de ordine.
office of a Priest is to preach the Word etc. But this is common to al: Next,
to baptize; and this also al may do, even women etc. The third office is to
consecrate bread, and wine: But this also is common to al, no less, then
Priests; And this I avouch by the authority of Christ himself, saying: do
this in remembrance of me. This Christ speak to al then present, and to come
afterward. If then that, which is greater, then al, be given indifferently to
al Men, and Women (I mean, the word, and Baptism) then that, which is less
(I mean to consecrate the supper) is also given to them. Thus Luther. Yea
Luther proceeded so far herein, as that, as D. Couell witnesses, he was not
afraid to affirm, that the Sacraments These be D. Couelis words in his defense
of M. Hooker art. 15. p. 101.
were effectual though, administered by Satan himself. With D. Couell agrees
the Protestant Hospintan, thus writing: Lutherus In hist. Sacrament. part.
altera fol. 14.
^o vsque progreditur etc. Luther proceeds so far herein, that he
maintained the Sacrament to be a true Sacrament, ^^iamsi a Diabolo
conficeretur, though it were to be consecrated by the Devil.

5. For absolute denial of tempor all Magistrates (an Heresy indifferently
condemned, both by Catholics, and Protestants) we find Luther thus to write:
Among Luth. de seculari potest in tom. 6. german.
Christians no man can, or ought to be a Magistrate; But every one is to other
equally subject etc. And again: As Christ Luth. in tom. 7. Wit. tenberg. fol.
327.
cannot suffer himself to be tied, and bound by laws etc. So also ought not
the Conscience of a Christian to suffer them.

6. Touching Luthers denial of certain parcels of Scripture: And first the
Epistle of S. James is called by Luther, Contentious, Luther praesai. in epist.
Iacobi edit. 4. Ienensi.
swelling, strawy, and unworthy an Apostolical spirit. The book of the
Apocalypse is also rejected by Luther, by the acknowledgment of Bullenger, thus
writing hereof: Doctor (z) Upon the Apocalypse englished c. 1. sermon. 1. fo. 2.
Martin Luther, hah (as it were) sticked this book, with a sharp preface, set
before his first Edition in Duch; for which his judgment, good, and learned Men
were offended with him. Hereunto I will add Luthers contempt of Moses, and
some of the Apostles: Against Moses he thus writes: Tom. 3. Wittenberg. in
Psalm. 45. fol. 423.
Habuit Moses labia in faecunda, irata etc. And again: Moses habuit labia
diffusa fell and ira. Touching the Apostles, he thus controuleth S. Peter; S.
Peter In epist. ad Gala^. 1. tom. 5. Wittenb. of anno 1554. fol. 290.
did live, and teach, extra verbum Dei; besides the word of God. Thus we may
see, how no wind was able to weigh down the ears of Luthers pride.

7. Luther also taught an Heresy, whereby the Propagation of Christian Religion
is much endangered; to wit, That it was not lawfall to wage war against the
Turk: an error; which enen the greatest Idolatours of Luther have mainly
condemned. Luthers words are these: Luth. in tom. 2. Witte^berg In assert.
damnat. per Leon^ decimum assert. 34.
Praeliari contra Turcas, est repugnare Deo visitanti iniquitates nostras per
illos. To wage war against the Turk, is to resist God visiting our sinn^s by
the^: A point so confessed, that Erasmus, thus writes of the consequence, and
effects of Luthers doctrine: Many In ep. ad fratres Inferiori^ Germaniae.
of the Saxons following herein, that firct doctrine of Luther, denied to
Caesar, and King Ferdinand aid against the Turk etc. And said; they had
rather fight for a Turk not Baptized, then for a Turk Baptized; meaning, the
Emperor. Thus Erasmus.

8. Touching Faith, and good works, Luther taught an Heresy, disallowed by all
learned Protestants. For Luther teaches, as follows: It is Luther upon the
Galat. englished, in c. 2. And see Luther in his Sermons englished fol. 204.
impiety to affirm, that faith without Charity, iustifyeth not. Nay Luther
proceeds further, thus writing: Fides nisi sit sine etc. Except Luther tom.
1. Prop. 3.
faith be without the least good works, it does not justify; nay it is not
faith. And thereupon, the more to debase good works, he thus says: In his
Sermons englished p. 147.
Works take their goodness of the Worker; And Luth. ibid. page 276.
no work is disallowed of God, unless the author thereof be disallowed
before. Here now I end touching Luther, Where you may perceive [Neuserus] that
this your Sun (of which you before vaunted) proves to be but a fading Comet;
the fyery zeal (you spoake of) but a turbulent combustion se^ on flame by
Luther in subjects minds, against all Christian Magistracy; and the reflux,
which Luther (as you pretend) caused in the Church of Rome, was instantly
attended on, with a flux and ouerflowing of many dreadful, and blasphemous
doctrines, then broached, and defended by him. But here I refer two points to
the mature Consideration of you [M. Doctour] and these two learned men, here
present. First, whether Luther can truly be challenged at this day for a
perfect Protestant; (and consequently, whether the Visibility of the Protestant
Church, can be truly justified in him) considering, both the several
Catholic Doctrines, as also the many explorat Heresies, and blasphemies, he
maintained even after his revolt from the Papacy. The second (though but
incidentall at this present) whether it sorteth to the sweet proceeding of
God, to use as his Instrument, for the reedifying of his Church (admitting it
before ruined) a man, who practiced his pen (and this after his supposed
calling) to the wronging of Christian Faith, and Charity; to the fortifying of
the state, and Empire of Christ's greatest Enemy; to the expunging of Gods
sacred Writ, and conuitiating of his greatest Servants: to the disauthorizing
of all Christian Princes, and Civil Magistrates: to the dishonoring, and
debasing of the Sacraments: to the disualewing of the infinite worth, and price
of Christ his Passion: to the vphoulding, and maintayning of a stoicall, and
fatal Necessity in all things: And lastly to the absolute denial of the most
Blessed, and holy Trinity. Now (Gentlemen all) if you want a Protestant, to be
the square, and rule of Protestancy, I am content (in this your penury) that
you take Luther for a Protestant.


OCHINVS. I am amazed to here of these Points: and I would not believe them:
but that Luthers own wrytings are yet extant, and ready to charge him with
them.


NEVSERVS. I condemn my self [Michaeas] of my former rash, and unexamined
assent, given in behalf of Luther: and I blame my own hasty Credulity But by
this I may learn, that the attendant of Wisdom, is slow belief. But, M.
Doctor, we would wish you, to ascend to higher times.


D. REYNOLDS. I will. And I will ascend sofely and by small degrees. Only before
in part of excuse (though not in defense) of Luthers errors. I must put you in
mind [Michaeas] that the purest gold Oar is mixed with some dress: the
fairest rose beset with sharp pricks, and diverse ancient and reverend Fathers
had their ouersights. But to proceed higher: what say you [Michaeas] of the
twenty years first before Luther? Do you not think, that there were then many
markably, and visibly known, who professed the present Protestant faith, and
Religion?


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor. If you can euict to much, then you are to name those
many Professors: if not many, some few: at least some one or other. If you
can, I now urge you to it. But it seems by your silence, being thus provoked,
you cannot name any one Protestant then living: so rare in those days (though
so late) were the byrds of such an Aerie.


D. REYNOLDS. Do you not know, that Bucer, Melancthon, and Pelican, were
professed Protestants, even before Luthers breaking with the Church of Rome?


MICHAEAS. Indeed D. Morton In his Apol. Cathol. p. 42.
in extreme penury, and for maine releife of his Cause, is not abashed to nam
the said three men for Protestants, before Luthers revolt from the Pope:
Whereas it is certain, that all these were originally Catholics: and only
upon Luthers fale, did after adioyn themselves to him.

I here further tell you, that it is repugnant to Common sense, that any
Protestants, or any administration of the word, and Sacraments, should be
within the twenty years, next before Luthers Apostasy (for I can term it no
better) and yet no memory to be extant thereof, in any one Country or other,
throughout all Christendom; especially seeing all Occurrents thereabouts (if
there were any) should have been performed in the memory of Man, and
consequently less subject to forgetfulness. Again, you pretend, you can
exemplify in Protestants for all former ancient times; and yet you fail even
in this last age: Belike you will persuade us, that our knowledge of these
matters, is like to some bad eyes, which see things a far of, better, then
nearer at hand.

Furthermore, I here ask the reason, that if any such examples of protestancy
had been immediately before Luthers revolt, why at least did not Luther,
Zwinglius and the rest, that adjoined themselves to him, make mention of some
such Protestants?


D. REYNOLDS. The Protestant Church doubtlesly was in those days, but it was
in solitude: And herein I join in judgment with D. Whitakers, thus censuring
of this point: Ante Lib. de Eccles. contra^ Bellarm. controuers. 2. quaest. 5. ^
Lutheri tempora, latebat Ecclesia in solitudine, Before the times of Luther,
the Church lay hid in the desert.


MICHAEAS. I grant, the Doctor answers so; but why does not he (being much
provoked by his Adversary thereto) alleadg as much as one Man, who was a
Protestant before Luthers chang? Again I demand, why did those supposed
Protestants immediately before Luthers days, lie so hid and unknown, at
Luthers resing? If you say for fear of Persecution (for no other pretext you
can allege) I reply, that fear of Persecution could not be pretended to be a
let after Luthers open revolt; but that the Protestants (if any such were)
might securely then have stepped out, and publicly have joined themselfs with
Luther; Considering that then diverse magistrates and commonwealths had openly
undertaken the patronage of Luthers doctrine and Religion; And who observes
not, that the flood of any doctrine in faith is more or less, as it is
governed with the full or wayne of secular Authority?

But to urge a more irrefragable proof, for this matter. This point (to wit,
that not any one Protestant was to be found, through the whole World,
immediately before the days of Luther) is so clear and undeniable, as that we
find the same granted, by a whole volley of Confessions, proceeding from the
Protestants own penns. For thus (for example) D. Jewel acknowledges: The In
his Apolog. of the Church part 4. c 4.
truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of, when Martin Luther and
Hulderick Zwinglius, first came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel.
And upon this ground it is, that Bucer In ep. ann. 36. ad Episc. Hereford.
styles Luther: The first Apostle to us, of the reformed doctrine. Yea
Conradus Slussenberg (the Lutheran) thus vehemently contesteth this point,
saying: It is In theolog. Caluinist. l. 2. fol. 130.
impudency to affirm, that many learned Men in Germany before Luther, did
hold the doctrine of the Gospel: With whom in like manner conspireth
Benedictus Tract. de Eccles. page 145.
Morgenternensis, thus writing: It is ridiculous to say, that any before the
time of Luther, had the purity of the Gospel. Thus these Protestants: from
whose authorityes being thus fully recited, I gather [M. D.] this Resultancy;
That Luthers revolt was so far, from proving the contemning of the Visibility
of the Protestant Church, or the administration of the word and Sacraments; as
that it proves a manifest interruption, or rather a nullity thereof. It being
so fully confessed, that at the first appearance of this Mis^reant of Saxony,
(I mean of Luther, who first poizned the Duchy of Saxony with his doctrine)
there was not any one Protestant (much less, a Protestant Church, preaching
the Word and administering the Sacraments) upon the face of the earth, to be
seen or heard of: But hereat I marvel not, since Philosophy reaches us (to
speak by all ^sion) that where the Object is wanting, there the sense
suspendeth it operation.


DOCTOVR REYNOLDS. Admitting all that you say, to be true, touching the first
twenty years before Luther; yet it is most eu^cent, that John Hus (who lived
anno. 1400. and not very many years before those 20. years) was a good and
true Protestant; for him I find registered for a most holy Martyr by M. Fox,
Act. mon. page 190.
and D. In his Treatise of Antichrist p. 40.
Downeham.


MICHAEAS. John Hus did live in the year. 1400. Who first was a Catholic
Priest. The cause of his death, was in that he taught the Necessity of
Communion under both kinds, and the seditious doctrine touching Princes,
Bishops, and Priests, being in mortal sin.

But to make a more particular dissection of this Instance; The Articles,
wherein his followers (the Bohemians) dissented from the Church of Rome, were
these following, which M. Fox thus relates: The Bohemians Act. Mon. p. 260.
being demanded in what points, they did differ from the Church of Rome; the
only Propositions, which they propounded, were these four Articles first,
Communion under both kinds; The second, that al Civil dominiou was forbidden to
the Clergy; The third, that the preaching of the Word was free for all Men, and
in all places; The fourth, that open crimes are in no wise to be suffered, for
avoiding of greater evil. Thus M. Fox of the Hussite, who (we see) as
comparting with the Church of Rome in all other points, cannot possibly be
alleged, for, visible members of the Protestant Church.


D. REYNOLDS. But what do you say of John Hus himself, was not he a
Protestant, and dyed in defense of the Protestant faith?


MICHAEAS. M. D The testimonies of Luther and M. Fox shall decide this point
between us. And first M. Fox thus says of him. Quid Fox in Apocalypse c. 11.
page 290.
vnquam docuit, aut in concilio defendit Hussius etc. What did Hus defend at
any time, or taught in the council, wherein he might not seem even
superstitiously to agree with the Papists? What does the Popish faith teach
concerning Transubstantiation, which he did not in like sort confirm with the
Papists? Who did celebrate Masses more religiously, then he? Or who, more
chastely, did keep the vows of Priestly single life? Add hereto, that touching
free^^l, faith, prede^^nation, the cause of justification, merit of Works, what
other thing taught he, then was taught at Rome? What Image of any saint did he
cast out at Bethleem? therefore what can we say, (for which he deserved, death)
touching the which, he is not a like to be condemned with the Sea of Rome, or
with it to be freed and absolved? Thus far M. Fox, with whom agrees. Luther,
thus writing of Hus: The In colloquijs Germ. c. de Antichristo.
papists burned Hus, when as he departed not a fingars breadth from the papacy;
for he taught the same, which the papists do; only he did find fault with their
vices and wicked life; against the Pope he did nothing. Thus Luther.

Besides all the Catholic doctrines, mantained by Hus, he taught (as above is
touched) the Heresy of Wiclef, to wit, that there are no Princes, Priests, or
Bishopps, while they are in mortal sin, as M. Fox Act. mon. 230. Art. 1. and
2.
records; with whom agrees the Protestant Osiander, thus writing: Nullus est
Dominus ciuilis, nullus est Praelatus, nullus est Episcopus, dum est in mortali
(x) In epitom. Cent. 15. p. 469.
peccato: Haec propositio approhart non potest; sed passus est Ioannes Hus hac
in part aliquid humani: There is no Civil Prince, no Prelate, or Bishop,
whiles he is in mortal sin: This proposition cannot be approved; but John
Hus suffered herein the infirmity of Man. Now I cannot, but admire the
incredible boldness of M. Fox, who acknowledging the former Heresy mantayned by
Hus, but especially granting (as showed out of his own words) that Hus did
hold all the cheise points and frame of the present Roman Religion, was
nevertheless not ashamed to pronounce John Hus, for a most holy Martyr (as
above is expressed) meaning a martyr of his own Protestant Church. So gladly
you Protestants (for the supporting of the continuance and visibility of your
Church) do make claim, to any Catholic, or heretic whosoever; who in one
only point of Religion, (though dissenting in all others) may seem to compart
and interleague with you. Thus far of Hus, whom to legitimate, for a
Protestant, you see, it is impossible.


OCHINVS. I must here agree in judgment with Michaeas. And this Instance had
far better been forborne, then obtruded; And indeed it is no small blemish to
our Church, to insist in such weak and insufficient examples. But [M. Doctour]
Let us entreat you, to rise up to Higher times in your discourse.


D. REYNOLDS. I will satisfy your desire. The next then, in whom I will
instance, shall be our own Contryman Wicklef: Whom all the world (I hope) will
even dispose, that he was a perfect Protestant; and that himself and his
followers enjoyed the administration of the Word and Sacraments; the practice
of which is acknowledged to be an essential note of the Churches Visibility.
This my opinion touching Wicklef, being a Protestant, is not mine alone; but it
is warranted with the authorityes of M. Fox, Act. mon. printed. 1596. page 391.
and the learned In his book of the state of the Church page 418.
Crispinus.


MICHAEAS. Indeed [M D.] M. Fox and Crispinus (I grant) do so teach; but how
truly, Observe, what follows; and then give up your eauen and impartial
judgment. And yet before I come to the tuche of this point, I must put you in
mind, what thy two former Protestants grant in the places by you cited, that at
Wickleffs revolt (supposing him to be a Protestant) the Protestant Church was
wholly invisible; for thus M. Fox Fox vbi supra.
writes: In the time of horrible darkness, when there seemed in a manner to be
no one so little spark of pure doctrine, left or remaining; Wicklef by Gods
providence rosevp, through whom the Lord would first awaken and raize up again
the World. Thus he. This Wicklef being an Englishman (as you know, M. D.) was a
Catholic, Priest, and Person of Lutterworth in Leicestershirs; and as Stow In
his Annals of England printed 1591. p. 425.
relates, He first inueighed against the Church of Rome, because he had been
deprived by the Archbishop of Canterbury, from a certain benefice. He lived,
anno. 1370. Now that Wicklef cannot be truly claymed for a Protestant, I prove,
in that (besides he was a Catholic Priest, and no Church of the Protestants,
then known to him) he still retained many Catholic Opinions; and withal
taught diverse notorious Heresies,

Touching his Catholic Opinions still believed by him, I will allege diverse
out of his own Wrytings; First he believed seven Sacraments, thus writing of
them: Quaedam Wicklef in postilla super 15. cap. Marci me^tioneth all the
seven sacraments. And in postilla super 1. Cor. cap. 1. he writes, as is here
set down.
sacramentaper se promulgauit Christus etc. Certain sacraments Christ did
promulgate by himself, as Baptism, the Eucharist, the sacrament of Orders, and
of Penance; certain also by his Apostles, as the sacraments of Confirmation,
and of Extreme Unction.

He also believed the rites and Ceremonies of the Mass, as appears in his
book de Apostasiac. 18.

Touching his praying to our Blessed Lady, he thus in fervor writes: Wicklef
sermon. de Assumpt. Mariae.
Hic videtur miht, quod impossible est nospraemiari sine Mariae suffragio: It
seems impossible to me, for any man to be rewarded, without the suffrage (or
prayers) of Mary, He acknowledged the worship of Relics and Images, of which
he thus says: Wicklef de Eucharist. c. 9.
Ador aneus imagines, vnde and signa etc. conceditur it aque, quod reliquae
Imagines etc. sunt cum prudentia ador andae: We worship Images, as signs etc.
Therefore it is granted, that relickes, Images etc. are to be worshipped with
prudence.

Touching Merit of Works, and works of Supererogation; Wicklefe was so forward
in defense thereof; that Stow thus writes of him: In his Annals printed 1592.
p. 426.
Wicklefe and his disciples went in course russet garments, down to the
heele^, seemed to contemn all temporal goods, for the love of eternal
riches; adiayned himself to the begging friars; approouing their poverty, and
extolling their perfection. He thus teaching with the Catholics, that a
Religious, and voluntary poverty, is the greatest abundance. Besides these his
several Catholics doctrines, He defended diverse gross Herefyes. He first As
witnesses O^iand. Ce^t. 15. p. 457.
taught, that all things came to pass by an absolute and stoicall Necessity:
He condemned lawful Oaths, savoring (as Osiander says) Cent. 6. 10. 11 etc.
p 459. a^t. 43.
of Anabaptisms. Touching Ecclesiastical persons, thus writes In ep. ad
Fredericum Miconium.
Melancthon of Wicklefe: Wicklefus contendit presbiteris non licere, vt
possideant quicquam proprium; Wicklefe mantayneth, that it is not lawful for
Priests, to possess any thing in propriety. He further taught even by the
acknowledgment of M. Fox Act mon. p 96. art. 4.
(the Canonizer of the Pseudomartyrs of his Religion) that if a Bishop or a
Priest be in deadly sin, he does not order, consecrato, or baptize; Which
point is also verifyed of Wicklefe, by Epitom. h^st. Cent. 9. 10. 11. a^t. 4.
Osiander. Furthermore, Wicklefe did not only ascribe (with Catholics) merit
to works, done in state of grace; but he was so passionatly resolute herein, as
that (as Tom. 3. c. 7 8. 9.
Waldensis witnesses) he taught merit of works, done by force of nature, with
the Pelagians. Finally, (n) Osiander in epitom. hist. Ce^t. 9. 10. ^1. 12.
Wicklefe taught, that there is no Civil magistrate, while he is in mortal
sin; and this so grossly, that Melancthon thus censureth him: De Domino
civilly, sophistice plane, and seditiose vixatur; Wicklefe disputes of the
civil magistrate sophistically and seditiously: (o) M^lancthon. vbi supra
And according to this his doctrine in speculation, his followers in great As
witnesses S^ow, vbi supra.
numbers did rise against the King; And for such their treason, diverse of them
were apprehended, and executed.

But to contract this point, touching the Heresies of Wicklefe; This matter is
so evident and confessed by diverse learned Protestants, as that Pantaleon (a
Protestant) places Wicklefe in the Catalogue of Heretics, thus writing;
Johannes In Chronol. p. 119.
Wicklefus cum Lolhardis, in Anglia suam Haeresim praedicat; John Wicklefe
di^^lgeth with the Lolhards, his Heresy in England. And Melancthon thus writes
in general of him: Melancthon. vbi supra.
I have found in Wicklefe many errors, whereby a Man may judge of his spirit.
Finally M. Fox Act. Mon. p. 95.
(though at other times, gracing him with the title of a Protestant)
confesses, That VVicklefe used often for fear of persecution and danger, to
dissemble his Religion; Which no man (in the judgment both of Catholic and
Protestant) professing any conscience, can lawfully do. Thus much touching
Wicklefe.


OCHINVS. M. Doctor. I must confess (even between God and my conscience)
that hitherto the Vessel, from whence you have drawn all your former wine (I
mean examples of Protestancy) is not good and pure: But I hope, we shall have
reason to say (in regard of your other more conuincing Instances, hereafter to
follow) with the chief steward of the feast in the Gospel: Joan. ^.
Thou have kept the good wine, until now. But howsoever it is, Truth is not so
feeble, as to be forced to leave (for it own supporting) upon the cruches of
any one man's ability.


NEVSERVS. Truly hitherto, the Examples of protestancy are insufficient (for
how can they be reputed Protestants, who not only maintain the most articles
of the Romish Religion; but also do pertinaciously justify diverse confessed
Heresies?) Nevertheless, I doubt not but Ochinus and my self shall be able to
prove, that the Protestant Church was enriched at all times, with many of the
faithful; though not always it was so gloriously subject to the eyes of
others. But [M. D.] what do you say to the times precedent to the former? For
we are most willing, that Michaeas should have good satisfaction given him
herein.


D. REYNOLDS. I say, that in those times flourished not two or three, but many
hundred Protestants. For then lived VValdo, from whom, as from a most worthy
stem (his branches) the Waldensis are descended. All which (both the father
and the Sonns (even in the judgment of M. Fox) Act. Mon. p. 628.
were perfect Protestants. In those times also were the Albigenses, confessed
for good Protestants. Also the Henricians or Apostolici, Peter Bruts. learned
Almericus, and diverse others lived about those days: Indeed there were so
many Protestants in those times, as I am partly troubled, where to begin to
reckon them; but may here say with the Poet: Inopem me copia fecit.


MICHAEAS. Thus [M. D.] are but ostentations; And I see, that saying verifyed
in you: Many through love, do hurt themselfs. For you through your over much
affecting, to preserve the honor of your Church, do indeed) by prostituting
diverse Pseudoprotestants) indignify your Church: For all these, whom you now
have alleged, are merely Excentrous (as I may term them) and irregular
Sectaries; their doctrines indifferently moving about the Poles of Catholic
Religion, Protestancy, and Sensuality.

And first touching Waldo. It is certain, that he was a Layman of Lions in
France; unlearned, but rich, and gave money for the translating of the
Scripture into his own vulgar tongue. Of him the Waldenses are derived about
the year 1218.

Now that neither Waldo, nor the Waldensis (his followers) were Protestants,
(though they be much urged for such, by many Protestants) is several ways
proved.

First, in that they did still hold diverse Catholic points, as the Real
presence in the Blessed Sacrament, of whom concerning the same point Calvin
thus writes: Epist. 244.
Formula Confessionis etc. The form of the Confession of the Waldenses does
inuolue all those in eternal damnation, who do not confess, that the bread
is become truly the body of Christ. They also maintained seven Sacraments, the
doctrine of Vows, of single life, and of Purgatory; with all which doctrines
Benedictus In tract. de Eccles. p. 124.
Morgenstrensis (a Lutheran) charge the Waldenses, and reprehendeth them for
the same.

Lastly, they were so full in defending the doctrine of merit of works; as
that, as D. Humfrey In I^^uitism. part. 2. rat. 3 p. 270. And M. Fox Act. mon.
p. 628.
writes of VValdo; He did forsake all things, that being poor, he might
follow Christ, and the Evangelical Perfections. And in the end, it did so
faule out, that his scholars and disciples were an Order of begging Friars,
and commonly called: the Poor Men of Lions. And did profess (as D. Humfrey D.
Humfrey vbi supra.
affirms) a kind of Monastical life; And finally labored to Pope Innocentius
(the third) to have their Order confirmed; but could not prevail, as
Vspergensis witnesses in his Chronicle.

Secondly, The Heresies mantayned by VValdo and his followers are such, as that
you [M. D.] in regard of their defense of them, cannot challenge them for
Protestants.

For first, they taught, that married Persons mortally sinned, in having the Act
of Matrimony, without hope of Procreation, as testifyeth Illyricus Illyricus in
catalog. teftium verirat. p. 743.
the Protestant. They also did hold all embracements (mark this gotishe
doctrine) and things done above Illyrecus vbi supra. page ibid.
the girdle as touching, kissing, words, compression of the papps etc. to be
done in charity: They further taught, that neither Priests Illyrecus vbi supra.
p. 760.
nor civil Magistrates being guilty of mortal sin, did enjoy their dignity,
or were to be obeyed: That Ibid p. 731. et p. 745.
Laymen and Women might consecrate and preach: That Clergy Ibid. p. 729.
Men ought to have no possessions: That men Ibid. p. 735. et 756.
ought not to swear in any case: They Illyric. ibid p. 734.
went to the Catholic Churches dissemblingly, and confessed and communicated
dissemblingly: Finally (to omit some others) they condemned all Princes
Illyric. ibid p. 735. et 755.
and Judges. And thus far (M. D. and you two learned Men) to prove, that VValdo
and his followers were no Protestants, (though it is not denied, but that some
one point or other of protestancy, they might mantaine) and consequently, that
the example of them is defective, to prove the Visibility of the Protestant
Church in their days.


NEVSERVS. But what say you [Michaeas] of the Albigenses, and the rest above
mentioned by M. Doctor? Were not all they Protestants?


MICHAEAS. I grant, they are marshalled among Protestants by D. D. Fulke
against the Rhemish Testarne^t in Apoc. 12.
Fulke and D. D. Abbots in his second partof the defense etc. printed 1607. p.
55.
Abbots. But here [M. D.] you are either deceived, or (which I think not)
intend to deceive. For here the Albigenses are brought for show only of greater
variety of dishes, the better to furnish the table of Protestancy: Whereas
indeed they were of the same Sect with the Waldenses, or rather the same Men;
according to the judgments of D. Abbots and D. Fulke. For D. Abbots thus
writes: In his book against D. Hill his reasons. p. 57.
These Leonists, or poor Men of Lions, and waldenses, and Albigenses were the
same Men; but diversely, and upon diverse occasions termed by the Romish
Sinagogue: And D. Fulke says the same in these words: De success. Ecclesiast.
contra stapletonum. p. 332.
They are called the Waldensis by the vulgar Papists; as also by others, they
are named the poor Men of Lions, Leonists, Albigenses, or by what other name,
it pleased the Sycophants of Antichrist.

Now these Albigenses (be who they will, either the same with the Waldenses, or
not) as they mantayned some points of Protestancy; so with all even by the
testimony of Osiander In Cent. 13. l. 1. c. 4. page 329.
the Protestant, they taught diverse execrable Heresies. The words of Osiander
are these: Albigensibus dogmata haec attribuuntur; Duo esse principia; Deum
videlicet bonum, and Deum malum, hoc est Diabolum etc. These opinions are
ascribed to the Albigenses: That there are two Principles; to wit a good God,
and a bad God, which is the Devil; and who created all bodies, as the good God
did all souls etc. They do reject Baptism, and they say, to go to Churches,
and to pray in them, is not profitable: etc. They condemn Marriage, and do
allow (as holy) promiscuous concubitus, al promiscuous lying together, how
wicked soever etc. Thy deny the resurrection of the body, and that Christ was
true Man. Thus far Osander, who also says: The opinions of the Albigenses are
absurd, wicked, and heretical; and finally, terms their spirits: an
Anabaptisticall furye. And D. Cowper In his dictionarium historicum, annexed to
his thesaurus printed anno. 15-78. at the word: Albigenses.
of Winchester, makes like mention of their absurd Heresies. A point so
acknowledged, that D. Jewel wholly disclaymeth from the Albigenses, as
Protestants; saying thus plainly: They In his defense of the Apology. p. 48.
be none of ours.

Touching the Apostolici, or Henricians; they are so far from being
Protestants, as that they are acknowledged for Heretyks by D Fulke, D. Fulke in
his Retentiue against Bristow. p. 124.
D. Jewel, In his defense of the Apol. p. 48.
and Osiander, Cent. 12. p. 291.
who reports their Heresies.

But to proceed forward to other of your Examples. Peter Bruis is censured for
an Heretic, by Osiander, Osiander. Cent. 12. p. 282. and 283.
and Hospinian; Hospinian in histor. Sacrament l. 4. p. 361.
who relates his Heresies.

Almaricus his Heresies are reported by Osiander, and himself rejected for an
Heretic, and not acknowledged for a Protestant by the said Osiander; Osiander
vbi supra.
neither by D. Jewel, In his defense of the Apol, vbi supra
who speaking of the Albigenses, the Apostolici, and Almaricus, says (as
before) they be none of ours. And thus far Gentlemen) touching the Waldensis,
the Albigenses, the Apostolici, or Henricians, Peter Bruis, and Almaricus.


D. REYNOLDS. I see no reason, but that we may be justly distrustful, in
giving over much credit, to the writing of former times, which charge the
Waldenses, Albigenses, and the rest, with the Heresies by you recited: And if
such wrytings were either false in himselfs, o^ but forged only, through
deceate and confederacy of their Enemies; then may the said Men well be reputed
for true, and perfect Protestants.


MICHAEAS. If you [M. D.] be so diffident, as that (contrary to the judgment of
Osiander Hospinian and other Prtestants) you will not believe the writings of
former times, charging Waldo and the rest (in this passage or discourse
mentioned) with the Heresies before alleged; then what color can you pretend,
why you should give Credit to those Writings of the same (s) Cent. 9. 10. 11.
p. 326.
time, which affirm, that the foresaid Men believed certain Opinions of
Protestancy? And therefore it follows by force of all Reason, that such
Writings affirming both the one and the other, are either jointly to be
believed and credited, or jointly to be rejected, as false and forged: And the
rather, seeing the Reporters of those times, did impartially and indifferently
recite and condemn, all those opinions, wherein the foresaid Heretics
dissented from the Church of Rome; without any foreknowledge, which of the said
Opinions, would either be approved or rejected, by Men of this age. So weak
you see [M. D.] is this your Replye.


OCHINVS. I am of judgment, that the Waldensis, and the rest can(...) truly be
reputed for Protestants, in regard of the reasons alleged by you [Michaas.]
And I do hold, that your last reply [M. D.] (touching the uncertainty of the
credit of those wrytings, charging the Waldensis, and all the other with
Heresies) is most firmly avoided by Michaas.


NEVSERVS. I am of the same judgment with Ocbinus herein: And the truth is, we
do much wrong the honor of our Church, by pretending such unworthy Men, for
members thereof. But proceed [M. D.] to higher times.


D. REYNOLDS. In the precedent ages to these former (if credit may be given to
authentical Historyes) there were not only many Protestants, but even several
Books then written, in defense of the Protestant Religion: As the Author of
the Book, written against Images, in the name of Carolus Magnus: Bertram,
Vlrick, Berengarius etc. All or any of which to deny, to have been
Protestants, were to infringe all authority of Ecclesiastical History.


MICHAEAS. There are not any of these, you have named, as much (I may say) as
of the halfeblood to a Protestant: so little affinity there is, between the
Protestants Religion, and these Men's religion. I grant, that some Protestants
(and these but very few, and of mean esteem) do instance (through their
security of better examples) in these your mentioned men; but how coldy and
weakly, we will now discover. And first, touching the Book written against
Images, in the name of Carolus Magnus, I say, first, that book concerns only
but one point of Religion; and consequently it can give no proof of
Protestancy in those days. Secondly, I aver, that it was forged by some
Heretic, that denied the doctrine of Images (perhapps) in those days; but
never made or allowed by Carolus Magnus. This I prove first, because Carolus
Magnus was wholly addicted and devoted to the Church of Rome, and it faith in
general; And therefore the less probable it is, that he should wr^t, or
suffer to be written in his name, any book, inpugning but any one point of
that Religion. I will relate the words of Hospinian (the Protestant) touching
his affection to the Catholic faith; Thus be says: In ep. dedic. histor.
Sacrament.
Carolus Magnus nonsolum publicis edictis etc. Charles the Great did not only
command by public Edicts, that the Ceremonies, rites, the Latin Mass of the
Church of Rome, and other decresse and Instituts of the Pope of Rome, should be
observed, through out the whole Empire; but also himself did force the
Churches, to these observations under pain of impresonments, and other kinds
of punishments; with whom also conspireth in judgment herein Crispinus In his
book of the state of the Church. p. 221.
M. Cowper, In his Cronicle p. 473.
and Osiander. in ep. hist. eccles. cent. 8. p. 101.
Secondly, in that it is acknowledged by learned writers, that Carolus Magnus
was an enemy to those, who impugned Images. For Paulus Lib. 2. hist. Franciae.
Aemilius witnesses, that Carolus did send twelve Bishops unto a Council
houlden at Rome, under Pope Steven in confutation of the error of the
Grecians, against Images. The same doctrine of Images, as defended by Carolus,
is further confessed by the Centurists, Cen. 8. c. 9. col. 570.
D. Cowper, In Chronic. p. 474.
and by Ioannes Lib. 1. pro Imaginibus.
Aurelianensis, who lived in the time of Carolus Magnus. Thirdly and lastly,
there are suspicious of the forgery of that Book. For it appears out of the
book of Pope Adrian, to Carolus Magnus (which book was purposely written,
against that book diuulged in Carolus his name) that the said book was then
written by some secret enemy of Images: a point so evident, that Calvin Instit.
l. 1. c. 11. Sect. 14.
intimates the uncertainty of the Author of that Book, thus saying: E^tat
refutatorius liber sub Caroli Magni nomine etc. There is extant a book of
refutation, under the name of Carolus Magnus; which we may easily gather to be
made about that time: so doubtfully and irresolutly Calum writes of the
author of that Book.

Touching the supposed book of Beriram, written de Corpore and Sanguine
Domine, and dedicated to Charle the Bawld; as said, to impugn the doctrine of
the Real Presence in the most blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist: Which book
some think to have been forged by Oeculampadius, in the name of Bertram. I say
[M. D.] first this book writes so doubtfully and intricatly of the Real
Presence, using the words: figure, spiritual, and Mystery, with such
qualifications, as that no strong Argument against the Real Presence can be
drawn from thence; yea which is more, this book so much favors the Real
Presence, as that the Centurists Cent. 9. c. 4. col. 212.
do thus censure of it: Transubstantiationis semina habet Bertramus, The book
of Bertram has in it the seeds of Transubstantiation. Secondly, the
Catholic writers of those times, (as Hospinian relates at large) did honor
In histor. Sacrament. l. 4 p. 317.
Bertram, as a holy Martyr of the Catholic Church. How then is it probable,
that Bertram should write a book against one of the chiefest Articles,
defended and believed by the said Church? Thus far of Bertram.

Touching Vlricke (who was Bishop of Augusta) who is urged for a Protestant, in
that it is supposed, he should write an Epistle to Pope Nicolas in behalf of
Priests Marriage, and printed lately at Basil. We reply, that by force of all
Reason, this Epistle is but forged by some enemy of the Roman Church in his
name; and was written diverse years after Pope Nicolas was dead, or before that
Vlrick was borne. For as Onuphrius L. de Romans Pontif.
writes; Pope Nicolas the first (to whom it is supposed, Vlrick should write)
was elected Pope, anno 858. enjoying the same nine years, and two months, and
dyed anno 867. Whereas Vlrick was not made Bishop of Augusta, till anno 924.
Which was after the death of Pope Nicolas; And he contemning Bishop fifty
years, dyed anno 973. Of which point, we may read Vspergensis, In Chronico-
Cytraeus, In Chronico.
and Pantaleon. In Chronico.



D. REYNOLDS. But what say you [Michaeas] touching Burengarius; I hope it
cannot be denied, but that he impugned the doctrine of Transubstantiation?


MICHAEAS. I come to Burengarius (who lived anno 1051. and was Archdeacon of
Angiers) who is challenged for a Protestant, for his denial of
Transubstantiation, in the most blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist; I answer,
first. It is true, that for a time he impugned the doctrine of
Transubstantiation: yet afterward he recanted As M. Fox confesses. Act. Mon.
p. 13.
his Heresy therein and dyed most Catholic in that Article. Secondly, I
answer, that this Heretick-Catholicke Berengarius, did hold diverse errors,
even in the judgment of Oecolampadius, In epist. Oecolampedii et Swinglii. l.
3. p. 710.
the Protestant: who thus writes of him: Berengarius non nulla affirmat
aduersus Baptismum parnulorum, and coniugium, Berengarius affirms diverse
things against the Baptism of Infants, and Marriage: And again: Damnata
Ibide^ p 812.
est Berengarij Opinio, Sacerdotio Christiano parum minus tribuens: The Opinion
of Berengarius is condemned, which ascribed over little to Christian
Priesthood. Also Papir Masson L 3. in Hugone et Roberto.
in his Annals of France writes, that Berengarius and his followers denied the
grace of Baptism; denied, that men committing mortal sin, could ever
obtain Pardon; and further, that Berengarius was an enemy to Marriage. Thus
much of Berengarius his own and his followers Heresies: though himself before
his death (according to the judgment of certain Catholic Writers) recanted
his Heresies.

But (M. D. and you Gentlemen) I will conclude this passage, with recurring to
one observation above set down. suppose therefore for the time, that these
former books were doubtful, but truly penned by the Authors, under whose
name they go: suppose also that Berengarius had never recanted his heresy in
denying of Transubstantiation; suppose finally, that you may allege diverse
other sectaryes, houlding this or that point of Protestancy: yet what can all
this convince? It can never prove any Visibility of the Protestant Church:
seeing all these (thus admitted) are but the Examples of one or other private
Man, who was originally Catholic and after embraced some one or two points of
Protestancy (still remaining in all other articles, wholly Catholic.) And
therefore I much commend the Ingenuity of D. Fulke In his answer to a
Counterfeyte Catholic. p. 34.
herein, who foreseing the impertinency of these Examples of Bertram,
Berergarius, and those others, rejects them in these words: Although these and
such like defenced some part of the truth which we ^ould against you; yet le^st
you should object, it was but in some one or two points, ^passe them over with
silence Thus D. Fulke, who even upon this ground, preterm^^teth all the said
examples, and first instanceth in Wicklefe.


OCHINVS. I do find [Michaeas] some learned Protestants to make mention of
Ioannes de Ioannes de Rupe scissa, and Guilielmus de S. Amore, claymed for
Protestants by M. Napper upon the Reuclat. in c. 20.
rupescissa, Gui^ie^mus de S. Amore, Peter Peter blois i^. claymed by M.
Gabriel Powel in his considerat. p. 25.
Blois, and some others for good and found Protestants? what is your opinion of
them.


MICHAEAS. I grant they are claymed for Protestants, but observe how iniustly.
And first, touching Ioannes de rupe scissa: M. Fox Act. mon. printed 1596. p.
287.
thus writes of him. Johannes de Rupe scissa, lived anno 1340. who for
rebuking the spiritualty for their great enormityes, and neglecting their
office, was cast in prison. Thus M. Fox. Thus we see, he otherwise was
Catholic in all points. Willi^lmu^ de S. Amore is thus charged by Pantaleon
In Chronographia page 102.
the Protestant: Gulielmus de S. Amore Monach^s ex (...)osyna, in otio
(...)tes, non salua^i scribens, a Papa Haereticus censetur: Guilielmus de S.
Amore, teaching, that Monks living of Alms in idleness, could not be saved, is
therefore censured by the Pope for an Heretic. Lastly, Peter Blois, who lived
anno 1200. is freed from being a Protestant by Osiander in these words: Cent.
12 p. 181.
Petrus Blesensis etc. principum, praelatorum, religiosisorum and priuatorum
peccata^ grauiter arguit; non tamen Pontificios errores refutauit. Peter Blois
did much aggrauate the sins of Princes, Prelates, Religious, and private Men;
but he no way intermedled with the errors of Popish religion. Now [Ochinus] I
refer even to your self, how untruly these former Men may be obtruded upon us
for Protestants. But the proceeding of our Adversaries in this question of the
visibility of their Church is incredible, who are not ashamed (in their own
defense herein) to challenge (besides registered and confessed Heretics) any
one, that has impugned the Pope or his Church but in any one point, either of
manners or doctrine; And hence it is, that they challenge to themselfs for
Protestants, men, whom all the world do know to be Catholics, in all articles
of faith without exception: Thus are Willielmus Occam, and Gandanensis by M.
Fox: Act. mon. printed 1596. p. 358.
and John Scotus Osiander cent. 9. p. 44.
by Osiander urged for Protestants. Thus also is S. Bid claymed by D. Humfrey,
In Iesuitim. part. 2. rat. 3. page 326.
of whom Osiander In epitom. cent. 8. page 58.
thus speaks: Bid was a Papist in all those Articles, wherein Protestants do
at this day dissent from the Pope. Thus is Peter Lombard placed in the
Catalogue By Simon Pauli in method. aliquot. locorum doctrinae. fol. 12.
of the Doctors and restorers of the heavenly doctrine, whom notwithstanding
M. Fox Act. mon. page 41.
styleth: An archpillar of Papistry. Thus also Ioannes Gerson and Thomas
Aquinas (whom all Christendom acknowledges to be of the Church of Rome) are
challenged for Protestants by Illyricus. See all these and some others, in the
Alphabeticall table of Illyricus his Catalogue, re^^ium veritatis.
Finally, Thus is Erasmus canonized by them for a Protestant, and particularly
by your self [M. D.] L. 1. de Romans Idolat. l. 1. c. 2. act. 3. p. 73.
and yet we read, that Erasmus thus writes: Erasm. in l. 16. epist. 1^
Christum agnosco, Lutherum non agnosco, Ecclesiam Romanam agnosco. Christ
(...) acknowledge, Luther I do not acknowledge, the Church of Rome I
acknowledge. But D. Field (one of this university) ouergoeth all others; for he
with more, then a meretricious and frontles bouldnes, auerreth, that all
Christendom before the days of Luther, were Protestants; for thus he writes:
D. Fyeld in his book of the Church. l. 3. c. 8. p. 76.
We firmly believe, that all the Churches of the world wherein our Fathers
lived and dyed, to have been the true (Protestant) Churches of God etc. And
that they, which taught, embraced, and believed those damnable errors, which
the Romanists defend against us, were only a faction: An assertion, which
Impudency it self would blush to mantayne; it being controuled by all
historyes whatsoever, and by the free acknowledgment of all Protestant writers
without exception.


NEVSERVS. This bold asseueration of D. Field (I confess) displeases me
infinitely; and it is no small blemish to us (who profess the Gospel) and who
should bound and measure our speeches with truth, at least with some
probability of Truth, thus to write. For who knows not, that the Mass (which
contains in it self, diverse doctrines of the Romish Religion) was the
public Leyturgy, celebrated in all Churches throughout Christendom, at
Luthres first revolt from the Pope? And I grant, that this may give just
suspicion to many to think, that we make undue claim to the ancient Fathers,
and others above instanced (being further of in time remoted from us) when some
of us blush not, to affirm so untruly of the days next before Luther, and of
the time, in which himself first did rise up; it being yet in the memory of
Man. But [M. Doctour] I pray you, proceed to higher times.


D. REYNOLDS. I acknowledge, it is a difficult point, to name professors of
Protestancy, for every age: Though (no doubt) our Protestant Church (as being
the true Church) enjoyed many Professors at all times. But these examples
before produced, may give great conjecture; that at all times since the
Apostles, there have been many faithful Protestants, and an answerable
administration of the word and Sacraments.


MICHAEAS. Touching your former produced examples; your own secret judgment
(no doubt) assures you that as yet we have not met with one pertinent example,
in all this discourse. But seeing you [M. D.] do forbear to instance for
former ages, yet not discussed (contrary to your promised attempt in the
beginning) I would entreat Ochinus, or Neuserus, to insist in particular
Instances of Protestancy, for every such age.


OCHINVS. I will speak both for my self and N^userus. The labor of
instancing is peculiar to M. Doctor; And therefore we would be loath, (as
being no more able to perform it, then he) to take it from him, and assume it
to our selfs.


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor and you two Gentlemen. These are but words, serving
fruitlesly to rauell out the time, allotted for disputation: Therefore once
more I urge you all, to give instances for every age, not yet mentioned.


NEVSERVS. What needs this earnest solicitation of you in this point? There
were (no doubt) in every of those Centuryes many Protestants: And let that
suffice.


MICHAEAS. What Neuserus? Generalityes without particulars? What Logic is
this? And yet you know, Logic is the scholars eye, wherewith he discerns
Sophisms and subtle Euasions. But the plain truth is, neither any of you, or
any learned Man whosoever is able so much, as but to suggest any one man (much
less any one Country) professing in the next precedent ages the Protestant
faith. And therefore (since Necessity is ever pardonable) I pardon you all for
your flying to these general answers; though I must confess, they openly
discover the strayts, within which you are here environed.

But [Learned Men] seeing we have waded so far in this discourse, we will
reflect a little upon the former examples or Instances. And I will here deal
liberally with you, in yielding ^or the time more, then I am bound to do. And
as the Ma^^ematicians do forge certain imaginary and vnreal Circles in the
Heavens, whereby they arrive to the knowledge of the true and natural motions
of the stars and planets: So I will for the time here imagine, that Waldo,
Wicklef, Hus and the rest by you exemplifyed, were in all points Protestants,
and that their faith was not contaminated and soyled with any one Error or
Heresy: yet from these acry supposals, I will nevertheless deduce the
infallible and certain truth of the defection of the Protestants Church; And
will prove, that the said Examples (admitting them for true examples) are not
sufficient, for several Reasons, to support the visibility of the Protestant
Church.

1. And first, we are here to call to mind, that the Church of God (as
appears from the Etymology of the Word: Ecclesia, and the Ecclesiastical
acceptance thereof) is a calling out, or Congregation of many of the faithful:
So as to the necessary being of the Church (especially after the first
plantation of it) not one or two, but diverse and many faithful must concur.
Which point is made more evident, in that the administration of the Word and
Sacraments (being ever a most necessary Attendant of the Church) includes in
it self a multitude of persons, consisting of Pastors and Doctors, on the
one side, and of spiritual sheep or children on the other side. In like sort
the former prophecyes touching the increase, amplitude, and continual
splendor of the Church do euict the same. Now to apply this to our present
purpose. In some of the former examples, we find no mention of others, joining
in belief with the first supposed Protestants of that time: Therefor from
hence it may be concluded, that the being of any one such strange Protestant or
other, does not include the being of any Protestant Church at that time; much
less, the Visibility of such a supposed Church, during but that very time.

2. Secondly, the Scriptures and first part of our discourse, do irrefragably
prove, that the Church of God must, not at one only time or other, but all
times, and in all ages, without the least interruption or discontinuance (much
less, without interruption for many hundred years together) be most visible
and conspicuous; for it is resembled (even in this respect) by Gods sacred
Writ, to a City, Math. (...) Esaias 2.
placed upon a hill, that cannot be hid at any time: And to a mountain, Esaias
ibidem.
prepared in the top of mountains, and exalted above Hills. All which implies
a continual and incessant Visibility of the Church: To which Scriptures D.
Fulke Against the Rhenish Testament in 2. Thessal. 2.
and In his answer to M. Reynolds preface p. 34. and 37.
D Whitakers subscrbe (as above is showed) Both who teach, that even in the
greatest persecution of Antichrist (much more, then at other times) the Church
of God shall be most visible, and as Bullenger Upon the Apocalypse p. 200.
says: right famous. This now being granted, and withal it being acknowledged
by D. ^ulke In his answer to a Cou^terfeyte Catholics p. 36.
and other learned Protestants, (who speak more sparingly and warily here of,
then others of their Brethren do, who grant a longer time of the reign of the
Catholic Faith and Religion): That anno Domini 607. the papists religion
prevailed (as the said Doctor speaks) and that all Popes from Boniface the
third, were Antichrists; which Boniface did live about the said year 607.

Now here satisfying my self at this present, with our Aduers: Confessions,
touching the continuance of our Catholic Religion; I demand (M. D. and you
learned Men) what Protestants can be alleged, living between Anno 607. and
(...) 220. at which time lived Waldo. Here are about six hundred years
between these two times; during all which Period, as also for every year
thereof, you stand obliged to allege Protestants for the continuance of the
Visibility of your Church; or else to acknowledge your Church not to be the
Church of God. But here all you Protestants are at a stand; as being not able
to name any one Protestant living within the compass of the said six hundred
years; I mean from anno 607. to anno 1220 whereby to support the Visibility of
your Church, but for any part of that time (much less for whole time.) And if
you [M. Doctour] can instance for those times, I here provoke you thereto: for
as for Bertram, and Berengarius etc. their examples are over unworthy to be
insisted upon (as above is showed) Besyds, supposing them for Protestants, yet
their examples serve but only during the life of Bertram and Berengarius; both
which lived some four or five hundred years after the acknowledged foresaid
607. year of Boniface; for which four or five hundred years, you still
remain bound to instance your Protestants.

Again Waldo (as is said) lived in anno 1220. Wocklefe lived anno 1370. Hu^ in
anno 1405. Luther lived more then a hundred years after Hus. Here we see
again, there is a good number of years between every one of these several
times: And here I demand again of you, to name some Protestants to fill up the
Bancks (as it were) or empty rooms of these many Sta^ions: During all which
time, you cannot instance (I am sure) in any one known confessed Protestant.
Wherefore I conclude, that seeing the Church of God is to be at all times and
seasons ever visible and discernable; And seeing your former Examples of Waldo,
Wicklefe, Hus, and the rest above mentioned (admitting them for true examples
in all points) are found defective to prove your Churches Visibility; that
therefore your Protestant Church (for want of this visibility, so necessarily
required) is not the true Church of God; and consequently, that I have no
warrant, to leave the Catholic Church, and to implant my self in your
Protestant Church.

3. Thirdly, All the former Men (I mean, Berengarius, Waldo, Wicklefe, Hus,
Luther etc.) were originally Catholics; and then after by forging of new
doctrines (before untaught) they divided themselves from the Church then in
being: And so thereby they justified in themselfs those words of S. John: (r)
they went out of us; the very signature or Character Joan. 2. and Act. 15.
of an Heretic, even in the judgment of Protestants. Osiand. inepitom. Cent.
1. l. 3. c. 1. p. 78. thussaith: nota, haeretici ex Ecclesia progrediuntur.
Now this disparture or going out of the Church, implies in lieu of a
continuance of their Church, an interruption, discontinuance, and defection of
their Church (and consequently a want of Visibility of their said Church: Since
it infallibly proves, that the doctrines taught by these men after their
departure, was not taught by the Church before in being: for if they had been
taught by it, these Men needed not to leave the then known Church, for their
defending and teaching of their said doctrines.

4. Fourthly and lastly, you (no doubt) will say, that Wicklefe, Hus, Luther
etc. did preach the word and administer the Sacraments to their disciples
(since without these means, even by your confession, the Church cannot
subsist.) Here then, seeing no Hebr. 5.
Man takes to him the honor of Priesthood, but he that is called of God, as
Aaron was. And seeing according hereto it is said: how Romans 10.
shall they preach, except they be sent? And further, who so Joan. 10.
enters not at the door, into the sheepfould, but clymeth another way, is a
theife. I now demand [M. Doctour] who did call Luther, Hus, Wicklefe, etc. to
preach the word, and administer the Sacraments? Or by whom were they sent?


D. REYNOLDS. I here answer, with Calvin, So lasciuius, a Protest. relates of
Calvin, in muscouit. et Tartar. religione^. c. 23.
Beza, In his conference at Po^si.
and D. Fulke: Against Stapleton and Martial. c. 2.
that they had extraordinary calling immediately from God, in reguard of the
Popes tyranny in those days, and the ouerflowing of superstition of those
times.


MICHAEAS. This is but extrauagantly spoken, and merely forged by you
Protestants [M. D.] as having no other color to warrant your calling. But
Musculus, loc. com. p. 394. Amandus Polanus in part. theolog. l. 1. p. 30^.
to refute this phantasy: Extraordinary calling is ever accompanied (as it was
in the Apostles) with working of miracles, even by the judgment of the
Protestants themself: Among whom Luth. tom. 5. (...). Germ. (...). (...).
Luther thus expostulateth others of their extraordinary calling, saying: Vnde
venis? quis te (...)is^^? (...)isunt (...), que is a Deo missum esse testantur?
(See how by Gods providence, Luthers pen turns upon himself.) And
therefore D. Bils^n, as wholly rejecting all extraordinary Calling (not
warranted with Miracles) thus confesses: In his perpetual gouerme^t of the
Church c. 9. p. 111.
They can have no part of Apostolical Commission, who have no show of
Apostolical succession. Thus then Luther, Hu^, Wicklefe, and the rest are
exempted from all extraordinary Calling, immediately by God himself: since
their Calling was never confirmed with the working of any one miracle, even in
the judgment of D. Fulke, whose words are these: It Against the Rhenish Test.
in Apocalyp. 13.
is known, that Calvin and the rest, whom Papists call Archhereticks, do work
no Miracles.


D. REYNOLDS. Some learned Protestants (to wit, Contra Durae^m l. 9. p. 820.
D. Whitakers, D. Bridges, In his defense of the government page 1276.
and others) do auerre, that it is not improbable to affirm, that Wicklefe,
Hus, Luther, etc. received their calling from the Church of Rome; Which calling
was conferred upon them. before their departure out of that Church. Which
opinion of theirs (admitting it for true) takes away the supposed difficulty
of this your Argument.


MICHAEAS. Never [M. D.] does the poor and fearful hair use before the
hounds, more windings and turnings, to save her life; then you Protestants do
here, to salve your Vocation: for you being here stabled; to get your self out
of the mire, sometimes affirm your calling to be extraordinary, and immediate
from God; warranted by him with certain Euthusiasms (forsooth) and
illuminations. But when the vanity of that pretext is laid open, then you fly
to the Catholic Roman Church, making it your Sanctuary. But see, with what an
absurdity this your later Answer is accompanied. For (besides, that Walde, as
being a Layman, never received any calling from thence) Why do you and others
most contumeliously call the Roman Church, Antichristian? seeing it seems, you
confess, that it is able to confer true Calling to Luther, Hus, and the
rest, and to their successors or descendents; which ability and power is
peculiar only to the true Church. For if the Pope be Antichrist, and his
Church, Antichristian (as your Brethren in their pulpitts, do vociferate) then
how can you pretend, their Calli^g to be sufficient and warrantable? seeing your
own men teach, Propositions and principl^^ disputed in Geneua p. 245.
that in Babylon (meaning thereby the Church of Rome) there is no holy Order or
Ministry indeed, but a mere usurpation. And most certain it is, and confessed
by all learned Men; that Antichrist cannot auaylably confer commission, for the
Preaching of the Word of Christ, and admitting the Sacraments of Christ. Now if
Luther, Hus, Wicklefe, and the rest do want true calling, then they cannot be
any true visible Pastors of Christ's Church; and consequently they cannot
justify in themselfs their Churches visibility: So plunged (we see) you
Protestants are, when you are demanded to justify the calling of Luther, Hus,
Wicklefe, and their successors.

And thus far now (Learned Men) to demonstrate, that supposing Waldo, Wicklefe,
Hus, Luther, and the rest instanced in your precedent passages, had been in all
points of belief, Protestants; and that they had otherwise neither comparted
with the Catholics, in any Catholic doctrines, nor had defended any gross
and acknowledged Heresies; yet it is most evident (in reguard of the Reasons
and arguments here alleged) that the examples of them are defective and
insufficient, to prove the visibility of the Protestant Church, in that manner,
as the visibility of Christ's Church is taught both by Catholic and
Protestant, and peculiarly by our selfs, according to the beginning of this our
disputation.


OCHINVS. With M. Doctor good leave, who has showed great reeding in his
former examples (though they be not so conuincing and pregnant, as I did hope
to find them) Neuserus, and I will undertake, to justify the visibility of our
Protestant Church, in all precedent ages. And you are hear (Learned Michaeas)
to know, I am of opinion, that supposing no instances at all of Protestancy
could be given, for all these former times by you mentioned, yet follows it
not, that therefore there were no Protestants in those times (which is only the
Question between us) for many Reasons may be given, why the names of such
Professors are not now known to us of these days. And one Reason may be
this, you know well, the Popes for many ages have borne more, then a serpentine
malice to the Protestant Religion; ever endeavoring by all means possible, to
extirpate it out; Therefore my judgment is, that their rage and fury was so
precipitate and violent against the Protestants of forms ages, as they labored
by all courses, to extinguish all remembrance of them, as by burning the books
written in those times by Protestants; by purposely making away of all other
Records of Protestancy; and by an absolute concealing the names of all
Protestants; thus hoping, that the Memory of them, might be interred with their
Bodies. This is my opinion. I mean, that there never was an utter disparition
and vanishing away of the Protestant Church in ancient times but only, that
the names and Professors of that Church were most diligently concealed from
all after times, through the Popes affected malignity.


MICHAEAS. It is strange, to observe the exhorbitant proceeding of Protestants
in matters of Religion. For sometimes you Protestants do diuulge in your
wrytings, that there can be named Protestants, living in every Century since
Christ (as you, M. D. in the frontispice of this discourse, with great
ven^itation did undertake to perform.) Now you retire back [Ochi^^s] from M.
D. assertion, and say; doubtlesly there were Protestants in all ages; though
their names and memoryes by some indirect course or other, were concealed from
Posterity: So distracted you are in your own judgments, passed upon one and
the same point at several times. Which certainly must be reputed as a Moale in
the face of a learned man; since now zealously to affect an opinion, at another
time to let the same saulle, by entertayning the contrary opinion, is but the
Ague of an irresolute, and inconstant judgment. But to come to the point.
First I say, that this evasion of Ochinus mainly ouerthwarteth M. D^^tours
former Instances. For if the names of all Protestants were buried in
forgetfulness, by the Popes Agens (as here you say) how then can we know, that
Berengarius, Waldo, Wicklefe, etc. were Protestants? And if these and others
were Protestants, then was not Protestancy and the Mantayners of it wholly
extinguished by the former Popes sedulity and diligence. How do you extricate
your self [Ochinus] out of this Labyrinth? Again, I say, this your sentence
is but a mere Imagination, wrought in the forge of your own brain. For you
have neither proof nor color of proof, that either the names of Protestants
in former ages should be concealed, or their books, or any other Records
touching them should (by the labored confederacy of the Popes and their
followers) be suppressed and made away; And why then should here your bare
asseueration be credited?

Secondly, I urge, that such proceedings, as here are pretended to be (as the
extinguishing the light and splendor of Christ's Church, for so many ages
together) do mainly impugn the Prophecyes of holy Scripture, delivered of it,
for we read, that it is said of Christ's Church: Her Esaias: c 60.
Sun shall not be set, nor her Moon hid: That she Daniel. 2.
shall not be given to another People; but shall stand for ever: That she
shall be Esaias. 60.
an eternal glory and joy from Generation to generation. All which Prophecyes
(besides diverse others (recited by your self before) tending to the exaltation
and glory of Christ's Church, how dissortingly and disproportionably can they be
auer^ed of the Protestant Church of former times? If so the Annals, Records,
and all other Monuments of it former being be wholly obliterated and
extinguished?

Thirdly, this Evasion contradicts the more ingenious and plain
acknowledgments of others of your own Brethren: who do teach, that your Church
for sundry ages has remained wholly invisible, or rather utterly extinct. I
will here produce the authority only of D. Parkins; His words are these: For
many In his exposition upon the Creed, p. 400.
hundred years past, an universal Apostasy has ouerspred the whole face of
the Earth: And our Church has not been visible to the world.

Lastly and principally, this your surmise impugneth all experience, touching
the chief Occurrents of the same ages and times. For first we find, that the
personal defects and blemishes of certain Popes are registered in those times,
and the relation of them are at this present extant; Neither could the Popes
prevent the same; And from such relations do the Protestants (and particularly
you, M. D. D. Reynolds in his conference with M. Heart. c. 7 diuis, 6. the like
does D. Jewel in his defense of the Apology.
in some of your writings) vpbraid us with the less warrantable life of some
Popes. Now then these things standing thus, how could the Popes hinder the
registring of any Professors of faith, adverse and contrary to themselfs in
those days? It is absurd therefore to think, that the Popes were well
contented, that their own scarts should remain to be seen by all posterity
(supposing, it were their powers, to prevent the same) and yet should
affectedly labor, that all testimonies of different professors in faith from
them (but especially of Protestant Professors) should be buried in eternal
silence and oblivion: Themselfs not being able to forsee, that protestancy
should sweigh more in these days, then any other erroneous faith and Religion.
Again, the Examples of the Wrytings of Hus, Wicklefe, the pretended book of
Carolus Magnus, the supposed book of Bertram, the connterfeyted Epistle of
Vlrick, and all other writings of the foresaid Heretics, or any others at this
day yet extant,) and not suppressed) fight mainly with this your Opinion: For
were it not, that the said Wrytings and books were yet remaining to the world,
the Protestants of these times could not have known, what articles of
protestancy the said Heretics did mantayne in those days.

Furthermore, the very subject of the Decrees and Canons of Catholic
Councels, celebrated in all former ages, is chiefly the condemning and
anathematizing of particular Heresies, there [verbatim] set down and
expressed, as they did rise in the same ages; with commemoration and recital
of the Heretical doctrine invented, and the person inuenting, with all other
due circumstances. Ad hereto, that your own Brethren confess, what we here
endeavor to prove. Among whom D. Whitakers shall serve for all at this time;
who being glad to make claim for Protestants of all such, as in any sort
resisted the Pope, thus writes to his Catholic Adversary: Contra Duraeu^ l.
7. p. 469.
Vestris historijs nostrae Ecclesiae memoria viget; Et qui Pontificij regni res
narrare conati sunt, ij nostrae Ecclesiae sunt testis. The memory of our Church
florisheth even in your Historyes; And those, who labored to relate the
proceedings of the Popes Kingdom, are become Witnesses of our Church. Thus D.
Whitakers. Lastly, we will adioyne, to all the former experiences, the
historyes and Cronicles even of the Protestants, whose subject, task, and
designed labor is to relate and make mention of such strange and new
doctrines, as did rise in every age; showing, how the said doctrines were not
proved over in silence by the Church of Rome; but how, and when, and in what
Popes reign, they were openly gainsaid, crossed, and condemned by the said
Church. And all this the Protestant Historiographers do borrow from the
Catholics ancient Records (for but for those Catholic Records, they could
not tell, how in these days to write of those matters.) This (we see) is
performed very diligently by the Century writers, in their several Centuryes:
by Pantaleon in his Chronographia; by Osiander in his Epitome Eccles. And by
Illyricus in his book styled: Catalogus testium Veritatis, qui ante nostram
aetatem reclamarunt Papae. And which is here to be noted (as making more in our
behalf herein) diverse of these opinions and doctrines, thus related by these
Protestants, to have been condemned in former ages, are such, as are at this
present mantayned for true doctrine by the Protestants. Now from all these
premises we may fully gather, how far those former ages or the Popes then
living, were from laboring and affecting to keep in silence or suppress any
doctrine whatsoever, or persons mantayning the same, which did appear to be
repugnant to the faith and Religion of the Roman Church at those times. But
gentlemen I fear, I have been over long.


OCHINVS. Learned Michaeas, I do confess, I have seldom seen the weakness of
an opinion more fully and irreplicably displayed, then this of mine is by you
at large, even by direct of several reasons; And therefore for ever after I am
resolved wholly to disauthorize, and depose it. For indeed I see, It is but a
mere aerie and vasperous Conceate, instantly dissipated before the least beam
of a clear Judgment.


NEVSERVS. I do (with you Ochinus) acknowledge the transparency of it, since an
impartial eye is at the first, able to see through it. But [Michaeas] I see no
reason, but that we may aver, that the Protestant Church, and the
administration of the Word and Sacraments were in all ages; though the
particular professors of it were latent, and indeed invisible, through the
raging tyranny and persecution, wherewith the Popes of former times did afflict
all those, who in external profession of faith did in any sort dissent from
them. And you know, how adverse Adversity is to Man's inclination: And therefore
the less wounder, if the rays of protestancy were in former times ouerclowded
with the mysts of persecution.


MICHAEAS. Indeed, I have read, that Antonius sadellius (a protestant of no
vulgar note) gives this reason of the latency of his Church, and of the want
of administration of the word and Sacrament in former ages; with whom it seems
you [Newserus] in judgment do join. But to poyze the weight of this reason.
Where first I must put you in mind, that it being approved, makes the
protestant Church to be wholly invisible in former times; and so destroys the
main Thesis or Tenet, mantayned by you all in the beginning of this
disputation; who jointly did aver, that the Protestant Church was in all ages
visible, and the professors of it were, known and discernable; But to let
that pass. Thus I argue, in further disproouall of this your poor refuge. The
Church of God under persecution, either communicates openly with the false
visible Church, in participation of Sacraments and external profession of
Faith; Or else she does refrain, from all such external communion. If she does
not communicate with it; then by such her refrayning, she is made known, and
consequently is become therevisible: If she does communicate with a false and
idolatrous Church (as you repute the Church of Rome to be) then is she not the
true Church; since the true Church cannot brook any such dissimulation: I will
enlarge my self upon the several parts of this Argument. And first, that the
true Church by not communicating with a false Church, is (in regard of the
persecution coming thereby) made visible, is clear even in reason it self.
For who are persecuted, but Men, that are known? And how can one lying
secretly and unknown, be said to be persecuted? A point so evident, that M.
Curtwright confesses, that the Church under persecution is visible and
sensible, for else (says he) how In Whitguifts defense, p. 174.
could it be persecuted? Yea he further thus contesteth with his Adversary,
saying: To let pass, both Scriptures and stories Ecclesiastical, have you
forgotten, what is said in the first of Exodus? that the more the children of
Israel were persecuted, the more they increased. With whom agrees M. Jewel,
saying: In his Reply, p. 506.
The Church is placed upon a mount, her persecutions cannot be hid. I may truly
ad herto, that the greater and more violent the persecution is, the more
visible known, and conspicuous, is the Church made thereby; like to a ship,
which the more it is tossed with waves and storms, the higher to the eye it
appears; or like unto an Arch in building, which the greater weight and
burden it bears, the more strong and firm it remaynes.

The truth of which point is further warrantable, from the example of the
persecution in the Primitive Church; which of all pressures of the Church, was
incomparably the greatest. And yet we find, that the particular Bishops,
Confessors, and Martyrs are even to this day made known, who they were, and
what Heresies or false Religion they impugned; And this from the penns not only
of Catholic Historiographers, but even of Protestants; of which subject, you
may peruse the In Ce^t. 1. 2. 3.
Centurists, In Chronographia.
Pantaleon, In Chronologia.
Functius, Cent. 1. 2. 3.
Osiander, and M. Act. Mon. in his discourse of the tenn. Persecutions.
Fox. And may not the English Catholics (if I be truly informed) deservedly
here insist in the Examples of their own Nation. The Catholics whereof in
regard of their former persecutions in Queen Elizabeth her reign, are so far
from being latent and invisible, as that they were become most famous and
remarkable, throughout all Christendom. O pietatem de crudelitate lndentem.
Tertul. l. de resurrect. carnis.
Are not the names and memoryes of those reverend Priests, and others of the
Laity (to speak nothing of many worthy Confessors, and others suffering great
losses and disgraces) who lost their lives in her days only for Religion
(whose blessed souls I humbly beseech, to interceede and pray for me, to our
Savior:) Are not their names and memories (I say) even to this day fresh and
living? have their deaths obliterated and extinguished their memoryes, or
rather through a speaking silence, perpetuated and eternized them, their lives
being by this means extended beyond their lives? Who, by reason of their then
calamities and pressures (too well known to God and Man) became balls to that
state; and might justly complain in the words of the Apostle: 1. Cor. 4.
Spectaculum facti sumus mundo and Angelis, and Hominibus. Such were the stormy
floods, innundations, and ouerflowings of persecution in the said Queens time.
But to return, and to apply this here said. If the Catholics in this Country
(being but a small part of Christendom) could not, but for some few number of
years in comparison, escape the search and hands of their persecutors, but
became thereby most visible and known: the very Air ecchoing forth their
miseryes; How could then the Protestants, (being supposed to be dispersed
throughout many Nations) lie hid, and avoid for so many ages together (as is
pretended) the force of that persecution, which is affirmed by our Adversaries,
to have been far more greiuous, then ever this of England was.


NEVSERVS. I pray you [Michaeas] descend to the second part of your former
Argument; And first tell me your judgment, if it be not lawful for avoiding of
loss of goods, or death it self, sometimes to conceal our Religion?


MICHAEAS. No, we never ought to conceal our profession of faith, for fear of
any punishment how great soever: for here, nolle confiteri, Tertul. l. de fuga
in persecut.
negare est. And though we are not to importune persecution (for this were to
tempt God) or to take a spiritual pride in our afflictions, for our Profession
of faith, yet if the temporal Prince do impose any miseryes upon us our
Religion, we are with all alacrity and Christian magnanimity, patiently to
endure the same; ever continuing in our former Religion, loyalty, and
obedience, and pouring cut our daily prayers to the Almighty; that he would
vouchsafe to touch the said Princes heart, with commiseration of our despicable
and betrampled estates, and to grant him all true temporal and eternal
happiness our selfs in the mean time ever remaining confortable: Quid hic mali
est, Tertul. l. aduersu^ gentes.
cuius reus gaudet, cuius accusatio votum est, and paena faelicitas: But I will
come to the second branch, which contains the reason of this my Assertion;
Which was: That if the Church of Christ does communicate with a false and
idolatrous Church, she cease (ipso facto) to be the true Church of God. This
is most evident out of Gods sacred Writ, which teaches us. Romans 10.
that with the heart a man beleiueth unto Justice, and with the mouth confesses
unto salvation: Which text is truly paraphrazed by D. Field in these words:
Seeing the Church is the Lib. 3 of the Church page 1.
multitude of them, that shall be saved; And no man can be saved, unless he make
Confession unto salvation (for faith hid and concealed in the heart, does not
suffice.) It cannot be, but they, which are of the true Church, must by the
profession of the Truth, make themselfs known in such sort, that by their
profession and practice, they may be discerned from other men: A point further
receiving it most warrantable truth, from Truth himself, who thus threatens:
Math. cap. 10.
Whosoever shall deny me before Men, him I will deny before my Father in
Heaven. And from hence it is, that the Protestants themselves think, they are
obliged in conscience not to be present at the Service or Mass of the
Catholic Church, or to participate with the Catholics in their Sacraments:
Which kind of Recusancy is punctually taught by In his Synops. printed, 1600.
page 612. 613. 614.
D. Willet, In Council. Theol. page 628.
Melancthon, In his discourse hereof recited in Melanc^hons former treatise of
Council. Theolog. p. 634* 635.
Peter Martyr, Alleged in the foresaid place by Melancthon.
Bucer and Lib. de vitendis superstitionibus, extant in Calvin. tract. Theolug.
etc. p. 584.
Calvin.

But to draw toward an end of this your pretext of persecution. The same is
refuted even from the nature of the Church, delineated in Gods holy Word: and
accordingly acknowledged by you Protestants. For if the Church of God must at
all times be visible, and eminent (as is largly proved by us all in the first
part of this discourse) and must be eminent in so full a manner; as that we are
commanded to repair to the Church in all our spiritual Necessityes, according
to those words of our Savior: Math. 18.
Tell the Church etc. And if the administration of the Word and Sacraments must
even to the end of the World, ever and at all times be practiced in the Church
of Christ; How then can the Church, but by these means become most visible, or
rather most radiant? The force of which reason I will conclude, with the words
of D. Humfrey, thus writing: In Iesuitism. part. 2. tract. 2. rat. 3. p. 241.
Dum ministri docent, alij discunt; illi sacramenta administrant, hi
communicant; omnes Deum inuocant, and fidem suam profitentur; Qui ista non
videt, talpa est caec^or, Whiles the Ministers do teach, and others do hear;
whiles these Men do administer the Sacraments, those do communicate or
participate of them; whiles all do call upon God, and profess their faith; He,
that does not see these things, is more blind, then a moale.


NEVSERVS. Have you not often observed [Michaeas] how a little qu(...)tity of
copper, in a counterfeyte Coin; And yet neither is the corn or gould
extinguished or annihilated? But that it may be truly said, the Corn and
chafe is mingled together, and the gould and Copper moulted together; And yet
neither is the Corn, chafe, nor the gould copper: Why then by the like
analogy and proportion, may it not be here auerred, that the Protestant Church,
was in former ages in the Papacy; the Papcy was in the Protestant Church; and
yet the Protestant Church was not the Papacy? Which being granted, freeth our
Church from an absolute Inuisibility, at least from an utter extinction and
overthrow of it in those former Popisn times. And to my remembrance, I have
read certain learned Protestants, expressing this point, not much differently
from my words: for I find M. Parkins, thus to allude to this saying: In his
reformed. Cathol. p 328. 329.
The Church of Rome may be said to be in the Church of God; and the Church of
God in the Church of Rome; with whom D. Whitakers Lib. de Eccles. page 165.
seems to conspyre, thus writing: Ecclesia ver a fuit in Papatu; sed Papatus
non fuit Ecclesia vera: And with these former even In ep. Theol. ep. 1. p. 15.
Beza (besides Calvin in l. epist. epist. 104. Osiander in epitom* hist. Cent.
16. part. alt. page 1072.
others) does agree, saying: voluit Deus in Papatu seruare Ecclesiam; et si
Papatus non est Ecclesia. Which answer is thought so sufficient and choking,
as that the former learned Protestant, M. Parkings much rests upon it, thus
even exulting: D. Parkins vbi supra.
This answer serves to stop the mouths of Papists, who demand of us, where
the Church was fourscore years before Luther: for they are answered, that our
Church has been since the days of the Apostles, and that in the very midst
of the Papacy.


MICHAEAS. O how ingenious and pregnant [Niuserus] is Nouelisme in faith;
spining (like the silk worm) out of it own womb, such fine threeds of wit:
But (alas) these threeds are too weak to detayne and hold the Adversary. This
diuersion of yours (rather then answer) consists of a froath of words,
artificially put together: And indeed it partly resembles your own former
similitude. For the matter (as I may say of it) is even (...)ase metal,
gilded over with a specious show of mystical phrazes. For you Protestants,
seeing you are not able to instance particularly in any one man (during so many
ages, as from the Apostles days to Luther) who was a perfect Protestant; much
less to instance in the administration of the Word and Sacraments: And also
perceauing by Experience, that it sounds in the ear couldly (and indeed,
harshly) to grant in plain and direct words, that the Protestant Church
(during all those ages) was wholly extinct and vanished away out of the world:
and further remembering, that great and huge burdens are better removed by sleight of witty Engines, then by strength; have at length resolved to deliver
this your doctrine or Position, in an affected and obscure phraze, thereby (as
under aueyle or clowd) to shadow the falsehood thereof; saying, as above you
allege: The Church is in the Papacy, the Papacy is in the Church; And yet the
Church is not the Papacy. Thus do you here imitate physicians, who give
physic to delicate bodies, not in the gross substance, but either in
infusion, or extraction.

This curious frame of speech maks (as I said) a glorious show, at the first;
but examine it, and it presently resolves to nothing; like unto the lightning,
which is an eminent Object to the eye, and yet it no sooner comes, then it
vanishes. Now for the better discovery and displaying of this your slight,
you are here to conceive, that the sense of these words is not, that the
Protestant Church had in those times a latent and hidden being in Catholic
Countries, without having intercourse or Communion with the then known and
visible Church, in the Sacraments. For so the true Church could not be said, to
be in the Papacy; no more then at this day in respect of it like aboadin
Turkish Countries, it can be said to be in Turcisme. Therefore the particular
manner of this strange and stupendous mixture together for external Society
(like chafe and Corn in due heap, or copper and gould in one coin) is truly
expressed by Osiander (the Protestant) in these words: In epitom. Cent. 16.
part. alt. p. 1076. and 1072.
Quod semper sub Papatu aliqui pij homines fuerint, qui errores Pontificios,
and idolatrica sacra improbarunt: temetsi id non semper profiteri and ebant,
nemo negat; No man denies, but that there were ever under the Papacy some holy
men, who disliked the Errors of the Popes, and their Idolatrous worshipps:
although they durst not openly profess so much, Nisi ardere aut ad minimum
exulare velint, except they would burn for their Religion, or at least suffer
banishment. And yet the said Protestant more fully: Animum ad is it a po^tificia
idolatrica sacra non applicusrunt, tameisi extern^^ritus non pro^sus
negligerent, vt communi consue^^dino (quasi torrente rapido) arriperentur, vt
eadem cum alijs facerent; The faithful of those times, did not apply their
minds to, to those popish idolatrous worships; although they did not wholly
neglect their external rites and ceremonies: and they were led with common
custom (as men carried with a violent stream) to do the same things with the
Papists; Quorum infirmitatem Deu^ tolerauit and ^ondonauit, Whose infirmityes
herein, God did tolerate and pardon. Thus Osiander does apologize for his
Protestant Church in former times. From whose testimony (we see) that the last
sublimated sense of your former sentence resolves to this point; To wit, that
the Protestant Church in those former times, being in. or under the Papacy, did
through fear of burning, or banishment, or some other persecution, dissemble
their Religion, and communicate in all eternal rites and ceremonies with the
Church of Rome. This is the sole true construction of the foresaid quaynt
sentence, though the former Protestants (and perhapps, also your self
Newser^s) thought it good policy, to deliver this their meaning to their
followers, in nyce and artificial words (as Physicians are accustomed to give
their most bitter pills, rolled in sugar.) But seeing this point of gross and
palpable dissimulation in Religion, is sufficiently discussed in our last
passage, I will enlarge my self no further therein.


NEVSERVS. Michaeas, I must confess, that upon my more serious and intense
observation of what you have here spoken, touching our delivery of our former
Answer, that it is like to the spydars web artificially wouen, but to small
purpose: And indeed in a true examining of it, it is (as you rightly say) but
the former Answer drawn from persecution, though fashioned a new, in an other
mould.


OCHINVS. I do acknowledge the same with Neuserus; And therefore it is but loss
of time, to insist in such Extrauagancyes and phan^asyes. But to proceed, if
there were no other reason to euict the visibility etc.

If there were no other reason, to euict the visibility of the Protestant
Church, yet this following is of it self sufficient: The true Church of Christ
is ever to be visible (as we all above have taught:) Now we can prove out of
Scriptures, that the Protestant Church is only the true Church. Therefore we
may infallibly conclude, that the Protestant Church has ever been most
visible. That our Church is the true Church of Christ, we prove, in that it
professes that faith, which is agreeable to the holy Scripture. This is our
demonstration; This is our Asylum. Here we need not to recurre to
Ecclesiastical Historyes, or to search out examples of protestancy for every
age; since this reason comprehends within it self all ages, as a greater
number does the lesser.


MICHAEAS. Indeed I grant, this Argument is the Mayster-peece in all your
shopps; and (as you well term it) your Sanctuary. But may not the Arians, the
Anabaptists, or any other Heretics prove by the same ground, their Church
ever to have been visible? Who (no doubt) with as great confidence (as your
selfs do) will maintain, that they can justify their Church from the Scripture
it self, to be the only true Church of God: See how you Protestants here
labor with the general Infirmity of all Sectaryes; and see how truly that
Aphorism of the Physicians is verifyed in you and them: to wit, One and the
same Symptom is incident to sever all diseases. But seeing Doctor Whitakers
(for his vpshot) did cast his last argument in his conference with Cardinal
Bellarmyne, in this your frame and mould, to prove that the Church of Rome had
altered it Religion, because (said he) it faith and Religion is contrary to the
holy Scripture; Therefore as loath to obtund your ears with a fastidious
iteration of the same points, I refer you to the full answer of the
Cardinal, In the first part of the Converted Jew.
given thereto. Only before I here cease, I will pattern this your Evasion. If
then some slippery fellow should truly owe your [Ocbinus] a hundred pounds, and
ought to pay it by ten pounds every year; The yearly days of payme^ts being
come, you require of him the silver. He confidently auerreth, that he has
paid you every year, the allotted portion of ten pounds, till the whole
hundred was paid. You deny the same, and will him, either to show some
quittance of any one payment, or produce some witnesses thereof, or relate some
circumstance either of time or place, where the yearly payme^ts were made. Now
he (not being able to make good any one of these points, not so much as but for
one years payment) flies to this shift, saying: Every man of honesty,
integrity, and sufficiency will pay his debts, according to the due times of
payment; But he is assured, that himself is in the number of these men
professing honesty, integrity, and sufficiency. Therefore certain it is that
he has paid the foresaid hundred pounds, within the prescribed times of
payment. Thus this Cheater brings his own honesty (which may justly be
called in Question) as a Medium, for proof of these his imaginary payments, as
you do allege the Conformity of the Protestants Religion to the Scripture, for
the supposed visibility of your Protestans Church for many ages. Now [Ochinus]
if you like this man's answer (for both his and yours are wouen in one and the
same loome) my wish then is, that the next time you lend any silver, you may
(for a punishment of your ignorance herein) be repayed back after the same
manner.


NEWSERVS. I cannot, but ingeniously confess, that our flying to the Scripture
in this place, serves only but to prevent the instancing of Protestants for
former times: And so to make a subtle and fly transition from the expected
examples of Protestancy, to the uniformity of the Protestant Religion with the
Scripture: And indeed it is but a Paralogisme or fallacy, called Petitio
principij; consisting in assuming that to be proved and confested, which is
most in Question. For the main Question between the Papists and us is,
Whether their Religion or ours is more agreeable to Gods Word? And [Michaeas] I
confess you speak the truth, in saying; that every Heretic will appeal to
the Scripture, and will urge a conformity of his faith to it, and consequently
may seek to justify his own Churches visibility by this his Appeal; Whose
Private spirit (forsooth) by detorting of the Scripture, is able to Project any
text thereof (as Al^hymists do of Mettalls) so as it shall endure the touch,
for the gilding over of his Heresy: An Haeretici Lib. aduers. Haereses.
(says old Vincentius Lyrinensis) Diuini Scripturae testimonijs vtantur?
Viuntur plane and vehement er quidem; sed tanto magis cauendi sunt.


OCHINVS. Indeed now upon a second reuiew of this my argument, I do not find
that force in it, which in the beginning it seemed to carry. And I do see, that
every Heretic (I mean in his own judgment, and according to his own false
interpretation of Scripture) may challenge the Scripture for the fortifying of
his Heresies, as fully as we Protestants can do: And therefore. I do allow that
former sentence of Vincentius, alleged by you. Neuserus.


D. REYNOLDS. I have found some of our own learned brethren, to teach (though
aforehand I tell you, Michaeas, that I dissent in opinion from them) that the
Church of Rome and the Protestant Church, are but one and the same Church* from
which position they infer: that seeing the predictions of the continual
Visibility of the Church of God, and an uninterrupted administration of the
Word and Sacraments have been performed (at least, as you Romanists do auer^e)
in the Church of Rome; that consequently (ours and yours being but one Church)
they are performed in the Protestant Church. And according hereto we find M.
Hooker Lib. 3. Eccles. po^ p. 130.
thus to teach. We gladly acknowledge them of Rome, to be of the family of Jesus
Christ etc. And again; we say that they of Rome etc. are to be held a part of
the house of God, a limme of the visible Church of Christ: with whom
conspireth D. Some In his former sermons, and two questions, ser^ 3. p. 44^.
thus granting: The learneder Writers acknowledge the Church of Rome, to be
the Church of God. But this Opinion I have to the liberty of every one, either
to retain it, or reject it.


MICHAEAS. Here now you Protestants are retired to your last refuge and hold:
And thus is Error glad to be shrouded, under the Wings of Truth. For whereas
the most dispassionate, sober, and learned Protestants among you, do grant,
that for many ages before Luthers revolt, they cannot truly and really justify
the visibility of their Church in particular, (much less the administration of
the word and Sacraments.) And yet during all the said ages, they see, that all
this is actually accomplished, in our Catholic Roman Church; They are
therefore forced to give back, and to retire in all their former answers; And
at length are driven (for the supporting of their own Church) to say that the
Protestant Church and the Roman Catholic Church, are identically but one and
the same Church: And thereupon they infer, (as you M. Doctor say) that seeing
our Catholic Church be general acknowledgment, has ever continued visible,
during all the former ages; that therefore your Protestant Church (both being
but one and the same, by their (courteous yielding) has also enjoyed the same
privilege of a perpetual Visibility, and the like administration of the Word
and Sacraments: So ready you Protestants are, for the preserving only of your
own imaginary Church in former times, to join hands with they Catholics (if
so they would agree thereto) you granting, that your own Succession, calling,
and Ministry is and has been, for former ages continued and preserved, only
in the Succession, calling, and Ministry of our Catholic Roman Church.

And according to this our meaning, M. Bunny (a Protestant of good esteem here
in England) deals plainly and ingeniously herein; for he not only teaches,
as the former Protestants do, but gives sincerely the true reason of such
their doctrine; to wip, that otherwise they cannot prove the being of the
Protestant Church, during so many former ages: for thus he writes: M. Bunny in
his Treatise of Pacificatio^ sect. 18. p. 108.
Of the departing from the Church, there ought to be no question amang us. We
M. Bunny vbi supra p. 123.
are no several Church front them (meaning from us Catholics) nor they from
us; And therefore there is no departing at all out of the Church: Nor any do
depar^ from them to us, nor from us to them etc.

And yet more fully: It M. Bunny ibidem page 119.
was evil done of them, who urged first such a separation etc. For M.
Bunibidem p. 36.
that it is great probability for them (meaning us Catholics) that so we make
our self answerable, to find out a distinct and sever all Church from them,
which has continued from the Apostles age to this present; Or else, that needs
we must acknowledge, that our Church is sprung up but of late, or since theirs:
And finally M. Bunny thus concludes: Vbi supra p. 92.
Our Adversaries see themselves to have advantage, if they can joint us to this
separation. Thus M. Bunny. But touching my particular judgment herein, I
utterly (with all Catholics) disclayme from mantayning, that our Church and
the Protestant Church is all one: And I confidently auerre, that this strange
Paradox is invented by Protestants, for the reasons above expressed.


OCHINVS. What is the matter brought to this Issue, that we must grant the
Papists Church, and our Church to be one and the same Church? Is this [M.
Doctour] the event of our disputation? I will here imprecate with the Poet
A^n^d. (...).
against myself.

Sed mihi vel tellus optem prius ima debiscat;
Vel Pater Omnipotens adigat ^^ful^ine ad vmbra^,
Pall^^ies vmbras Erebi, ^octe^que profundam.
Before I acknowledge the Synagogue of Rome, to be the Church of God.


NEVSERVS. I give you free leave [Ochin^s] to include me within this your
imprecation. For I will dye the death of a sinner, before I grant, that the
Popish Church is the same with the Protestant Church. What? shall Superstition
and Idolatry (by our own consents) be advanced and set up (side by side) with
the Gospel, in the thrown of Gods Tabernacle? It is a thing insufferable; and
the thought thereof is not so much, as once to be entertained.


MICHAEAS. Gentlemen; good words. God grant your own Prayers against your
selfs, be not heard. And though I be of your mind, that the Catholic Church,
and your Church is not all one Church, yet if before your deaths, you do not
acknowledge the Church of Rome, for the true Church, doublesly your prayer
will be heard, when your selfs (though too late) shall with unutterable (but
improfitable) remo^se, condemn your selfs, of your own gross consideration,
in so weighty a matter.

But M. Doctor and you two. Hitherto, we see our discourse has been chiefly
spent in your obiecting Arguments, for your Churches visibility, and my
answering of them. Now I do expect, that our Scenes be altered; And that I may
insist in obiecting, what I have red confessed, even by the most learned
Protestants touching this subject: For these alternatiue variations of parts in
dispute, are in all Reason, and by custom of all Schools, most warrantable.


D. REYNOLDS. We give you good leave. For it argues a great distrust and
diffidence in a Man's cause, to tie his adversary only to answer, and never to
suffer him to oppose: And it is as unreasonable, as if in a Duelisme, the one
party should be indented with, only toward, and never to sryke: Therefore
proceed [Mich^^s] at your pleasure.


MICHAEAS. Truth says Cont. Donatist. post. collat. (...) ^4.
[S. Augustin] i^ m^re foroible to wr^ng (...) Confession then any rack^ or
torm^nt. Which sentence we fy^d to be justified in this Question of the
Protestant Churches Inuisibility: For diverse learned Protestants there are, who
as being more ingenuous and upright in their wrytings, and in their managing of
matters of Religion, then others of their party; and as well discerning the
insufficiency of all pretended Instances, and other colorable euasions and
answeares (which serve only to bleare for the time the impenetrating and weak
eyes of the ignorant) do in the closure of all, both by certain necessary
inferences, as also in plain and express terms, grant the point here
controuerted; to wit, that the Protestant Church has for many ages together,
been wholly invisible, and not known to any one man living; or rather, that
during such said ages, it has been utterly overthrown, destroyed, and (as it
were) annihilated, and no such Church in being. The proof of which point
shall be the subject of this passage.

This point then is proved two ways, and both from the penns of the
Protestants. First, from their acknowledged want of succession of Pastors, and
of their like defect of sending by ordinary Calling. Secondly, from their
manifest and open complaints of their Churches inuisibility for former ages in
express words; or rather of it utter extinction and Nullity.

And as touching the first. It is evident even in reason it self, that that
Church, which wants succession of Pastors and ordinary Calling, (if any such
Church could be) must needs be invisible, at least at that time, when such
want is. And the reason hereof is, because this want necessarily presupposes,
that there were not in that supposed Church, any former Predecessors or
Pastors at all, which could confer authority or calling to the succeding
Pastors or Preachers. But where no Pastors are, there are no sheep (for it
is written: how Romans (...)
shall they hear, without a Preacher?) And where no sheep are, there is no
Church; And where is no Church, there is no visisibility of it; since even
Logic instructs us, that: Non Eutis ^^n est Accidens. That the Protestant
Church for many ages, has wanted all personal succession, and ordinary
Calling, is ouereuident; seeing (besides that, which has been said of this
point already) we find diverse learned Protestants to confess no less. For
thus does Sadellius write: Diverse De rebus grauiss. co^trouers. page 319.
Protestants affirm, that the Ministers with them are destitute of lawful
Calling, as not having a continual visible succession from the Apostles times,
which they do attribute only to the Papists. And hence it is, that many
Protestants confess, that they are forced to fly (e) The Protestant Lasciuius
recites this saying of Calvin I. de Russor. Muscouit. etc. religione, c. 23.
to Extraordinary Calling, which is immediately from God, without any help of
man. Thus for example, Calvin says: Quia Papae tyrannide etc. Because through
the tyrann^ of the Pope, true succession of Ordination was broken off;
therefore we stand need of a new course herein; and this function or Calling
was altogether extraorinary. Thus Calvin. And D. Fulke Against Stopleton,
Ma^tial. p. 2.
in like manner says: The Protestants, that first preached in these days, had
extraordinary Calling; with whom agrees D. Parkins, saying: The calling of
W^cklefe, Hus, Luther, Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr etc. was extraordinary.

Thus we see, that the Protestants, confessing the want of (g) In his works
printed, 1605. f. 916.
personal succession in their Church, as also the want of Ordinary Vocation,
and flying therefore to Extraordinory Vocation; do even by such their
Confessions, acknowledge withal the Inuisibility of their Church in those
times, and an interruption (next before) of all personal succession: for if
succession of Pastors had then been really and truly in being; then had those
men been visible, to whom the Authority of calling others to the Ministry had
appertayned; and consequently there had been no need of Extraordinary Calling:
Which Extraordinary Calling is ever accompayned with Miracles (as above is
showed) in the judgments of the more sober Protestants: Ama^dus Polanus in
part. Theolog. p. 308. Musculus in loc. c^^. p 394. Luther tom. 5. lenae Germ.
(...). 491.
or otherwise it is but a mere illusion: And we have not red or heard, that
any of those first Protestants (who vendicated to themselves this Extraordinary
Calling) have ever wrought, in confirmation either of their Calling or
doctrine, any one Miracle.


OCHINVS. I must confess [Michaeas] that you have discussed well of this
point, and in my judgment very forcingly. But proceed (we entreat you) to the
second branch of your Proof; since I can hardly believe, that any Protestants
will expressly acknowledge the Inuisibility of their own Church: for if they
do, then is the Question at an end, and has received it uttermost trial, that
can be imagined.


MICHAEAS. The event will seal the truth of this point. And first, that
immediately before Luthers revolt, the Protestant Church was invisible, Vibanus
In his Apologetic. c. 176.
Regius (a markable Protestant) confesses so much. But of the Protestant
Church it visibility at Luthers appearance, we have already fully discoursed:
and therefore we will ascend to higher times. M. Parkins then thus writes of
ages more remote: We say, In his exposition of the Creed. p. 400.
that before the day of Luther, for the space of many hundred years, an
universal Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth; and that our Church
was not then visible to the world. Caelius Secundus De amplitud. regni Dei. p.
212.
Curio (an eminent Protestant) confesses no less in these words: Factum est,
vt per multos i am annos Ecclesia latuerit, ciuesque hutus regni vix ab alijs
(ac ne vix quidem) agnosci potuerint etc. It is brought to pass that the
Church for many years has been latent, and that the Citizens of this
Kingdom could scarsely (and indeed not as all) be known of others. D. Fulke
confesses more particularly of this point, saying: In his answer to a
counterfeit Catholic. p. 16.
The Church in the time of Bonifac^ the third (which was anno, 607.) was
invisible, and fleed into wilderness, there to remain a long season. M. Napper
rises to higher times, thus wrytinge: Upon the Revelation in c. 11. and 12.
God has withdrawn his visible Church, from open assemblyes, to the hearts of
particular godly men etc. during the space of twelve hundred and sixty years;
the true Church abiding latent and invisible: With whom touching the
continuance of this Inuisibility agrees M. M. Brocard upon ^he Apocalypse. fol.
(...).
Brocard, an English Protestant. But M. Napper is not content with the latency
of the Protestant Church, for the former times only; but inuolueth more ages
therein, thus auer^ing: During Upon the Reuelat. in c. 11. and 12.
even the second and third Ages (meaning after Christ) the true Church of God
and light of the Gospel, was obscured by the Roman Antichrist himself. But
Sebastianus francus (a most remarkable Protestant) ouerstripeth hearein all his
former Brethren, not doubting to comprehend within the said Inuisibility, all
the ages since the Apostles, thus writing: for In ep. de abrog. in vniuersum
omnibus statutis Eccles.
certain the external Church together with the faith and Sacraments vanished
away presently after the Apostles departure; And that for these thousand and
four hundred years (mark the lenght of the time (the Church has been no
w^eare external and visible. Which acknowledgement of so long a time (or
rather longer) is likewise made by D. Fulke, in these words: In his answer to
a counterfeyte Catholic page 33.
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles time. But D. Downham
(with whom I will hear conclude) is not ashamed to insimulate the very times
of the Apostles, within the like latency, thus wrytinge: The Lib. de
Antichristo l. 2. c. (...). page 25.
general defection of the visible Church (foretou^d 2. Thessal. 2.) begun to
work in the Apostles times. Good God. Would any Man hold it possible (were it
not, that their own books are yet extant) that such eminent Protestants should
confess (contrary to the necessary Visibility of Gods true Church, proved out
of the Scriptures, and acknowledged by their own learned Brethren) their own
Church to have been wholly latent and invisible; or rather, wholly extinct and
annihilated for so many ages together? But this we must as^rybe (O God) to thy
holy permission, who, as thou suffered in the time of the Old Testament, thine
Enemies to sheath their swords in their brethrens sides; so hear tho^
permiteest (for the greater honor of thy Church) so many learned Protestants
(even with wounderfull admiration, sweet Jesus) deadly to wound their own
Church, faith, and Religion, with their own penns.


D. REYNOLDS. Forbear (Michaeas) these woundering Interiections, the
accustomed Dialect of an ungoverned Passion. I grant, these learned Protestants
above alleged were of this opinion; Notwithstanding to confront their
authorityes, there may be found many others as learned and judicious
Protestants, as these are, who absolutely mantayne the Visibility of their
Church for all ages. And I see no reason, but that the sentences and judgments
of these other should preponderate and weighe equally with) the judgments of
the former Protestants, by you alleged.


MICHAEAS. You must pardon me (M. Doctor) if I wounder at things, so strangly
and unexpectedly fauling out. But to your solution. I say, it is most defective
for several reasons. First, because it mainly crosses the method agreed upon,
among us, in the beginning of our discourse; where you tied your self
irreph^ably to stand to the judgments and confession of your own learned Men.
Again, though you can bring other Protestants of as great eminency for
learning, as these by me objected; yet except you and the said Protestants
will insist in true and confessed Instances of Protestancy, for every several
age (which is impossible for you to perform.) your and their asseuerations are
to be reputed but naked, verbal, and inauayleable.

Lastly and principally, your Replye is insufficient, Because I hear allege
Protestants confessinge the Inuisibility of their own Church, to their own
mighty prejudice, and the Catholycks great advantage; And therefore it must
needs be, that the rack of Truth forced them (being otherwise ingenuous,
learned, and judicious) to all such Confessions; Whereas such Protestants, as
may be brought to gainsay and contradict the former Confession (as being men of
more spacious and large Consciences) do spoke in their own cause and behalf;
and therefore as being ready pressed to auere any thing (how false soever) for
the safery of their Church, are deservedly to be reputed in their wrytings,
more partial: So as in this case the Words of Tertullian may justly take
place. In Apologeti^o.
Magis fides prou^ est, in aduersus somet^psos confitent^^, quam pro (...)
^egantes.


NEVSERVS. I like well [Michaeas] the reason of your disparity, given touching
some Protestants confessing against themselfs, and others affirming the
contrary; to their own advantage.


OCHINVS. The difference set down by you is most foreible: for no doubt the
open Confession of one learned Adversary, is to ouerballance twenty denying the
same, even for that peculiar reason above mentioned.


D. REYNOLDS. Michaeas Suppose for the time, that we could not prove our
Churches perpetuali Visibility: yet saying you are not able, (if you were
pressed thereto) to justify and make good the Visibility of your own Roman
Church, during all the ages since the Apostles days. Therefore look into what
danger, through our confessed Inuisibility, we may be presumed to tune, within
the same we may justly includ you: And thus you own argument rebucts upon your
self.


MICHAEAS. Hear I see [M. D.] that for meare want of positive arguments, to
support your own Church, you are lastly fled to pick quarrels at our Church;
as if it were a justification of yourselfs, that we Catholycks did labor with
your infirmities; like men, who rejoice to have compartuers in misery. But to
your point urged. say it is impertinent to the whole drift of our dispute,
which was only, touching the want of Visibility in the Protestant Church; which
alone to prove, was by me undertaken; the visibilitye of the Catholycke Church
coming in incidently; like as a discourse of vice does often in the End; biget
some specches of Virtue; our Contrary being thus brought to our remembrance, by
means of the other Contrary. But because [M. D.] you shall discover no
tergiuersation in us herein, and that here to entreat of the continual
Visibility of our Catholycke Church, violateth our former imposed method:
Therefore I will pawn my credit, that there shall be left with you certain This
is performed in the Conclusion of this Trea^ise.
prouffs, con^ayninge the express and confessed Visibility of our Roman
Church, from the Apostles to these days; And this by the acknowledgment of
sundry learned Protestants; though hear by the way, I must tell you, that the
confessed Inuisibility of the Protestant Church, during so many former Ages,
does potentially and vertually include the proof of the Visibility of our
Roman Church, during the said ages: Seeing the Inuisibility of your Church (for
so long a time) is ascribed by you Protestants (as appears by many of the
former Protestants testimonies) to be the work of Antichtist; (you meaning
thereby, the Pope, and the Church of Rome) therefore it ineuitably follows,
from your own Primisses, that Popes and the Church of Rome have ever been
visible, during all the said former Ages and Centuryes.


OCHINVS. Newserus, I would have a word or two with you in private; therefore
if it please you, let us walk a little a part.


NEVSERVS. I am willingthereto: go into the next room, and I will follow you,


OCHINVS. You see here [Neuserus] how this Question of the Protestant Churches
visibility has been discussed and argued: And I must consesse, that [Michaeas]
has even in replicably demonstrated, that the Protestant Church has (at least
for many ages) been invisible, or rather extinct: you see also, how royatous
and abounding the old Testament^s in prophecyes, and other testimonies, that
the Church in the day, of the true Messiah, shall be at all cy^res, most
conspicuous and visible. Therefore what rests, but that either we must reject
the old Testament (which I never will do) for falsely prophetying of the state
of the Church; Or else we must deny, that these times of the new Testament, are
the times of Grace; and that the Church erected by Christ and his Apostles (as
wanting the accomplishment of the foresaid predictions) is the true Church?
which later point, I hold to be more probable.


NEVSERVS. You have prevented me [Ochinus] in time of speaking, but not in
judgment. For to confess the truth, after I had observed the weakness of the
Instances alleged (though alleged by the Doctor, with as much Scholarlike
Art, and advantage, as might be) my houering thoughts transported my judgment
to this your Center. Which though it be environed with difficultyes, yet I
hold it the more safe way with you (since the one must necessarily be rejected
as false and erroneous, they so diametrically crossing one the other) to
retain our former reverence to the old Testament, and absolutely to abandon and
disclayme from the New. And therefore, let us return back to Michaeas and the
Doctor, to acquaint them, with this our final resolution.


OCHINVS. Michaeas, and M. Doctor. My self and Neuserus have in the secretts
of our souls, passed our impartial censures upon this our Conference. And we
both acknowledge the full weight of Michaeas his resons, in disprouall of your
instances and of our own former euading answers: And our Conclusion is, that
we both assure our selfs, that the Protestant Church had never any visible
existence, for these many last several ages, at the least: And in deed (I
confess) when I do So says Ochinus in praefat. suorum Dialogorum.
consider, how Christ by his power, wisdom, and goodness, had established and
founded his Church, washed it with his blood, and enriched it with his spirit;
and discerning how the same is (funditus auersa) utterly overthrown, I cannot
but wonder; and being desirous to know the cause, I find, there have been
Popes, who have prevailed in utter extirpation and overthrow of Christ his
Church. Here you have my ceusure, accompanied with the true Reason thereof.


NEVSERVS. I do fully conspyre in judgment with Ochinus, moved thereto through
the strenght and validity of Michaeas his Arguments. And yet I hope, this is no
blemish either to you (M. Doctor who have most learnedly handled this point)
nor to our selfs, but only to the weakness of our cause: for there are some
untruths so palpable and iniustifiable, (and among them, rang the supposed
visibility of our own Church (that neither learning, Art, or the bestfiled
words (which commonly (...) the ear of credulity) are able to set a good gain
upon them. Therefore [Michaeas] to be snort, in beleiung that the Protestant
Church for many centuryes has been wholly invisible, Ochinus and my self are
wholly yours.


MICHAEAS. I much rejoice thereat, and I hope (notwithstanding both your former
acerbity of speeches) that now upon your second and more serious renew of this
point the acknowledgment of this one Truth will be a good disposition, for your
further encertaynment of the Catholic faith: since a dislike of the
Protestant Church implies in itself, a favorable respect to the Catholic
Church; which Church has ever been houored with a perpetual visibility.


OCHINVS. Stay [Michaeas] Not so. You are over hasty; your prae^ is as yet not
gotten; and your credulous expectation ouerrunne your judgment Know you
therefore; first, that touching your Church (at the stear^e whereof that Romish
Antichrist does sit) we hold it not (as above we protested) to be the Church
of God; And then it mat^reth nothing with us, whether your said Antichristian
Church have ever since it first being, been visible, or no For though we teach,
that the true Church must ever be visible; yet we teach not conuertibly, that
what Church has ever been visible, the same is the true Church, Furthermore
Michaeas and M. Doctor, take both you notize, that the confessed want of a
continual visibility, and of the administration of the word and Sacraments,
ministers to us a great suspicion, whether the Church of Christ, be that
Church of God, which is so much celebrated by the Prophets of the Old
Testament; and consequently whether Christ be the true Messiah of the World.
For if he had so been, doubtlesly he would not so quickly have repudiated his
intemerate and chaste spouse (for so the true Church of God is) after his
departure from hence.


NEVSERVS. What Ochinus ^ath delivered (though perhapps with amazement to you
both) I do here justify. And as it is evident, that the former Prophecyes have
not been actually performed in Christ his Church: So we must needs rest
doubtful (at the least) through want of the performance of the said
Predictions, whether Christ be that Redeemer of the World, which was promised
to the Fathers of the old Law; And whether he had true authority to erect this
Church, of which he has made himself Head ^or certainly the ancient
Predictions delivered in a prophetical spirit, touching the Messiah and his
Church, are infallibly to be performed in the Messiah and his Church.


MICHAEAS. How now my Masters? Is this the fruit of my refelling your Churches
Visibility? Tends your approbation of my former discourse to this? Whether aim
these strange and fearful speeches of yours? Will you disclayme from Christ
as your Redeemer, because the Prophecyes of the old Testament touching the
expansion, latitude, and continual visibility of the Church of God, are not
performed in the Protestant Church? And will you not confess the said
predictions to be fulfilled at all, because they are not fulfilled by that way
and means, as your selfs would have them? Take heed; do not obliterate and
deface those fair impressions, charactered in your souls, at your Baptism;
neither now di^auo^^ your (then taken) first now. O merciful God; how ignorant
are you in these matters? And then more miserably ignorant, it that partly
through learning you are become ignorant. Do you think to honor the Father,
by d^shonoring the Son; even that Son, in whom the Father took such
ineffable contentment? Math. 3.
Hic est filius meus dilectus, in quo mihi complacui. Certain it is, that if
you persevere in judgment, as your words import, you deny him for your Savior,
who had a Father without a Mother; a Mother without a Father: The first argued
his Divinity; the second his immaculate and pure Nativity. Tertul (...) gentes.
Quod de Deo profectum est, (...)eus est, and Dei Filius and Vnus Ambo. You
deny him, whose body was framed of such an admirable and delicate constitution
and temperature, as that the earth did then (contrary to it accustomed manner)
even power it influence upon Heavens; To be shor^, you deny him, who gave 1.
Timoth. 2.
himself (...) Redemption for all, who tasted Hebr. 2.
death for all; who Joan. 1.
took away the sins of the World; and finally who was Savior Joan. 4.
of the world, and reconciliation 1. Joan. 2.
for our sins: In the time of whose Passion, death did even ^eui^e, and
Eclips did enlighten: Lux Joan. 1.
in tenebris lucet, and tenebrae eum non comprehenderunt. But why labor I, to
celebrate his birth, who is from all eternity, or to perform his exequies, who
cannot dye; Romans 6.
Mors illi vltra non dominabitur. And by you assured, that who contemn Christ,
the Redeemer of all flesh, must needs contemn God, the Author of all flesh.

And where you call the Pope: that Romish Antichrist; see how malice seeleth up
the eye of your judgment you mantayne (is seems) that the true Christ and
Messiah is not yet come; How can the Pope then (by your doctrine) be
Antichrist; since Antichrist (you know) is to come after (not before) the true
Christ? Again for prouffe, that the Pope is Antichrist, you (no doubt) will
make show to rest upon the wrested authority of the New 2 Thessalonians. 3. Apoc. 17
Testament: And shall not then the said New Testament be of the like authority
with you, to prove, that Christ is the true Messiah?


OCHINVS. Tush (Michaeas) This is but your Oratorye. We say the Prophecies of
the old Testament (of which we have set down so great store) are infallibly to
be performed; We find they are not performed in Christ Church: How then can we
believe in Christ, as our true Messiah and Redemer, or rep^te his Church, for
the true Church of God? And where you (Michaeas) replye, that the said
Prophecyes are accomplished in your Popish Church, that forces nothing: since
we are assured, that that your Church is a superstitious and idolatrous Church,
and wholly alienated from the Covenant of God. Therefore briefly touching my
self, I openly say, I do expect an other That Ochinus upon the not performance
of the Prophecyes of the old testament in the Church of Christ, denied the
Trinity, taught Circumcision, and became an absolute Apostata, is witnessed by
Zanchius (the Protestant) in his book de tribus elohim, printed, 1594. l 5. c.
9. As also by Co^radus Slussenb. (a Protestant) in Theolog. Caluinist. lib. 1.
fol. 9. The title of which chapter in Sluffenberg. is: respontio ad Ochini
blasphemiam. And lastly, the same is auerred by Beza, in Polygam page 4.
Messiah, an other Redemer: And I do not acknowledge your Christ to be the
second Person of the Trinity: And therefore I do hold, that the Old Law being
in force, Circumcision is to beretayned.


NEWSERVS. Michaeas, the stream of the times ought not to bear down the
Truth. Therefore seeing in the Church of Christ, the Predictions of the
Prophetts (above by Ochinus and my self fully alleged) touching the
enlargment, the vninterupted Visibility, and the incessant administration of
the Word and Sacraments are not performed: I here pronounce, that That Neuserus
through the want of the performance of the foresaid Prophecyes, denied our
savior Christ, reputed him a seducer, turned Turk, and was circu^cized at
Constantinople, is witnessed by Osiander (the Protestant) Cent. 16. part. 2.
page 818. in these words: Adam Neuserus, Pastor Heidelbergensis etc. prolapsus
est in Turcismum, and Consiantinopole circumcisus. As also by Conradu
Slussenberg. in Theolog. Calvin. lib. 1. art. 2. fol. 9. in these words: Adam
Neuserus olim Heidelbergensis Ecclesia primarius Pastor, ex Zwinglianis^^ per
Arianismum ad Mahometismum, progressus est.
Christ was not the true Messiah, but aseducer; and that his Church is not the
Church of God. And more particulary for my self (as continuing for ever in this
my sentence) I am resolved to go to Constantinople: and there (as now believing
in the law of Moses) I will be circumcized. Therefore (Micheas) content
yourself, and forbear all further vehemence of speech against us: in^o which
before you did begin to enter; but show in you^ words greater temperanee and
Patience.


MICHAEAS. Patience Peace Pr^digious men. It is hear a Virtue, to transgress
all bonds of Patience; and but stupiditie* not to be angry. You Miscreants,
unworthy to breath, since you deny him, through whom you breath; and vnwothy to
enjoy a being, since you reject him, who gave you your Being presumptious
Clay, that d^^est thus contest with thy maker. Think you my Words shall be
slow, in defense of him, who is the Word: Joan. 1.
(...) Verbum care factum est, and habita^t in nobis? No. I must speak. I will
speak. Never (never) shall my ears be guilty of my Redemers blasphemies, but
that my Tongue to it uttermost power shall replye (and in this fervor keep me,
sweet Jesus, to my last gasp) And I will be ready to trumpet ^orth the disgrace
and ignominye of you both, throughout all Christendum Call you your former
Religion: The light of the Gospel, which finally tends to put out the Light
it self? erat lux Joan. 1.
vera, quae illuminat ^mnem hominem. O that I had one of the coals of the holy
^ltar of God, to sear your blafphemous tongues, as the Esaias. 6.
Seraphin by taking one of the coals thereof, did purify the lips of the
Prophet Esaias* o impiety of times, in which such Munsters are bred; worthy for
fear of infecting others, to be eliminated out of the Society of Men, and to
be relegated unto some desert or Wilderness; there to converse with Beasts since
in sauadgnes of Nature you excede beasts* you Batteyd Infidells, that cannot
endure the light of the Sun, Malac^. cap. 4.
orietur Sol Iustitiae: under what name do you expect Salvation; Since Act. 4.
there is not any other name under heaven, given unto Men (then tha^ of Jesus)
wherein we must be saved? Cannot the Prophecyes of the Old Testament (upon
which in other points, you seem so much to rely) touching so many
particularities of our Saviors Birth, Life, Passion, and Resurrection (the due
consideration See hereof the first part of the Co^^erted ^ew at the beginning.
of all which, I acknowledge, first made me a Christian*) prevail with you, to
confess him for your Red^mer? Since all those particulars were to be performed
only in the true Messiah* and all of them have been actually performed in him,
whom now you refuse. The patration of infinite stupendous Mirac^es, exhibited
not only by Jesus himself, but by his Apostles and servants, may be able (I
should think being truly weighed) to wash out this blot of your Infidelity,
and to ^yle away the rust of this your misbel^ife. o England, blushest not
thou, that after thy casting of thy primative faith, Ocb^nus was the Apostle,
by whose means and labor thou first did such Protestancy? Is this he, whose
presence Bale in prefat. act. Rom po^tific. printed 1558. initio.
in those day^s is said to make thee happy; and whose absence unfortunate; and
Calvin. l. descandalis, (extant) iu tract. Theolog. printed, 1597* page 111* vt
supra dicitur.
whom all Italy could not equal? See (to thy dishonor, and his perdition)
what he is become: A Jew, a Turk, an Aposta^a, forsaking Christ and all
Christianity and teaching Circumcition and polygamy or plurali^ye of wyfes; a
doctrine, where Sensuality diminishes the pleasure of sense. And thou
He^delberg (at this present honored, by having trans-planted in thee, so fair
a Rose ou^ of the English garden) Behold here once thy chief Pastor Neuserus
(and now confessedly a chief instrument of the devil) from whom, as from one
(by supposall) peculiarly illuminated by the Lord, thou hearetofor^ did
receive thy spiritual nurrishme^t; Who^e Superintendency (forsooth) is not
afraid in the ^^d, openly to blaspheme against the Sauiou^ of the World, and to
turn Turk; and who having an uncircumcised heart, will needs carye about with
him a circumcized body. And Celebrious Oxford (the good^^est skryne of the
Muses, under the Sun) how can thou brook, that such impure Imps, as these,
should breath thy pure air? Or can thy worthy and noble Sonns (eminently
endued with all good lettars) endure the sight of these Infide^ls? Had thou
before been persuaded, that these two Monsters (whose very Souls and bodies
Man's goastly Enemy seems of late to organize) would have ^^ulne into these
blasphemies, no doubt thou would etc.


D. REYNOLDS. Stay [Michaeas] Proceed no further. You have spoken enough. And
I much commend your Christian fervor herein: And I confess, it gaulingly
vpbraids me, to see any of my own Religion, thus to apostatate from the faith
of Christ. And it is no small grief, that this disputation first intended, to
make one Papist a good Protestant, has in lieu thereof made two Protestants,
two Jews or Turks. But yet [Michaeas] let not the severity of your Censure
pase further, then the fault extends. It is only Ochinus and Neuserus (and
two, though too many, in reference to several thousands, is scare reputed a
number) who thus sin. Let not then the Gospel it self, or any other
Professors of it, be insimulated by you within this atrocity and Crime. And
you O^hinus and Neuserus. o soil not your selfs with this so foul an
imputation. But seeing Wisdom only judges of Wisdom, and learning of
learning; so let your learning and Wisdom equally run together, to
acknowledge him for your Redemer, who is the source of all Wisdom, learning and
knowledge: de 2. Io. an. 2.
plenitudin^ eius omnes accepimus. your Sin is most heinous and dreadful;
yet being attended hereafter with a true remorse and repentance, is remissible;
and for your conforts remember that Paull the Apostle (who once persecuted him,
whom you now deny) did expiate the sins of Saul the Publican.


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor you do well, and like a Christian Doctor, to endeavor
to re^all home these two wretches. Yet touching the paucity of Protestanticall
Apostates by you pretended; it seem^s, your Memory wrongs your Reading. For it
is a vast untruth to affirm, that only Ochinus and Neuserus have revolted to
Turcisme and Iuda^sme. For did not David George (a chief Protestant, and once
Professor) Osiander cent. 16. part. 2. page 647. says, of David George:
Vtebatur publico Vir Dei ministerio Basi^ien^i etc.
at Basil) become a blasphemous Apostata? who affirming our Savior to be a
seducer, and grounding himself (with Ochinus and N^user^s) upon the not
acco^plishment of the Prophesyes of the Churches visibility, in the Protestant
Church, thus writes: See historia Dauidis Georgij printed at Antwerp. 1568
published be the deuines of Basil.
Si Christi and Ap^stolor^an doctrina vera and perfecta fuisset etc. If the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been true and perfect, the Church,
which they had planted, should have cont^nued etc. But now it is manifest, that
Antichrisi has subverted the doctrine of the Apostles, and the Church by them
begun etc. therefore the doctrine of the Apostles was false and imperfect.
Thus that imp^ous Jew* And was not Alamannus, a Swinglian, and once most
Conradus Slussenberg* in Theolog. Calvin. l 1. art. 2. f. 9. Alemanus Bezae
antea fami^iarissim^s and ^irenuus Caluinista, R^ligioni Christianae longum
valde dixi^ and factus est Apostata and Iudaeus blasphemus
familiar with Beza? who, persuading himself, that the prophecyes touching the
continual vis^bility of the Church, were not performed in Christ his Church,
because he saw they were not performed in the Protestant Church, did thereupon
renounce Christianity and became a blasphemious Jew: a point so evident, that
Beza himself (notwithstanding their former inwardnes and friendship) thus
writes of him: S^ writes Beza in epist. 65. p. 308.
Alamanum affirmant ad ^uda^smum d^fecisse. Did not Georgius Paulus Stancurus
de mediatore fol. 38.
(minister of Cracouia) deny the Trinity with the Turks? In like sort
Conefius, and Laelius Socinus (a scholar in the school of Geneua (who writ
whole books against the B. Tri^ity) upon the former grounds forsook the
Christian faith. And this Socinus (as Beza Epist. Theol. 81.
witnes^eth) so at the first corrupted the first chapter of S. ^ohn his
Gospel (which speaks so plain^ly of Christ) as that, Beza says of him:
mih^ quidem videtur omnes corrup^ores long superasse. In like sort Andreas
V^lanus In Pa^aenesi.
(a great Caluinis^) not only became in the end a Turk, but infected many
others with his wrytings, against the Ble^s^ed Trinity and Christian faith. But
if you have a desire to r^ede of more Protestants, who became Turks and Jews,
as presuming, that the former Prophecyes were not performed in the Church of
God, I refer you to a book, to which I think you are no stranger; I mean
to that most elaborate and mother-booke (for it has given birth to diverse
others) written by your own brother, M. William Reynolds, and called Caluino
Lib 1. c^ 19 l 3. c. 3. and 8. and in diverse other places thereof.
Turcismus. You may also to the same end, peruse^ Conradus Lib 1. de Theol.
Calvin. a^t. 2. c. 9.
Slussenberg and Osiander Cent. 16. p. 207. 208. 209.
(both Protestants) where I presume, your stomach will be soon gluted, with the
displeasing gust of diverse others there related.

And now in the through of these examples, my thoughts are carried to Sebastian
Castalio (once Professor at Basil) And one highly extolled by your own D.
Humfrey Lib. de ratione interpreta^di (...). 1 p. 62. 63. And Osiander in Cent.
16. who says: Sebastianus Castaleo vir asprime doctus etc and dinguarum
perit^ssimus
and others. This Castalio, though he went not so fare as by open breach and
Apostasy to leave the faith of Christ; yet in regard that the former
predictions touching the spreading of Christ's Church; and the ever vneclipsed
conspituity of it, were not (in his judgment) performed in Christ Church, he
writes very perplexedly hereof, to King Edward the sixth in this Manner: Equidem
In the Preface of the great Latin Bible, dedicated to King Edward the sixth.
aut h^c futura f(...)endum est etc. Truly it is to be confessed, that these
predictions are either to be performed hereafter; or have been allredy; or that
otherwise God is to be accused of lyinge. If it be said, they have been
already accomplished. I ask of him, When? If he answer in the Apostles
days; I demand then, how it happens, that neith^r then the knowledge of God
was wholly perfect, and why it so soon vanished away; which was promised to be
eternal, and more abundant, then the floudds of the Sea? And then without
saluing this his difficulty, he finally thus dowbtfully concludes: Quo magis
libros sacros considero, eo minus hactenus praestitum video, vtcumque oracula
illa intelligas: The more ^peruse the Scriptures, the less do I find the same
performed, howsoever you understand the said Prophecies. See with what a
fearful and wavering trepitation of judgment, this learned Caluinist writes
of this point; through his false supposall, that the Catholycke Church is not
the Church of God; but cheiffly through his true acknowledgment, that the
former Prophecies were not performed in the Protestant Church. And thus far of
these Examples. But if you will have a censure, whether any Protestants (or
rather Caluinists) turn Arians or no (who as denying the most Blessed Trinity,
are little bettar, then Turks or Jews) I will give it in this Neuserus his own
words (and if I wrong him herein, let him now before you charge me.) who thus
has left written: None Oslander in epitom. cent. 16. p. 209. reports, that
Neuserus being turned Turk, and circumcised at Co^sta^tinople, did write these
words to one D. Gerlachius (a Protestant Preacher, at Tubinga) from
Constantinople.
is known in our time to be made an Arian, who was not a Caluinist, as
Seruetus, Blandrata, Paulus Alchianus, Gentilis, Gebraldus, Siluanus and
others; therefore who fears to faule into Arianisme, let him take heed of
Caluinisme. Thus you Neuserus: so certain it is that Arianisme, Turcisme, and
Iudaisme, are the last sublimations of Caluinisme.

Well M. Doctor. I am cloyed with the society of this discourse, and can hardly
endure any longer with patience, the sight of these two Wretches, belcking
forth such horrible poison; And therefore I will now leave you, and perhapps
insta^tly after (upon some urgent occasions) leave England. I could have
wished, that this our Dispute had made a deeper impression in you, then I fear
it has, for your incorporating into the Catholic Church: Never the less, I
will pray to God, that before your dissolution, you may be more solicitous and
careful in this so great a matter, which concerns your Souls happiness or
infelicity for all eternity. Touching my self, I do ingeniously protest, that
now by means of this discourse, I seeing the weakness of all that, which may be
urged by the learnedest Protestants, in defense of this Churches visibility, am
become hereby more settled and strenghtned in the Catholic faith and Religion,
then before I was; if more I can be. But now before I end, I cannot but put you
in mind [M. Doctour] how foully you were overtaken in your defense D. Reynolds
in his censura libroru^ Apocryphorum. tom. alter, in the table of Contents set
before, there at the numbers 161. 175. and 176. defends against Bellarm.
Ochinus his book written against the Mass.
of this impious Ochinus, for his writing against the sacrifice of the Mass:
where you may well see, that to deny the sacrifice, which was first instituted
by our Savior, is a fitting preparation toward the after denial of our
Savior himself.


D. REYNOLDS. I must confess [Michaeas] that notwithstanding whatsoehath been
said in this discourse, I still remain a member of the Protestant Church;
assuring my self, it is the true Church of Christ. Touching my defense of
Ochinus his writing, I did it out of my conscience; and my conscience (I trust)
will warrant it, at the last day. For your present departure, I am agreiued, we
shall loss you so soon; Only I would entreat you, to have in your discourses
(wheresoever, you shall hereafter come) a tender and gentill touch of the
Protestant Church, and of all the true and constant members thereof. And
herewith [Worthy, Michaeas;] I take my last farewell.


MICHAEAS. M. Doctor of your self I will ever speak, answerably to your
deserts; Nobly, and with great respect: Since you are a Man, whose bark is
richly fraught, with learning and Morality. And what defects have been
committed by you in this dispute, I do wholly ascribe them, to your want of a
good cause, not to your want of good parts. And if there have been any words
misplaced by, us on either side, s^t the thought of them vanish away: since
they were spoken Antagonistice^, and in hea^e of disputation; And so in all
kindness and Christian charity, I leave you, with this my advise that you will
not adventure your salvation upon your own private conscience preferring it
before the Judgment and conscience of the universal visible Catholic
Church: As for you two (fagotts of Hellfire) I grant my eyes even sparkle
forth^r^ge in behoulding of you; And I account (contrary to the place of the
burning Exodus 3.
bush) the place, wherein you stand, to be cursed ground. ^or since your Sun
is so f^rie of you (I mean, your excepted false Messiah) what can you look,
but for a winter of could despair and damnation? Therefore I will take leave
with you, in the phraze of the Apostle to Elymas, the Magitian (and what
greater Magic, then for one to be encha^ted to believe, that Christ is a
se^ucer?) O Acts. c. 23.
you full of all subtilty and mischeife, the Sonns of the Devil, enemies of
all justice, who cease not to pervert the right ways of our Lord: Adieu.


OCHINVS. You enjoy [Michaeas] the liberty of your Tongue; but ^age you well.


NEVSERVS. Let him go: I will nor take leave with him: such opprobrious
speeches he uses against us.


OCHINVS. Now [M. Doctour] Michaeas is gonne; And now we have the more freedom
of speech among our selfs, without fear of being ouerheard. I know, that not
only yonder black-mouthd Michaeas, but your self also, rest much disedisyed at
our ab^enunciation of Christianity. But [M. Doctour] come to the point. We see
the Prophecyes of the old Testament (which must ever remain sacred, permanent,
and (...)uiolable) do show that the Church of God in the days of the Messiah,
must ever be visible, known, and conspicuous, and must in all ages without any
intermission, enjoy a public and external administration of the Word and
Sacraments: And this is abundantly confessed, not only by us all in the front
of this our disputation, but by all learned men whosoever. We now
(notwithstanding such necessity thereof) cannot but confess, that the
accomplishment of the said Prophecyes has not been effected in the Church of
Christ, at le^st in the Protestant Church: how then can the Church of Christ be
that true Church of the Messiah, which is so gloriously deliuea^ed with the
penalls of the Prophets? Now what other resultancy can be out of the premises,
then that the Church of Christ (as wanting the fulfilling of the former divine
Oracles) is not the true Church of God; and consequently, that Christ is the
true Messiah and Savior of the World? except we will grant (which I never
will) the Papists Church (as having by relation of Michaeas the Prophecies
performed in it) to be the sole Church of God. Therefore so far, as touches
my self, I do renounce my former Christian faith, and will embrace the
ancient Law of Moses; and as intending to be serviceable to that Religion, I
will teach the doctrine of Circumcision, and will instantly write a Beza (...).
de Polygamia printed 1527. p. 4. says of this point: Pelygamiam nemo
vnqua(...) callidius vel impu^enti^s defendit, quam impurus ille Apostata
Ochinus i^ quibusdam D(...)
book of the lawfulnes of Polygamie or plurality of Wives; aunciently
practiced by the ^ewes in the old Testament; though now by Christians houlden,
as unlawful and altogether pro^^ibited.


NEVSERVS. By the Lord of Heaven, I cannot see how this difficulty can
otherwise be salued, then either by denyinge the Gospel of the New Testament;
or by granting the Church of Rome to be the true Church, which my Soul abhorrs
to do. For as concerning the perpetual Visibility of the Protestant Church, It
cannot be made good, notwistanding our great ventitation thereof before in our
Words: And therefore it were honesty in us now in the end to pull of our
Visards (through which we spooke to Michaeas) and plainly confese the truth
herein.

And here [M. D.] to take a short view of all the discourse passed, and to
examine it impartially a monge our selfs; We cannot but observe, that the
Exemples produced by you, were most insufficient; first, because they were no
Protestants at all: Secondly, in that admitting them for Protestants, they but
only serve (as Michaeas well noted) to justify the Visibility of Protestants
only for those times; neither you nor we being able to produce but only for
for me sake, any one confessed Example of Protestancy, for the space of six
hundred years at the least. Again, when Ochinus and my self perceived, that
no true instances of Protestancy could be given; I grant we used diverse
euasions and inflexious to and froe; and all for the saving of our Churches
honor. As first, to pretend (though God knows, a silly pretense) that all
Relations and testimonies of Protestants in former ages were by the Popes
industry and tyranny, utterly extinct. That failing, then we made show (for in
our private judgments, we could not really think it) That the Protestants in
former times were forced to lie secret and latent, in regard of the supposed
then raging Persecution. That plain answer not seruinge, then we thought good
to inuolue and roll our said evasion touching Persecution, in a certain
obscure and dark sentence: to wit, That the Church was in the Papacy; the
Papacy in the Church, and yet the Church was not the Papacy: a form of words
(as Mich^as truly ^^id forged by us Protestants, only to cast a ^yst in the
eyes of the unlearned. The next we fled (for our surest, but indeed sham full
refuge) unto the Scripture, pretending our Church to be consonant to it, and
therefore ever visible; a course which indifferently lies open to every
Heretyke. After all which (if you remember M. D.) your self did politikly
touch upon that opinion (though not with any great approbation of it) which,
for saving our Church from it utter ruin, teaches, that the Papists Church
and Ours are all one. But did you mark, how Michaeas never ceased, till he had
ferretted us out of all our former Connyhoales; be in the end irrephably and
choakingly proving, from our own learned Men's penns, the main question now
controuerted among us? Now [M. D.] seeing I am irrefragably resolved not to
admit the Papists Church for the true Church (though perhapps it has enjoyed
the fulfilling of the forementioned Prophecyes) I do therefore conspyre in
judgment herein with Ochinus, and ame determined to have this Country; from
whence I will retire myself into the Palatinate; Adamus Neuserus Conc(...)
natores in^^ Palatinat fiad suam (...)them perd* xi^, and con ^tacta cum
Sacerdotibus in Tur c^a amicitia, and dati^ atque acceptis vltro citroque
literis, Mahometanam religionem in Germania propagare (...)ter conat(...) est.
In Colloquio priuato inter Catholicu^ Pastorem and Baduini Ministrum Coloniae.
Anno. 1591. p. 5^^.
where I will draw the preachers to embrace my doctrine; will procure private
correspondency with some Turkish Pryests; will labor with all diligence to
spread the Turkish Religion in Germany; and finally will go to Constantinople,
and there I will be Circumcized.


D. REYNOLDS. O God unto what miserable and strange times have thou reserved
me, to se Christ thus abandoned by Christians, and embraced by Jews? And what
horrid and dreadful resolutions are these coming from our own bosom
adversaries? Alas, Ochinus and Neuserus, think what schandall it will be to the
Gospel, when it shall be truly rumored, that such men (as your selfs) are
Enemies of the Gospel. And what will many grave Protestants (and particulary
the most learned Beza) speak of you, for this your most infamous revolt? sweet
Jesus, that ^ewes and Heathens should find light in darkness, and Christians
darkness in light! You both say you will not acknowledge the Church of Rome, to
be the true Church of God. Be it so. Yet are the Professors of it, Christians.
And will you therefore abandon Christ Jesus, out of your malignity to them? o
no. A bad Christian is better, then no Christian; as a dime sight is better,
then to be stone blind. You demand, how can the Church of Christ be the true
Church, when the Predictions of the Prophetts touching it, are not performed in
it? Who knows, they are not performed in it? If you ask by whom, were they
performed? Where? and at what times? Remember that these are but Circumstances
of the business; and it is a received Axiom, that: Aliquando constat dear,
quando non constat de modorei. And how all these things may be reconciled, is a
Mystery sealed up (perhapps) by God from our knowledge, for our greater
Humili^ie. But to come to an end. Seeing you both are so obstinately headlong
(as if you were weary or ashamed of the Christian faith) to embrace Iudaisme; I
cannot but say, that I do much prefer Michaeas, before you both (for a Jew
being made a Christian, is much more noble, then a Christian, who intend to be
a Jew) and I do from henceforth forbid all entercours, and as sotiation with
you. Therefore fare you well, Both; only for this foul misnap of yours, I can
but euaporate my grief out into sights, and weep; because in neither of you,
I can see tears of remorse.


OCHINVS. We thank you [M. D.] for your freindly admonitions, though they
have no working influence over us. And where you urge, that Protestants will
speak fowly of this my change: I answer, let any of them, or Beza himself
(in whom you peculiarly insist) shower down reproaches upon me; as that, I am a
Beza in epist. 1. p. 11. calls Ochinus, Arianorum ^^a^d^s^^nus sautor,
Polig^niae (...) omniam Christianae religionis dogmatum irrisor.
secret fauorer of the Arians; that I am a defendour of Polygamy; that I am a
derider of all articles of Christian Religion; Yea let him plainly and bluntly
style me; an impure Beza de polyga^ia, p 4. calls Ochinus impurus Apostata,
as above is showed in the margen^.
Apostata; All this sweighs nothing with me; for I do glory to suffer opprobry
and disgrace, in defense of the ancient Jewish Religion. But come Neuserus;
let us begone. And thus [M. D.] I leave you, and commit you to the tuition of
the Highest.


NEVSERVS. Farewell, good M. Doctor, and the Lord of Heaven illuminate the
eyes of all those, who remain yet blinded.


D. REYNOLDS. Gentillmen, once more I leave you to God: Who at his pleasure, is
able to mollify, the most stonye ha^t.


FINIS.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
THE CONCLUSION.
HEAR now (Worthy Academicks) is my pen come to it full stop, and our
second Dialogue to it last Period: Where you have seen the true and unfeigned
down fall of the two former Protestants, Ochinus and Neuserus: and the
stumbling block, occasioning this their miserable precipitation. If any of you
do reap profit hereby (and I hope you may, if you vouchsafe to peruse it with
Ind^sterency) o how fully then is my labor recompensed? As for those, who out
of an affected morosity, do detractiuely preiudge of our labors in this kind:
and through their own inueterate auersio^ to the Catholic faith, do
betrample with all scorn and indignation our best endeavors (though I hope,
few or no such spydars do breed in your Colleges) I pryze not their Censures;
only I do, and still will pray incessantly to God, to give them more supple and
docible hearts; with whom we may perhapps truly expostulate in the Psalmists
phraza: Filij Psalm. 4.
hominum, vsque quo graut cord?

Peruse (learned Men) the authorityes and reasons here above alleged; and
deuyde in your judgments, what is here seigned by way of interlocution from
that, in which I really and forcebly insist; and then make in the secrets of
your souls, a reflection upon your own Religion. And that you may more
warrantably proceed therein I will here prove (though but briefly) the
visibility of our Catholycke Church, during all those ages, in which your
Protestant Church is above acknowledged to lie latent, or rather not to be at
all: a point (if you remember) of which Michaeas promised to leave behynd him,
some proufs.

1. This then I prove several ways. And first, from the Inuisibility of the
Protestant Church, during all former ages till Luthers insurrection (if so we
take Luther for a Protestant) For seeing ever since the Apostles days, there
has been a visible Church of Christ in the World (as all Ecclesiastical
Historyes, Chronicles, and Antiquityes do irrefragably convince) And seeing that
by the Confessions of all sides, there has been no other Church of Christians
visibly in being all these times, but either the Catholycke Church or the
Protestant Church (For as for the Arians, and other Heretycks, they continued
only for certain ages) And lastly, seeing it is acknowledged above by so many
learned Protestants, and otherwise also proved by many unanswerable arguments,
that the Protestant Church has not been visible for so many ages till Luthers
appearing: Therefore it inauoydably follows, that the Catholycke Church is
that Church, which has ever been visible and known to the World during all
that long space of time: And the rather, seeing the learned Protestants confese
(as above is showed) that all the former Inuisibility of the Protestant Church
was wrought by the labor, power, and diligence of the Catholic Roman Chuch
now how could the Roman Church effect so much for so long a time, except it
self during all that time, were most visible?

2. Secondly, I prove the same point from the acknowledged succession of
Pastors in our Catholycke Church, ever since the Apostles. Which ever visible
succession of Pastors necessarily includes in it self the ever visibility of
the Catholycke Church: those visible Pastors being the visible and most
eminent members of the said Church; and preaching and instructing others: who
even in this respect must become also visible and known.

Now that the Catholic Roman Church has ever enjoyed this visible sucession
of Pastors, is confirmed from the wrytings of the Centurists in their several
Centuryes: their relating of which point being a Principal part and subject of
that their so much commended Work; A matter so evident and confessed by our
adversaries, as that D. Fulke thus exprobrateth the Catholics in these words:
You can D. Fulke in his answer to a Counterfeyte Catholic. p. 27. and in his
Reioinder to Bristowes Reply. p. 343.
name the notable personages in all ages (observe these words: in all ages) and
their government and ministry and especially the succession of the Popes you
can rehearse in order, and upon your fingars. Thus D. Fulke.

3. Thirdly, We prove the former assertion of our Catholic Church its
Visibility, during the first six hundred years after Christ (and consequently
during the whole period of the Primative Church) by taking a view in general,
how the chief ancient Fathers of those times are pryzed and entertained by
the Protestants; who indeed (dispensing with all Ceremonies herein) do
absolu^ly reject them, as inexcusable and gross Papists. For as for these last
thousand years; It is acknowledged by all Protestant whosoever; that our
Church has been most visible, tyrannyzing (they say) over the true Church, for
so many ages. And according hereto M Powell In his considerations of the
Papists reasons p. 105.
says: From the year of Christ six hundred and five, the professed company of
Popery has been very visible and conspicuous.

But to proceed. If the most ancient and most reverend Fathers of the
Primative Church, (I mean, Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita, Justinius, Ireneus,
Tertul^an, Origin, Cyprian, Athanasius, Hilarious, the Cyrills, the Gregoryes.
Ambrose, Basil, Optatus, Gaudentius Chrysostom, Jerome, Austin, and diverse
others) be accounted by our adversaries, most earnest Professors of our
Catholic and Roman faith; then follows it ineuitably, that our Catholic
Church was most conspicuous in those days: since those Fathers were then the
visible Pastors of the Church; and then consequently the Church (whereof they
were Pastors) must needs be visible.

That these primative Fathers were Papists (as our Adversaries term us)
appears evidently out of these few confessions here following; which for
breuity I have discerped out of the great store of like acknowledgments of this
point occurring in our adversaries books.

And first, Peter Martyr Lib. de votis, page 476.
thus confesses of this point: As long as we insist in the Fathers, so long we
shall be conversant in their errors. Beza thus insulteth over the Fathers: Even
In his preface upon the New Testament, dedicated to the Prince of Condy.
in the best times (meaning the times of the Primative Church) the ambition,
ignorance and lewdnes of the Bishopps was such, as the very blind may easily
perceive, that Satan was president in their Assemblyes or Conncells.

D. Whitguift thus conspireth with his former Brethren: How In his defense of
the Answer to the Admonition, p. 472. 473.
greatly were almost all the Bishops and learned writers of the Greek Church
and Latin also, for the most part spotted with doctrines of freewill, of merit,
of Innocation of Saints, and such like? meaning such like Catholic doctrines.

Melancthon is no less sparing in taxing the Fathers, who thus confesses:
Melancthon in 1. Cor c. 3.
Presently from the beginning of the Church (that is, presently after Christ
his Ascension) the ancient Fathers obscured the doctrine concerning the
Justice of Faith, increased ceremonies, and devised peculiar Worshipps. But
Luther himself shall end this Scene, who most securiously traduceth the
Fathers in these words: The Fathers Tom. 2. Wittenberg. anno 2551. de ^eruo
arbitrio. page ^34.
for so many ages (meaning after the Apostles) have been blind, and most
ignorant in the Scriptures: They have erred all their lifetyme; and unless
they were amended before their deaths, they were neither Saints, nor
pertaining to the Church. Thus Luther; And thus much touching the Fathers of
the Primative Church, being professors of our present Catholic Faith and
Church; and consequently, that our Catholic Church was most uisible and
flourishing in those primative times.

4. Fourthly, The former inexpug(...) verity is proved, from that, the Church
of Rome never suffered change in faith, since it first plantation by the
Apostles. Now if the Church of Rome never suffered chauge in Religion; and if
it has ever continued a Church since the Apostles days; and lastly if at this
day it professes our present Catholic faith; then follows it
demonstratiuely, that there were visible Professors of our Catholic faith in
the Church of Rome, ever since the Apostles: and consequently, that our
Catholic Church has ever been uisible since those times. To prove, that the
Church of Rome never brooked change of faith since the Apostles days, I
refer you to the first former Dialogue of the Converted Jew.

5. Fifthly and lastly, our foresaid Assertion is acknowledged for true and
vndoubred, even from the penns of our learned Adversary, who most frequently in
their wrytings do intimate so much. And here I am to crave pardon, if I iterate
some few testimonies and acknowledgments of Protestants, above produced in this
Dialogue; Which as they there did prove an inuisibility of the Protestant
Church in those former Ages; so here also diverse of them prove (so nearly do
these two points interueyue the one the other) a continual visibility of our
Catholic Church, during the said times.

To come then to these confessions of the Protestants in this point, touching
the ever visibility of the Catholic Church; I will ascend up by degrees even
to (and within) the Apostles days: And this, because some Protestants (as
less ingenuous and upright in their writings (do affoard to our Catholic
Church a shorter time or Period of visibility, then others of their more
learned and well-meaning Brethren are content to allow.

First then M Parkins thus says: In his exposition of the Creed. p. 307.
During the space of nine hundred years, the Popish Heresy has spreed it
self over the whole earth. This point is further made clear from the Penns of
the Centurists and Osiander; all which do in every of the Centuryes (from S.
Gregory's time to Luther) name and record all the Popes (...) cheyfe Catholic
Bishops, and diverse others professing our Catholic faith, according to the
Century or age, wherein eich of them lived.

But to ascend higher M. Nappier confesses of a longer time, thus saying:
Upon the Revelations, (...) 43.
The Popes Kingdom has had power over all Christians from the times of Pope
S^luester and the Emperor Constantyn, for these thousand two hundred and
sixty years. And also again: M. Napper, vbi supra. p. 68.
from the time of Constantyn until these our days, even one thousand two
hundred and sixty years, the Pope and the Clergy has possessed the outward
visible Church of Christians

But M. Napper in an other place deals more bountifully with us herein; for
thus he witnesses: During Vbi supra p. 191.
even the second and third ages, the true temple of God and light of the
Gospel, was obscured by the Roman Antichrist.

Sebastianus Francus allows the Visibility of our Church from the time
immediately after the Apostles; thus wrytinge: Presently In epist. de abrog. in
vniuersum omnibus statut. Ecclesiast.
after the Apostles times all things were turned vpsyde down etc. And for
certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together with
their faith and Sacraments vanished away, presently after the Apostles
departure. With this Protestant D Fulke conspireth, thus saying: The In his
answer to a counterfeyte Catholic. p. 35.
true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times. Which being spoken by
him of the Protestant Church; then may we infer, that the Church of Rome and it
faith (as presumed to be by the judgment of this Doctor, the false Church) was
visible immediately after the Apostles. With D. Fulke agrees Peter Martyr thus
writing: Errors Lib. de Votis page 477.
did begin in the Church presently after the Apostles times; Peter Martyr
here understanding by the word: Errors, our Catholycke doctrins, with these
three last Protestants, the Author of the book called Antichristus, Page 13.
sieve pronosticon finis Mundi (a Protestant) thus iumpeth: from the Apostles
times till Luther, the Gospel had never open passage. Now this hinderance of
the Gospel is supposed by him, to proceed from the Pope and Church of Rome;
therefore during all those times the Church of Rome has been visible.

But D Downham confesses more freely hereof, who does include the very times of
the Apostles with in the Visibility of the Catholycke Roman Church, thus In his
treatise of Antichr. l. 2. c. 2. p. ^5.
teaching: the general defection of the Visible Church (foretold 2. Thessol.
2.) begun to work in the Apostles times, he meaning hereby, that the
Visibility of our Catholic Church did obscure in the Apostles days, the
Visibility of his Protestant Church. From this Doctors sentence Hospinian
Histor. Sacrament. lib. 1. c. 6. page 20.
(the Protestant) little dissenteth, who speaking of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, thus writes: I am tum primo illo saeculo, viuentibus adhuc
apostolis etc. Even the very first age (the Apostles being alive) the devil
endeavored to deceive more about this Sacrament, then about Baptism; with
drawing Men from the first form thereof.

Thus (judicious Men) you may fully see how visible at all times our Catholy^ke
Church has been; And of this Verity you may be more fully assured, not only
(by fiction) from the discourse of Michaeas, the Converted Jew; but even from
Michaeas, The Prophetical Jew; Whose praediction of the amplitude and ever
conspi^uitie of Christ's Church (and consequently of our Catholycke Church) is
set down in these words: In Michaeas cap. 4.
nouissimo di erum erit mons domus Domini praeparatus in vertice montium, and
sublimis super colles; and fluent ad cum Populi; Et properabunt gentes multae,
and dicent: Venite ascendamus ad montem Domini, and ad domum Dei Jacob; and
docebit nos de vijs suis, at ibimus in semitis ^ius. Which Prophecy, as it has
been hitherto fully accomplished in the present Roman Church; so on the other
side, how unaptly (indeed, how falsely) it can be applied to a Conuenticle of
Christians, which is confessed (for many more years, then a thousand) to have
been wholly latent and Invisible (or rather utterly extinguished) I leave to
your Candor and impartialitie to censure.

But before I take my leave with you for this time, (most excellent Men) I will
cast my eye back upon the Premises in gross, discussed in this Treatise. If
then it be so (as is above manifested) that the Church of God must at all times
be resplendent and visible: If she must ever enjoy the administration of the
Word and Sacraments by the ministry of her Doctors and Pastors without any
interruption; and this with such an imposed Necessity, as that the being D.
Whitakers says so. l. co^tra Du^aeum. l. 3. p. 249.
of them constituteth a Church, the want of them destroys it. If we all be
bownd under pain of eternal damnation, to incorporate our selfs into that
Church, which is beutifyed and enriched with the former spiritual endowments;
and to avoid all such Societyes of Men, wherein they are wanting; seeing only
the members of Christ's true Church are capable of Salvation: If finally our
Catholycke and Roman Church, on the one side, by the frequent Confessions of
our learned Adversaries (besides oll other proofs thereof) has always enjoyed
the said privileges of Visibility, and administration of the Word and
Sacraments; And the Protestant Church on the other side (even by their own
like acknowledgments) has been for many Centuryes and ages, wholly distitute
and depryued of these spiritual graces, and (as I may term them) Immunityes.
What stupor then and dulnes of mind, or rather what Letargious constitution of
the Soul (forgetful of it own well fare) possesses so infinite Men at this
day; as to deuyde themselfs from our said Catholycke Church even in great
hostility; and in lien thereof, to be ranged with particular and nouelizing
Conuenticles?

The consideration whereof (most judicious Men) though I look not to be of
that weigh with you, as to move you actually to implant your selfs in our
Catholic Church; yet since you are wise, learned, and loath (no dowbt) to
commit any such explorate errors, as the force of Natural Reason and your
own Consciences may freely check; I am in good hope, that the serious perusal
of the points above disputed, will at least prevail thus far with diverse of
you; as that you will not be ready hereafter in your discourses, so tragically
to enueigh and declame against a Religion, which is fortyfied which such
impugnable and irrefragable proufs, as our Catholycke faith (even from our own
Adversaries mouths) is euicted to be: But that you being Men professing
Conscience, Integrity, and Ingenuity, will bear a more favorable respect to
the said religion;

And herewith I will conclude, recommending you all in my daily prayers unto
him, who out of his Power and Goodness created us all, and out of his Mercy dyed
for us all; to the end, that by our professing of a true faith, and exercizing
of a vertu^us life, he might save us all; seeing otherwise we can no more
auaylably expect eternal Beatitude, then the Patriarchs dying in Egypt, could
hope to be buried in the Laud of Promise.

Laus Deo, and Beatae Virgini Mariae.
AN APPENDIX, WHEREIN IS TAKEN A SHORT VIEW [CONTAINING A FVLL ANSWERE] OF A
PAMPHLET ENTITVLED: A Treatise of the Perpetual Visibility, and succession of
the true Church in all Ages. Printed anno. 1624.
CVRTEOVS READER. Thou may be aduertized hereby, that not long since, to wit
in the year. 1624. there came out a certain Book entitled: A Treatise of
the perpetual Visibility and succession of the true Church, in all Ages: not
subscribed with any Name. The reason thereof (belike) was, in that the Author
(as guilty to himself of his impure proceeding therein (durst not justify
neither himself, nor this his labor: Though the entituling him in the Epistle
to the Reader (which seems to be written by some other person, then the
Author) The most Reverend, Religious, and painful Author thereof etc. does
in the judgment of many, intimate him to be no mean Man, but a great master
in Israel: to wit either D. White, or D. Featly, or some other as great as
either. To this concealing of them, of the Authors name (who, as being a
Protestant, might boldly and without danger subscribe his own name to his own
Book; far differently from us Priests) I may ad the Authors affected
silence through out his whole Treatise, in not touching, neither glancing at
the then late and fresh Conference had at London, even of this very Subject of
the Visibility of the Protestant Church in all Ages, between the before
mentioned D White, and D. Featly on the one part, and M. Fisher and M. Sweet
on the other: This Author not so much as naming either the said Priests or
Conference; though all the Realm did then ring thereof. But his intended
policy therein may well be presumed to be, that if he had made any particular
Reference to the said Conference or Priests; he might well assure himself,
that then presently an answer would be shaped against his Book; which ^e had
less reason to fear (as he thought) his Treatise coming forth in this lovely
manner. And so himself (as no doubt, he hoped) might have set down (as the
phraze is) with the last Word.

But whosoever the Author is; most certain it is, that the Treatise is most
shalow and frothy; though otherwise it be fraught with diverse deceats and
impostures: But we must pardon him, seeing we are to remember, that there are
some falsehoods (and among these, this of the supposed Visibility of the
Protestant Church in all Ages, may justly be placed) of so deep a tincture of
lying, as that no art can make them receive any other dye.

The ambitious title (as presuming the Protestant Church to be the true Church)
promises (you see) to prove; that the Visibility and Succession of the
Protestant Church has perpetually and without interruption been in all ages,
since Christ his days. But here that vulgar saying is justified: parturiunt
montes nascitur ridiculus mus: as will easily appear to any, that shall
studiously peruse the former Dialogue, or will observe, what is here adjoined.

And as touching this precedent Catholic Treatise of the second part of the
Converted Jew. Though it be indeed purposely and principally written against
all eminent Protestants in general (as appears by the alleging of their
names and testimonies therein) who heretofore have mantained by their penns,
the continual visibility of the Protestant Church; yet may it with all be
justly reputed, as a full answer to this discourse here examined; seeing the
whole scope, drift, and chief examples of Protestancy (I mean of Hus,
Wicklefe, Waldo, and diverse others) insisted upon by this Anonymous and
namelesse Author, are discovered in the former Dialogue, for false, idle, and
impertinent; as being alleged long since by other more famous Protestants:
Thus we see, that this Author is glad to lick up the arguments of his former
Brethren, and to feed upon their reuertions. Now what other things of lesser
moment may occur herein (especially touching the impostures and calumnyes
here practiced and the names of some obcure men, suggested for Protestants only
by this Author,) they shall in this short Survey be displayed and refuted.
What is here set down by me, is set down with all affected and labored
playnes of words or style; purposely forbearing all excursions or
amplifications of discourse; and this to the end, that the Reader may with the
less distraction of Judgment and Memory, have at once a short and whole
Synopsis and sight of this Authors falsehoods, subt^ltyes, and snares; where
with he labors to illaqueate and entangle the simple and ignorant.

And now to descend to a particular dissection or anatomizing of this Pamphlet.
First the Reader is to observe, that the Writer thereof spends 28. pages, in
seeking to prove, that it is not exacted, that the Church of God should be at
all times visible; at least to others. Yea he is so full and earnest therein,
as that merely crossing his prefixed title, he laboreth to prove the contrary
to the said title; for thus (to omit diverse such other passages) he writes:
The Page 3.
godly are driven to extremityes by Heresies or persecutions; they be visible
one to an other etc. they are not so apparent to other men, as that at all
times they know, where to find Assemblyes and Congregations of them. And
again: It is not Page 17.
doubted, but that the Woman (to wit, mentioned in the Apocalypse) does
represent the Church, concerning whom being in Wilderness, it does manifestly
follow, that for the time of her abode here, which the Almighty has decreed,
she should not be discerned; that is, by her Enemies, who did and would chase
her. Notwithstanding it is not to be doubted, but she knew, where herself was.
And yet more fully: The Page 24.
Church of Christ, whilst this troublesome World lasts, is now glorious,
then shadowed; in one age in bewty, in an other kept under; under some Princes
in peace, under others in persecution; yea sometimes so pressed with the
extremity of the malicious, as that she is glad to remain retired into secret
places, and not to appear openly to the, malignant. But in an other place
following, (to wit, page 26.) he plainly depriueth the Church of Christ of all
Visibility, thus speaking: In the days of Constantius, when the Arian Heresy
had once gotten on head, wherein the World did there appear any sensible
Congregation, mantayning the orthodoxall belief?

Now what a strange Invisible Visibility (as I may term it) does this Author
assign to the Church of God? in effect thus extrauagantly arguing: The Church
of Christ is sometimes more obs^ure, then at other times: Therefore the Church
of Christ is sometimes invisible. For I can see no other Inference nor other
end, whereunto his former speeches are directed. But this slight, as being
shadowed under the color of Persecution, is refuted in a passage of this
former Dialogue. And here I now demand, how does all this sort to the former
glorious title of his Book? to wit: Of the perpetual Visibility, and
Succession of the true Church in all ages.

Now how painfully (or rather calumniously) the Author laboreth to prove this
inconspicuous^es and obscurity of Christ his Church, we will in some few leaves
touch; referring the Reader to the beginning of the former Discourse, for the
more full refuting and impugning of the same: Where it is demonstrated, that
the Church of Christ must at all times be most visible.

And first, this Pamphleter much insisteth in the times of the Jews; proving
from the paucity of true beleiuers among them, that the Church of Christ is in
like sort at diverse times to be straytned. And to this end, he produces many
sentences of the Prophets (whose places Psalm. 12. 1. Samu^l. 22. Esaias. 1. 5.
6. Ezech. 22. besides others.
for greater breuity, are noted in the margent) But here his Ignorance (or at
least his fraud) is discouerable. For first, these places are to be
understood, not so much of want of faith; as of bad conversation in life and
manners, wherewith the Prophets did charge the Jews. Secondly, the Texts
alleged are indeed for the most part in words spoken of the Jews in general;
but not intended by the Prophets to be meant of all the Jews promiscuously.
Which Prophets were often accus^omed (as S. Austin Lib. de vn^tat. Eccle^. c.
12.
well notes) to reprehend the whole People, as if not any among them were
good, though many among them were pious. Thus for Example Ezechiel says c. 3.
All the house of Israel are impudent and s^ifharted; and yet in the nynth
chapter of the same Prophet we thus reed: Set a mark with Ta^, upon the
forheads of them, that mourn and cry, for all the abominations, that be done
in the midst thereof.

Lastly, this Inference drawn from the state of the old Testament, and applied
to the New, is most inconsequent: Both because the New Testament is better
established, then the, old; seeing to it is promised, Math.
that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against Christ's Church; And also it
is styled: The 1. Timoth. 3.
pillar and foundation of truth. And finally, in that the Peoples of the Jews
were not the Universal Church of God (as the People of the Christians are) And
therefore out of the Jewish Synagogue, there were diverse others of the
faithful and Just; as Melchisedech, Job, Cornelius, the Centurion, the Eueuch
of Queen of Candice etc.

This ended, this Triffler in page 6. and several other places, me^tioneth the
usual Objection taken from the words of Elias, saying: relictu, sum solus. But
this is fully satisfied in the first part or beginning of the former Dialogue.

In the next place (to wit, page 10.) he comes to depres the glory of the
Church of Christ, during his aboade here upon earth, and time of his Passion;
but all this most impertinently: seeing the radiant splendor and Visibility of
Christ his Church was cheiffly to begin (and then for ever after to continue,
till the worlds end) after the descending of the Holy Ghost, and not before.
This done, the Author comes to the times of the Tenn Persecutions by the
Heathen Emperors; proving from thence the obscurity of Christ's Church in page
25. To which I answer, that these Persecutions (according to the nature of
persecution) were so far from making the Church of Christ in those days
invisible; as that it became thereby most visible; seeing none are persecuted,
but visible Men: And the very names of the cheiffe Martyrs of those days are
yet most fresh and honorable in the memoryes of all good Christians, even to
this very hour: they remaining yet registered in the Ecclesiastical Historyes,
both of Catholics and Protestants.

In page 26. he instanceth in the times of the Arians, and produces Saint
Ieromes testimony and words to wit, Jerome aduers. (...)uc^erean.
The whole World did s^ght, and wounder, that it was Arian; from which
authority he would prove the Inuisibility of Christ's Church in those days. But
here the Author discovers his ignorance. For here First, Jerome calls that
(by the fig^^e Synecdoche) the whole World, which is but a part of the World; S
Jerome meaning only of certain parts of Christen (...). Secondly S. Jerome
here takes the word: Arian, in a secundarye signification. For here he calls
them improperly, and Abusiue, Arians who through Ignorance did subscrybe to the
Arian Heresy. For he speaks of that great number of Bishops, which came out
of all parts of Christendum to Arimine; and were deceived by the Arians,
through their mistaking of the greek Word: Omosios; and there upon Materially
only they subscrybed to the Heresy of the Arians. But the same Bishopps being
after admonished of their error, did instantly correct the same, and bewailed
their mistaking with tears and penance. Thus we se, the true relation of this
point really proves an actual Visibility of the Orthodoxall Christians, at
that very time.

Page 27. He insisteth in Athanasius and Liberius, as the only defendours in
those days of Christ's Divinity; and consequently that the Church of Christ
did only rest in them two: For thus he writes: The Church for any external
show, was brought low; for if any body held it up, it was Athanasius, who then
played least in sight, and durst not appear. Here is strange and wilful
mistaking; for though it be granted, that Athanasius (in regard of his fervor
and learning) was more persecuted by the Arians, then any other Bishop; yet to
^auer, that himself alone, or Liberius did only impugn the Heresy of Arius,
and that there were no other Orthodoxall Beleiuers at that time, is most
improbable, or rather most absurd. This is proved; first, from the Council,
which was assembled chiefly for the suppressing of the Arian Heresy; at which
Council Athanasius himself was present.

This Council consisted of three hundred Bishopps and more; the greatest part
whereof by their voices did absolutely condemn the Arian Heresy. Now how can it
be conceived, that all the said Bishopps (speaking nothing of the Orthodoxall
Laity of that time) excepting only Athanasius, should instantly either a fore
or after apostatate or through fear of Persecution, externally profes the
Arian Heresy? Again, the truth of this point is further confirmed from the
Epistle, which Athanasius and the Bishops of Thebes and Lybia gathered together
in the Council of Alexandria, did write to Pope Paelix, the Second of that
name; wherein they unanimously protest to defend with all Christian resolution,
their Orthodoxall faith against their Enemies, the Arians.

Thirdly, the falsehood of the former Assertion is euicted from that, that many
Fathers and Doctors living in the very age of A^hanasius and Libertus (and
diverse of them even in the days of Athanasius, and well known to him) did
refute and contradict (ex professo) the Arian Heresy in their learned wrytings:
As for example, Lib. co^tra Eunomium.
Basil, Orationes quinque in theolog.
Gregory Nazianzene, Lib. de Trinitate.
Gregory Nyssene, Catecheses.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, Lib. 9. de Trinitate.
Hilarious, In c. 1. ad Timot.
Ambrose, Contra Arian. haeres. 69.
Epiphanius and some others: Now in respect of the Premises, can it be but
dreamed, that there should be no Professors of the Divinity of Christ in those
days, but only Athanasius, or Liberius?

Page 25. The Pamphleter leaving examples and authorityes, descends to
Reason, thus arguing: Faith does much consist of things, which are not seen.
Therefore (seeing we believe the Holy Church, as an article of our faith) it
follows, that it needs not to be ever eminently visible, or apparently
sensible unto us.

Learnedly concluded. Therefore for the better instruction of this Pamphleter,
he is to understand; that in the Church of God, there is something to be seen,
and something to be believed. We do see that company of men, which is the
Church, and therein the Church is ever visible; But that, that Company or
Society is the true visible Church of God, that we see not, but only believe:
Even as the Apostles did see that very Man, which is Christ, the Son of God;
but that he was the Son of God, this the Apostles did not see, but only
believe.

In page 28. and 29. as also in some other pages before, he much insisteth in
the words spoken of the Woman in the Revelations. cap. 12. of whom it was
prophesied, that she should fly into the Wilderness; affirming that by the
Woman, is understood the Church, which is not to be seen in time of
persecution. To this I answer; first, this passage being taken from out of the
Revelations, cannot (as evidently to us men) prove any thing; seeing the
Revelations being delivered in visions and prophecyes (many of them being yet
unaccomplished) and figurative speeches, we cannot so easily apprehend the true
sense and meaning of them. Secondly, What diverse learned Catholics and some
Protestants, do understand by the Woman in the revelations (differently from
the urging of this Author) is set down above, in the first part or beginning
of the former Dialogue. Thirdly, admitting, that by the Woman, is understood
the Church in Persecution; yet follows it not, that therefore she shall be
invisible (which is the point, for which it is urged here (seeing a Church, in
that it is persecuted, even in that respect is become visible (as is proved in
the Treatise above) though otherwise it be granted, it is not so gloriously
eminent, as it is in time of prosperity.

Now whereas the Author page 29. from the Woman (mentioned in the Revelations)
flying into Wilderness, thus disputes: The true Church is for the time out of
sight in the Wilderness: But so say they (meaning us Catholics) was their
Church never: Therefore Will they, Will they, their Church is not the true
Church. Here Ignorance mixed with extreme boldness, disputes. For whereas
Learned Men (both Catholics and Protestants (as appears in the former
Treatise) make a continual Visibility, to be a Mark of the true Church; Here
the Author (diametrically crossing all former Authorityes, above alleged)
teaches, that that Church, which ever has been visible, and never out of
sight (to use his own words) cannot be the true Church; and consequently that
the Catholic Roman Church is not the true Church: Thus he (contrary to all
other authors) makes an Inuisibility to be a necessary Mark of the true
Church. Ad hereto (as before is intimated) that if in this Pamphleters judgment,
the true Church must sometimes even of necessity be out of sight, and in
Wilderness (or otherwise not the true Church) how then does not this mainly
feight with the title of his Book, to wit: Of the perpetual Visibility and
Succession of the true Church in all ages? And why should not the title thereof
rather be: Of the interrupted and discontinued Visibility of the true Church?

And thus far of the first part of this Pamphlet in which we see, how
painfully the Author has labored, sometimes to prove, that the Church of God
must at certain seasons be more glorious and resplendent, then at others
(though no Catholic denies this, and therefore the prouffe of it is but
impertinently undertaken) At other times, as in his last produced sentence and
argument, as also in some passages above cyted, to prove that the true Church
must be often wholly invisible, plainly thwarting the Inscription of his book.
But his affected calumny here (whereby he bewrayes his own guiltines in these
his unworthy Scripts.) is only, to prefix this discourse of the Churches
obscurity, or rather Inuisibility; that it may serve, as an excuse (and for a
plastering over) of those few, weak, and false examples of Protestancy in
former ages, alleged after in this Pamphlet by him: For he hops, that by
this his former insinuation of the Churches obscurity, the Reader will less
expect any full demonstrations and certain arguments of the Protestants
Churches Visibility in former times; and the rather seeing such an vnterrupted
visibility is not (in this Man's weening) necessary to the true Church.

Now here we will further tract this Author in his passages, who, (whether he
be D. White or D. Fearly, or some other) next begins with extraordinary
calumnye and deceate, to exemplify his Protestants for certain ages. For
whereas he ought to prove (even from the Title of his Book, and the
Controversy of the Protestants Churches visibility, now ventilated between us
and his Party) that the Protestant Church (seeing he presumes it to be the
true Church) has been visible for the space of sixteen hundred years (for so
long since and more, it is since our Saviors Incarnation) he produces
examples (admitting them for true) only for four hundred years at the most;
and immediately before Luther; so leaving one thousand, and one hundred years,
and more (a small time, you see) wholly destituted of any one produced example
of Protestancy: he saluing this his omission, or leaving over these eleven
hundred years, in this manner following: What Page 100.
the old Fathers taught (meaning the Fathers of the Primative Church, as being
Protestants) we have time hereafter to show, (which time of his showing, what
they taught, is not yet come) And of the supposed Protestants, between the
Primative Church and the times of Waldo (he ascending no higher then Waldo)
being about six hundred years, he uses this preterition: We shall Page 89.
not need to ascend any higher (meaning any higher from Luther, then to Waldo)
Which otherwise to make plain, is as easy, as to deliver that, which hitherto
I have spoken: And it is not to be conceived, that Petrus Waldo (of whom the
Waldenses did take their name at Lions) had his doctrine from no body etc.

Is not this a very learned satisfaction (think you) or rather a satisfaction
unworthy to proceed from any Man, professing learning for instancing of the
being of Protestants, from Christ his time to the days of Waldo (containing
about twelve hundred years, or but little less) for all which time he
instanceth not in any one Protestant, but wholly slips it over notwithstanding
the Catholics ever earnest provoking of the Protestants herein? Or can any
impartial judgment, demanding for instances of Protestancy, during all or any
of those former ages, rest thus contented? Here then (good Reader) thou see,
how this Author abuses thee, who deals with thee herein no otherwise, then
if he justly and truly owing thee Sixteen hundred pounds, should in speeches
vauntingly pretend, that he had paid thee every penny thereof; And yet he
coming to particular accounts and reckonings with thee, should be able to
prove, that he had paid thee (and this also, but in counterfeyt silver) only
four hundred pounds; affirming in lieu of further payment, that he would be as
able to pay thee all the rest, as he has already done this lesser Sum.
Would thou not take such an one, for a most dishonest and perfidious man? The
case of this Treatiser is here just the same.

But to return to the Fathers of the Primative Church, Of whom he says, what
they taught, he would hereafter show; meaning (belyke) in some other Book
hereafter to come forth Of that labor he is now already prevented; And
therefore the Reader may find in the Conclusion to the former dialogue, that by
the confessions of most learned Protestants, the Fathers were absolute Papists
(as we are called) and are therefore by the said Protestants utterly rejected.
In which former passage, is also proved, from the Protestants like Confessions;
that all the Professors of Christianity, between the times of the ancient
Fathers, and the days of Waldo (containing six hundred years at lest) were
wholly of our present Roman Religion; and not any of them a Protestant.

But let us now in this next place, come to his particular Instances of
Protestancy, for the space of four hundred years only above mentioned: in
setting down of which the Pamphleter uses this ensuing policy (for indeed he
is a man wholly made of sophistications, deceats, and collusions) he does not
begin with Waldo, so descending to Luthers days; seeing by this plain method
the Reader might at the first sight and sensibly observe, that he has omitted
(contrary to the title of his Book) eleven hundred years, without giving any
one instance of Protestancy for all those several ages. Therefore he craftily
begins to instance in the times before Luther, and so ryseth upward some
four hundred years from this day, in his pretended Examples: Thus hoping, that
the vulgar Reader would either, through not perusing the book to the End, or
through want of Judgment, not so easily and instantly espy, how far (and no
further) he had proceeded in these Examples.

Now touching his Examples; he first instanceth in Hus and Page 30.
Jerome of Prage, who lived anno Domini 1400. that is, some hundred and twenty
years (or thereabouts) before Luthers Apostasy. To this Example of Hus, in
which the Pamphleter chiefly insisteth (for as for Jerome of Prage, he but
embraced some of Hus his errors, as learning them from him) I First answer,
that supposing Hus had broached all points of Protestancy; yet follows it
not, that Luther had received the said Doctrine from Hus, by an uninterrupted
descent of Belief (as this Author pretends) for it may well be, that Hus
his Errors were extinct in respect of any beleiuers before Luthers days: Even
as Aerius denied prayer for the dead, and the Heretic Manichaeus freewill
(as Lib. de Haeres. c. 23. and 46.
S. Austin witnesses) yet were those Heresies utterly extinguished for many
ages, till Luther revived them. Secondly, the articles, which Hus mantayned
(different from the Roman Church) were but four, as they are recorded by Fox
himself: Of which, the doctrine of Communion under both kinds, was the
chiefest: though according to the judgment of Luther epist. ad Bohem. and lib
de captiuit. Babylon(...) de Euchar.
Luther, it is a point but of In differency. In all other points Hus was
Catholic, which this Author calumniously concealeth. Thirdly, Hus mantayned
that acknowledged Heresy on all sides, that Bishopps and Princes (being in
mortal sin) were not to be obayed, but thereby did loose all their
authority. Which Heresy is in like sort wholly concealed by this Pamphleter.
Concerning the particular prouffes of all which points, even from the
Protestants Confessions, I refer the Reader to the former Dialogue, where
Michaeas discovers them at large: as the like he does of Wicklefe, Waldo, and
others hereafter alleged by this Treatiser. Fourthly, if the Visibility of the
Protestant Church may be justified in Hus, or in Waldo, Wicklefe, or in any
other hereafter obtruded for a Protestant by this Pamphleter, because eich of
them taught two or three (at the most) of Protestant points, then by the same
reason may the Protestant Church de said to have been visible, in the Arians,
Athan. in Apolog. pro fulga.
for rejecting of Traditions, and for perpetrating many sacrileges against the
Sacraments, Altars, and Priests; in Pelagius, Ierom. lib. contra Pelag.
for teaching every sin to be mortal; in Vigilantius, Ierom. lib. contra
Vigilant.
for condemning all religious virginity, and affirming the relics of Saints
are not to be worshipped: In the Manichees, for denying of freewill: And in
diverse such others: (4) Austin. lib. de Haeres. c. 46.
All branded Heretics and registered for such, by the orthodoxal Fathers of the
Primative Church. Now this Inference I would entreat the Reader to observe,
with peculiar application to all the pretended examples of Protestancy,
alleged in this Pamphlet. Fifthly, if we should grant here all that, which is
spoken of Hus, yet it but warranteth the visibility of the Protestant Church,
only for the age, in which Hus did live: His doctrine not being taught in ages
before.

Now here in this discourse touching Hus, I am to put the Reader in mind, how
this Author spends many idle leaves, in showing how the Nobles of Bohemia,
mantayned the errors of Hus; And that they came into the field in great
forces, against the Emperor in defense of the same: so much (says he) was the
doctrine of Hus dilated. He also introduces some one or other, inueighing
against the Popes manners and Clergy of those times: and for such their
proceedings, he terms them Protestants. (And this method, he mightily
observes throughout his whole Pamphlet.) Idly inferring: as if faith, which
resids in the understanding, were not different from manners and conversation,
which rest in the Will: Or that abuses in manners, will not ever be in some
members of the Church: Or finally that a Protestant, for charging of some
Ministers of his part with disorders of life, or Puritans for their bitter
inuerghing against the Bishops here in England, were therefore to be reputed
Roman Catholics: so loosly and weakly he disputes herein.

But all these his Digressions, in respect of the undertaken subject of his
discourse, are merely extrauagant. And in my judgment his intention in these,
and other such dilations, and declamatory inuectiues (wherewith his Treatise is
in many places hereafter fraught) is chiefly, but to fill up leaves of paper:
that so his book might grow to some reasonable quantity. For seeing all his
supposed examples of Protestancy in his Treatise, might well be contained
(omitting all froathy ambages and circumstances) in two sheets of paper, and
seeing such a poor thing could not come forth alone, with any credit to the
cause, or reputation to the writer: He therefore thought it more fit, to
interweaue in his Pamphlet diverse long and tedious discourses, how improfitable
soever. This to think, I am the rather induced: in that we may further
observe: in how great and large a letter his Book is printed: and how spacious
the margent of his leaves are, being almost as much paper in quantity, as that,
which is printed: And all this (as probably may be coniectured (to the end,
that this his learned Tome (forsooth) might contain some indifferent number of
leaves: See how subtle Heresy is, in triffles and things of no moment.

The Author having finished his discourse of Hus, and his adherents and
followers: in the next place rises to the Waldenses, Page 52.
who (as is here alleged) denied Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and blessing
of Creatures. First, touching Transubstantion, what the Pamphleter here
delivers, is a vast Untruth; as appears from the testimony even of
Calu(...), Epist. 244.
thus writing: Formula Confessionis etc. The form of Confession of the
Waldenses doctrine, does inuolue all those in eternal damnation, who do not
confese, that the Bread is become truly the body of Christ. In like sort,
touching the doctrine of Purgatory, Benedictus In tract. de Eccles. p. 124.
Montargensis (a Lutheran) charge the Waldenses therewith: from which two
Examples we may take a scantling, what credit is to be given to the Pamphleter,
in his other Assertions hereafter. But grant, that the Waldenses did teach some
one or other point of Protestancy; yet in regard of their far greater Number of
Catholic Articles, ever believed by them, and their many execrable Heresies
(condemned for such both by Catholics and Protestants) both which points this
Pamphleter pretermitted in silence; The Waldenses cannot justly be exemplified
for Protestants: Now of the Catholic Articles, as also of the Heresies
believed by the Waldenses, see the Dialogue above in the passage touching
Waldo, and the Waldenses, and their followers.

After this Author has finished his speech of the Waldenses, he further thus
proceeds: The Page 54.
Author of the sixtenth Century names about the year* 1500. Baptista
Mantuanus, and Franciscus Picus Earl of Mirandula; both which inueighed
against the Clergy and their whole practice: Also one D. Keisers pergius, an
other called John Hilton, a third named Doctor Andreas Proles, and Sauanorola,
all grawning under the burden of those times. Again, the Pamphleter thus
says: And the Page 56.
same is written of Trimetheus, an other learned Man, who lived at that time.
Thus this our Author.

Now how exorbitantly and wildly are these urged for Protestants? For First,
they are auerred to be such only by Protestant Writers (to wit, O^^ander and
Pantaleon) who herein may well be presumed, for the vphoulding of their own
Protestant Church, to be partial in their Relations. Secondly, this Treatizer
does not instance any points of Protestancy believed by any of them (which if
he could, no doubt, he would not have omitted) but only urges their wrytings
against some pretended abuses of the Church of Rome in those days. And
therefore such his proceeding is but calumnye and impertinency. Lastly, touching
Sauanorola and Picus of Mirandula (for as for the others, they are so obscure,
that hardly any particular information can be had of them.) It is certain,
that they were both Roman Catholics, and dyed in that Religion. For as
concerning Sauanorola, he believed all the Articles of the Roman faith (as
evidently appears out of his own writings, styled: Vigiliae) excepting the
doctrine of the Popes power to excommunicate. This one point he contumaciously
denied, and for this he was burnt.

Touching Picus of Mirandula, Sir Thomas More of blessed memory) writing his
life, shows, that he was so fully a Roman Catholic, that in his life time,
he sold a great part of his lands to give to the poor; that he often used to
scourge and discipline his own flesh; that if he had lived longer, he intended
to have entered into the Religious Order of the Dominican Pryars: That in time
of his sickness he received (according to the Catholic custom) the most
blessed and reverend Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, for his Viaticum;
Finally that hearing the Priest in his sickness to repeat unto him, the
articles of the Roman faith, and being demanded, whether he believed them;
Answered, He did not only believe them; but did know them also to be true: So
fowly (we see) this Pamphleter is ouerseene in alleging Sauanorola and Picus
of Mirandula, for Protestants.

But to proceed further. This idle waster of pen, ink, and paper (for I can
term him no better) next descends (in a retrograte and disorderly method)
to Laurentius Page 56.
Valla the Grama^ia^; who touching the Articles of the Roman Catholic faith,
only denied freewill; as appears even from the Protestant Illyr. catal.
testium Vetir. tom. 2. printed 1597. page 872.
Writers; And who after (g) submitted himself to the Pope, and finally dyed in
all points Catholic; all which this Author affectedly concealeth. He says
of Valla in this sort: Valla wrote a Treatise of purpose, against the forged
donation of Constantine: He pronounces of his own experience, that the Pope
makes war against peaceable People, and sows discord between Cittyes ()
Valla in his Apol. ad Eugenium Papam 4. Po^tif. prope finem.
and provinces etc. With much more refuse of base matter, concerning the
supposed coueteousnes of the Pope; yet notwithstanding all this, he names not
any one Article of Protestancy defended by Valla.

But the Pamphleter thus further proceeds to others, saying: About Page 57.
and sequentib.
the same time lived Nicolaus Clemingius, who rebuked many things in the
Ecclesiastical State; and spoke excellently in the matter of General
Counsels etc. Petrus de Aliaco Cardinal of Cambray, gave atract to the
Council of Constance, touching reformation of the Church; There he does
reprove many notable abuses against the Romanists etc. About Page 58.
the same time lived Leonardus Aretinus, whose little Book, against Hypocrates
is worth the reading; So is the Oration of Antontus Cornelius Linnicanus,
laying open the lend lubricity of Priests in his days: So does Page 59.
he detect many abuses and errors, who wrote the ten agreiuances of Germany;
But those, who compiled the hundred agreuances of the German Nation, do
discover many more. And then the Pamphleter most ambitiously (or rather
ridiculously) thus concludes: By this time I trust, it is manifest, how false
a slander of the Papistsis that before the days of Martin Luther, there was
never any of our Religion. Egregiam vere laudem, and spolia ampla refectis.
Tu calamusque t^^s.


For who observes not, how absurdly you Pamphleter do apologize. For the
Visibility of your Church? Thus (good Reader) thou see, that this Author
instanceth in Valla, and others above mentioned, for Protestants; and yet
sets not down any one Article of Protestancy believed by them: for not any
of them denied the Real presence, Purgatory, prayer to saints, the Seven
Sacraments, Justification by Works, the Popes Supremacy etc. All that this
Author can produce the^ for, is, because they did write Satyrically and
bitterly against the abuses of the Church, in those days. But to this we
replye; That it is granted on all sides, that both in the Catholic and the
Protestant Church, there have been (and still are) diverse of irregular and
disedifying lives. Must now those, who in their wrytings or Sermons reprehend
such, be necessarily supposed to be of a different faith from those, whom they
so reprehend? Who sees not the weakness of this inconsequent and absurd kind of
reasoning?

From the former Iustances, the Pamphleter ascends to John (l) Wiclef,
prostituring him for a Protestant. And here (...)) Page 60.
also he spends many leaves in wandering excursions of speeches; and indeed
to no other end, but (as I intimated a fore) to dawbe ink upon paper. For he
pretends to show the Aussits had received their doctrine out of the Books of
Wiclef; how the Council of Constance condemned Wiclef for an Heretiycke; as
also how the doctrine of Wiclef was much dilated hear in England. But to
manifest, how impertinent the alleging of Wiclef for a Protestant is, I refer
the Reader to the Dialogue; where are showed out of Wiclefs one Wrytings the
many Catholic articles of the Roman Religion, (to wit, the doctrine of the
seven Sacraments, Rites and Ceremonies of the Mass, praying to our Blessed
Lady, worship of Images, merit of Works, and works of Supererogation etc. still
believed by him, even after his leaping out of our Church. As also there are
showed the many condemned Heresies in like sort mantayned by him, after his
departure from the Roman Church; and this from the penns of the Protestants.

But here before I end with Wiclefe, I must put the Reader in mind of one
notorious Collusion or deceate, much practiced by this Pamphleter, touching
diverse of the former men alleged for Protestants, but most particularly
touching Wiclefe. It is this: He here particularizeth no Protestant articles,
but only the denying of Transubstantiation; yet where he abundantly declares,
that W^clefe was condemned by the Church of Rome for his defense of many
errors and Heresies, he subtly bears the Reader in hand (though he
expresses not any of them in particular) that all these Heresies condemned in
him were points of protestancy; thereby to make show, what a great number of
protestant articles were believed in those days, and how much the said Men did
participate in doctrine with the protestants of these times. But this is a
mere slight and imposture; seeing it is evident, that besides some few points
of protestancy believed by Wiclefe, Hu^, the Waldenses or Albigenses, there
were many more Heresies mantayned by them and then condemned by the Church of
Rome; Which are acknowledged for Heresies, both by Catholics and Protestants;
and such as in no sort concern the Protestant Religion; as way evidently
appear from the perusing of the several passages of the former Dialogue;
wherein the heresies of Wiclefe, Hus, the Waldenses, and others are at large
displayed.

From Wiclefe the pamphleter comes to Geffray Chaucer. And thus he is forced
by his own poetizing and forging art, to beg some prouffe from Poets. Of
Chaucer he thus writes. Page 69.
He did at large paint out the pride, lascivious, vicious, and intellerable
behavior of the Popes, Cardinals, and Clergy etc. adding much more
securili^y of his own: and setting down certain verses of Chaucer. But what
proves this? For first, we are not in reason to give credit to every verse
dropping from the satyricall pen of Chaucer. Secondly, admit all were true,
that Chaucer writes; yet seeing his reprehensions do only touch manners and
conversation, and not faith; it follows not, that Chaucer was a protestant
(as I have intimated in the former examples (or that the Protestant Religion
was in his days professed, which is the only point here to be proved.
Thirdly, if it must be concluded that Chaucer for such his writing was a
protestant; then by the same reason may Spencer the Poet, for his bitter taxing
of the Clergy in his Mother Hubbardstale; and Daniel, for his controuling of
the present times, touching Religion and Learning in his Musophilus, be reputed
Catholics or Papists; and yet it is well known, they both were Protestants,
and the later rather a puritan.

The Pamphleter next insisteth in one Walter Page 71.
Bruit, an English Man, living anno 1393 and puteth him forth for a protestant,
for his defending of diverse supposed doctrines of protestancy there set down.
To this I answer: first, he alleges no authentical writer affirming so
much, but only an obscure Register of the Bishop of Hereford: and therefore it
may justly be suspected to be merely suppositions and forged (or rather, that
it is but feigned, that such a writing is) seeing such a writing may with more
facility be coined without any discovery of deceat therein: as being to he
found only among the Antiquityes, belonging to the said Bishop, who is a
protestant. Secondly, suppose all for true: yet seeing that Scedule proves
the said Brute to be a protestant, but only in some points: it follows, that
he was Catholic in the rest: and therefore can no more be challenged, for a
protestant, then for a Catholic: being the faith of a professor in any
Religion ought to be entyre, perfect, and complete; otherwise no man can take
his denomination and name from the same faith. Thirdly, suppose him to be a
Protestant in all points, yet seeing he is but one particular man; and that it
cannot be proved, that others did communicate with him in doctrine, his
example cannot prove the visibility of the Protestant Church: since one man
alone cannot be accounted for a Church. Lastly, this example serves (admitting
it for true) but for the time, that Bruyte lived; It not being able to be
proved, that the doctrines of Protestancy (imputed to him) were taught and
believed in all other Ages and Centuryes.

This done, the Pamphleter Page 7^.
proceeds to diverse burnt and put to death for their Religion, in the days
of King Henry the fourth, the fifth, and the sixth, King Edward the fourth, and
King Henry the seventh. Which testimonies he takes out of that lying Legend
of Fox; to which book no more credit is to be given, then to Esop fables. But
to these examples, I reply first. The Treatiser sets not down the
Protestant articles mantayned by these men, for their defense of which, they
are here presumed to be burned: And therefore it well may be, that they
suffered death for their broaching of some other heresies or blasphemies, not
controuerted between the Protestant and the Catholic; and therefore such
Examples are wholly impertinent. Secondly, if we do admit the authority of Fox
herein; yet it proves, that those men lost their lives, but for one, two, or
three particular points (at the most) of protestancy, mantayned severally by
eich of them; they embracing all other points of Catholic Religion: being
both more in number and of greater importance; And if it be otherwise, then let
this Author prove* (...) were Protestants in all chief Articles of
Protestancy.

Now how insufficiently such examples can be suggested, for the visibility of
the Protestant Church in former Ages, appears, both from that already set
down in this Survey; as also more fully from the perusal of the former
Treatise.

And here the Reader is to observe, that as such men (above mentioned) cannot
justly be taken for Catholics, so may they truly be ranged for heretics;
seeing a stubborn and contumacious belief but of one heresy, makes a man, an
heretic: Whereas it must be an ^nanimous faith of all points of true Religion
(without exception of any) which is exacted for making a man a true beleiuer:
For the nature of true faith does here participate, of the nature of an action
morally virtuous; Which is become defective, through the want of one due
circumstance only, but is made perfect and complete, by the necessary presence
of all due circumstances.

After the former examples, he comes to Marsilius Page 78.
de Padua (an acknowledged Heretic) Who chiefly erred in denying the Popes
authority Now the Pamphleter to make his doctrine in this one point, to seem
more diverse in several points from the doctrine of the Catholics, subtly
deuideth it (in setting it down) into several branches. But to what end is
this example pressed? Seeing it was the error but of one Man at that time, and
principally but in one Controversy; He comparting with the Catholics in the
doctrine of the Real presence, Purgatory, Freewill, praying to Saints, merit
of Works, Traditions etc.

In the next place he urges two Italian Poets, Dantes and (r) Page 79. and 80.
Petrach for Protestants, because they did write somewhat in depressing the
Popes Authority, in behalf of the Emperor.

Now to discover more fully the Pamphleters falsehood, in his producing these
two Italian Poets (Dantes and Petrach) as supposed by him Page 81.
to teach, that the Pope is Antichrist, and Rome Babylon, I will hear prove:
from their own wrytings the mere contrary to this his impudent assertion. And
first touching Dantes; He thus writes of S. Peter in his Italian verses.

O luce Cant. 24 del Pa^ad.
etern^ del gran viro,
A cui nostro Signor lascio le chiaui,
Ch' ei porto giuda questo gaudio mir^. That is: O eternal light of that great
man,
To whom our Lord did leave the keys, which
He did carye with wonderful joy.


In like sort, touching Rome it self he thus discourses.

Non Cant. 2. dell Inferno.
pare indeg no al huomo d'intelletto,
Che ei su de l'alma Roma, and de suo impero
Nel' empirco ciel' per padre eletto.
La quale, el quale a voler direilvero,
Fur stabilite per lo loco sancto;
r' fiede il successor del maggior Piero.
In which verses Rome is called a reverend City; a holy place; fortified and
strenghtned even from Heaven; and finally the seat of Peter.

Again, Dantes was much aduers against Pope Nicolas the third; whom being dead
Dantes notwithstanding thus honored with his Verse.

Et Cant. 19. dell. Inferno.
se, non fusse, ch' aucor le me vieta
I ariuerentia delle sum chiani,
Cheiutenesti vella vita lieta,
Iover ei parcle ancor piu graut.
In which words Dantes confesses plainly, that the reverence, which he did
bear to this Pope, in regard that he received the keys of the Church (meaning
supreme authority in Christ's Church) was the cause, why he did forbear to
write more sharply against him. Finally, to omit many other like passages,
Dantes says, that Boniface the eight:

Ne Cant. 22. del' Inferno.
summo offitio, ne Ordini sacri
Guardo in se.
In which verse he acknowledeth, that supreme authority and holy Orders did
resyde in Boniface; whose manners were otherwise displesing to Dantes.

In this next place I will come to Petrarch, who thus writes in acknowledging
the power of the Bishop of Rome. Lib. 1. Seuilium Epistolaru^ ad Talana^dum
Cardinalem.
Quis (quaeso) non stupeat, simulque non gaudeat, si amicus sit Vicario IESV
CHRISTI? And further: Romano Lib. 1. Inuectiuarum contra Medicum.
Pontifici omnes, qui Christiano nomine glortamur, non modo consilium, sed
obs^quium insuper and obedientiam debemus. All we, who glory in the name of
Christians, do owe not only counsel, but duty and obedience to the Bishop of
Rome.

Now for greater euidency of this point, I will descend to the particular
praises, given by Petrarch, to particular Popes in his Italian book, written
of the lives of Popes.

We there then find, that of Pope Vrbanus 5. he thus writes: Fu nelle sacre
Scripture dottissimo, and santamente visse: Vrbanus was most learned in the
holy Scriptures, and liuod most Sanctly. Of Clemens 6. he thus records: Fu
and per nome, and per fatti, di molte virtu pieno: Clement was both for his
name and for his deeds, replenished with much virtue. Of Benedict. 12. these
are his words: Beneditto fatto Papa reformo l'Ordine di S. Benedetto etc. era
feruido nella fide, and nelle buone operezelatore: Benedict being created Pope,
did reform the Order of S. Benedict etc. He was feruerous in the faith, and
zealous in good works. etc.

To be short, of John 22. he thus says: Costuifu ottimo and glorioso Pastore;
fece molti bein, and Hereticiper zelo della fide condamno! This man was a very
good and glorious Pastor; He did many good deeds, and condemned Heretics, out
of his zeal to the faith. And now I ref^r to any in different judgment,
whether these two Italian Poets (Dantes and Petrarch) did think the Pope of
Rome to be Antichrist, or no, (as our Page 81.
Pamphleter seems to urge, ^hey did) and whether the former praises can be
truly applied to Anthichrist, and the whoare of Babylon: ^o evident it is, that
what the foresaid Poe^ts did Sa^yrically wryce, was written only against some
disorders in the Church of Rome, and against the presumed faults of some
particular Popes; but never against their supreme dignity in the Church of
Christ. And as touching the former Popes by Petrarch so commended; We are to
remember, that his praises delivered of them, where written after the deaths of
the said Popes; and therefore his words could not be censured to proceed from
adulation and flattery; but according to his own true and secret judgment
passed upon those Popes.

In the same manner, for their like inue^ghing against the fulness of the Popes
power and jurisdiction, he alleges certain obscure men; to wit, Dulemus,
Hayabalus, Ioannes Biraensis, Ioannes de Rupe scissa, three religious Men; who
lived and dyed (in respect of all other points) in the Roman Church. And yet
touching Ioannes de Rupe scissa, both this Author and the author of Catalogus
testium veritatis: (From whom this man takes it) are deceived, if we may
believe Fox Vide Fox in act. Mon. speaking of this Ioa^ne^ de Rupe scissa.
who thus wrytes of him: Ioannes de Rupe scissa, lived in the year 1340. who
for his rebuking of the spiritually for their great enormittes, and neclecting
their office, was cast into prison.

Our Pamphleter after produces Gerson for a Protestant, of whom he thus says:
Gerson Page 81.
saw in his ages many horrible abuses of the Church of Rome, and in his
wrytings spoke liberally of it. Is not this a learned prouf for Gersons being
Protestant in all points of Protestancy?

After all the former ^nstances the Pamphleter (even for want of other matter)
returns back again to the Waldenses Page 82.
or Albigenses, iterating with a tedious prolixity his former discou^s
concerning them, and this in many leaves: Whereby he shows the extreme
mendicity of his Cause; and that he laboreth with all Art possible, to draw out
this his Treatise (as is above said) into some reasonable number of sheets. But
touching the Waldenses, I refer the Reade^ (as before I willed) to the
p^rticular passage of Waldo, in the former Dialogue.

His former Extrauagancyes of discourse being ended, he is not ashamed to
challenge S. Bernard Page 91.
for a Protestant, of whom he thus writes: Before our ascending thus high, we
might tell you of S. Bernard, whom all though it is lykely at the first dash,
you will challenge as your own; yet when you have well aduized of him, you may
let him go again. O perfrictam front^m, and wonderful Impudency. For who is
so ignorant or so bold, that will not confess S. Bernard to have been a Roman
Catholic in all points? He was a religious Man, and Abbot of Claireuaux and
Author of many Monasteryes in Flanders and France (as O siander Epito^. Cent.
12. p. 309.
the Protestant confesses) he also was Pryest, and said Mass to his dying day
(as all Writers of him do testify) A point so evident, that for his being a
great and eminent member of our Catholic Church, the Centurists (al
Protestants) thus censure him: Bernard^^s Cent. 12 col. 1627. and 1638.
coluit Deum Maozim, ad nouissimum vitae suae articulum: And further they say
of him: Bernardus fuit acerrimus propugnator sedis Antichristi, Bernard was an
earnest defendour of the sea^e of Antichrist. Here now I refer to the candid
and upright Reader, what impudency it was in this Man, to challenge Bernard for
a member of the Protestant Church. But here touching S. Bernard, I cannot but
abserue this Authors fraud and imposturous cariadge, who terms all such
Articles, wherein S. Bernard did agree with us; as the Sacrifice of the Mass,
Purgatory, merit of Works, free will praying to saints, and indeed all other
Catholic Articles whatsoever (only his boldness of writing to Pope Eugenius
excepted, to whom before he had been Master, and thereupon presumed to write
more freely) Slips Page 92.
and Lapses, Page 93.
as they were believed by him: which in us Catholics he exagerateth by the
name of Superstition, Idolatry etc. And thus we may see, how one and the same
Cause being exemplified in different Persons, is by this Pamphleters deceate,
diversely censured.

Leaning S. Bernard, the Author generally (but with out any prouf at all)
wishes his Page 95.
Reader to think, that the Protestant Church was in all Countries in
Christendom, and did lie hid, as those Jews did in the time of Elias, for
fear of Persecution. But this he only says, but proves not: and it is
therefore rejected with the same facility, with which it was spoken.

Now touching those Men, who conceales their faith for fear of persecution, I
refer the Reader to the former dialogue, wherein the weakness of this pretext of
Persecution is particularly displayed.

That done, the Pamphleter says, that Page 96.
India, Armenia, Asia the l^ssar, and Egypt, had in former times Christians in
them (for he gives them no other name, then Christians:) And then he inferrs,
without any proof at all, or instances in the points of their Religion, that
they were Protestants. Poor man, that thus most insensibly reasons: Seeing we
find the Christians of all those Countries to agree in all the chief points,
with the present Roman Churrch; Only some of them do not acknowledge the
primacy of the Bishop of Rome, above all other Bishopps.

In the last place of all, he much insisteth in the Greek page 96.
Church (within which are included the Russes and Muscouits) he thus saying
thereof: The Greek Church was never so much as in show extinguished; And from
whom the Russians and Muscou^ts had their faith. And then a little after he
thus enlarges himself: We should do wrong to Almighty God etc. to pull from
him, so many ample Churches (meaning the Greek Church, and the others above
specifyed) inferring from thence, that the Protestant Church did in former ages
rest visible, even in the Greek Church.

Now this his shameless alleging of the Greek Church for Protestants,
shall be confronted with the testimony of Sir Edwin In his Relation of thestate
of Religion used in the Westparts of the World, in the last fol^o, but five.
Sands (a man of his own Religion) who plainly affirms, that the Greek
Church does concur with Rome in opinion of Transubstantiation, and generally
in the sacrifice and whole Body of the Mass, in praying to Saints, in
au^^cular Confession, in offering Sacrifice and prayer for the dead, Purgatory,
and worshipping of pictures. Yea the Protestant Deuines In their book
entitled: Acta Theologorum Wittenbergensoum and Ieremiae Patriarchae
Constan^in^p. de Augustana Confession etc. Wittenbergae Anno, 1584.
of Magdeburg do record, that the Greek Church does not only believe all the
former Articles, recited by Sir Edwin Sands; but also that it beleiueth and
teaches the signifying Ceremonies of the Mass, Confirmation with Crisme,
Extreme V^ction, all the seven Sacraments, Alms for the dead, freewill,
Monachisme, vows of Chastity, the fast of Lent, and other prescribed fasts,
that Priests may not mary after Orders taken, and finally that the tradition
and doctrine of the Fathers is to be kept. Now here I refe^re to any one not
blinded with prejudice, whether the professors of the Greek Church, are to be
accounted for Catholics or Protestants: And from hence we may disc^uer the
idle and ridiculous vaunting of this Pamphleter, who in the close of this point
touching the Greek Churches being protestant, and a continual Vis^^ili^y of
Protestancy in the said Churches, thus insulteth: Look to these places (you
Papists) and Imagine, that if there had been none, but these; yet the words of
the Scripture, (i) Page 97.
which in generality speak of a spouse, had been true: And Christ had there
had his Body upon earth: and the Church had not been utterly extinguished, if
neither We, nor the Synago^ue of Rome had been extant. Thus he.

His former examples being ended, he entertayneth his Reader with great store
of frothy and needless matter, touching former differences between the Popes
and Emperors, the (k) Page 98. 99. 100.
Kings of England and France. And then all such persons, as did bandy
themselves either by writing or otherwise with the said Emperor or Kings,
against the Popes of those times, the Pamphleter urges for Protestants though
the chief cause of such differences between the Popes and the said Princes,
was touching Distribution of Ecclesiastical Livings, within their own
Realms. That done, the Treatiser extra^agantly discourses in his de^lamatory
railing vein, that the Pope is Antichrist: But how rouing and wandering all
this is to the title of his Pamphlet, and proving of his own Churches
visibility (the which he obliged himself to perform) may appear, by what is
already set down.

After all this, and for a Close of all, he obiecteth (for forme-sake, as if
his taking notize of what, we can truly object against his writing, were a
sufficient answer to it) certain exceptions urged by the Catholics, against
his former Instances of protestancy: Which Objections of ours being set down,
he shapeth no true Answer unto them. And first, he thus obiecteth in our
behalf: (l) The Papists will begin and say, that (...) Page 102.
we rake together, as the Ancestors and forerunners of our faith, such as
were notorious Heretics, as Wicklefe, Hus, or the Waldenses etc. To which
(after much securtility of words) he finally thus answers: We do Page 103.
not believe that all those, are Heretics, whom you Papists will so call or
account. But we reply hereto, and say; That not only the Catholics, but the
Protestants themselves do particularly charge Wicklefe, Hus, the Waldenses, as
also Almaricus, Peter Bruus, etc. with many gross and absurd Heresies,
acknowledged for such even by our Adversaries; as may abundantly appear by
recurring to the several passages of this former Dialogue. The defense of
which heresies does necessarily make their defendours, absolute Heroticks:
seeing they were mantayned by Waldo, Wicklefe, Hus, etc. with a froward and open
contempt of the authority of Gods Church, publikly teaching the contrary: far
differently from S. Austin, S. Cyprtan, and Lactantius, their beleiuing
certain errors (the which this Pamphleter, for the more lesning of the
Heresies of Waldo, Wicklefe, Hus, etc. in p. 112. suttely repeateth) seeing
these Fathers taught them only, as their own probable opinions: ever
submitting (with all Obedience) their Judgments therein, to the supreme
Judgments of Christ his Church. Ad hereto, that seeing those Books written by
Catholics of those times, do indifferently charge Wicklefe, Hus, Waldo, and
their followers with mantayning of some one point or other of protestancy, and
with diverse absurd Heresies: The authority therefore of those Writers are
either equally to be believed in all their accusations, or equally to be
rejected in them all: And the rather, seeing they could not foretell (a
consideration much to be observed) or presage, what points touching faith and
Religion, and different from the then Roman faith (wherewith Waldo, Wicklefe,
Hus, etc. were then charged) would be professed, bele^ued, and mantayned in
these days, by the enemies of the Church of Rome: And therefore it necessarily
follows, that the accusations passed in former times upon Waldo, Wicklefe,
Hus, and the rest, are either in general true, or in general false: If false,
then have we no sufficient Records, that there were any in those days, who
believed any points of protestancy: If true, then certain it is, that as
Waldo, Wicklefe, Hus, etc. mantayned some points of protestancy, so with all,
that they mantayned diverse explorate Heresies: and acknowledged for such both
by Catholics and Protestants.

Secondly, the Pamphleter objected in the Catholics name in this sort: None
Page 110.
of all those, which hitherto have been named, or can be named (meaning for
Protestants) but in some known, confessed, and vndowbted Opinions did varye
from you: And therefore they and you Protestants may not be said to be all of
one Church. This difficulty he salueth with a most impudent and bare denial,
saying: All those, whom before I have named, did generally for all main
Matters teach the same, Which we now teach. What forhead or shame has this
Man? For First, as touching Waldo, Wiclef, Hus, and their followers (in whom
through out this Pamphlet, the Author principally insisteth) It is confessed
by Osiander, Luther, Fox, and other Protestants, as also it appears by some
of their own Wrytings, that they agreed with the Catholics in most points of
Catholic Religion, which were of greatest moment (as in the Real Presence,
seven Sacrements, praying to Saints, Purgatory, frewill, Merit of Works, and
in all other most principal Articles of the present Roman Religion) Concerning
the proof of all which points, I remit the Reader to the Former Dialogue.
Secondly, touching other obscure Men, alleged by the Pamphleter for
Protestants he commonly and for the most part (some two or three excepted)
exemplifieth no other Article of Protestancy defended by them, then their
disobedience and inueighing against the Bishop of Rome. But if he could have
justly auerred them for Protestants in all chief Articles, why would he not as
well particulary set the said Articles of Protestancy down, as he did the
other, touching their disclayming from the authority of the Bishop of Rome? Ad
hereto, that many are produced for Protestants by this Author, only for their
sharply speaking and writing against the manners and conversation of the
Clergy in those days; they not dissenting from the doctrine of the then
Church of Rome in any one article whatsoever; and ever even ackuowledging the
Primacy of that Sea.

To all the former points I may adioyne this following Consideration. That
supposing the forsaid alleged Men were protestants in all points: yet do they
not prove the Visibility of the true Church of Christ, for these Reasons
ensuing: First, because they were but few in number, and in regard of such
their paucity, the Predictions of the amplitude largnes, and continual
splendor of Christ Church could not be performed in that small number.
Touching which predictions, peruse the beginning of the Dialogue: Secondly,
because neither this Author, nor any other Protestant living (how learned
soever) can prove, that, there were in those times (specified by this
Pamphleter) any Administration of the Word and Sacraments practiced by any of
these supposed Protestants: which ever necessarily concurs to the existence and
being of the true Church; as is demonstrated in the former Tract. Thirdly,
because the former Men could but serve for instances during their own lives,
and no longer; The Pamphleter not being able to name any one Man for a
Protestant, for the space of many Ages and Centuryes together: which point
being so, impugneth not only the Nature of Christ's true Church, which must at
all times and ages be most visible; but also it crosses the Title of this
Pamphlet: wherein the Author undertakes to prove the Visibility of his Church
in all Ages.

Thus far now (Good Reader) I have labored in surueighing this Idle Pamphlet.
Now for they better memory, I will briefly recapitulate and repeat certain
chief impostures and deceatefull deportements, practiced by this Author
throughout his Book. And then I will remit both him and his Treatise, to they
own impartial Judgment.

1. First then, I may remember his putting no name to his Book, nor taking any
Notize of the then late Conference in London, touching the Visibility of the
Protestant Church: nor once naming M. Fisher and M. Sweet, the two then
disputants. Which concealed Course our Pamphleter purposly affected in all
probability: seeing otherwise he might well think, that the setting of his own
Name down (especially if the Author were either D. White or D. Featly) or
having in this discourse particular reference to the foresaid Disputation, might
sooner draw on an answer to his Pamphlet, from one of the said two Fathers, or
from some other Priest.

2. Secondly, You may call to mind, that in the first part of his Treatise, he
laboreth to prove rather the Inuisibility of the true Church, then the
Visibilitie thereof (contrary to the Inscription of his Pamphlet) chiefly to
intimate thereby, that a continual Visibility of the true Church is not so
necessarily to be exacted, as we Catholics do teach it is: and consequently,
that what few, weak, may^ied, and imperfect proufs and examples for the
continuance of protestancy, he was after to allege, the same might be thought
sufficient and strong enough, for the establishing of his own Churches
Visibility.

3. Thirdly, The pamphleter callengeth any one for a Protestant who did but
hold one or two Articles of protestancy (and especially if he did but impugn
the Popes authority) or did write against the Manners and conversation of the
Clergy of those days; though otherwise he did agree with the Church of Rome,
in all Articles of faith.

4. Fourthly, He callengeth those for protestants, who were condemned by the
Church of Rome, for other Errors, then are mantayned by the protestants; so
making the ignorant Reader believe, that the Pope in those days condemned only
the doctrines of Protestants for Heresies. this the pamphleter does to the end,
that the number of the professors of his Church in those days might seem the
greater, in his Readers eye.

5. Fyftly, he most cauteously concealeth the Catholic doctrynes, ever
believed by Hus, Wiclefe, Waldo etc. as also sic most falsely extenuateth such
Heresies, as they mantayned, and are acknowledged for Heresies even by learned
protestants; The Treatizer subtelly forbearing to name or set down (in expres
Words) any one of their Heresies.

6. Sixthly, For want of better Authors, he flees to the testimonies even of
Poets (as Chaucer, Da^^es, Petrarch) urging them for protestants; only by
reason of their Satyrs, written against the supposed abuses of Rome.

7. Seauently, he most impertinently dilateth and spreads himself, in long
and tedious discourses, touching the increase of the Doctrine of Waldo, Hus,
Wiclef etc. as also touching the Contentions between the Popes, and the
Emperors, the Kings of England and France; and finally spends diverse leaves
in railing against the Pope, as Antichrist: All which werisome prolixityes he
uses, thereby to spine out his book to some reasonable lenght or quantity;
seeing otherwise to the title of his book, they are mearly impertinent.

8. Eighthly, his Monstrous Impudency is to be observed, in making S. Bernard,
and the Greek Church in former times, as also the Churches in India, Armenia,
Asiae, Minor, Egypt etc. to be protestants, without showing any one Protestant
Article, that they did hold; excepting the Greek Church, denying the Popes
Supremacy.

9. Nynthly, The title of his Book, being to prove the continual Visibility of
his own Church in all ages, he produces his Examples of protestancy
(supposing them for the time, to be true Examples) only for the first three or
four hundred years before Luthers days; and so (mearly crose to the title of
his book) he omitteth eleven hundred years, without giving instance of any one
protestant, during all those Ages.

10. Tenthly, Touching the Compass of those few ages, for which he produces
some supposed Examples, his fraud and calumny is, to begine from Luther upward
(and not downward toward Luther) thereby the better (as is above said) to
conceal from a vulgar Eye, the small number of those ages or Centuryes, for
which he endeuoreth to prove the imaginary Visibility of the protestant Church.

11. Eleuently and lastly, his stilling the Catholic Articles (to wit of the
Real Presence, Purgatory, free will, praying to Saints, and all the rest,
believed by S. Bernard and other Catholics only Lapses and Slipps; the belief
of which Articles in us Catholics at this present he, commonly calls Idolatry,
Superstition etc. But this alleuiation of words and speech he uses most
subtelly of S. Bernard that so notwithstanding S. Bernards different belief
yet by this Pamphleter he nevertheless may be reputed a good protestant.

Thus far (Good Reader) of his chief affected sleightes And with this I end,
referring this one Consideration unto thee. That is: If the question of the
Visibility of the protestant Church through the Conference had thereof at
London (immediately before the coming out of this Pamphlet) and occasion of
that other Toy, entitled: The Fisher catched in his own M^t, was at that
time, much discoursed and talked of by many Men through out the land; and
therefore the Mantayners of this Visibility did stand more obliged (by all
Reading and learning possible) to justify the same; being then and at all
times, so much provoked unto it by us Catholics, and if nevertheless, the
Author hear refuted, being styled in the Epistle of this Treatise: A most
reverend, and learned Man, and one who has more particularly and perspicuously
traualled in this Argument, then any in our English tongue; And therefore he
may be presumed in all lyklyhood, to have spoken in defense thereof, as much as
can be spoken therein: If (I say) this Man cannot but for three or four ages
only (and these, nearest to Luthers days) seek to justify the same; and this
by means of some few, false, defective, and misapplyed examples and Instances,
accompanied with diverse frauds impostures, and Collusions: What other thing
then from hence may be concluded, but that it is impossible to make good or
prove the Visibility of the Protestants Church, during all the ages since
Christ to Luthers days (or indeed, du^ing but any one ^ge thereof) And
consequently, that the Protestant Church, for want of such a necessary
Visibility (ever attending o^^ the true Church of Christ) is not, nor can be
the true Church of Christ?

FINIS.
THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE CONVERTED JEW OR THE THIRD DIALOGVE OF MICHAEAS THE
JEW.

Between. The right honorable, the Lord Chief Justice of England. Michaeas,
the former Converted Jew. M. Vice Chancelour of Oxford.


The Contents hereof the Argument following, will show.

Vide mulierem ebriam de sanguine Sanctorum,

Apocalips. 17. THE ARGUMENT OF THE THIRD DIALOGVE OF MICHAEAS. STYLED THE
ARRAIGNMENT OF THE CONVERTED JEW.
MICHAEAS, after his disputation ended in Oxford, with D. Reynolds, Ochinus,
and Neuserus, touching the Inuisibility of the Protestant Church; and giving it
out, that he would instantly depart from thence; Nevertheless lies secretly
in Oxford, and has peculiar acquaintance with some of the choyest wits there;
whom he persuadeth to the Catholic, and Roman faith.

The Vice-Chancelour of Oxford, hearing thereof, apprehends Michaeas,
conuenteth him before the right Honorable the Lord Cheife-Iustice of England;
before whom he stands arraigned of three Crimes. The first, that (according to
the falsely supposed Principles of the Roman Religion) he laboreth to plant
disloyalty in the Scholars minds. The which Michaeas absolutely denies; and
thereupon retorteth (by way of recrimination) the crime of Disloyalty upon the
Protestants, both for their doctrine thereof, and for their practice. The
second offense urged by the Vice-Chancelour is, that Michaeas did write
certain short Discourses of diverse points of Catholic Religion, and diuulged
them to the Scholars of his acquaintance: Of which discourses the
Vice-Chancelour getting a copy (of Michaeas his own hand writing) delivers
it (in the presence of Michaeas) to the Lord Cheife-Iustice. This Action
Michaeas acknowledges it, as true, and warranteth it by force of Reason, and
strong example. The third Crime. That, Michaeas (being a Roman Priest)
undertakes to reconcile some Scholars to the Church of Rome, and daily
celebrateth Mass.

All this Michaeas grants unto, justifying such his proceeding, by deducing
the antiquity of Priesthood: of the power of remitting sins (in the Sacrament
of Penance) and of the Mass even from the times of the Apostles, and the
Primative Church: By reason of which occasion, the present state of Priests,
and Catholics in England, is impart discoursed of.

To conclude (omitting diverse other short insertions, and passages in the
Dialogue, incidently occurring) the Lord Cheife-Iustice (as inclining to
clemency, and commiseration) proceeds to an honorable, and myld Censure, or
judgment against Michaeas; at which censure the Vice-Chancelour mightily
stormeth. And so, (Michaeas, earnestly praying for the Kings health, and true
happynes) the Dialogue ends.

THE ARRAIGNMENT OF THE CONVERTED JEW BEING A DIALOGVE BETWEEN THE RIGHT
HONORABLE THE LORD CHEIFE-IVSTICE OF ENGLAND MICHAEAS THE CONVERTED JEW AND M.
VICE-CHANCELOVR OF OXFORD.
Wherein is proved (besides diverse other short insertions) that the
Protestants stands more chargeable with disloyalty to their Lawful Princes,
then Catholics do.
THE VICE-CHANCELOVR. MY Lord. All duty to your Lordship. I have here brought
before your Lordship, a Man most turbulent in his proceedings; and who of late
has much ruffled, and disordered the fi^e, and quiet state of our University,
by seeking to infect the Scholars thereof, with his Popish, and superstitious
doctrines: One, whom kind, and courteous entertaynment (for such he has found
at our hands) cannot mollify, and whose demerits are of that nature, as that
Compassion showed to him, would prove Cruelty to others; And we should become
accessory to our own hurt, to suffer such a man to pass un punished.
Therefore I hope your Lordship will not preserve him, who^ the Law has
overthrown; nor suffer his present calamity (how great soever it may seem) to
attract from your clear judgment commiseration, and pity; But rather you will
vouchsafe to remember, that he doubts his crime, who masketh it under the
tecture of Religion.

This is that Michaeas; homo Act. 24. The Jews so called S. Paul in their
Accusation.
pestiferus and concitans seditionem; who after his disputation in our
University with the most learned D. Reynolds, made show presently to leave our
university, and to retire himself into some forayne Country: But many months
have since that time passed: He, during all the while, secretly lourking among
us (so the Spidar lies close, to surprise the incautelous flee) seeks to get
private acquaintance with diverse eminent Masters of Arts, and others of the
younger sort. Which being obtained, he then enuenometh their judgments with
Superstition, and Idolatry, and with his other Romish positions, breathing
disobedience, and disloyalty against the Magistrate. And indeed he has such a
facility by slye, and subtle insinuations, to serve himself within the
Scholars affections, as that it is most wounderfull: For first he commonly
begins a far off, to talk with them of the nature of other Countries,
and of his own trauells in other universities (to which discourses our
Scholars do lend their greedy ears) before ever he enters to talk of
Religion; And so (like a good tabler,) he usually plays with them an
aftergame, the more speedily to come to his designed end. The hurt, which he
has already perpetrated in our university (which is one of the two eyes of the
whole Realm) is great and insufferable; and your Lordship well knows, that
Math. cap. 5.
if the eye be wicked, then all the Body shall be dark. Therefore now at the
lenght having apprehended him, I have converted him before your Lordship that
so he may be punished by the Law, who has transgressed the Law.


LORD-CHEIFE JUSTICE. Stand forth Michaeas. Many and greiuous (you see) are the
complaints given up against you; from which you must either truly vindicate
your self, by being faultles therein, or otherwise you must undergo the
chastisment appointed for such offenses. And though we Judges be ordained to
punish what is evil; yet we are to wish, that men do not prove themselves
evil: And therefore I desire, that your Innocence (if innocent you be) may be
here cleared: for I hold it a far greater oversight to punish the guiltles,
then to leave unpunished the guilty; Since Justice instructs us not to
delight in punishment, but to recurre to it for plain necessity. Now speak
Michaeas, what you can in your own defense.


MICHAEAS. My Lord. I do hear first prostrate myself in all Humility before
your Honor; resting glad, that though my accuser have wronged me by thus
falsely traducing me before your L. yet that it is my fortune, to appear before
such a Judge, with whom Innocence shall find it sanctuary, and only true faults
be corrected: for I presume, that that sentence of the Psalmist is even
imprinted and sealed up in your heart: Psalm. 57.
Recte iudicate filij hominum.

Now for my more just defense your L. may hear be aduertized, that I am a Jew
by birth and Nation, and a Roman by Religion; and do hold, that Jerusalem, (I
mean the Church of Rome, which is upon earth, the spiritual Joan. cap. 4.
Jerusalem) is the place, where Men ought to worship. I came into this
flourishing Kingdom, only through my great desire of seeing your famous and so
much celebrated Universities, with intention of return in a convenient time.
Now I trust (my L. I speak it under correction of your more experienced
Judgment) that I, as being a stranger, and not borne within these dominions, do
not stand precisly subject to the laws of the said dominions; And therefore,
what I have committed (suppose most to be true, as most of it is false) may
well be an error in me; but any heinous crime (as now it is exagitated) it
cannot be. And further every Man well knows, that even by the law of Nations,
the very name of a stranger (who in this respect cannot take particular notise
of the Municipall statuts and Ordinances of the Realm) does plead excuse for
many Transgressions; the committers whereof being borne subjects, are severely
and deservedly punished. Therefore my L. since Laws are made rather to
succor, then to wound Mankind, I dowbt not, but your L. will hear dispense
with all stern severity, and will remember that saying of an ancient Father:
Facilius Ira, quam Indulgentia obliqua est.


VICE CHANCELOVR. See you not my L. how this Polypragmon, this Michaeas dare
not only (without fear) violate the laws of our Realm; but also will needs
brave it before your Lorship, that for being a stranger, and not borne in our
Nation, he stands not subject to the said Laws? and thereupon does justify his
impietyes; but it seems he gloryes to be extremly facinorous: Tertul. lib de
Pudicit.
Est and mali dignitas, quod in summo pessimorum collocetur.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Michaeas. Your Plea hear is most weak and defective for
though you be a stranger, and as you say, not borne under the laws of our
Dominions; yet you must know, that you had leisure enoughe to be acquainted
with our Laws, before you entered into our Country, or at lest within short
time after. And you must conceive, that the Laws being made by the consent of
the whole Realm, are not to be violated in favor of any one Man. Furthermore,
where you speak of Privileges and Indulgences allowed to strangers even by
all National Laws; you must ^^ke notize, that these favors are imparted to
strangers with some conditions and restrictions; to wit, if the bad comp^rtment
and cariadge of the said strangers do not worthily (...) them of participating
of the said Privileges; since otherwise, no reason there is, why they should
be partakers of them; And indeed the less reason, because in time of
Necessity, when the Prince is to command aids, forces, or Tributs from his
subjects, no such releife and helps can be expected at the hands of any
strangers, resyding in his Country. Lastly, it were repugnant to the nature of
Justice (which in it self is ever sacred and inviolable) that a stranger,
(such an one, as you Michaeas, are) by coming into a forrayne Country, and as
it were, by indeuizing himself for the time, should become a subject in the
fruition of the benefits of the said Country; And yet, when he would perform
any unlawful act, he should of new create himself a stranger. Therefore
(Michaeas) my judgment here is, that you stand obnoxions and subject to our
laws; And therefore you must either plead yourselfe innocent in the objected
Crimes; or else the Laws of our Realm will justly take hold of you. What say
you therefore to the offenses, wherewith you here stand charged?


MICHAEAS. Well my good Lord: since it is so I humbly submit myself to your L.
grave judgment herein, and do willingly recalle my former mistaking, in
alleging the privilege of a stranger. Yet I hope I rest excusable: since not
knowing, but that it might stand in force, I had no reason (by not insisting
upon it at the first) to be unjust to mine own Innocence, or to be slow in
mine own defense. Now my L. to come to the objected Offenses. Where first I
must say, that though an extraordinary Love of Justice does sometimes cause
Injustice in the lover: Yet no such effects do I fear in your L. since you are
one, who will impartially censure of Men's Actions, as they are in themselfs:
and not as they are tragically amplified by the tongue of malice.

Touching then my accusations, I must put your Lordship in mind, that my
Adversaries Serpentine (not Prudence, according to our Saviors words, but)
Subtilty, has in accusing of me, so affectedly mingled together Truths with
falsehoods, as that I can neither with one breath absolutely acknowledge all,
nor absolutely deny all. If I say, I have not persuaded some Scholars of the
University to the Catholic Roman Religion, I do lie; And if I do confess,
that I have diuulged to them any Positions of our Religion, as supposed to
contain the seeds of disobedience and disloyalty to their Prince (besides the
untruth thereof) I should be false to myself, and wrongfully become my own
Accuser. Therefore) to sever and ^ane these two different points, one from the
other) know you (most worthy Judge) that I do freely grant, that during my stay
in this your celebrious University, I have moved diverse of the students to
embrace our Catholic and only true Religion. And if it be the^ an offense to
persuade a Man to save his soul, I do here acknowledge my self to be an
offendour in this Kind, and shall receive with comfort any imposed punishments
for the same: But if it had been far better for one, to have lied in
everlasting Informitye and Abis of Nothing, then to enjoy a Being, and after
to have that Being (for want of a true faith and Religion in his Creator) to
be punished with eternity of pains; I hope then, we live not in those
Canicular and vnluckly times, but that the persuading by fair and sweet
means to the true faith and religion, shall be houlden if not as worthy of
Commendacion yet at lest as exempt from blame and dislyke; and the rather,
since Men are not to be forced by laws to an erroneous faith only for
statesake: Religionis Ter^^l. l^b ad Sca(...).
non est cogere religionem, quae sponte suscipi debeat, non vi.

Touching the second point, wherewith my adversary (too myld a word, my Enemy)
charge me at this present: that is, that I should lie secret in the
University, and labor by all means possible, to plant in the Scholars
judgments such Theorems of doctrine, as might breed disloyalty in their mynds;
It is a most false and calumnious imputation: myself being therein as
innocent, as Innocence itself. I know well, that as on the one side, nothing
is more delicate, then is the sense and feeling of an Estate; so on the other,
I am assured, that our Catholic Religion is so far from approving disloyalty,
as any Profession or Religion can be. For it teaches with the chief Apostle,
that we 1. Pet. 3.
ought to be subject to the King, as excelling; It surther instructed us with
the Apostle of the Gentills, That Roman. cap 13
we are to be subject to higher powers, seeing there is no power, but of God,
that Who vbi supra.
resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they, that resist,
purchase to themselfs damnation; Finally, that we Ibidem.
ought to be subject even of necessity, and for conscience sake; since Ibidem.
such a Power bears not his sword without cause.

Now our Religion teaching all this, why should this Plantife out of his own
speculatiue and suspicious concea^e (like to a superfluous Comment, which
ascrybeth more to the Text, then ever the Author meaned) soil my innocent and
clear intentions with the aspersion of such a foul demeanor? Therefore my L.
since this is only storm, which at this present chiefly showereth upon my
disgrace; I hope that the radiant beams of Justice (through your L. means)
will be of force to discipate and dissolve it.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. My Lord these are the accustomed common places of mouths,
exhaling forth disloyalty; I mean, to plead innocence, though never so faulty;
and to stuff their excuse with tragical phrases, apt to stir up a vulgar
pity. But if this Man [my L.] who has contaminated himself with so many
foul breaches of Civil Hospitality (which all men in all Nations most
ceremoniously observe (may pass vnchastized; then let vice expect to be
rewarded, and virtue punished. But why do I labor so painfully to take the
height of this his wicked action (since it is a kind of error, over precisely
to insist in proof of most evident Truths) as if doubt were here to be made
either of your L. judgment herein, or of your Justice? the one being
sufficiently warranted unto us, by your long experience in this kind; the other
by your many examples of like Nature. But to turn my words particularly to
you, Michaeas. I pray you, why must your stay in our University be kept so
close and secret, after you gave it out, you would instantly depart? Belike you
thought, the more retyredly you lived from the eye of us all, the greater
conceate would be had of your presumed Worth; and so your followers might keep
you, as a treasure reserved to themselves; you imitating herein Diogenes, who
became the more eminent, in regard of his affected obscurity.


MICHAEAS. O M. Vice-Chancelour. do not thus betrample upon old age and
calamity; neither lay a further weight of digrace, by your forgeryes upon him,
whom misery and years have almost prostrated even with the earth. Neither
seek to enlarge my faults with your more greiuous fault. And where you inuest
my private retyringe in your University with a veyle of a desired emminency; I
must replye, that I am as far from all such elation and pride of mind, as your
self is from all charitable censuring of me. For I do acknowledge my self to
be a mean and de^ected Old Man, and do ascrybe all glory height and honor to
him, who is celsitudo Psalm. 137.
humilium; And who being only supreme, does most delight in those, who are the
lowest; And this deservedly, since we find by experience, that who are most
poor in Spirit, are commonly most rich in the guyfts of the Spirit.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. M. Vicech: I would have you to descend to the particular
doctrines of disloyalty, broached by Michaeas in your University: for as yet
both your words have been spent only in discoursing and aerie generalityes. And
they are particulars only, of which the law takes hold: for since the
punishment prescrybed by the Law is particular, it follows, that the offense
must also be particular. Therefore show in such and such a point with others
particularityes, where Michaeas has offended against the Sovereignty of
Princes.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. My L. I will. You have di(...)gled (Michaeas) to your
sollowers, that the Pope has full authority to det^one Kings and Princes
(though never so absolute) at his pleasure. And further Papists teach, that the
spiritual Jurisdiction residi^g in the Pope, ought to have that predominancy
over all temporal authority, which the soul has over the body. To be short,
this point (to wit, that your Popis^ Religion does teach rebellion and
insurrection of the subjects against their lawful Prince) is so clear, as
that we may well say, Papistry and Disloyalty are almost Termini conuertibiles:
for though some disloyal Men are not Papists: yet every Papist (in that he is
a Papist) is to his sovereign Protestant Prince, disloyal.


MICHAEAS. You are glad (M. Viach.) to moysten this your dry accusation, in
the froath of many idle and splenfull words. Your accusation stands upon two
points: First, you charge me in particular for disseminating of disloyalty in
your University: That being only said, you make in lieu of further proof
thereof a sub^^ll transition to the doctrine of other Catholics in that point:
As if what were wanting to the perfecting of my supposed Crime therein, ought
to be made up, by the accession and application to me of other Catholic
Doctors wrytings of that subject.

Now to the first I answer. It is a most false Calumny forged in your own
brain, and wrought upon the anuile of Mali^e. For produce (if you can) the
parties, to whom I ever uttered such a Doctrine, the Place or the Time, Where
or when, such speeches were delivered. Thus, we see, that this your report (as
being in it self most false) is wholly disuested of all Circumstances,
necessarily attending upon every humane Action. For even to re^cyle the secrets
of my soul herein: I did in all my discourses with your Scholars purposely
avoid of Sta^e,
(as a seamarke) all such questions [of State:] so unwilling I ever was, but to
touch upon those dangerous sands. And for the greater demonstration of my
Innocence herein, and of my Loyalty to his Majesty of England, I here
acknowledge (and in this acknowledgement I do for the time, depose and put of
the person of Michaeas, and speak in my own person, the Author of this
Treatise; and in the name of all other Priests and Catholics of England) all
layalty and fidelity to our most gracious and dread sovereign King Charles,
and to his most illustrious and worthy Queen; beseeching the Almighty to
grant him a fruitful bed, and to make him Parent of many noble Children: And
further I humbly pray to the Highest, that he may in all tranquillity and true
happynes reign over us many years; and after his dissolution of Body, that he
may equal in everlasting Be atitude the greatest Saint of his Predecessors
now in Heaven. This is my Protestation made in all sincerity, and in which by
Gods grace even to my last gasp. I intend to continue and persevere.

But now to resume my former shape of Michaeas. Touching the first point of my
accusation (M. Vice-Chancelour) you see how clear and innocent I am. I will
now hasten to the second branch, containing (as you say) the doctrine of
Disloyalty, taught even by all the Doctors of the Roman Church. First I
answer, It is a most iniust slander obtruded upon them by you; since not any
one Catholic Doctor teaches, nor aone good lay Catholic beleiueth, that
the Pope can at his ny pleasure depose Princes, and transfer Kingdoms and
states, as to him best likes. Secondly, I reply, that seeing you never cease
to vpbraid our Catholic Religion, with the foul stayne of disloyalty (this
being your, and other Protestants common Theme, wherein you so much ryout in
malignant exagerations) Therefore as awakened by your so often ingeminated
accusation herein, I do avouch (pardon me most Reverend Judge, if being thus
provoked, I enter into a Subject, perhapps ungrateful to you) that the
Protestants do by infinite degrees, stand more reprehensible in this point of
disloyalty and disobedience toward their Prince, then we Catholics do. And
this I will prove, if I may be suffered, at this present against you [M.
Vice-Chancelour] first from the positions and speculatiue assertions of the
most learned Protestants; and after, from the actual insurrections and
rebellions of Protestants, against their lawful Princes.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. This is the Scene [Michaeas] of men of your disposition, that
when you are truly charged with your own faults, then in place of better
answer, you insimulate (by way of recrimination) your Adversaries within the
same faults. But it seems by you, that dotage is the accustomed Attendant of
old age; or that you take a delight and complacency to have the subject of
disloyalty often in your mouth, as you ever have it in your heart. But begin at
your pleasure to charge us Protestants (if you can) either with the doctrine or
practice of disloyalty. My Lord-Iudge (I know) will give you leave, who in the
end shall perceive, that all what you can imagine in this point, is but meet
imagination, and no real Truth; And so in your discourse, you will resemble
that Man, who dreams, he does but dream.


MICHAEAS. O wound not [M. Vice-Chancelour] my reputation with these
Philippicks and declamatory Inuectiues; so much hurtful even to the speaker:
for, Tertul
quomodo placabit Patrem, iratus in fratrem? And rest satisfied, that I do not
solace myself (as you suggest) in this unpleasing Text: but do acquaint my
self with discourses of that subject, with the like intention, that the moral
Philosopher does busy himself with the nature of Vice; which is, the better to
avoid Vice.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Michaeas. I must needs now say, that you do infinitely wrong
our Religion, by ascrybing both to the chief Doctors and Professors of it,
this odious Crime of Disloyalty and Rebellion. No, no. Our Gospel which comes
from God, best teaches our duty toward the Lieutenants of God. I presume,
that herein you rest but upon the bare and naked speeches of others of your
own Religion, our designed enemies: But you must remember, that as things,
which are seen by reflection, are imperfectly seen; so reports and bruits
taken only at the rebound of partial men's mouths, deserve but a light ear.

But seeing it is the part of a Judge, to hear all sides with an indifferent
ear; you may [Michaeas] at your pleasure begin your discourse of this your
assumed Argument, where I doubt not, but M. Vice Chancelour will sufficiently
repel all your reasons, and answer to your examples, to the greater Honor of
our Religion; which is a free from all stayne and blot of disloyalty, as an
intemerate virgin is free from any defiled touch. Therefore, Proceed.


MICHAEAS. My L. I will; And I must entreat your Patience herein, as desirous
to abstain from giving the lest just offense to your L. And touching this
subject, I dowbt little, but that (howsoever you are as yet persuaded) after I
have finished my Discourse, your morning and more retired thoughts will (at lest
in the secrets of your own Judgment) give an other censure hereof. And I will
begin in delivering the Positions and doctrines, which the most accomplished
Protestants for literature, have left of this Argument in their Books and
wrytings.

And first do we not find Luther even to deny all secular principality, as
most unlawful now in these Christian days? For thus he writes: Among Luth. de
secular. potest. in tom. 9. German.
Christian Men none is superior, save one, and only Christ. As also more
fully: Among Luth. vbi supra.
Christians, no man can or ought to be a Magistrate; but eich one is to other
equally subject. And further in contempt of all Magistrates touching matters of
Religion, he thus discourses: As Christ Luth. sermons englished and printed
1579. p. 97. and tom. Witenberg. f. 327.
cannot suffer himself to be tied and bound by Laws etc. So ought not the
Conscience of a Christian to suffer them. And more: If the Luth. Sermons vt
supra. p. 261.
Civil Magistrate should contend, that his Commandments be necessary to
salvation; then as it is said of the Traditions of the Papists, the contrary is
to be done. Thus we find, that Luther is not afraid, not only to impugn all
Magistracy and domination in certain cases; but he is also not ashamed, to
dogmatize and teach in his wrytings, that there neither are nor ought to be any
true souerainty or Princes at all, now in the days of Christ. To which Princes
partly their Eminency graced with Pomp and state; but chiefly an innate and
imbred Obedience to Power and Majesty (God and Nature making that now good,
which law of man did first ordain) induce men to exhibit all due reverence and
veneration: In compare of whom, even the greatest subjects are to seem but
private and obscure; like the brightest stars, which are darkened in the
presence of a fayrer light.


VICE CHANCELOVR. Touching Luther [Michaeas] you must know, that although we
acknowledge him, to have been a great instrument of God, for the revealing in
these later times the Gospel of Christ; yet we grant, that in some points he
varyed from the Truth; and particularly in denying all Magistracy and
Principality. But all other chief Professors of our Religion concurrently
teach with us the lawfulnes of Princes, and all due Obedience unto them.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour If Luther by your own acknowledgment, did err
in this point, how then can you rest assured, that he did not err in other
points of faith, first by him broached, and after entertained by you: Since he
had no better warrant for teaching the truth in the one, then in the other; and
it is certain, that a manifest error but in one point, carries with it a
possibility of erring in any other point. But to come to your answer. I say
the contrary thereto will presently appear. For is it not evident, that
Swinglius (a man of extraordinary note among you) thus teaches? Quando Tom. 1.
in explanat. Art. 42.
perfide and extra regulam Christi egerint Principes, possunt depon^: When
Princes do evil, and contrary to the rule of Christ, they may be deposed. Thus
Swinglius; who there warranteth this his doctrine from the example of Saul,
whom God deposed; although before he designed him, King. Yea Swinglius thus
further proceeds: Due Swingl. in l. epist. Oecolam. and Swingl. l. 4. epist.
Cunhardo Somio etc. Promittendum est Caesart officiu^, si modo fide^ ^obis
per(...)* illibatam.
reverence it to be promised to Caesar, if so be permits to us our Religion
inviolable: Thus intimating, that if the Prince does not permit Religion, then
no honor is to be given, but resistance is to be made. Swinglius furthermore
continues his former discourse in these very words Romanum Swin(...) ^b^ ^upra.
Imperium, ^m^ qu^du^s aliud Imperium, vbi religionem sinceram opprimere
caperit etc. If the Roman Emperor, or any other Prince or Sovereign shall
begin to oppress the sincere Religion, and nos illud negligentes patim^ etc.
And we negligently suffer the same. We shall stand charged with contempt
thereof, as much as even the opp^essours themselves: An assertion so much
displeasing to other more sober and quiet Protestants, that D. Bilson does rest
much dist^sted with those words of Swinglius; saying in lieu, of further
answer to them: As I muse In his true d(...) rence part 3. page 273.
at Swi^glius his words; so I like not his judgment.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Mich(...). You know well, that Swinglius and Luther lived
both in one time together: I mean, then, when though many Articles of the
(...) were by them discovered; yet all were not discovered; but happ^ly they
might mantayne some errors; The Sun of Christ's Gospel not as then arriving
to it Meridian and full ascent. And indeed it is a kind of imperfection and (as
I may term it) a sign of an over rigid nature, to expect in the w^yters of
those firster times, no imperfection at all. But now in these more late and
refyned days, the Professors of the Gospel have wholly exploded the former
doctrine of Luther and Swinglius herein. For what Men do more advance and
defend the dignity and sovereignty of Princes, then we do in our Sermons, and
other our private Conferences?


MICHAEAS. If you do so much magnify in your Pulpitts (as you say, you do) the
regallity of Princes, it is to the end, that in the close (I speak only but of
some of you) you may the better undermine them all: like the earth, which for
the time nurrisheth all Creatures, yet finally deuoureth all Creatures. But
because you reply, that the Professors coming after Luther and Swinglius,
cannot be blemished in their wrytings, with any spot of disloyalty; Therefore
to follow you in your own method therein, I will come by degrees from Luther
and Swinglius even to these our days; and so descending in times, I will
ascend in weight and force of Argument.

And now to come to Calvin, who next in time succeeded Swiglius, and toward
whom most of you Protestants do commit a Kind of Idolatry. It is over evident,
that Calvin thus writes of Princes and their authority: Earthly Calvin in
Daniel. c. 6. Abdica^t s^ pot^^ta^e ^err^^i Principes, du^ ^ns^rg^nt con^r^
Deu^; ^mo i^digni sun^, qui ces^antur in number(...) h^m^num: P^tius ergo
co^spuere oportet in illorum capita, quam illis parere.
Princes do depr(...) themselfs of authority, when they erect themselfs against
God, yea they are unworthy to be accounted in the number of Men: and we are
rather to spit upon their f^ces, then to obey them. Thus we se, that Calvin
teaches that, Princes commanding things unlawful, do utterly depryue
themselfs of all authority and regality, where with a fore they were inu^sted.
With which former Words of Calvin D. Wilks (no vulgar Protestant) does vppraid
the Puritans in this sort: They In his obedience or Ecclesiastical Union. page
60.
were your teachers, who account those Princes (who are not resined by their
spirit) unworthy to be accounted among the number of Men; and therefore rather
to be spitted upon, then obeyed: They were your teachers, who defend Rebellion
against Princes of a different Religion Thus D. Wilk^.

To come next to Beza. He was so full and intemperate in overthrowing the
authority of Princes; as that he did purposely write a book of this very
Subject, styling it: De (...) Magistratuum in sub^^tos: a book much dislyked
by D. Bancroft (the late Arch Bishop in his Survey of the pretended discipline.
page 48 As also in the book entitled: Dangerous Positions.
of Canterbury) and D. Succl^ffe: Which Doctor t^us censureth thereof: Beza D.
Succleffe in his answer to a certain(...) applicatory page 75.
in his book of the power of Magistrates, does arm the subjects against their
France in these cases etc. And further: Beza (m) roundly teaches, what reason
have Christians to obey him, that is Satan's sl^ue. And yet speaking more of
that Book of Beza, he says: a book, D. Succleffe vbi supra, page 98.
which overthrows in effect all authority of Christian Magistrates. To
contract this point touching Beza. Beza himself thus writes in one of his
Epistles to a friend of his: P^rplace^ In his epist. theolog. epist. 68.
mihi etc. It pleases me very much, that you write, that private Conuents and
assemblyes are to be made without the authority of Princes And again, in the
said epistle: Si pijs semper expectandum putas, dum lupi vltro cedant etc. If
you think, we must stay the delays of godly men, till the woul^es do freely
depart, or are driven away by publyke authority: I cannot yeald to your
judgment therein etc. And if we had made such delays, What Churches should we
have had at this day? Thus far of the doctrines of Calvin and Beza in this
point: concerning both which in general, I will set down the judgment of
therefore named D. Bancroft, passed upon them both, who thus writes: He that In
his Survey of pretended discipline. page 42.
shall reed M. Caluins and M. Bezaes two books of Epistles etc. Would
certainly marvel to understand, into what actions and dealings they put
themselfs of war, of peace, of subjection, of reformation, without staying for
the Magistrate. Thus he.

Next we will come to k^ox, who thus teaches: Reformation Knox to the
Communalty f. 49. and 50.
of Religion belorgeth to the Communalty. Knox histor. page 343.
God has appointed the Nobility to bridle the inordinate appetits of Princes,
Knox hist. p. 371.
Princes for just cause may be deposed. Finally Knox further avouches in these
words: Knox to En^la^d and Scotland. fol. 76.
If Princes be tyra^ts against God and his Truth, their Subjects are freed from
the oath of obedyence. Of all which passages of Kno^see D. Bancroft in his
book of dangerous Positions. Neither his Colleague Bucanan is lose sparing
herein: for thus he teaches: The Bucanan. l. de iure regni page 13.
People have right to bestow the Crown at their pleasure And yet with ^at more
debasing spyte he thus egurgi^ates his ve^ome: It Bucanan vbi supra. p. 40.
were good, that rewards were appointed by the People for such, (...) should
kill Tyrants, as commonly there is for those, which have killed vulues. Finally
Bucanan affirms, that People Bucanan vbi supra page 62.
may arraigne their Prince. Now in regard of these impious positions of Knox
and Bucanan, I fully approve and allow the grave sentence of the Bishop of
Rochester; who in his Sermon Preached the (...). of No(...)ber and printed.
^606.
at Pooles Church, terms these two men: The two fiery spirits of the Church
and Nation of Scotland.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Michaeas. Notwithstanding what you here have alleged
touching strangers; yet no part thereof conce^neth the Church of England, or it
Members: Our Church remaining most incontaminate, f^ee, and spotles from the
l^ast tuch of disloyalty. And therefore what is by you as yet hearesaid,
concerns us little; you only discovering your Ignorance in misapplying other
men's doctrines to us, who wholly disclayme from the same.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour: Pardon me, if I here do say, you charge my
Ignorance with greater Ignorance. For first, are not your Protestants of
England of the same faith and Religion with Luther, Sw^nglius, Calvin, Beza,
and the others above mentioned? If you be not, then have you erected a new
Protestant Church of late, different from all Protestant Churches before in
Being. If you be of the same faith, must you not then confess, that your
Religion teaches disobedience and disloyalty to your Prince? Secondly, it is
over manifest, that the Church of England (I speak of some members thereof
only, and not of all) does stand most chargeable with the same crime. In proof
of which point, I will produce the testimony of your former Archbishop of
Canterbury, D. Bancroft; who in one of his Books, thus confesses of English
Ministers concerning this point, saying: I omit In h(...) Survey of the
pretended holy discipline page 48.
their desperate courses of deposing Princes, and putting them to death in
diverse cases of resistance against reformation: The general sum was this:
That if the sovereign Magistrate refuse to admit it; the Ministers, the
inferior Magistrate, the People etc. might set it o^ foo^e themselves. Of
these, and such like arguments diverse books (he meaning, made by English
protestants) were allowed by the Ministers of Geneua, to be there then printed
in English, and to be published in England etc. And again the said Archbishop
in an other of his Books, speaking of the seditious English Protestants in
Queen Maryes time, thus writes: Goodman, D. Bancroft in his dangerous
Positions page 34.
Whitingam, Gilby, the author of the book of Obedience, with the rest of the
Geneua Accomplices in Queen Maryes days, urged all states by degrees, rather to
take arms and to reform Religion themselves; then to suffer such Idolatry and
Superstition remain in the Land. But to descend more particularly to this
Goodman. He was a forward Protestan^ in Queen Maryes time, and did write a
book of this very subject, as D. Bancroft In his dangerous positions. p. 35.
and D. Succliffe In his answer to a certain libel supplicatory. p 192.
affirm. Thus hereof he writes (as D. Bancroft D. Bancroft vbi supra page 35.
alleges his sentences) If Goodman in his said Book p. 119. 139.
Magistrates transgress Gods Laws, and comman^ others to do the like, then
have they lo^^ honor and obedience, and ought no more to be taken for
Magistrates; but to be examined, accused, condemned etc. And more: Goodman p.
63. and 43.
It is not sufficient for subjects not to ob^y the wicked Commandments of
their wicked Princes, but to withstand them also. And yet more plainly: Evil
Goodman page 144. and 145.
Princes ought by the laws of God to be deposed. To abbreuate this unpleasing
subject, there was also in the said times an other Book, made against the
authority of Princes and entitled: Of Obedience. Which book is much disliked
by D. Bancroft In his dangerous Positions page 35. 36.
and D. Succliffe, In his answer to a libel supplicatorie. page 71.
in which book we thus read: Kings In the book of Obedienc. page 25.
have their authority from the People, and by occasion the People may take it
away again. And more: By Obedience. page 110.
the word of God, in a manifest defection (meaning of faith and Religion) a
private Man having some special inward motion may kill a tyrant. Mark you
not, how he does Rauiliac it? And finally: It Obedience page 99. and 103.
is lawful to kill wicked Kings and Tyrants. But I will wade no further in
this argument. For I much fear, that the before unheard, and now unexpected
recital of the former Protestants doctrines is most displeasing to the ears
of this honorable Judge. Only I must note, that among the above mentioned
Protestants, some do speak with more respect and honor of Princes; others
with a^^ contempt and disgrace; yet all of them alleged do with one and the
same eye or countenance, indifferently look upon this principle; to wit: That
Princes in some cases may be deposed: such a dispacity we find in this their
generally acknowledged Conclusion: So in the pourtrayture of diverse men's faces,
we observe great disproportion, in one and the same proportion.


LORD-CHEIFE JUSTICE. Michaeas. I must confess, that these Doctrines of the
former learned Protestants, touching the deposing of Princes are most strange,
and indeed, distasteful unto me. But it well may be, that either the places by
your in^ertions and additions are corrupted; or that you have violated them by
diuorcing the words from their true intended Sense: Which sense of their (no
doubt) is different from that meaning and Construction, which you have imposed
upon them. But to confess my ignorance, I have not at any ty(...) r^d the former
Authors; And therefore I must refer this point (for my fuller satisfaction) to
the judgment of M. Vice Chancelour, here present.


MICHAEAS. I do assure your (...). in all sincerity, that the testymonyes of
the former Protestants are truly aledged; without any s(...) (...)ertion either
of the Words or sense: And hearein I appeal even to M. Vice-Chancelour own
judgment; who if he can change me with any such wilful imposture but in any
one of the passages above, I will acknowledge my self guilty in all. Besides,
all the former Authors are long since departed out of this World; and
therefore my fault (if any such were) should be far more odious and
insupportable; since Christian Charity teaches us, to tread gently upon the
graves of the dead.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Suppose (Michaeas) that we should grant, that all the former
Protestants did teach, as you have produced them; for to speak the truth, I
cannot take any just exception against your allegations; and the less, seeing
I find some of our own Brethren by you alleged (and particularly D. Bancroft
and D. Succlif) to acknowledge with discontent their said sentences. Yet seeing
they were but certain Metaphysicall and aerie speculations only of Scholars;
men unapt for a mes and Rebellions, and not of any acting spirits: Their
doctrinall Comminations therefore (as never being accompanied with any
external Acts of disloyalty) are to be reputed the less dangerous to Princes
and Magistrates. And thus in regard hereof, it may be truly said, that the
error of those former Protestants hearein was but small, though the point,
about the which they erred, was great. But the Case is far otherwise with you
Papists, who do not only teach and warrant rebellion by your doctrine; but also
have actually practiced the same with great effusion of innocent blood, to the
amazement of all Christendom, and irreparable dishonor of your own Religion.


MICHEAS. I will here speak with the Poet (M. Vice Ch.) mutatio nomine, de te
fabula narratur: Since these your words do ^ustly recoyle upon your self, and
your Religion. And therefore even to choke you irreplyably hearein, I will
present to your view, the tragical and deplorable face of many stats and
Countries in Christendom, engendered from the former Protestants Principles; In
the contemplation whereof we shall find it a Mystery, ever peculiar to diverse
Protestant stats, to cast of their loyalty and obedience; that so either by one
means or other they would either find right, or make right, to violate the
bond of all souerainty (as men speak of Hercules breaking Gorgons knot) with
whom it has been usual, to grow wanton in shading of blood, for the more
speedy establishment of their Gospel to the end then, that these former
doctrinal Theorems of Rebellion shall not become meare aerie (as it pleseth you,
M. Vice-Ch. to term them) I will truly and really incorporate them in diverse
most lamentable Insurrections and outrages, perpetracted by Protestant subjects
against their Catholic Princes. Many of which Rebellions did receive their
first Conception (and after their birth) even from the violent inciteme^ts and
instigations made by diverse of the before alleged Protestants: Writers, in the
mynds of the subjects against their Catholic Liege Lords. And in showing
this, I will first begine with England, then Scotland, and so I will pass to
other more remote Countries.

Now touching England. Do we not find, that the aforenamed L. Archbishop D.
Bancroft, speaking of the attempts made in Q. Maryes time for advancing of the
Protestants Religion, thus writes? Sundry Englishmen did write hither (meaning
(p) In his dangerous positions. page 34.
from Geneua) sundry letters and books of this subject; That the Councillors
of Q. Mary's time, Noblemen, Inferior Magistrates, and (rather then fail) the
very People were bound before God, to overthrow superstition and reform
Religion, whether Q Mary would or no; yea Though it were by putting her to
death. And according herto we thus read in the former book of Obedience: By
Gods law and Man's law, Q. Mary ought to (q) The Book of obedience page 99.
and 103.
be put to death; as being a Tyrant, a Monster, and a cruel beast. O poor and
titulary sovereignty, that is forced in these men's judgments to be thus subject
to it own subjects, and to endure those opprobrious and contumelious terms
from any one obscure Superintendent, which civil Conversation forbids
among Men of the meanest rank and quality. No, supreme domination and rule,
whearewith Princes are invested, is like to him, from whom it self originally
first streameth; that is, Absolute and independent; and brooketh not the
control of any such, whom God has subiugated to it by lawful subjection.
But to proceed: from these former, and other such elements and Principles of
Treason, it came to pass, that one Wiltin Thomas See hereof Holinshed Chron.
the last edition volum. 3. page 1104.
with others, conspyred to murder Q, Mary; for which offense he was hanged,
drawn, and quartered: that D. Crammer Act Mon. printed 1596. page 1282 and
Holinshed ^reat Chronicle volum. 3. page 10^3.
(Archbishop of Canterbury) partly for spreading seditious Books, and chiefly
under pretext of Religion for ayding the D. of Northumberland with horse and
Men, was sent to the Tower, arraigned in the starrchamber, and attaynted of
High Treason: Finally, that S. Thomas Wyat, (seconded with the D. of Suffoch)
attempted his treason against Stow in his A^nals page 1046.
the said Q Mary, only under the color of erecting Protestancy. But to leave
England, and to come to Scotland: Who is ignorant, that Knox H^l^n(...)d great
Chronicle in the history of Scotland, the last edition. p. 366.
being instructed in this Art at Geneua, returned into Scotland, attempting to
reform Religion even by open rebellion, and force of arms; and murdering the
Cardinal in his bedchamber at S. Andrews, was conuented to appear before the
Queen Regent, and for not appearing was proclaimed Rebel? In like sort, D.
Bancroft thus further writes of Knox and his Confederats and followers: They
In his dangerous positions. p. 1^.
kept the field two months, and took away to themselves the coining irons, and
justified the same etc. They gave the Queen the lie diverse times, and used her
with most despi^full speeches, and re^ounced their obedience unto her; and
depryued her of all further regiment by formal Act, penned by Kno^.

The said D. Bancroft thus further enlarges himself, touching Knox and hi,
followers, saying: By D. Bancroft vbi supra.
the persuasion of Knox in his Sermon, they did cast down and destroy ^t S.
Andrews both the houses of the Eryars, and the Abbeys in that town: So deal^
they with the Abbey of Scone, the Friars at Ste^cling, and Lu^quo, and
Edenburrough; the Queen being fled thence for fear.

Thus D. Bancroft of these men's proceedings; who not content in afflicting the
said Queen, in such rebellious a manner, further extended their malice and
Disloyalty in so high a degree, to the last Queen of Scotland; as that his
deceased Majesty (her Son) thus complained thereof: King James in the sum
or the co^(...)nce at Hampton Court. printed 1604. p 81.
How they used (speakind of Knox and his Confederats) that poor Lady my
Mother, is not unknown, and with grief I may remember it.

Touching Ge^enna, Goneu^, I would say (but the mistaking is not great, since
what the one teaches, the other punishes) We find that D. (...) l^ste thus
truly writes: In his answer to a certain (...) (...) p. 149.
They of eneua did depose their Liegt Lord (who was Catholic) and Prince from
his temporal right; albeit he was by right of succession the temporal Lord
and owner of that City and Territory. Which whom conspireth D. Bancroft thus
writing hereof: The in his Survey of the pretended holy discipline page 11.
Citizens of Geneua receiving some good encour agement (meaning from Calvin and
such others) I doubt not, took upon them the endeavoring of altering
Religion: and omitted not the occasion offered of changing also the Estate of
the Commonwealth.

In this next place, the (...)ow Countries affoard a greater euidency and
demonstration of this point. For O^iander (a most eminent Protestant) thus
wounds his own Professors: The Low In epitom. cent. 16. p. 941.
Countries by public writing renounced all obedience and subjection to
Philip, their Lord and King etc. When Osiand. vbi supra. page 801.
four hundred of them, (men of good rank) had sued for tolleration in
religion, and did not prevail, the impatient People stirred In defens. tract.
de diverse. gradib. minis^tor. c. 2. p. 74.
up with fury at Antwerp and other places of Holland, Z^land, and Pladders,
threw and broake down images etc. The y subjects of those Countries took
arms against the Magistrate, and made the Prince of Orange their Governor: A
truth in like sort confessed by D. Sarauia in these words: They of the Low
Countries did overthrow and spoil temples and monasteryes with Monks, Bishops,
and the whole popish Clergy, against the mind of the chief Magistrate, and
prom^se given.

Finally Crispinus Of the state of the Church p. 627.
(the Protestant) and the foresaid Osiander Cent. 16. p. 959.
do relate, that one Petrus Dathenus and other chief Protestants of Gau^t, did
stir up in the year. 1587. the Ci^tizens to cast all the Mass Priests (as they
speak) and Monks out of the City, and to place their goods in the Treasury.

Next let us come to France. What civil Wars have been raized by the
Protestants, during the space of forty years together, till the last King
Henry the fourth made himself Catholic, only for their Religion, against
their Catholic Kings and Princes? Many historyes are become the subject
thereof; only I will content my self with discerning some few testimonies and
confessions of the Protestants herein. And first may occu^re the battle of
Dreux whereat As Antony fayus witnesses (being a Protestant) in vita and obitu
Bezae. p 45.
Beza himself was present; undertaken only for the advancement of the
Protestant Religion and of which Battle Beza thus writes: The Nobility Beza
in his epistle dedicatory of his new Testament, to the Queen of En^la^d printed
1564.
of France under the noble Prince of Condy, laid the foundation of the
restoring true Religion in France, by consecrating most happily their blood to
God, in the battle of Dreux. In like sort, we thus reed in a Protestant
book, entitled: The general Inuentory of the History of France; and
translated into English by Ed. Grimston: The Printed 1607. page 593.
Protestants of Meaux transported with indiscreete zeal, grounded upon their
numbers, did fly to the Churches, beat down images, and make the Priests
retire. And again: Beza vbi supra page 610.
preaching at Grenoble, Charters, and Orleans with his sword and pistol in his
hand, exhorted the people to show their manhood, rather in killing the Papists,
then in breaking Images. And yet more: The vbi supra p. 623.
Protestants (to wit anno. 1567.) being first armed, were in the beginning
masters of the field etc. The King being incensed against them, was at Me^ux,
and preparing to celebrate the feast of S. Michael, the Prince of Condy
approaching with five hundred horse, by this attempt forced the King to retire,
with some amazement to Paris. And yet further: The Prince of Condy and the vbi
supra, page 610. 625. etc.
Admiral kept S. Denis, S. Owen, and Auberuilliers to curb Paris. The
Constable (the Kings Lieutenant) gathered an Army, whereupon bartayle e^sued
etc. Which Author of the aforementioned Inuentory of France, relates many
more occurrents of those matters, which here for breuity are omitted.

But to proceed further touching the Country of France. Osiander (the foresaid
Protestant) records this matter in these words: The Ce^t. 16. page 698.
Protestants under color of exhibiting a Confession of their faith, came armed
to the Kings palace etc. That Osiander vbi supra. p. 804.
civil war, for Religion was renewed; the Prince of Condy being General of
those of the reformed Churches; and the Constable, General of the Kings Army.
That the Constable vbi supra.
being slain in these wars, the Kings Brother supplied his place. To
conclude this point of the Prince of Condy his rebellion herein; It is so
evident and undeniable, that Crispinus (a Protestant) thus writes hereof:
After Of the state of the Church page 625.
many messages (though in vain) sent by the King to the protestant Princes,
the war began again. For the Prince of Condy rose up in arms, and swore
not to leave them, under whose protestation this sentence was placed: Deo and
victricibus armis.

This lamentable subject of Protestant Subjects rising against their Catholic
Princes, has busied my tongue very long: Therefore I pass over, how in Basil,
(a chief City in Heluetia) a great dissension did rise between the Burg^sses
and certain of the Senators, for cause of Religion only (as Crispinus Of the
state of the Church p. 509.
relates.) And how the Burgesses having taken arms, forced the others to
agree, to what they demanded; and thereupon they did cast down Images; and how
twelve Senators favoring our Catholic Religion, were cast out of the Senate;
and how the Mass was first by these means abandoned, throughout all that
S^gnory.

Also, I pretermit the doleful passages of this nature, practiced in
Swe^eland, of which Country Cythreus (a Protestant) thus relates: Cythreus in
Chronico anno 1593 and 1594. p. 75. and 71.
Sigismond being King of Sweueland by hereditary succession, was constrained to
give his assent, that none should bear office in that Kingdom, but such only
(meaning Protestants) as retained the Confession of Augusta. He further says
thus. They forced the King to content himself with exercise of his
(Catholic) Religion in his own Chapel. A truth so well known and
confessed, that Osiander thus speaks of it in general terms: The
Protestants Osiander cent. 16. p. 1115.
of Sweueland did decree, that the exercise of Popish Religion, should be
banished out of all parts of that Kingdom etc.

Finally, I pass over with a gentill ^uche, what the Kingdom of Palonia, has
suffered in this kind; of which point the foresaid Protestant Osiander thus
writes: Certain Cent. 16 p. 115.
of Polonia did (out of an untimely zeal) expel their Priests, with great
violence and sedition: without expecting permission (as the said Author Cent.
16. p. 653.
confesses) of the King

Thus far (most worthy Judge) I have proceeded (contrary to the byas of mine
own natural disposition) in relation of these lamentable I lyads, as I may
term them but I am to be pardoned; since the vpbrading importunity of M.
Vice-Chancelour, did compel me thearto: from which former Examples we may
gather, that for diverse years past, most Nations of Christendom have become
the sable and mournfulle Theaters or stages, whereupon so many blouddy
Tragedyes have been acted; or rather the very shambles, whearein have been
shaughtered so many thousand Christians; and all this warranted, under the
pretext of introducing the Protestant faith and Religion. And for the more
justifying of these so wicked perpetrations, we find diverse most eminent
Protestants even with great lauds and applauses to celebrate these their
attempts. To forbear the Encomion above recited, given by Beza to the
Protestant Nobility of Fran^e, who were slain at the battle of Dreuz; do we
not find, when even an inundation of blood (shed through the insurrection and
Rebellion of Protestants) had ouerflowed most parts of Germany, that Luther
thus honoreth in words the same? Vide or Luther. loc. com. class 4. c. 30. fol.
55.
mihi videre Germaniam in sanguine natare etc. Christus meus viuit and regnat;
ego vino and regnabo. It sermes, that Germany even swims with blood: But Christ
lives and reigns; and I will live and reign. As also he thus further
triumphet heareof: Thou complainest, Luther. loc. com. class 5. p. 57.
that by the Gospel the world is become tumultuous; I a swear, God he
thanked: These things I would have to be; and woe me miserable Man, if such
things were not. In like sort does not Calvin magnify the former seditions
attempts of knox in this manner? Knox Galuin in epist. ^d Knox epist. 305. page
566.
valiantly bestows his labor upon Christ and his Church. O poor weak blast
of wynd (since iniust praise is no better) thus idly spent in commending that,
which deserves all discommendation and reproach: for I much fear, that these
Men, thus extolled for such their rebellions combustions and assacinacyes, are
interested in that sentence of Saint Austin: La(...) vbi non sunt; torquentur
vbi sunt.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Michaeas. You have hear entered into a wide and wyld
excursion of Discourses. But I hold them not altogether pertinenm: since all
your former Instances were undertaken, for depression of superstition and
advancement of the Gospel of Christ. The weight whereof is to ouerballance all
humane respects. And how far a Man may proceed hearein, I will not determyne:
Only I hope, I may without offense say, that in matters so me^rely touching the
endangering of our Gospel, and for the better beating down of Antichrist, it
is a kind of Passion to be insensible and void of Passion. But you should
(Michaeas) have brought some examples of Protestants disloyalty, and want of
duty against their Protestant Prince, if so you had thought to have wounded our
cause indeed: But since you have not, nor cannot insist in any such, your
former Instances we repute (supposing them to be true) for less material and
conuincing.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour. If it did comport with my present afflicted
state, or with my due reverence to this Seat of Justice I could well smyle to
see, how you still give ground more and more, in every of your answeares,
against our former authorities and examples, for whereas the main Question
hear is, Whether the Protestant Religion does teach any disloyalty to the
Prince, of what Christian Religion so ever he be? And whether the Professors
of Protestancy do truly stand chargeable, with such their Disloyalty for matter
of Religion? you now have hear used diverse inflexions and turnings to wynd
your self out of this Labyrinth. For first, when Luther and Swinglins were
produced out of their own wrytings to that end; You answer, that indeed
they were justly charged thearewith; but nevertheless the times after them,
being more refined and purged from all errors, were most free from all such
imputations. When to impugn this reply, I did urge, that Calvin, Beza, Knox,
Bucanan and diverse others of these days, did in their book and wrytings most
confidently defend the same doctrine of Rebellion and disloyalty for defense of
Religion: Your next slight was (crossing your former answered) to say, that
though these later Men did teach the said doctrine; Yet seeing this was but
only the speculation of some Protestant Scholars; but never put in practice by
any of them, or their followers; that therefore their error was herein the
less dangerous and more pardonable. When to confront this your silly evasion,
some of the said particular Protestant writers, and many thousands of other
Protestants are urged (by their open rebellions and insurrections) actually to
have practiced the said speculatiue doctrine of disloyalty: You then lastly
replied, that all this was undertaken by them, for the defense of the Gospel,
and depressing of superstition and Idolatry: Which you say, may perhaps
desearue hearein a myld censure. And further, you affirm, that you hold the
Protestants less chargeable with any just fault hearein, because they are ever
loyal to their Protestant Princes, for any attempts touching religion; though
not ever loyal to their Princes of a different religion from them. But how
rouing and wandering are all these Replies from the Question hear ventilated?
Which was, Whether Protestants did teach or put in practice Rebellion and
insurrection against their lawful Princes, of what Christian Religion soever
they were?

But M. Vice-Chancelour. I do hear pardon you. For either you must have openly
confessed in the first entrance of this passage, that the Protestants do stand
obnoxious, for teaching and practizing of disloyalty, etc. Against their true
Kings and soueraigns (which, perhaps, you were loath to do) Or otherwise, as
being deprived of all better. If any learned Protestant, think, I do wrong his
party, by feigningly imposing these euasions upon the Vice-Chancelour; then let
that Man set down such his other own replies, as he may think more
satisfying to all the former objected authorityes and examples, and he shall be
answered. For I cannot presage, what hear could by said by any Protestant,
but either to use these sleights, or otherwise plainly at the first acknowledge
the Protestants doctrine hearein. Answeares, you must have been forced (thereby
to wine a little time) to have used your former declynings and subterfugious
tergiaersations. But belyke you did at the first call to mind, that the least
degree of weakness in a Cause, wheare nothing but weakness is, is to be reputed,
as a kind of strenght; and that little sconces are fore the present good
fortresses; when Castells, Rompyers, and such other strong forts are Wanting.

But M. Vice-Ch. To trace you in the steps of your last refuge. I do hear
auonch, that Protestants even to their Protestant Princes, only for matter of
Religion (contrary to this your last assertion) have manifested great
disloyalty: Thus is your Gospel set against your Gospel; I will not say with
Esaias, Esaias. 19.
the Aegiptians against the Aegiptians. And here I pass over (for greater
breuity) the examples of this Kind, acted in Scotland See hereof D. Succlif in
his answer to a certain libell supplicatory page 80. and H^^inshed in the
history of Scotland the last edition p. 433.
and Germany, Osia^der epito^. cent. 16 p. 735.
even by Protestants against their Protestant Princes; and will a while rest in
the ouertures and intendments at least, hear in England. And according heareto
we find D. Bancroft thus to write of the proceeding of the Purita^s, against
their Protestant Bishops: The In his dangerous positions. page 74.
Puritans meet and co far concerning the proceedings of the Ministers,
without assistance or staying for the Magistrate. And further, talking of Penry
and other Puritans, he thus accuses them: They D. Bancroft vbi supra. page 137.
would make men to believe, that they had for the times, and within their
limits, an absolute authority, as if themselfs were Princes. In like sort, this
Doctor recites Martin Sein^r, making mention of a hundred vbi supra.
thousand hands; and what a stroke so many would stryke together; and that
(Martin affirming) their suyte should not be rejected; especially in such a
time, whearein we now live in danger of our enemies abroad, and therefore had
need of no causes of discoradgment at home. Thus D. Bancroft cyteth the words
of Martin Marprelet; and then he gives his sentence and judgment of this their
Menage, and terms it thus: A speech, at least seditions.

This Doctor also further discoureth the threats of the Puritans against the
Magistrate, and he alleges one of their comminations thus in their own
words: We have D. Bancroft vbi supra page 140.
sought to advance this cause of God by humble suyte to the Parliament, by
writing etc. seeing none of these means used by us have prevailed, if it come
by that means, which will make all your hearts to ache; blame yourselfs. Finally
not to stay long hearein D. Succlif thus speaks of Martin Marprelate: Martin
wishes, that the Parliament (d) In his answer to a certain libell supplicato.
page 76.
would bring in the Eldership (notwithstanding her Maiestyes resisting of it)
vz by a rebellion. They bragged of a hundred thousand hands, and in plain
^^armes, talked of Massacring their Adversaries. Thus D. Succlif, with whom I
will hear end.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Though I cannot deny (Michaeas) the former attempts of the
Protestants; Yet since not only the Papists Doctrine, but also the mainfold
traitorous desigments and real practizes of them against their Protestant
Prin^es, are no less tragical, then the former related by you are; I do not
see, but that granting the Protestants to be faulty in defect of Loyalty, you
Papists may in a far more high degree be justly insimulated within the said
Crime. Good God, your treasons and machinations have been so apparent and so
approved, by the consent almost of all other Papists; as that I may truly
pronounce, that in the whole thronge of Papists, a true and Loyal Papist
toward his Protestant Sovereign (so rare such an one is) is like a Diamond,
placed among many white Saphyrs: So just reason had the learned D. Morton to
say of your Profession: We may D. Mort in his Romish position^ page 51.
now expect as well a white Ethiopian, as a loyal Subject of this Religion.


MICHAEAS. Alas. M. Vice-Chancelour. These are but verbal exagerations without
prouffe: which as they are but wind of sp^enfull tongues, so are they blown
away with the Wynd. Be it, that some Catholic Doctors in certain peculiar
Cases, do ascrybe a powrfull authority to the Pope against Princes; And grant
also, that some few Catholics have proved to be (to the ineffable grief and
dislyke of all other good and sober Catholics) Disloyal to their Prince: Yet
since the difference both of their doctrines, and circumstances of their
attempts, are incomparably short and inferior, to the doctrynes and real
insurrections of the Protestants, against their Sovereigns; You have no reason
(M. Vice Chancelour) thus to insult, in galantry of such amplifying speeches
against us. Therefore I will parallel them hear together; that so you seeing
the great disparty, may ^ecall (for shame) those your speeches; and suffer
your cheeks to witness your former error.

And first touching the doctrine. The Protestants (I mean, those former
alleged Protestants) do extend this power of deposing Princes to every pore
parochial superintendent; who is Pope, (or so would be) within his own
circuit; yea for want of such a turbulent fellow (if at any time, theare can be
a want of these) they give this liberty (as above I have showed) to the base
Common people, and promiscuous multitude; the many headed tyrants of all humane
societyes: The Catholic deuynes, who most defend such transcendency of
proceedings, do nevertheless ascrybe the doing of it to the Pope only; who is a
stranger, and therefore further of from any such sudden and present attempting;
and who himself in case of Heresy (as a private person) lies open to the same
peril. This also they teach must be done, by many former sweet admonitions
and proceedings. To proceed to the attempts on both sides. The Protestants
have actually deposed several Kings, Queens, and absolute soueraigns: Thus is
the King of Spain deposed, of a greater part of the Lowcontryes; the King of
France, of certain Cittyes in France; The supreme Lord of Geneua, of his
Territory belonging to that City; The Emperor, of many Imperial Cittyes in
Germany; King Sigismond, of his Kingdom of Sweueland and Finally his Majesty's
Grandmother and Greatgrandmother, of the Kingdom of Scotland: The Pope and the
Catholics have never yet to this day, actually detroned any one absolute
Protestant Prince or King, throughout all Christendom, of their Sates and
Territoryes. The greatest matter of this nature, that can be alleged, is the
excommunications of King Henry the eight of England, Queen Elizabeth his
daughter, and King Henry of France the fourth. The Protestants have come into
the fyeld against their Catholic Princes, in many huge Armies and hundred
thousans of men; as appears by the wars made by them in the Low Countries,
France, and Germany: which wars have continued for many years: The Catholics
never yet leuyed any such Armies against their protestant Prince. Lastly the
Protestants have not only deposed their Princes of several states and
Countries; but they have really impatronized themselves of the said states, and
keept them in their own possession; as is over manifestly evident by the
examples of Rochel in France, Geneua, Holland, Zeland, several parts of
Germany, Sweueland, Transiluania etc. The Catholics to this very day have not
made themselves Lords of any one town or City (much less of any state or
Kingdom) which have belonged to their protestant Princes. And thus far
touching the libration and weighing in an even hand, the doctrine and attempts
taught and made by Protestants and Catholics in point of disloyalty, against
their lawful dread soueraigns of a different Religion.

And now (M. Vice-Chancelour) after the true unfolding of these matters (which
before were lapped up in a great mistaking) I demand of you, where are your
former Termini Conuertibilis of Papistry and Disloyalty? Your similitude of one
Diamond, among many worthles Saphyrs? And D. Mortons strange beast? As if all
Papists (and ^o Protestants) were guilty of Treason and Rebellion, against
their lawful Princes: so fowly, you see, your self was mistaken therein; and
so wildly did your Blackmouthed Doctor ^aue of a white Ethiopian.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Michaeas. I am tired with learning thus much of this
distasteful Theme; and I am unwilling, you should spinne out this discourse to
any further lenght: Therefore you may here end. And truly I would scarce have
believed till now, my own eyes (much less, my ears) that the Protestants
wrytings and actions had stood so justly subject to this kind of Reprehension.
But I must yield (though with grief) to such evident testimonies, as you have
produced; and the rather, seeing you (M. Vice-Chancelour) suffer them to pass
without either gainsaying the testimonies alleged, or denying the Examples
insisted upon.

But [Michaeas] notwithstanding the truth of all, what you here have said;
Nevertheless you have proceeded very partially in your discourse; seeming to
inuolue all Protestants within the greiuous offense of disloyalty, because some
of them do deservedly stand obnorious thereto: And you deal as iniustly
herein, as if one should charge all mankind with drunkenness, because many men
do sin therein. But I fear, you repute no men loyal, but those of your own
religion.


MICHAEAS. My honorable Lord. be such and oversight far distant from my
thoughts; and God forbid, my charitable conceats should be enriched within so
narrow a compass, as Your Lordship seems to conjecture. No. I do willingly
acknowledge, that many Protestant Doctors have in their wrytings learnedly
defended the right and royalty of absolute Princes, against their subjects of a
contrary religion. I also do as fully acknowledge, that theare are many
thousand Protestants in the world, who (no dowbt) would spend their lives and
livings in defense of their Souerain of a different faith, whose love, zeal,
and loyalty is carried with a most forcible bent to their Princes safety and
honor. What is above delivered by me, is even forcedly drawn out of me, by
way of recrimination; since M. Vice-Chancelour would never cease to weary your
Lordship and idly beat the wynd, in obiecting Disloyalty to me and my
Religion* Therefore my good Lord, do not think, I do extend my former discourse
to Protestants in general; or particularly to the Protestants of England in
these days, whose laudable and confessed Loyalty far be it from me in any
sort to impugn but rather my pene shall be ready upon just occasion, to
celebrate such their due praises thearein. But to be short, your Lordshid may
observe, that what is above spoken, is spoken not by me, but by the Protestants
themselfs; and acknowledged, as so spoken (and therefore condemned) by other
learned Protestants. What dislyke then I may incure heareby, the same does
necessarily attend upon D. Bancroft, D. Bilson, D(...)u^cliffe and other
moderate protestants, condemning the foresaid protestants of disloyalty. I am
but the poor Relater of their words, and can be reputed no more faulty
hearein, then is the Herald, for openly proclayming the rebellion of a subject
against his prince; or the Printer, for printing a history, containing the
manifest confessed vices of some particular Men.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Well, well, Michaeas. All what you have said (to which for
this time, I will forbear further to reply) is not sufficient, to wash out the
staynes of those other cryms, which you have perpetrated in our university. You
are come hither to make a rekoning for them, and not for to rauell out the
time, in long and tedious perorations. I say, that besides your disloyal
positions, which you have distilled into our Scholars judgments (which are
over manifest, howsoever you do palliate them with impudent denyalls, and
subtle recriminations) you have enuenomed some of them, with many
superstitious and Popish doctrines. And not content to effect the same in words
and speeches only, you have not forborne (so precipitious and impetuous you are
in your designs) even to write certain short Treatises of the said Popish
Opinions; giving them to your Proselytes* that so the poison of these your
doctrines thus spreading it self, and multiplied through these your aerie
wrytyngs (as through a well disposed Medium) may the more speedely affect the
sense and understanding of the more weak students. Now My Lord, if such a Man,
who has thus discolered the beauty and reputation of our (otherwise) most
famous University, shall escape unpunished; then instead of due vnpunishments,
let us erect Tropheys and garlands of Honor to Men, for their attempted
impietyes. And that your Lordship shall not find this my Accusation to be only
verbal; but that you may rest assured, that this Man Act. 18^ These words the
Jews spoke against S. Paul at his Arraignment.
persuades Men to worship God, contrary to the Law; I have hear brought unto
your L. a Copye of Michaeas his own hand writing of every such Papistical
doctrine, by him vented out. Hear the wrytings are, which I deliver at this
present into your L. hands to peruse at your pleasure. The which, after your L.
have red, you shall find them to be, but certain ro^ing Paperbulletts, shot by
Michaeas, against the walls of our flourishing University; Which (for the time)
may perhaps make some small crack and noise, but cannot batter: so fortified
and firmly seated our Academy is, through the strenght of the Gospel.


CERTAIN SHORT DSICOVRSES TOUCHING SOME POINTS OF CATHOLIC RELIGION, WRITTEN
BY MICHAEAS THE CONVERTED JEW AND FIRST.
That the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments are not
the true Notes of Christ's Church; And that admitting them for such, they make
wholly against the Protestants, and for the Catholics.
THIS Question will take it best illustration and unfolding, if it be
considered; first, Categorically and absolutely in it self; To wit, whether the
Administration of the Word and Sacraments can be reputed to us, for Notes of
the Church? Secondly, Hypothetically, that is, that if by supposall it be
granted for the time, that they are the true Notes of the Church; Whether the
said Notes do prejudice the Protestant Church, and advantage our Catholic
Church, or no?

Both these points shall hear be discussed. And first of the first. Wheare
the Reader is in the beginning to understand, that the true Reason, why Ins^it.
c. 1. par(...). 10. (...)ela (...) di(...) verb^ p(...)dic(...) S(...)nto(...)
que obj(...)onem posuimus.
Calvin, the Confession of Art. 7
Augusta, In his (...) of the answer p 81.
D. W(...)gift, Contra Camp. rat. (...).
D. Whitakers, and all other Pro(...) in general do prescribe these as Notes
of the Church is for two respects: first, that by this means themselves may be
Vmpiers, where and which is the true Church; seeing they alone through their
misapplication of the Scripture, and privilege that they ascribe to their own
Spirits, interpreting the Scripture, will with a Lordly peremptorines decree
and set down, Where and when the Word is truly preached, and the Sacraments
duly administered (they rejecting all other Men's interpretation herein) and
consequently, where and which is the true Church. The second reason of the
Protestants constituting these as Notes, is, Because on the one side they see,
that the Church of Christ by force of all Reason and prudence, is to enjoy
some Notes, for it distinguishing from all profane Conuenticles: And on the
other side they well discover, that the Notes of the Church assigned by
Catholic Writers (to wit, Antiquity, Suc^ession of Pasteurs, an ^ni^terrup^^d
Visibility, Working of M(...)s, Holin^s of Life and doctrine, Vaity, and diverse
others of like nature) are by all Ecclesiastical Authors, reason, and
experience, and by the Protestants confessions, peculiar to our Catholic
Church; and incomparible with their protestant Church. Therefore in this their
want of be^te^ Notes (seeing even for very shame, some Notes their Church must
have) they have thought it good policy, to erect the preaching of the Word and
use of the Sacraments, as Notes: And thus they, rejecting all former Catholic
Notes, do reduce (as above is said) the determining of which is the true
Church, to the inappealable and last Resort of their own private opinions;
passed upon the true preaching of the Word and the due administration of the
Sacraments.

But now to come to the Question it self, touching these Protestant Notes;
Where the ^eader (for the more clear setting down of the state of the
Question, and his own better instruction) is to conceive; first, that these
Protestant Notes (supposing them to be Notes of the Church) prove only the
place, where the Church is; but not, which is the Church; Which here is only
the Question. Secondly, the Reader is to call to mind, that whereas a Note may
be of two sorts: The one in respect of Nature; the other in respect of us,
according to the doctrine of the learned Protestants themselves, thus teaching:
Nottus est duplex; Lub^ertus (the Protestant) l. 4. de Eccles. cap. (...)
Vnum Naturae, vlterum nobis: that here the Question is only of such Notes, as
are Notes in respect of us, for our better informing, which is the true Church
(since here we are instructed a postartori, and according to the measure of
that knowledge, which God vouchsafes to affoard to us.) And not as they are
Notes in respect of Nature; Which Notes in regard of Nature, are ever
(...)sicall secret, and often essential to the thing, of which they are Notes.
Now in reference hereto, we free^y grant, that the true preaching of the Word
and administration of the Sacraments may be termed Notes of the Church; but
not Notes to us, which is the only point now isluable: for though they be Notes
in Nature, of the true Church: yet what anayleth it us: since they are not
Notes to us for our direction, to find which is the true Church?

And here we are to remember, that the Question is not, what kind of Notes, or
what kind of knowledge is better (for it is granted, that scire per Causas, is
most perfect and noble) but the Question is, what kind of knowledge God is
content to imparte to us, in this life, for the attayning of the Mysteryes of
our f^^th, and particularly for the knowing and searching out, which is his
Church.

Now that the true preaching of the Word, and use of the Sacraments cannot be
erected as notes of Christ's Church (I ever mean in respect of us) is several
ways demonstrated.

And first, this I prove from the Nature of a Note; which is ever to be of a
greater perspicuity and clearnes, and better known to us, then the thing is,
of which it is a Note. Since otherwise it should follow (an inference both in
reason and Art most absurd) that, that which is unknown, should be proved by
an other thing, which is less known an^ more obscure.

That the true preaching of the Word and administration of the Sacraments
(which is but a necessary (...) to the true preaching of the Scripture) are
more obscure and unknown to us, then is the Church; I prove first, from the
Scripture; which teaches, that true says (which is the effect of true
preaching the Word) proceeds only from the Ministry of the Church, according
to that: how Romans 10
shall they believe, whom they have not heard? and ho(...)sh a^ they hear,
without a Preacher? Thus Gods sacred Word (we see) does presuppose, that the
Minister, who is the member of the Church, (and consequently it follows
hereby, that the Church must be before known) does reveal unto us the true
sense of the Scripture. And therefore Calvin thus well says of this point:
Deus Instit. l. 4. c. 1. para (...). 5.
potest memo(...)sues perficere: nolit tamen eos adol^scere in (...)ilem
^tatem, nisi educatione Ecclesiae: God can pe^fect and instruct us in a moment
(meaning touching faith) yet he will not bring us to any manlike (as it were)
and perfect strength therein, but by the help and lab^ur of the Church. And
hence it is, that in all Controuersyes touching faith, we are always for the
determining of them, bot^ in the judgments of the ancient Tertul. l. de
Pra^^^pt c 21 irenaeu^ l. 3. cap. 4.
Fathers and learned Protestants D. Barow l. de fide and (...) ortu p 40.
Melanct^^ l (...) epist. ad Re^^cm An(...), p 49. Hocker in Eccle(...) pol in
the pr^face sect. 6. page 28. D. Bancroft in his Sermon preached 8. of February
anno. 1588.
referred to the Church; Among whom I cannot here pretermit the sentence of D.
Field, thus writing: Seeing D. F^eld of the Church in his Epistle Dedicatory.
the Controversies in our time are grown in number so many, and in nature so
intricate etc. What remains for me^, d^sirous of satisfaction in things of
such consequence but delige^tly to search out, which among all the societyes of
Men in the World, is that blessed Company of Holy Ones, that house-hould of
faith, that spouse of Christ, and Church of the living God, which is the pillar
and ground of truth, that so they m(...) follow her directions, and re^i in her
(...)? Thus we are instructed by this learned Protestant, to know which is the
true faith in all Controuersyes and sincere (...) the Word, from the Church;
and not to know, which is the Church, from the sincere preaching of the Word.

Secondly, that the true prea(...) of the Word and the use of the Sacrements
^re more ob(...) and difficult to us to be known, then to know (...) is the
true Church; appears from the volunt^^y acknowledgments of our most judicious
Adversaries: For greater (...) hearei^, I will insist only in o^e or two. And
to omit the answearable judgment hearto of D. Fyeld, potentially included in
his (...)met words; We do find Iustus Molitor (a learned Protestant, and
Adversary in his (...)gs to Cardinal Be^l^rmy^e) thus to confess: Nobis De
militante Eccies. p. ^34.
Quo ad iud(...)s ^o f^s^ al^ qua notitia, prius vera Eccles(...), quam (...)
praedicatio (...)o^escit etc. The true Church by a cert(...) co(...), (...)
so(...) k^o^ne to us, according to the judgment of reason, then the preaching
of the true word is known. With whom c(...)pireth in expr^s Words the foresaid
mentioned (...)testart Lubbertus, thus writing: Sacramenta Lib. de Eccles.
printed 1607 p. 226.
in v(...)nt nobis m(...), quam ^psa Ecclesia: The true use of the (...)ments
i^ less known ^o us, (...) the Church. And (...) gives his ^eason hereof in
these Words: Nobis notio^a su(...) externa signa^per quae rem^ qu^^doque
cogn(...); The external signs are more man(...)st (...), v^, by which we know
a thing* (...) heareby imp^ying, that the true administration of the word and
Sacraments is internal and inward in respect of the true external Notes of the
Church. For although eich preaching of the Word and use of Sacraments be
external and subject to the outward Sense; yet which is the true preaching of
the word, and true administration of the Sacraments (for as they are purely
preached, and sincerely administered, so (and no otherwise) are they appointed
by the Protestants for the Marks of the Church) is internal; since truth in
doctrine is internal and invisible. We may ad hearto, that in the note of true
preaching the word, the beliuing and receiving it so preached and this with
perseverance) is included by our Adversaries doctrine, as a part of the same
Note. But how can it be known, whether the Word (though truly preached) be
truly heard and believed with a final perseverance? So far distant is this
pretended Note, from being (for our direction) a true Note of the Church.

An other Argument for the impugning of the Protestants former Notes may be
this. The Scripture it self cannot be made known to us to be Scripture, but
by the attestation of the Church: for as for that sentence, which teaches,
that the Majesty and voice of God, which appears in the Scripture, or the
Private Spirit judging of it, ass^eth us, which is true Scripture, it is an
exploded Error; Seeing one Man is persuaded, he fyndeth in those books, which
himself admits for scripture, that Majesty and voice of God: the which very
books, for want of the said supposed voice or Majesty, an other Man utterly
rejects, as Apocryphil. And in like sort, the private Spirit of this Man
embraces such books, as Canonical: the which books the Private Spirit of an
other absolutely discanoneth.

Now this being granted, it from hence ineuitably resulteth, that first we must
know, which is the true Church, to give this approbation of the Scripture,
before we can know, which is the Scripture; and much more then, before we can
be assured, which is the true preaching of the word and sincere construction or
Sense of the Scripture. Now that our knowing which is Scripture, proceeds
from the authority of the Church, I first prove, not only from S. Austin, who
says: (n) Actibus Apostolorum necesse est me credere, si c^edo Euangelio;
((...)) Tom. 6. contra epist. fundamenti c. 5
quoniam vtramque Scripturam similiter mihi Catholiea commendat Ecclesia: But
also from the acknowledgement of our learned Adversaries; whose words in their
wrytings to this purpose are most plentiful. I will content myself (referring
the Reader to the references of others Kempnit. exam. part. 1. p. 69. Za^chius
de Sacra Scriptura p. 61. D. Whita^ aduers. S^apelto. number p. ^00. D. ^ewd in
(...) defense of the Apology. p. 201.
at this time with Peeter Martyr, and M. Hooker. Peter Martyr, thus writes: We
In his Common places englished part. l. c. 6.
acknow ledge it to be the function of the Church (seeing it is endued with the
Holy Ghost) that it should discern the true and proper books of Scripture. M.
Hooker more fully (...)th hear of, saying In his Eccles. policy. sect. 14.
lib. 1. p. 86.
Of thing necessary, the very chiefest is to know, what books we are to (...)
^^ly; Which point is confessed impossible, for the Scripture it self to teach
etc. For Eccles. pol. l. ^2. sect. 4. p. 102.
of any Book of Scripture did geus testimony to ^ll; et sti^ that Scripture,
which geneth credit to the rest, world require ^n other Scripture to g^ue
credit unto it: Neither could we come to any pa^se, when reon to rest unless
besides Scripture, theare were something, which might assurs us. Which thing M.
Hocke^man other place articulatly ^earmeth: The vbi supra l. 3. p 146.
authority of Gods Church, thus saying: We all know, the (...) outward Motyue
leading Men to esteem of the Scripture, is the authority of the Church. Now if
by these learned Men's con^ession, the Church has authority to propownd to us,
which books presented for Scripture, are true Scriptures and which are Apocry^
hall and spurious; then follows it, that the Church has in like sort
authority to propownd to us, which is the true and pure sense of the Scripture;
since the one is as necessary to us, as the other; for it aduantageth us little
to know, which are the undoubted books of Scripture, if so we know not which
is the true sense of the Scripture.

Now out of the Premises I demonstratiuely conclude, that seeing by the
authority of the Church (and not otherwise) we are tought which ^ookes of
Scripture are Canonical, and consequently which is the true sense of the said
Scripture; that therefore the Church being f^ster in ode^ of knowledge to us,
then either the Scripture, or the true preaching of the word of Scripture; the
true preaching of the word is not, nor can be apprehended to be a Note to us,
to find thearby which is the true Church. Since then it would follow (an
absurdity incompatible with all true discourse of Reason) that a thing, which to
us is later known, should be a Note to us of that, which by us is first known.

An other argument may be drawn from the Nature of every true Note; which
ought to be so peculiar to that, of which it is a Note, as that it cannot be
applied in the judgment of others to it meare Contrary: But we see different
sectaryes teaching contrary doctrynes, and professing themselfs to be members
of different Churches, do all nevertheless promiscuously challenge the true
preaching of the Words, and the use of the Sacrements to be the Notes of their
so much discording Churches or Conuenticles. And therefore the before named
Lubbertus thus truly pronounces of this point: Lubbertus, l. de Eccles.
printed. 1607. l. 4. c 2. p. 202.
Praedicatio, Sacramentorum communicatio, and similia, Ecclesiae essentiam non
attingunt; sunt enim Haereticorum conuerticulis and veris Christianorum
Ecclesi^s communia: The preaching of the word, the distribution of the
Sacraments, and such like, do not belong to the essence of the Church since
these things are common both to the Conuenticles of Heretics, and to the true
Churches of Christians. And according hearto we find by experience, that
Lutherans, Protestants, and Purita^s theaching most repugnante doctrines, do
wartant these their doctrines, by the former Notes of preaching the Word. And
therefore it from hence follows, that it is no less a madness in our
adversaries, to prescrybe the preaching of the word and the use of the
Sacraments, for the notes of the Church (which are common to all Heretical
Conuenticles at least in their own Opinion) then for one, who would discover
and note out one particular Man from all others, to distinguish him from them,
by saying: It is he, who has two eyes, one nose, one mouth, two arms etc.
Since these Notes or description are common to all men in general.

Again, I thus dispute. A true Note of any thing ought to be at all times
(without discontinuance) a Note theareof, and not sometimes only: since
otherwise it is but a temporary Note. But theare has been a Church of God even
then, when there was no Scripture at all: much less any preaching or
interpretation of the Word Therefore the preaching of the word cannot be
erected, as a true Note of the Church. The Assumption of this argument is
manifest: For it is acknowledged, that the Church of God continued two thousand
years before Moses his time, without any Scripture: and therefore D. Parkins
truly thus says: Morses In his reformed Catholic. p. 133.
was the first pennman of Holy Scripture; With whom agree De Sacra Script. p.
133
Zanchius, D. Whitak. de sacra Script. p. 99. and 583.
Whitakers, and all other learned Men whosoever. Again after Moses had pened
the Scripture, it remained only in the custody of the Jews, and was among them
for many years lost; as it is granted even by the marginall annotations of the
English Bibles of the year 1576. where it is said: That Upon the 2. of Kings.
c. 22 and 2. Chron. 34.
it was either by the negligence of the Priests lost, or by the wickedness of
idolatreus Kings. And yet even in those times Job and diverse others were of the
true Church of God: of which point peruse S. De ciuit. Dei. l. 18 c. 47
Austin.

Furthermore Irenaeus Lib. 3. cap. 4.
says, that theare were diverse Cou^tryes of Christians, which believed only by
preaching and by force of Tradition, without enjoying any Scripture at all. And
it is certain, that after our Saviors passion, theare was a distance of time,
before any part of the New Testament was written. And after when it was penned,
what partly by violence of persecution, and partly through scarsity of
Manuscripts, the New Testament could but come to the hands of few, in respect
of the whole number of Christians then in being: which being true: how then
could the Scripture or the preaching of the Word be a known Mark, to all
other Christians of those days? Neither avails it here to reply, that
whatsoever was then delivered by Tradition, was agreeing and answerable to what
was before or after written by the Apostles and Evangelists. This satisfyeth not
the point; seeing admitting so much for true; yet what was then delivered, was
received by the hearers through the authority only of the Church, and not by
Note or direction of the Scripture; which is the point here concrouerted. But
to proceed further. I do aue^re, that this Position of erecting the preaching
the word for a Note, for the ignorant to find out the true Church, implies in
it self an absolute contradiction. The reason is this First every true Note of
anything, must first be known it self to the party so ignorant and doubting:
But it is impossible, that the true preaching of the Word should be known to
one, as long as he con^nues ignorant or doub^f^ll; therefore it is impossible,
that to such a man the true preaching of the Word should become a Note of the
Church.

Secon^ly, True says is no sooner known, but that withal the true Church is
known; Therefore true preaching of the Word (from whence springs true says)
cannot be any Note of the Church: Since that thing, of which any Note is given,
ought not to be coincident with the Note; but is to be known after the Note is
known; and not immediately at o^^ and the same time with the Note; seeing the
end of the Note is after to know a thing, of which it is a Note.

My last argument here used shall be taken from the consideration of the
obscurity and difficulty in general of the Protestant Note here given. For if
the Scripture be in it self most sublime, abstruse, and the sense thereof
impenetrable without Gods directing grace therein; how then can it be obtruded
for a Note of the Church, not only to the learned, but to the illiterate and
unlearned? Now that the Scripture is most difficult, is a point acknowledged by
all learned men, and proved by senerall Media. First because the Scripture is
authentical only in the originalls, according to those words of D. Whitakers:
De Sacra Scriptura con^^^u^rs. 1. q. (...). p. 128.
Nullam nos editionem, nisi Hebraicam in vetere, and Graecam (...) Nouo
Testament^ authen^^cam facimus. This being admitted, how can the ignorant in
the Hebrew and Greek tongues, know which is true Scripture, or which is the
true sense of the Scripture? If it be replied, that they are to know true
Scripture from the Translations of it, I say hereto that (besides no
Translation of Scripture ^s authentical Scripture, both in the former Doctors
judgment, as also in the censure of D. ^n his b^e^fe answer to John Burges
page 94.
Couell) seeing there are many Translations made of Scripture by the
Protestants, and one mainly differing from an other, and accordingly eich such
translation is charged as Heretical and erroneous by other Protestants, the
ignorant in the tongues cannot discern which translation among so many is the
truest. And as touching the English Translation in particular, it is thus
condemned by the Protestants themselves: In the abridgme^t of the b^oke ^iue^
by the Minister of Lincoln Diocese to his deceased Majesty. vide p. 11. 12.
13. etc.
A Translation; which takes away from the text; which adds to the Text; and
that sometimes to the changing or obscuring of the meaning of the Holy Ghost.
And yet more: A Translation, which is absurd, and senseless, perverting in
many places the meaning of the Holy Ghost. Now then if the ignorant, who can
but reed, is thus stabled, how shall all they do, who cannot reed at all? And
yet to all such Men God (who 1. Tim. 2.
would have all men saved) has left some means for their direction, to find
out the true Church; which means must be suitable to their capacity and in
themselves infallible; seeing otherwise they cannot produce true faith, without
which the unlearned cannot be saved.

The like difficulty of the scripture appears, not only from the seeming
contrary places of the scripture; one text in show of words impugning an other;
all which to reconcyle (though in themselves they are reconcilable) there is
no small difficulty: But also even from the many Comments of the scripture,
made even by the Protestants. For if the scripture be easy and facill, to what
end do themselves bestow such labor and pains in illustrating of it? And if
it be of such difficulty, as that it needs Commentaryes for it further
explanation, how then can the true sense of it be prostituted (especially to
the unlearned) as a true Note of the Church?

Lastly, the difficulty of the sense of the scripture is so great, as that it
self needs other more clear Notes (as I may call them) to make it self
known; without which Notes it self rests most doubtful And yet are these
second Notes in themselves most uncertain. The Notes for the finding out of
the true sense of the scripture, are in D. (g) Reynolds and D. (h) ((...)) In
his ^^n^e^^^^ p 83. 84. 92 98. etc.
Whitakers judgments, these following: Reading of the Scripture Conference of
Places, we^g^^^g the Circumstances of the text, Skill in (...)gues Prayer etc.
In the observation of all which, a (...) Lib. de Sacra Script. p. 521 522. etc.
Man stands nevertheless subject to error and false construction of the
scripture, even by the judgment of D. Whitakers, thus saying: Lib. de E^cl^^
co^trouer^. 2. quae^^t 4 page 221.
Q^^l^a ^ll^medi^ su^^ etc. Such as the means of i^terpreting the obscu^e
places of the scripture are, such also is the interpretation but them (...)es
of in^^^p e^ing obscure places are incerta, dubia, and ambigua, uncertain,
doubtful and amb^guous: Therefore it necessarily follows, that the
interpretation it self is uncertain; si incerta, tunc potest esse f(...)sa,
and if it be uncertain, then may it be false. Thus far D. Whitakers.

Now I refer to any Man's impartial judgment, how the true preaching of the
Word (which ever presupposes the true sense thereof) can be a certain and
infallible Note of the true Church; when itself necessarily ^elyeth upon
means, as Notes of it; which means are in themselves uncertain; and at the
most can affoard but a doubtful, and perhapps a false construction of the
Scripture?

And here now I can but commisserate our adversaries: who seeing themselfs
enui^oned in these strayts, touching the finding out of the true sense of the
Scripture, by Men unlearned, vnskilfulle in the tongues, and perhaps not able
to read (and consequently touching this their mayntayned Note of the Church)
are ^^nally and for their last refuge, enforced to compart hearein with the
very An^baptists; fleeing for the interpreting of the Scripture, to the
testimony of Gods Spirit, and immediate instruction of the Holy Ghost. Sortably
hearto we find, that the foresaid D. Lib. de Sacra Script. co^trouer^. 1.
quaest. 2. p 127.
Whitakers (to re^er others M. Wutton in his answer to a pop^^bly Pamphlet.
page 20. D. Barlow in the defense of the Articles of the Protestant Religion.
page 199.
to the Margent) thus writes: Omnes linguarum imperiti etc. Al those who are
ignorant in the tongues, though they cannot judge of places whether they be
truly translated or not; yet they appr^^e and allow the doctrine, being
instructed by the Holy Ghost. Thus he. O you Galat. (...)
sensles Galatians, who have bewitched you? For may not any ^obler, Wibstar, or
other Mecanical fellow (as by experience we daily find they do) flee to this
refuge for their interpreting of scripture; at ouching themselfs in the
interpretation thereof, to be peculiarly enlightened with the spirit and
instruction of the Holy ^ho(...)? Which being granted, what Heresies so absurd,
which these ignorant fellows will not attempt to mantayne? And thus far to
prove, that the true preaching of the word and a due administration of the
Sacraments) which resulteth, as above is said, by sequel out of the former
Note of true preaching) cannot be appointed as Notes to us, for our direction
to find out the true Church of Christ; within which we are bound (under pain
of eternal damnation) to implant our selses.

I will su^uect to the Premises this pertinent a^imaduersion following. It is
this. When the Catholics do demand the Protestants, to set down certain
Notes of the true Church: And they answe^ri^g, that that Church is the true
Church, which enjoys a true preaching of the Word, and a due and auayleable
administration of the Sacraments. Now hear I aver, that this description of
Notes is but our own question, re^ur^ed us back in other terms; and
consequently but a Sophisme, ^^nsisti^g in an idle circulation of the same
point, in^ested with a new form of words. For when I demand, which is the true
Church; I vertually, implicitly, and according to the immediate meaning of my
Words, demand which Church is that, which enjoys the true preaching of the
Word and the true use of the Sacraments: since only the true Church is honored
with this Kind of preaching and distribution of Sacraments: The Protestants
then answearing, that that is the true Church, whearein are fo^d the true
preaching of the Word and due administration of the Sacraments, do they not
give me back my own Question, varyed in other phrazes? being no other thing in
sense then to say: That Church, which enjoys the true preaching of the word;
and due use of the Sacraments, is that Church, which en^^yeth the true
preaching of the Word and due use of the Sacraments: Most absurd, being but:
Demonstratio eiusdem per Idem, justly exibilated out of all schools.

Hear now I will end this first part of this Question of the Protestants Notes
of the Church; Admonishing the Reader of one thing: to wit, that whereas S.
Austin Epist. 166. and l. de Unit Ecclaes. c. 3.
and other Doctors do say, that out of the Scriptures, we learn, which is the
Church. This is so to be understood that we are able to prove from the
scripture, wheare the Church is: but this, not as from a Note of the Church
(which is the point only hear issuable) but only because the scripture
teaches which are the Notes of the Church; in teaching of what nature and
quality the Church ought to be.

In this next place, we will handle the foresaid question Hypotetically, and by
supposall only; That is, we will imagine for the time, that the true preaching
of the Word, and due administration of the Sacraments, are the Notes of the
Church to us. To this end we will call to mind, what diverse learned Protestants
do teach hearein: Calvin thus says: Pastoribus Instit. l. 4. c. 3. sect. 4.
and Doctoribus earere nunquam potest Ecclesia etc. The Church can never want
Pastors and Doctors, to preach the Word and administr^r the Sacraments.
Doctor Fyeld confirms the same in these words: The Of the Church l. 2. c. 6.
ministry of Pastors and teachers is absolutely and essentially necessary, to
the being of a Church. Briefly Doctor Whitakers affirm, That D. Whtak. contra
Camp. rat. 3. p. 44.
the said Notes being present do constitute a Church, being absent, do subvert
it. Now all this being granted, I confidently aver, that the force thereof does
most dangerously recoyle upon our Adversaries: since it irrephably proves,
that the Protestant Church has been (contrary to the Nature of the true
Church) at several times (or rather for several ages together) wholly extinct
and annihilated. Sine during many ages, it has been vterly void and depryued
of Pastors and Doctourr, to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments.

That the Protestant Church has during so many reuolutions of years absolutely
wanted all Pastors and Doctors, to preach the word and dispense the
Sacraments, is euicted in general from the confessed Inuisibility of the
Protestant Church for many Ages; concerning which subject, I refer the Reader
to the perusing of the Second part of the Converted ^ew, out of which, I will
discerpe certain Confessions of the learned Protestants. First then Sebastianu
Francus (a Protestant heretofore alleged) thus writes: For Epist. de
abroua^dis in vniuersum omnibus statut. Ecclesiast.
certain through the work of Antichrist, the external Church together with
the faith and Sacraments vanished away presently after the Apostles departu^e;
and for these thousand four hundred years, the Church has been no wheare
external and visible. D. Parkins in like sort thus confesleth: We In his
exposition of the Creed p. 400.
say, that before the days of Luther for many hundred years, an Universal
Apostasy ouerspred the whole face of the earth; and that our Church was not
then visible to the World. In regard of which confessed latency of the
Protestant Church, Calvin had just reason (as presuming his own Brethrens
preaching of the Word to be true) thus to say. Instit. 4 c. 1. sect. 11.
Factum est, vt aliquot secul spura Verbi praedicatio euenuerit etc. It was
brought to pass, that the pure preaching of the Word of God did vanish away,
for the space of certain ages. The perspicuity of which point (I mean of the
inuisibility of the Protestant Church in former ages) will more easily appear,
if we insist for Example but in the ryme immediately before Luthers Apostasy; of
what time it is thus confessed by D. Jewel; as taking his doctrine to be the
truth: In the Apology of the Church of En^land. part. 4. c. 4 p. 426.
The Truth was unknown at that time, and unheard of when Martin Luther and
Hulderick Swinglius first came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel.
Thus we see, that the acknowledged Inuisibility of the Protestant Church
demonstratiuely proves the want of the former Protestant Notes, (to wit, the
preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments) during all the
time of the said granted in Visibility; And that therefore the Protestants have
much endangered themselfs, assigning the said Notes, for the Notes of the true
Church.

Now that the setting down of the forsaid Notes do make for us Catholics is
no less clear, then the former point, for seeing it is granted, that Pastors
and Doctors must be in the Church, till the end of World, for the
administration of the Word and Sacraments; as not only D. Fulke, and other
learned Protestants do teach; but also is evidently proved in the foresaid
mentioned Second Part of the Converted Jew: And seeing an vnterrupted preaching
of the Word and administratian of the Sacraments has ever (by the like
Confession of our learned Adversaries) been in our Catholic Church; Therefore
it may inauoydably be concluded, that either our Catholic Church (as ever
enjoying the former imposed Notes) is the only true Church of Christ; Or (which
is most absurd in it self, and repugnant to infinite places of Holy Scripture)
that there has been (for several ages) no true Church of Christ at all,
extant upon the face of the Earth. That the Catholic Roman Church enjoys
the preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments (besides the
euidency of the truth thereof other wise) is confessed by D. Field, In his
Book of the Church l. 3. c. 6. f. 72.
who speaking of Luther and others, acknowledges, that they received from the
Church of Rome their Baptism, Christianity, Ordination, and power of
Ordination: By Luke Osiander, thus writing: Ecclesia, Epito^. Cent. 16. p. 736.
que sub Papatufuic etc. The Church, which was under the Papacy, when Luther
was borne, was the Church of Christ; for it had the ministry of the Gospel,
the sacred ^eriptures Baptism, the Lords supper etc. and finally (to omit many
others) by Luther himself thus acknowledging: In his book against the
Anabaptists.
N^s fatema^ etc. We confess, that there is under the Papacy, true Scrpture,
true Baptisime, the true Sacrament of the Altar, the true keres for the
remission of Sins, the true office of preaching, true Catechism. Thus
Luther. And here with I end touching further discourse of this subject:
remitting to the even and impartial censure the more sober Protestant: whether
the danger and detriment, which fall upon our Adversaries, by erecting the
preaching of the Word and administration of the Sacraments, for Marke^ of
Christ's Church (granting them for the time, to be the marks thereof) do not by
many degrees ouerballance the advantage, which our Adversaries (by pretending
them for Notes) do hope to gain. Since as by such their pretense, they on the
one side, labor to reduce the knowing which is the true Church, to their own
private Judgments (which every learned and judicious man at the first sight
expoldeth, for an impostute) so on the other side, they are forced even by most
necessary Inferences (resulting out of their own doctrine herein) first to
grant, that the Protestant Church, as for many ages, by their own
acknowledgments, wanting the said Notes (being essential to the true Church)
has for the said ages (contrary to the Nature of Christ's true Church) been
utterly extinct, and not in being. Secondly, that during the said centuryes or
ages, our Catholic and Roman Church (through it ever enjoying of these
Protestant Notes) is the true Church; or that otherwise, there has been no
true Church of Christ, in all that great compass of years; Which last point to
affirm, is most repugnant to God sacred Esaias. 60 and 62. Psalm. 102. Ephesians 4.
besides many other places.
Writ.

That the Pope and Church of Rome may (upon most urgent Occasions) sometimes
dispense with some degrees of Mariadge, prohibited in Leuiticus; And that in so
dispensing the Law of Nature (which ever binds) is not violated or
transgressed by them.
THE explanation of the Question takes it source from this one Proposition: To
wit; All the preceps, which are delivered in Leuiticus (touching the degrees
prohibited in mariadge) do not bind Christians by deuyne law, to observe them.
Which proposition or sentence being once confirmed and fortifyed; it then
follows, that the Church of Christ and the Head thereof, may upon just and
most urgent occasion dispense without any sin, with some degrees prohibited
in Leu^^icus.

For the better unfolding and understanding of this one proposition, we are
first to conceive, that both the Catholics and Protestants do teach: That the
precepts of Leuiticus do not oblige Christians, as they are properly
Leniticall; that is, as they are Positive and Iudic^all; but only as they are
Natural; that is, as they are prohibited by the law of Nature.

Now the Catholics do further teach, that as some preceps in Leuiticus are
Natural; so some other preceps are not natural, but merely judicial; and
therefore may be dispensed with, by Christ his Church, as the Council of Trent
Sess. 24. Can. 3.
affirms; Whereas our Adversaries mantayne, that all the precepts of
Leuiticus are Natural; and therefore ^ich of them indispensable by the Church.

Now here we are to remember, that those are Natural precepts, which are
known for such only by the light of nature, without any discourse: or at
least, which are known for such, by a most small discourse of Reason: And
these precepts are the same among all Men, in all nations and times, both for
the knowledge of them, and for the rectitude and iustnes of them. Now such
precepts, as for the knowing of the^, do need supernatural light, are called:
Diuina positiua, divine Positions: And those other Precepts, which receive
their establishment by humane discourse, from the Prince or Magistrate, are
styled: Humana, humana Constitutions: and these are not the same among all men
and in all nations.

Now then this justly presupposed: The first proposition, to wit. That all the
Precepts delivered in Leuiticus (touching the degrees prohibited in Mariadge)
do not bynd Christians by divine Law, to observe them. Is proved.

First, from the consideration of the different punishments, appointed in the
twentieth of Leuiticus against those, who transgress in Ma^iadge the different
degrees, prohibited in the eighteenth of Leuiticus Thus for example, we there
find, that Mariadge contracted in the first degree of Affinity in the right
line, God punishes with death, and compares it with adultery and sodomy:
Which are manifestly against the Law of Nature. The same punishment of death is
there appointed for such, as marye in the first degree of Consanguinity in a
collateral line; as when the Brother maryeth the Sister. But now in the second
degree of consanguinity in the collateral line (as when the nephew maryeth his
Fathers sister, or the Mothers sister) this Mariadge is punished with a less
and more gentill punishment. In like sort, mariadge in the first degree of
Affinity in the collateral line (as when one maryeth the wife of his brother
being dead; and in the second degree; to wit, when the nephew maryeth the wife
of his uncle) is not punished with death of the parties, so contracted; but
only with privation of children: That is, that the children begotten in such a
mariadge, should not be as^rybed or reputed the children of their said patents.
Now this punishment evidently shows, that these mariadges are not prohibited
by the Law of Nature; since the light of Natural Reason does not dictate to
all Men, that the former chastisement is a just punishment of the foresaid kind
of mariadge.

Secondly, the former proposition or sentence is thus proved. If all the
precepts of Leuiticus (touching the degrees of mariadge) were ordained by the
law of nature; then follows it, that they should be universal; so as all
mariadges contracted within the degrees there prohibited, should be unlawful.
For what is prohibited by the Law of Nature, is in all times and places
prohibited; as even the Protestants do mantayne. But Moses has prohibited
Leuiticus certain mariadges, and has permitted other mariadges in the same
degree. Therefore this prohibition in Leuiticus proceeds not from the law of
nature; but is merely judicial and positive: and consequently dispensable.
The Assumption of this argument is evident: for the Law of Leuiticus does
forbid mariadge of the nephew with his Aunt, either by his Fathers or his
Mothers side; and yet it forbids not mariadge of the Uncle either of the
Fathers side or Mothers side, with the Neese either of the Brother or the
sister: And yet the nephew and the aunt are in the same degree, in which the
uncle and the neese are. In like sort Leuiticus forbids mariadge with the
wife of the brother, though dead; and yet it does not forbid mariadge with the
sister of the wife, except the wife be alive; and consequently, it forbids
not with the sister of the wife being dead: And yet there is one and the same
degree of affinity with the sister of the wife, and the wi^e of the brother.

Thirdly, the foresaid verity is thus proved: If all the preceps (touching the
prohibition of degrees in Leuiticus) were Natural, and binding by the law of
nature; then they should at all times be bynding, even before the Law was
Queen of them. As we see, that the Law of not killing, of committing adultery,
of not stealing etc. were obliging, before the law of these Precepts were given
to the Jews by Moses. Now if the foresaid Laws touching the degrees
prohibited in mariadge, were ever and at all times binding; Then Men of
sanctity and in high grace and favor with God, would never have contracted
mariadges within those prohibited degrees: But there are federall examples of
holy Men, who in the law of nature, did contract mariadge within the degrees
prohibited in Leuiticus.

According hereto we find, that the Patriarch Jacob did take to wifes, two
sisters, both living together: to wit, Lia and Rachael, as we ^eede in
Genesis: Cap. 2^.
But this is expressly forbidden in the eighteenth of Leuiticus: it being the
first degree of affinity in the Collateral line. In like sort, Judas Gene(...)
3^.
(the Patriarch) did give in mariadge to his second Son, the wife of his
first Son, being dead: and the second son after dying, Judas promised her
to his third son: And yet this degree is prohibited in Leuiticus: since it is
(as the former was) the first degree of affinity in the Collateral line.

Neither can it be replied against these examples, and some others of this
nature here omitted: That these Patriarchs did sin in contracting the
foresaid mariadges: for although Holy Men (such as they were) may, as men,
sin: yet still to live and dye in this state without repentance, supposing it
to be sin (as Jacob and Judas did) is not incident to virtuous men, and such
as be the friends of God. Ad hereto, that if we grant, that the precepts of
Leuiticus do ever bind in conscience: the^ follows it, that not only Jacob
and Judas did sin: but also that the Sons of them both were bastards and
illegitimate.

Neither will that second Evasion (given by some) satisfy the former Examples.
Which is, that God did dispense in the said Marriages, through some intended
Mystery. This cannot be justified, seeing we read in the twentieth eight of
Genesis, that two Sister were joined in Mariadge to one Man. Thus did Laban who
(when he had de^eaued Jacob in obtruding to him one Sister, for an other)
offend him the other whom he accepted: Neither was this Act reprehended by any,
netheir repented of, as being an oversight. Which if it had been unaccustomed
and singular, and such as might justly beget a scandal; No dowbt the blessed
Man Jacob would either not have done it, or a^ lest would have warranted the
doing of it with some reason.

The like is evident in the fact of Judas, who, when he joined the wife of one
brother to an other Brother, insisted not in any dispensation from God for
warranting this his Act: but urged only the reason of the Custom: to wit to
the end that the seed and ospring of the dead Brother might be raised up.

Lastly, the former Proposition touching the prohibited degrees in Leuiticus,
is pro^ed out of Deutcronomy wheare it is Cap. 25.
commanded, that if any one dye without children, his Brother shall mary his
wife, that so he may raise up issue to his dead Brother. Now h^e^e it can not
be said, that this Law in Deut^onomy commands any thing against nature: since
it is most absurd, that the Author of nature should impug^^ and cross nature.
Therefore from hence we may conclude, that it is not against the law of nature,
but that for some most important and just reasons some prohibited degrees in
Leuiticus may be dispensed with. Now for the slauing of these two contrary
laws in Leuiticus and Deutronomy (that so the scripture be not contrary to the
Scripture) we are to observe (according to the judgment of the Learned) that
matrimony with the wife of the deceased Brother, is not prohibited in
Leuiticus: but only as such a mariadge is considered in it self nakedly,
simply, and abstracted from all Circumstances: even as manslaughter is taken in
the Decalogue, when it is said: Thou shall not kill. Which law of Leuiticus
does not hinder, why there may not after be ordained some particular positive
Laws, which may prohibit mariadge with the wife of the Brother, according to
some circumstance: and yet according to other circumstances, may warrant and
justify the said mariadge. Even as the foresaid law in the decalogue: Thou
shall not kill: does not let, but that particular laws and decrees may be
ordained, which may command a thief or a murderer to be killed: and may also
command, that he shall not be killed, who kills another either by chance, or
in his own defense.

Now if against the former doctrine, delivered in this question of prohibition
of degrees in Leuiticus: It be objected, that S. John Baptist (whose ministry
imposed an end to the old law) did confirm the precept of Leuiticus of not
marying the wife of the Brother, when he said to Herod: Math. ^6.
It is not lawful for thee, to have the wife of thy Brother: And therefore
howsoever this point was in the old law: yet now it is not lawful, but wholly
indispensable.

I answer hereto, and first say, that if we speak of the change and
abrogation of the Law, Christ only, and not Saint John Baptist did impose an
end to it: though it be granted, that Saint John Baptist was the last Prophet
of the old Law. I further say, that it was not lawful for Herod (even
according to the Law of Leuiticus) to have the wife of his Brother: because an
O^pring was then begotten of that former Mariadg (to wit, the daughter of
Herodiades, who so pleased the King with dansing, that she obtained the head
of S. John Baptist) That this daughter was the daughter of Herodiades, begotte
by the Brother of Herod, is acknowledged by the testimony of Homi^ 49. in
Matheun^.
Chrysostom: Secondly, I further answer to this example of Herod: that the
sin of Herod was not only Incest, but also adultery: since Herod did marye
the wife of his Brother, he being yet living, as S. In Comment. c. 24. in
Mathae^m.
Ierom witnesses out of ancient historyes: and L. 18. Antiquit, cap. 9.
Josephus auerreth the same.

Thus far then of this point, to show that all the Precepts of Le^iticus
(touching the prohibited degrees in Mariadg) are not commanded by the law of
Nature: and that they do not oblige Christians by divine Law, for the ever
observing of them: But that some of them are in themselfs dispensable: And
consequently that the Church of Christ may (upon most urgent Occasions)
sometimes dispense with some of the said Precepts.

Now hear then appears the inconsidrate and rash obloq^y of our Adversaries:
charging the Pope, that he teaching Mariadg to be a Sacrament: consequently by
his own doctrine, undertakes and presumes to alter the Matter or Essential
parts of a Sacrament: which was first instituted by Christ, and therefore
inaltorable by Man. To which false aspertion I answer, that neither the Pope
nor the Church can change the essential parts of this or any other Sacrament
for we are hear to conceive, that the Matter of this Sacrament is not the
joining together of every Man or woman (since then this Sacrament might be
perfected between the Father and the Daughter.) but only the joining together
of Lawful persons Now which are lawful persons for Mariadg, Christ did not
appoint or set down; but only a humane Contract between lawful persons being
presupposed, Christ himself did advance this conjunction to the dignity of a
Sacrament. Therefore the Church or the Pope does only determine, who are to be
accounted Lawful Persons, for the contracting of mariadge; And in this sort,
the Church does only prepare the Matter or foundation fitting for this
Sacrament: But does not, nor can alter and change the essential parts of the
Sacrament of Mariadge. And herewith I conclude this short discourse, touching
this subject.

That the Catholics do not expunge out of Gods writ, or reject those words in
the Decalogue. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc. But that
they willingly acknowledge them, as part of the Decalogue: howsoever they be
not sometimes set down in Cathechis^es and Primars.
Whereas the Protestants do charge the Catholics to conceal (through their
affected fraud) in their Catechis^nes and Primars one commandment, and so to
expunge it out of Holy Writ; To wit: Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image, nor the likeness of anything above in Heaven, or on earth
beneath: neither of those things, which are in the waters under the earth: Thou
shall nor adore them or worship them etc. This (I say) is either a fraudulent,
or an ignorant mistaking of our Adversaries. For the truth is, those words
(here recited) do but make one and the same Commandment with those first
words: Thou shall not have any other Gods before me; these later being but a
more full explication of the first words; and consequently may be omitted
sometimes in a short numbering or setting down of the Commandments. This is
thus proved: Every Image is not prohibited in the Decalogue or ten
Commandments; but only that, which may be truly called an Idol; that is an
Image, which is taken for God; or which represents God to be that thing,
which God is not. Therefore when it is said. Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven Image etc. the exterior Act of Idolatry is forbidden; But in those
first words: Thou shall not have any other Gods before me: the internal Act of
Idolatry is prohibited: Of which point most at large Saint Austin Quaest. 77.
discourses.

Now that Images are not absolutely forbidden by the law of God, appears; in
that the Scripture tells us, that God himself commanded Images to be made:
According here to we read in the book of Kings, 3. Regum. c. 6. and 7.
that God commanded the Images of the Cherubins, Lions and Oxen to be made: In
the Book of Numbers, Cap. 21.
the brazen serpent; And in Exodus Cap. 25.
the Images of the Cherubin to be made. From whence we may infallibly conclude,
that the making of Images is not absolutely forbidden by God, as a distinct
precept from the first; but only so far forth, as the Images be taken for
God; and consequently that (as is above said) these words (forbidding the
making of Images) do but make one and the same Commandment with the first
words: Thou shall not have any other Gods before me. And therefore the
Catholics do not fraudulently conceal one of the ten Commandments; as our
Adversaries do in their Pulpits tragically complain.

Again. If all Images should be absolutely prohibited, in the former words of
the Decalogue; then should it follow, that the Precepts of the Decalogue should
not be only ten, but eleven or twelve; an inference incompatible with the
Scripture Exodus 31. and 34. Deut^on. 4. 9. 10.
it self, which in express words teaches, that there are but ten
Commandments. The necessity of this Inference is thus proved. It is granted
on all sides, that those words: Thou shall not have any other Gods before me,
is one Precept. That, thou shall not take the name of God in vain, is an
other. A third: Thou shall keep holy the Saboath day. A fourth; Honor thy
Father and thy Mother. A fifth; Thou shall not kill. A sixth: Thou shall not
commit adultery. A seventh: Thou shall not steal. An eight. Thou shall not
bear falfe witness against thy neighbor. A ninth: Thou shall no^ covet etc.

Now that: Thou shall not covet etc. is either to be divided into two precepts*
so as the ninth Precept shall be: Thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife; the
tenth: Thou shall not co^ct thy neighbors Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing,
that is his. Or else those word: Thou shall not covet etc. with all the words
following to wit, his Wife, his Ox, his Ass, or any thing, that is his; do
make but one precept or Commandment. If they ought to be divided into two;
then follows it, that those words: Thou shall not make any graven ^mage etc.
shall be the eleventh Commandment (contrary to the Scripture) or that, this is
not a distinct precept from the first, videlicet: Thou shall not have any other
Gods before me. As Clemens Alexander: Lib. 6. sto^. citu^.
Saint Quaest. 71. in Euod. and epist. 119. cap. 11.
Austin, all schoolmen, and Latin Catechismes do teach. And then it follows,
that not every graven Image is forbidden in these words; but only that, which
is taken for an other God. Now if supposing further, that that: thou shall not
covet etc. be only one Precept (as some other fathers do hold) then (to make
up the tenth Commandment) all those words: Thou shall not make to thy self
any graven image etc. thou shall not adorethem, nor worship them etc. do
concur to make up one Precept or Commandment. But absolutely and simply to
make Images, and to adore or worship them being made, are two different things
in themselves; because one man may adore an Image, which he did not make; and
an other Man may make an Image, and yet not adore it. Therefore only one of
these two things is prohibited in the foresaid words. (Since otherwise there
should be eleven Commandments:) But it is certain, that the worshipping of
Images in place of God, is forbidden; Therefore the absolute making of them is
not forbidd^n; but only with reference of worshipping them instead of God.

Now the Schoolmen, and all Latin Catechismes, and Primars do follow herein
the first opinion of S. Augustine; to wit, that those words: thou shall not make
any graven Image etc. do make but one Commandment, with the first Precept of
not worshipping other Gods. And therefore Primars and Catechismes, intending
but briefly and in few words, to set down the ten Commandments, do omit to
set down that: thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image etc. thou
shall not adore them etc. because (as is said) these words are implicitly
included in the first Commandment. In like sort, and for the same cause of
briefly setting down the ten Commandments; we find, that Latin Cathechismes
and Primars do omit to set down diverse words immediately following in Exodus,
and belonging to the Commandment of keeping the Saboath day, holy. The words
omitted are these: Six days thou shall labor, and do all thy work; but the
seventh day is the Saboath of thy Lord, thy God etc. Besides many other words
there following. The same course the Catechisms and Primars take in setting
down the Commandment of honoring thy Father and thy Mother: where these words
following are also for b^euity omitted: that thy days may be prolonged upon
the land, which the Lord, thy God gives thee. Now is it not a loose and
dissolute kind of reasoning, thus to argue: The Papists do purposely conceal
and labor, to put out of holy Scripture, diverse passages immediately following
and belonging to the Commandments of keeping the Saboath day, holy; and of
honoring thy Father and Mother: because (for greater breuity) they do not set
down the said passages (being but mere explications of the said
Commandments) in their Cathechismes and Primars, when they make recital of
the ten Commandments. And yet we see, the Protestants do even in the same
manner argue most wildly against the Catholics, for not setting down those
words: Thou shall not make to thy self any graue^ Image etc.

If the Protestants could prove, that any one Catholic did say or mantaine,
that the said words of not making Images, were not Scripture, and were not
spoken by God, in the delivery of the ten Commandments to Moses: then they
had just reason, to charge the Catholics with great Impiety herein: But this
is impossible for the Protestants to do. And therefore this accusation of the
Protestants against the Catholics herein, is an error (as in the beginning
was intimated) compounded of malice and ignorance: where (I think) the greater
Ingredient is malice. And thus much touching the supposed raizing and expunging
out of one Commandment by the Catholics.

The Catholic Doctrine touching Images.
TOuching Images the Catholics do teach two things. First, that lawfully they
may be had and kept, by reason of the profit proceeding from them. Secondly,
that we having them, may lawfully give unto them a peculiar respect or worship
(above other profane things) as they are things consecrated unto religious
uses.

Touching the Vtility. This we find in them. First, they do instruct the
ignorant, and such as cannot read; and therefore they are worthily called:
Gre^^ry Nyssen, orat in Theodor.
Libri illiter atorum, by some of the fathers. And hence it is, that the
picture is so made, as that for the most part, it contains in it self a
short abstract or Compendium of the history of him, of whom it is the Image:
Thus for example, When Christ is painted either in the shape of a young Child
in the bosom of his mother; or in the form of a Man, tied to a Pillar to be
whipped; or hanging upon the Cross; or rising from the grave: or ascending to
Heaven etc. And so the ignorant by behoulding the pictures, are theareby put in
remembrance of the Incarnation, the Passion, the Resurrection, and the
Ascension of our Lord and Savior. And the like may be said of the pictures of
Saints: who are commonly pictured in such sort, as that the picture does
descrybe some cheiffe part of their Sanctity, sufferance, Martyrdom, or power
and authority.) as for example, S. Lawrence is commonly pictured lying upon the
gridiron, and so of other Saints) And thus secondarily it resulteth from
hence, that Images are profitabl^ to (...) our Love toward God, and his
Saints: Seeing we see by experience, that who loves, does most willingly
behold and comtemplate the Image of the party, so beloved by him.

Lastly and principally, Images do greatly healpe us in time of prayer; for
seeing and behoulding them at that time, they presearue in us the Memory of
Christ and his Saints: and so^n time of prayer our thoughts are fixed with
greater elevation of mind upon Christ and his Saints, by reason of the
pictures ^eare present. Now this is to be understood that when we pray, we
neither pray to the Pictures, nor honor them with the honor due to God (for
this is the Protestants wilfully mistaken assertion, most wrongfully laid to
our charge) but only in presence of them, we do in time of prayer, prosecute
God with that supreme reverence and honor, which is peculiar to himself
alone. This is the true use, which we Catholics make of Images in time of our
Devotions.

But now before we come to entreat of the worship of Images in particular; we
are to conceive, that according to all learned S. Thomas. in 3. sentent.
distinct. ^.
Schoolmen, Adoration or worship of any thing contains in it self three
different Acts. The first, is an Act of the Understanding by the which we
apprehend the excellen^y of any thing: The second, the Act of the Will; by the
w^^ch we are inwardly moved to manifest or protest our Worship, by some
exterior or interior Act: The third, is an exterior Act: by the which we
move our hat, or bow our leg, or show some other external sign in
manifestation of our inward worship given. Of which three Acts, the second
(which is of the Will) is most e^entiall; seeing the first may be without
Adoration, and the third with ^rision and scorn; as the Jews worshipped our
Savior upon the Cross. Hear further we are to remember, that that worship,
which is given to God alone, is a chief and supreme prostration and
inclination of the Will, with the apprehension of God, as the first beginning
and last ending of all things: and therefore as our chief Good: and is called
by the Deuynes, Latria: and cannot be communicated without Idolatry to any
Creature.

Worshipps given to Creatures are distinguished, according to the different
degrees of excellencyes in the Creatures. And so according to the different
degrees of the worth of Creatures, the worship exhibited is severally called:
as dulia, s^perdulia, cultus religiosus, and cultus ciuilis. Lastly, it is
further to be observed, that by the exterior Act, it is not easy to
distinguish the several kynds of worshipps: For almost all exterior Acts
(sacrifice only excepted) are common to every kind of worship. And according
hearto we recde, that Abraham with the same act of bowing his body to the
ground, did adore God, Genes. 17. did worship Angels. Genes. 18. And did
worship Men, Genes. 23. In like sort, all men do use to kneel to God in their
prayers: to their Prince or King: and to their own parents: yet with disparity
of honor to eich of these. And hear is the source and fountain of the
Protestats mistaking, who hearing that Catholics do sometimes exhibit part of
that external worship to Creatures, which is given to God: do instantly
exclayme forth in this, or the like manner; Se how the Papists commit Idolatry
to Creatures: see how they pray to stocks and stones: Poor Men, I commiserate
their Ignorance who so much mistake the true meaning of the Catholics
practice.

Now then the former doctrine presupposed, touching the worship given to
Images: This ensuing is the Catholic doctrine: Thus teaches the Counsel of
Trent. sess. 25.
Images of Christ and his Saints are to be worshipped and honored with a
peculiar respect; so as neither any Confidence be placed in the Images: neither
any petityon be made to them, nor that it be bele^ued, that theare is any
Divinity in them. And this honor, being but an inferior kind of religious
worship, ascrybed to things consecrated to holy ends (as is ever presumed) is
given them only for the persons sake, of whom they are Images, and whom they
represent.

This is proved by the example of the Images of the Cherubins, Exodus 25.
appointed by God to be placed over the Arc: and by the Image of the brazen
Serpent, in like sort appointed by God (which as we read in John c. 3. was the
figure of Christ.) But to both these the Jews gave a peculiar worship, as to
things ordained to religious uses: For how could they adore the Arc, but
withal they must adore the Images of the Cherubin? Or how could not the brazen
Serpent but be worshipped by the Jews: when it being seated in a high place by
Gods command, did cure those, which locked upon it?

But now I here infer, that if it were lawful to worship the Images of
Angels (I ever mean, with that respect, due to conseciated things) then by
the same reason, it is lawful to worship the Images of Saints departed. And
if the bras^n Serpent might be worshipped (so long as this religious respect
(without any act of Idolatry) was given to it) as be^ring the Image of Christ
in the form of a Serpent: then may the Image of Christ be esteemed venerable.
Ad hereto, that if the day of the Pascha be called, Holy, Exodus 12.
in regard of it signification: and because it was dedicated to divine Worship:
And if the vestements of the Priests in the old Law, for the same reason, be
termed, Holy: Exodus 28.
And if the sepulcre or grave of Christ, be named, Glorious: Esaias. 11.
If also it be said in Exodus: Cap. 3.
The place, where t(...)ou stand is holy: and this said by reason of the
presence of the Angel, being then there: And if in the New Testament the
Scripture be called: 2. Tim. cap. 3.
Sacrae litterae holy letters: and this only by reason, that the letters are
signs of holy things, expressed by them: And finally if to the name of JESUS
we be commanded to bow Philip. 2.
(the sound of the word being to the care, as the picture is to the eye) then
by the same reason, why may we not be^re to the Images of Christ and his
Saints a religious respect, in regard of the persons, of whom they are made?

Again leaving divine authorityes, and coming to force of reason. If a
picture be capable of disgrace and iniurye, in regard of the person thearein
represented; then by the same reason a Picture may be capable of honor,
respect, and reverence. This inference is most demonstratiue. Now that a
Picture is capable of disgrace or Contumely, is evident: For example, if a
Subject (disloyalty affected to his Prince) should deface, tear, or break, or
any otherwise indecently handle his Princes picture, as by stabbing it with his
knife, or the like: Or if some Athist (denving all Scripture) should betrample
under his feet (through scorn and malice) the Bible it self; Would not
these actions be severely chastized? And might not the Pictures of the Prince,
and the Bible, be said to have suffered disgrace and indignity heareby, with
reference to the wrong and indignity committed against the Prince, and the
sacred Scripture? Then by the same reason, may the Pictures of Christ and his
Saints be affected with due religious respect above other things: in regard of
Christ and his Saints represented in them, of whom they are the Pictures.

Only here we are to remember (as above is often intimated) that the respect
we give to the picture of Christ, is not that If any Author seem to say that
the same worship is given to the Image which to the hrofit upon either he
means that nothing is given to the Image but all to that which it
represents or that it is the same only in name not in nature or only
Analogice non vniuoce.
supreme honor and veneration due to Christ: but only an inferior religious
respect, due to things, as they are directed to spiritual ends: and not
otherwise. The verity of the former Point may be further confirmed, by our
custom of standing barehead, and giving reverence to the Cloth of Estate,
even in the Kings absence. ^or as to it (as representing our temporal Prince)
a civil honor may lawfully be given: so (by the same ground) a religious
respect or honor may be ascrybed to the picture of Christ, who is our chief
King and Savior.

That this our Catholic doctrine is warranted by the practice and authority
of the ancient Fathers, is most evident; And therefore I refer the Reader
hearein to the clear testimonies of Lib. 2. de doctrina Christiana. c. 25.
Austin, Sermon. 10. in psalm. 118.
Ambrose, In Leitu^^^a.
Chrysostom, In vita Paulae.
Basil, Quaest. 16. an Antiocum.
Jerome, Cent. 4. cap. 10. col. 1080.
Athanasius and others: whose whole sentences thereof were over long to set
down. This point of the Fathers judgment touching Images is so evident, that
we find Learned Protestants to confess no less of them: For thus w^yte the
Centurists: Lactantius affirms many superstitious things, concerning (n) In
^ulianum, vt citat Adrianus ad Imperator.
Christ's Image: Cent. 10. c. 8. col. 850.
And Bid erred in worshipping of Images. And Osiander In epito^. Cent. 6. p.
288.
confssseth, that Gregory by his Indulgenses, established pilgrimages to
Images. In his pageant of Popes. p. 24. and 27.
Bale thus plainly writes: Leo allowed the worshipping of Images. Finally M.
on the reuelat. p. 57.
Symondus thus accords with Bale: Leo decreed, that reverence should be given
to Images. To all whose confessed testimonies, we may adioyne the
acknowledgments of Functius Lib. 7. co^mentar. at anno. Christi. 494.
and Cedrenus, Cedrenus in co^pend. Histor.
confessing (as they prove out of Nicephorus in hist. l. 16. c. 27.
Nicephorus) that Xenayas Persa was the first in ancient times, that impugned
the due worship of Images.

That it is lawful to have Images in Churches, is taught (as true and
warrantable doctrine) by diverse learned Protestants; as by Cempnitius, Exam.
part. 4. p. 14. and 33.
by Luther, So does Beza relate of Luther and Bren^ius in resp. ad Act. Colloq
Montisb. part. altera in praefat. page 12.
and Brentius, Iacobus In epitom. colloq. Montisb. page 39.
Andreas etc.

But now I will conclude this discourse touching Images with a most
authentical and strange miracle, wrought by the Image of Christ, and recorded
by Lib. 7. histor. cap. 14.
Eusebius, In cap. 9. Mathaei.
Theophilact, and Lib. 6. histor. cap. 20.
Zozemene; all ancient and grave Writers; whose authorityes herein if we
reject, we reject by the same reason the proof of all other things, recorded
by ancient Historiographers.

It was this. The woman, whom our Savior cured of the bloody flux, caused to
be made a brazen Image of Christ; at the foot whereof did spring a strange
herb; the which herb, after it did ascend so high, as to touch the scirt of
the Image, it had virtue to cure all diseases. Which virtue (no doubt) God
would not have imparted to the Herb, but only in manifestation, that due
respect might lawfully be given to the Image of Christ. And thus far, touching
the Catholic doctrine of Images.

Touching Prayer to Saints.
Touching Prayer to Saints. I will deliver the Catholic doctrine thereof in
certain Propositions; which Propositions may searue as certain graduall stips
or degrees of this Controuersye.

The first Proposition may be this. It is not lawful to pray to Saints, as
authors or principal dispensours of divine benefitts, to obtain from them
either grace or glory, or the means of obtaining our Eternal felicity; much
less, the Crawne of glory or heaven it self. Since in this sense to pray to
them, were (according to the judgment of S. Austin Lib. de ciuitate Dei c. vlt.
and all Catholics) to make Saints, Gods. And therefore if at any time, the
words directed to Saints should sound otherwise: as when we say: Our Lady
healpe me etc. We are hear to insist in the sense, not in the naked words:
That is, Our Lady healpe me by her intercession and prayers to her son; and
no otherwise: Even as we find, that S. Paul says of himself: Romans 11. vt
saluos facere^ aliquos ex illis.
If I may save some of them: meaning, of the Gentills. And again the said
Apostle says of himself: To 1. Cor. 9. vt omnes racere^ saluos.
all Men I am become all things, that I might save all: meaning, to save all
not as God: but only healping them and furthering their Salvation by his
preaching to them, and by his prayers for them. Which words of the Apostle
(being truly understood) may sear^e well to stop the Mouths of the Protestant
Ministers, for their often mistaking and misinterpreting of the Catholic
Doctrine touching prayer to Saints.

The second Proposition. Saints are not our immediate Mediators, by way of
intercession with God; But whatsoever they demand or obtain of God for us,
they demand and obtain it, through Christ and his Merits. And according
hearto we find, that all the Prayers of the Church (which are made to Saints)
end with this clause: Per Christum Dominum nostrum: For we willingly
acknowledge, Ioh. 10. 14.
that no Man comes to the Father, by the Son; And that their is but one
Mediator of Redemption: though all the Saints may be termed our Mediators,
by way of Intercession.

The third Proposition. The Saints, which reigue with Christ, do pray for us,
and this not only in general, but in particular: That is, for particular Men,
and for the particular Necessityes of the same Men. This is proved first, from
those words in Jeremy: Cap. 15.
If Moses and Samuel shall stand before me, my Soul is not toward this
People. From whence it is inferred, that Moses and Samuel (then being dead)
might and were accustomed to pray for the People of Israel.

Secondly, the same is proved from the Example of Angels, who do pray for us,
and have a care of us in particular, as appears out of several passages of
Toby. 12. Zach. 1. Math. 18. Apoc. 8.
Scripture. But if the Angels do pray for us, then much more Saints; seeing so
far forth, as appertains to this function, nothing is wanting to the Saints
in Heaven, which Angels have: for they are endued with Intelligence or
Understanding, and with Will; they are ever in the presence of God; they love
us vehemently; and finally they Luc. 20.
are equal even with Angels: Besides, some privileges they have in this
point, which are wanting in Angels: to wit, that Saints are more conjoined
and united members of the body of the Church; and that they have tried our
dangers and Miseries, which Angels have not.

Thirdly, the former Proposition is proved from the many apparitions of
Saints, which have evidently testified, that they do pray for us even in
particular. Of diverse such particular Apparitions, See Lib. hist. c. 5.
Eusebius, Decura pro mortuis.
Austin, Orat. de Sancto Manante.
Basil, Orat. 1. in Iulianu^.
Gregory Nazianzene, In vita Gre^orij ueo(...) ^a^^ens.
Gregory Nyslene, and Lib. 5. histor. c. 24.
Theodoret; all which testimonies of so ancient and reverend Fathers to
reject, touching matter of fact, by answearing, that all such relations are
fabulous, is in effect (and by necessary inference) to take away all authority
of Ecclesiastical and humane Historyes.

The fourth and last Proposition. Saints and Angels are religiously and
profitably inuoked and prayed unto, by living Men. This is proved. First, We
read, that Jacob blessing the sonns of Joseph, thus says: The Genes. ^8.
Angel, which has deliured me from all Evil, bless these Children; wheare
we see, that Jacob expressly inuoketh these Angel. Again, we read thus in
Job. Call, Cap. 5.
if any will answer thee, and turn to some of the Saints: Wheare by the
word: Saints, he means Angels, according to the exposition of Saint Austin
In anno^at. in Job.
Secondly, this last Proposition is proved from that, that in both the
Testaments the Living were inuoked and prayed unto by living; as in the first
Book of the Kings, and in the last of Job. Cap. 7.
In like sort in the Epistle to the Romans S. Pauli thus says: Cap. 15.
Brethren I beseach you, that you all healpe me in your prayers for me to God.
Which Kind of prayer the Apostle uses in the Epistle to the 6.
Ephesians; in the first to the 5.
Thessalonians, in the second 3.
to the Thessalonians, in his epistle to the 4.
Colossians, and to the 13.
Hebrews: So familiar and usual was this to S. Paull. Therefore from hence I
conclude, that now it is lawful to inuoke and pray to the said Men; being now
Saints, and reigning with Christ. This Inference is most necessary and
demonstratiue. For if it be not now lawful to pray to them, It is either
because the Saints now in Heaven will not healpe us with their intercession to
God; But this is not so, seeing the Saints in Heaven enjoy greater Charity,
then they had hear upon earth: Or else in that the Saints cannot healpe us
with their prayers: And this less true: for if they could before healpe us with
their prayers, they being then but Pilgrims; much more now, they being arrived
into their Country. Or else because they do not know, what we pray or demand of
them: But this is false: for look from whence the Angels do know the
Conversion of sinners, for which they so much rejoice in Heaven, (as we read
in S. Cap. (...).
Luke) from the same source or wellspring of knowledge the Saints do know our
prayers; Or lastly, because we offer injury to God and Christ, if we pray to
any other, then to him alone; But this is the least of all true, seeing by the
same reason, it should not be lawful for us to pray to the living, that they
would pray for us; And then consequently Saint Paul should have been most
injurious to God and Christ, in praying to the Romans, the Ephesians, the
Thessalonians, the Colossians and the Hebrews, to pray for him to God.
Therefore, as it is no injury, but an honor to Kings, when their friends are
honored, and Ambassadors are sent to them; Even so here there is no injury
done to God, but honor, when the Saints of God are honored by praying unto
them; not as to Gods, but as to the friends of God: since otherwise it would
follow, that he should commit ((...)) Sermon. Euang. de sanctissima Deipara.
an injury to God (as is above said) who should desire and entreat the prayers
of the living. This argument is unanswerable, and the rather: since the Saints
in Heaven are members of the same Church, of which the living are: they also
wholly rely upon the same intercession of Christ with the living: for what they
desire for us, that they desire of God, through the merits of our Savior
Christ.

This doctrine of Invocation of Saints is further proved from several
ancient Counsels: whose places for greater breuity I refer the Reader to*
As to the Epistle of the Bishops of Europe, written to Leo the Emperor, which
epistle is adjoined to the Council of Calcedon, the Council of Chalcedon Act.
11.
it self, the sixth Act. 7.
general council, the seventh Act. 6.
general counsel, besides diverse others. That the ancient Fathers of the
Primative Church believed and practiced this doctrine of praying to Saints, is
evident from the references herein the margent. See then hereof Dionisius Cap.
7. Eccles. Hierarch.
Areopagita, Ireneus, Lib. 5. co^tra Haeres. vltra medium.
Eusebius, Lib. 13 praeparat. Euang. c. 7
Athanasius, (h) Basil, Orat. in 40. Martyrs.
Chrysostom, Homil. 66. ad Populum.
Gregory Orat. in Sanctum Theodoru^
Nyssene, Hilary, In psalm. 129.
Ambrose, Lib. de Viduis vltra med.
Jerome, In epitaph. Paulae.
Austin, Tract. 84. in Iohannem.
and others. This point of the Fathers judgment and practice herein is so
manifest, as that we find it to be thus confessed of them, by the learned
Protestants. M. Fulke thus says: D. Fulke in his Reioinde^ to Bristow.
I confess, that Ambrose, Austin, and Jerome did hold Invocation of Saints
to be lawful. The said D. Fulke does further thus write: In D. Fulk against
the Rhenish Test. in 2. Petr. c. 1.
Nazianzen, Basil, and Chrysostom is mention of Invocation of Saints. And
yet more fully the same D. thus confesses: Many D. Fulk against the Rhenish
Test. vbi supra.
of the ancient Fathers did hold, that the Saints departed do pray for us.
In which general condemnation of the Fathers herein D. Whitguift (the
Archbishop of Canterbury) thus co^spireth with the foresaid D. Fulke: In his
defense against the reply of Cart. wright. p. 472.
Almost all the Bishopps and Writers of the Greek Church and Latin also, for
the most part, were spotted with the doctrine of Invocation of Saints, and
such like points. To conclude D. Couell thus (...)peth with the former
Protestants, saying: In his examinat. p. 120.
Diverse both of the Greek and Latin Church, were spotted with the error,
about the Invocation of Saints.

Now that the Protestants do not only confess the ancient Fathers judgment
hearein; but that also diverse of them do believe the doctrine (...) self to be
true, is no less clear: For we find Luther himself thus to write: De In
purgat. quoru^dam articul.
intercessione diuorum, cum tota Ecclesia Christiana sentio, Sanctos a nobis
hon^randos esse and inuocando^. With whom agree In orat. 1. Chry^ost. de
Inuentio and maximo.
O^colampadius, Act. mon. p. 1312.
Latimer, and diverse See H^fferenfetus in loc. theol l. 3. stat 4.
Protestants in Polonia.

Now I will end this point, in setting the judgment of learned Jerome epist. 2
cotra V(...)l. Gregory. lib. 11. moral. cap. 13. 16.
Fathers and Catholics, touching the manner how Saints do hear out prayers.
Which is, that Saints as being in Heaven, even from their first beginning of
their beatitude and happiness, do see all things in God (as in a clear glass)
which belong unto them any way, according to that: Quid Gregory vbi supra
est, quod ibi n^sciunt, qui scie tem om^^a sciunt? And therefore they see and
hear our prayers, directed unto them. And hence it is, that the holy Souls
before our Saviors Incarnation and Ascension, being in Ly^bus Patrum, were not
prayed unto; because they then not being in Heaven, could not hear the prayer
of the living made to them; And therefore no maruayle, if neither in the old
Testament nor in the new, we find no express examples of prayer made to
Saints. To the former manner, how saints do see the actions of the living, and
do hear their prayers, I may adioyne an other manner of hearing the^ allowed
and taught by S. Lib. de cura pro mortuis c. 15.
Austin and other Nazianzene orat. fun. in sororem Gorg.
Fathers. Which is, that God out of his special favor and love to his
Saints, does open and reveal to them, the particular states and prayer of
their friends, yet living in the World.

Now how agreeable it is to all force of Reason, that Saints in Heaven should
know the affairs of their living friends, is several ways proved. First,
because the Luc. 15.
Angels in Heaven rejoice at the conuertion of a sinne^: Therefore the Angels
know the particular states of living Men. But if the Angels do, then by the
same Reason the Saints do: seeing so far as concern this point, theare is no
difference between the Angels and the Saints.

Secondly, the Nature of their beatitude requires such knowledge of the
affairs of their living friends. For seeing their Happynes is a main Ocean of
all joys (no kind of happiness being to them wanting, which is requisite for
them to have) therefore it follows, that for their greature measure of their
felicity, they are to have notice of the miseryes, wants, and prayers of their
living friends. And this the rather, seeing Nature is not abolished, but betered
and perfected by grace; from whence we may gather, that the Saints in heaven
do not abandon and reject the cares and states of their living friends; but do
still retain (though with greater perfection) their former natural desire, to
know and releive the state of their said friends.

Thirdly, This privilege of Saints, knowing the state, and hearning the
prayers of the living, best sorteth to the nobility and worth of their
beatificall and happy Vision of God. For if God has honored diverse of his
friends (whiles they lived in this world) with the guyft of Prophecy; as he did
Daniell, Ezechiel, Esaias, David, and many others, wheareby diverse of them
revealed many things to come, merely depending of Man's freewill (and therefore
not forseene, in their causes) as also did tell (at the very time they were
done) things done in places far distant and remote from them. How can it then
otherwise be, but that his divine Majesty is most willing to communicate unto
his Saints the state and prayers of the living? To the force of which Reason
S. Austin subscribeth in these words: If the Prophet Elizaeus (absent in body)
(a) Lib. 22. de ciuitat. Dei c. 29.
did see the brybe his servant Geizi did take of N^man syrus etc. How much more
in that spiritual body, shall Saints see all things etc. When God shall be All
in all, unto us?

Lastly, the damned spirits and devils, (being far absent from their Witches,
southsayers, and coniurers) do nevertheless hear their inuocations and
coniurations: As is warranted by all Experience. Shall any Man then think,
that the blessed Saints of Heaven, are depryued of hearing the prayers and
intercessions, which the faithful hear upon Earth, do make unto them? since
otherwise it would follow, that spiritual substances by their losing of Heaven
(I mean, the devils by their fall) did obtain greater prerogatives and
excellencye, then the souls of the Saints do by gayning and ascending up to
Heaven: an absurdity incompatible with the goodness, wisdom, and Charity of
God. And thus much, touching the doctrine of Prayer to Saints.

The Catholic doctrine touching Justification by works, Merit of works, and
Works of Supererogation.
TOuching Justification by Works, the Catholics teach, as follows.

Justification, Bellar. de (...)cat. l. 4. c. 10.
wheareby a Man being before wicked, and the Son of Wrath, is become the Son
of God, is wrought by the healpe of Gods grace (without any meritte of works on
our side) and by the spirit of faith and Charity, infused by God in us, in the
very Act of our Justification. Thus our Adversaries may see, that we do not
ascribe our first Justification to any of our works at all; though they most
wrongfully traduce us to the contrary; For we willingly acknowledge those words
of the Apostle: It Romans 9.
is not of the willer, or of the runner; but of God, who shows Mercy.

Secondly, the Catholics teach, that after a Man justified (being of wicked
become good) he may increase his first justification by works: That is, he
being already made just, by Gods grace and mercy, may by his works become more
Just: Which works are not those, which are performed by the force of Nature (as
the Pelagians did teach, and the Protestants do falsely charge the Catholics)
but as they are performed by the spirit and grace of God; and as they receive
their force and virtue from our Saviors Passion.

Concerning the merit of Works more particularly, the Catholics teach, as
follows; whose doctrine herein (for greater perspicuity) I will set down in
certain propositions; Which propositions do contain certain conditions,
necessarily required, that Works may merit.

The first proposition is this. That works may merit, it is required, that the
party (who works) be in state of grace, and an adopted Child of God. Thus we
exclude all works from meriting, which are performed by one, who is not in
state of grace; that is, who wants true faith, true hope, true charity: for
such Works are performed by force of Nature only, and not by force of Gods
grace.

The second proposition: That works do merit, a free and liber all promise or
Covenant of God is necessary; by which his promise of reward made unto good
Works, God in a manner obliges himself, to reward good works, according to
his promises. Here our Adversary may see, that we willingly confess, that no
works of ours (of themselves) can merit, as we abstract from them the promise
of God: for without this promise and Covenant of God, made out o^ his most
merciful bounty to remunerate good works, we do willingly say with the
Apostle: The Romans 8.
passions of this life are not condign, to the glory to come, that shall be
revealed unto us.

The third proposition. That Works do merit, it is (according to the most
probable opinion) necessarily required, that they chiefly preceede from
actually or virtually Charity, and love toward God: That is, that they be
undertaken chiefly and primatiuely for the honor and love we bear to God.
From whence it follows, that no works, which are not seasoned with this
condic^on of Charity in God, but have to themselves only peculiar and less
principal ends, c(...) merit.

The fourth and last proposition, which is implicitly included in the former
Propositions. That Works do merit, they must take their worth and dignity from
the (...)ritis of our Saviors Passion; and from thence receive (as it were) a
new tincture and dye. Thus we see, that originally and principally it is
Christ's meri^ts, which do merit for us; and that our works are but once of the
means, whereby we apply Christ's merit^s unto us.

That the doctrine here set down touching merit of works is suitable to the
doctrine of the Catholic Roman Church, is evident even from the authority of
the Council Sess. 6. c. vl^.
of Trent, where we thus read: To them, who work well to the end of their
life, and do hope in God, eternal life is given, both as a grace, and favor
mercifully promised to the Sonns of God, through the meritts of Christ Jesus;
as also as a reward, proceeding from the promise of the same God, faithfully
to be given to their good Works and Meritts etc. Thus the Council.

The certainty of this doctrine of merit of works receaueth it chief proof
from the holy Scripture; and this from the testimonies of Scripture of several
kinds. First, then from those places, where eternal life is called Merces, a
wage or reward. As Matthew Math. 5.
Rejoice, for your reward is great in Heaven. Again, Math. 20.
Call the workmen, and pay them their hyre, besides diverse others of like
nature. Secondly, from those places, wherein a heavenly reward is promised to
men, according to the measure and proportion of their Works; as where it is
said: The v^. Matthew. 16.
Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, and shall render to
eueryone, secundum opera sua, according to his works. In like sort it is said:
Romans (...).
God will render to every one according to his works: besides many other like
places, vz. psalm. 65. Luc. 6. 1. Cor 3. Galat. 6. Apocal, vlt.
here omitted.

Thirdly, from those testimonies of Scripture, which express the reason, that
works are the cause, why eternal life is given; thus we read: Math. 25.
Come you blessed of my Father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you;
es(...)iui enim, and dedisti mihi manducare, for I was hungry, and you gave me
to eat. Again in the same place: Quia in pauca fuisti etc. Because thou have
been faithful over few things, I will place thee over many things; enter into,
the joy of thy lord. And in the Apocalypse: Cap. 7.
These are they, which are come out of great tribulation etc. ideo sunt ante
thro^um Dei, therefore they are before the throne of God. In all which places
the particles: Enim, Qui^, Ideo, are causases; that is implying our showing the
reason and cause of a thing.

Fourthly, from those texts, in which a reward is promised to good Works even
by force of Justice; According hereto we read: Hebr. 6.
God is not unjust, that he should forget your work. As also that: Apoc. 2.
be thou faithful even unto death, and I will give thee the Crown of life.
See of this nature other texts 2. These. 1. 2. Tim. 4. Jacob. 1.
quoted in the margent.

Fifthly, and lastly, from those passages, wherein there is mention made of
dignity or worth; As where we read: The Luc. 10.
workman is worthy his wage. Again: vt 2 These. 1.
digni habeamini regno Dei etc. That you may be had worthy the Kingdom of God,
for which you suffer. See the like texts Sapient. 3. Luc. 20. Apoc. 3.
noted in the margent.

That the ancient Fathers mantayned the doctrine of merit of works: see for
greater breuity Epist. ad Romans
Ignatius, Lib. 4. aduersus Haeres. c. 72.
Ireneus, Lib. de Spirit Sanct. cap. 24.
Basil, Homil. 4. de Lazero.
Chrysostom, Orat. in Sanct. Baptism.
Nazianz, Orat. 1. de amandis pauperibus.
Nyssene, De vnitat. Eccles.
Cyprian, Lib. 1. de officijs, cap. 15.
Ambrose, Epist. 103. ad Sixtum.
Austin, Aduersi Iouinianum prop^ finem.
Jerome.

The judgment of the ancient Fathers touching merit of works is discovered
(besides by their own testimonies) even from the acknowledgment of the
Protestants. For first we find D Humfrey to confess in this s(...)rt:
Iesuitism. part. 2. p. 530.
Ireneus, Clemens, and others (called Apostolical) have in their wrytings
merit of Works. In like sort the Centurists thus charge Chrysostom: Cent 5.
col. 1178.
Chrysostom handles impurely the doctrine of justification, and attributes
merit to works. They also t(...) censure Origin Cent. 3. col. 265.
Origin made works the cause of our justification. In Co^fess. Wittenberg.
Brentius in like sort says, that Austin taught assiance in man's merits,
toward remission of Sins.

Luther styleth Jerome, Ambrose, Austin, and others Justice Luth. in Galat.
cap. 4 the latin word by him need is Iustiliarij
Workers of the old Papacy. D. Whitakers thus writes of the age of Cyprian:
Contra Camp. rat. 5.
Not only Cyprian, but almost all the most holy Fathers of that time were in
that error, as thinking so to ^ay the pain due to sin, and to satisfy Gods
justice. D. Whitguift (as before of praying to Saints, so) of merit of works
thus confesses: In his defense against the reply of Cartwright page 472. and
473.
Almost all the Bishopps and Writers of the greek Church and Latin also, were
spotted with doctrine of merit. Upon the Apocalypse ser 87.
Bullenger confesses the great antiquity of the doctrine of merit in these
words: The doctrine of Merit, satisfaction, and justification of works, did
incontinently after the Apostles time lay their first foundation. To conclude
this point M. Wotton (no obscure Protestant) rejects the authority of
Ignetius (the Apostles scholar) touching merit of works in this sort: In his
defense of M. Parkins p. 340.
I say plainly, this Man's testimony is nothing worth; because he was of little
judgment in Divinity. Thus far, touching our Adversary acknowledgments of the
Fathers judgment herein.

Now that some learned Protestants do teach and believe the doctrine of Merit
of Works, to be true and Orthodoxall doctrine, is no less evident, then the
former point. For it is taught, as true doctrine by the Public Page 495. and
273.
Confessions in their Harmony: by M. Lib. 5. eccles. pol. sect. 72. p. ^08.
Hooker, by In loc ^om de bonis operib. circu medium.
Melanct^on, and by Spandeburge In Margarit. Theolog. p. 48. and 50.
the Protestant.

To the former doctrine of merit of Works, I will adioyne the doctrine touching
works of Supererogation; Which doctrine is greatly exagirated and depraved by
many Protestants; who are not ashamed to traduce the Catholics, and to diuulge
both by pen and in Pulpit, that the Catholics do hold, that their works can
do more, then merit Heaven. But this is the Protestant^ (...)lumny; since the
Catholics do not hold or believe any such thing. Therefore I will set down
the true definition of an Euangelical Counsel distinguished from a Precept;
seeing upon Evangelical Counsels works of Supererogation are grounded.

An Evangelical Counsel of Perfection, is called any good Work, Which is not
commanded by Christ* but only commended by him, and poynted on to us by him; As
the Vow of Chastity of Poverty, of Obedience; and diverse other good Works, not
commanded by God.

It differs from a Precept. First, because the subject of a Precept is more
facill and easy, then that of a Council; Secondly in that a Counsel does
include in it the Performance of a Precept, and something more then a Precept;
Thirdly, in that Precepts are common to all Men to perform, Counsels are not
so; Fourthly, Precepts of their own nature do oblige Men to their performance;
Counsels are in the choice of one, to perform or not perform; Lastly
Precepts, being observed are rewarded; being not observed, the transgression is
punished: Whereas Counsels, being observed and kept have a greater reward;
being not kept, no punishment follows.

Thus far touching the definition of an Evangelical Counsel: Which in other
words may be also thus defined: An Euangelical Counsel is any such good Work
of high Perfection, to the performance whereof we are not bownd, as that we
sin in not doing of it.

Now whereas it is commonly objected against the doctrine of Evangelical
Counsels, That we are so obbliged to God, as that we cannot ever do more, then
we ought to do: It is therefore hear to be conceived, that if we consider Gods
benefitts bestowed upon us, we willingly acknowledge, that Man can not do more
good, then he ought: no not the thousand part of that, he ought to do, in that
Man cannot render or retaliate any thing of equal value and worth to Gods
benefitts.

Nevertheless If we consider the Law and Command imposed by God upon us; then
man may be said to do more, then indeed he is obliged by Gods Law to do. For
although Man cannot exceed or equal Gods benefits with his own works: yet he
is not become guilty hearby: seeing Men is not obliged to perform more, then
that only, which God commands.

Evangelical Counsels take the chief and first proof from sacred Scripture:
As wheare it is said: Math. 19.
There are certain Eunuchs who have gelded themselfs for the Kingdom of
Heaven: Which place is expounded of the Evangelical Counsel of Chastity, by
Lib. de habitu virginum.
Cyprian, In hu^clocum.
Chrysostom, De sancta virginitat. c. 24.
Austin, and others.

A second text (to omit diverse others for breuity) is that where our Savior
says to the young Man: Math. 19.
If thou will be perfect, go, and sell all that thou have, and give it to the
poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: Which text is interpreted of the
Evangelical Counsel of poverty, by S. De viduis vltra medium.
Ambrose, S. Lib. co^tra vigilant.
Jerome, and S Epist. 89. quaest. 4.
Austin.

The foresaid doctrine is further confirmed by the authority of the ancient
Fathers: For b(...)es their expositions of the foresaid places of Scripture,
this doctrine is further taught by In c. 5. ad Romans
Origin, Lib. de humanitate verbi vltra med.
Athanasius, Lib. de virginit. vlt. med.
Basil, Homil. 8. de Penit.
Chrysostom, Orat. in Julian. vltra medium.
Nazianzene, De habitu vir^inum vltra medium.
Cyprian, Lib. de ^^duis
Ambrose, Lib. contra Iouinianum.
Jerome, and finally by Lib. de virginitate Sancta. cap. 30.
Austin, who speaking of Precepts and Counsels, uses the very Word:
Supererogation, thus saying of precepts and Counsels: Dominus debitum imperat
nobis: in his autem si quid amplius supererogaueritis, in reddendo reddet nobis.

The doctrine of Evangelical Counsels is warranted and taught (besides by the
former ancient fathers of the Primative Church even by diverse learned
Protestants.

According hearto we find it is mantayned for true doctrine, by Eccles. pol
lib. 3. sect. 8. page 140.
M. Hooker, by D. In his defense of M Hooker art 8. page 49 50. 51. 52.
Co^ell, and by In Sacra 4. Euangel. in Math. c. 19.
Bucer, And thus f^r briefly of Justification by Works, of merit of Works, and
of works of Supererogation.

The Catholic Doctrine, touching Indulgences.
THe Vi^ulency of Protestants against the doctrine of Indulgences is most
remarkable. Wherefore for their better conceauing of the state of this Question
or Indulgences, this following in the Catholic Doctrine.

First, that Mortal sin is remitted by the Sacrament of Confession; so far
forth only, as concerns the guilt or offense of God and the punishment of
eternal damnation; yet so, that this eternal punishment by Gods Mercy is
turned into temporal punishment; as appears by the example of David: Who
(though the eternal punishment due to the guilt of his sins was for given)
yet was punished temporally by the death of his Son: For these are the words
in Scripture after his sin was forgiven: 2 Reg. c. 12.
Because thou have caused the name of God to be blasphemed, the Child, that is
borne to th^e, shall dye. In like sort, David's sin in numberring his People,
being remitted him; yet was he put to choose Reg. (...) 24.
for his temporal punishment and satisfaction, either War, Famine, or
Pestilence.

Now the guilt of eternal damnation for sin being remitted, there remains
a temporal punishment. And this te^porall punishment (thus reserved) is the
sole subject of Indulgences. Therefore an Indulgence (as hear the word is
taken) is a merciful relaxation or remission of temporal punishment, due for
sin, by applying the super abundant satisfaction of Christ, after the sin
it self and guilt of eternal damnation due to mortal sin is remitted by
the Sacrament of Confession; or for want thereof by perfect Contrition.

The ground and foundation of Indulgencs is chiefly the treasury and
satisfaction of Christ's death, which is of that infinity great value an price
(seeing every drop of his blood was able to redeem a thousands Worlds, in
regard of his Divinity being united to his Humanity) as that it can ueuer be
exhausted. For we read: that 1. Cor. 1.
Christ dyed for all; Also that 1. John. (...). 2.
Christ is apropitiation for our sins; and not for our sins only, but for the
Sins of the whole World.

But it is certain, that the price of Christ's death was not actually applied
to all Men hitherto living; since then it would follow, that all Men (which
hitherto have lived) should have been saved.

Therefore it follows, that theare yet remains a great abundance of the
price of Christ passion (if it were not in finite, as indeed it is) to be
applied and still will remain.

The dispenser of this treasury of the Church is the Head of Christ's Church,
who has power to apply this treasury for the absoluing of Men from their
temporal punishment, due to their Sins, already remitted by Sacramental
Confession, according to the authority given him in those words: Whatsoever
thou losest upon earth, shall be losed in Heaven; with which Math. 16.
place accord other places Math. 18. John. 20.
of the Evangelists. Now these words being general, they do extend as well to
the punishment due for sin, as to the sin itself; seeing the punishment is
as remissible, as the Sin; And as to the one are applied Christ's Meritts, so
to the other Christ's ^atisfactions.

The Cause, why any Indulgence is granted to any Man, ought to be just and
reasonable (or otherwise the Indulgence granted is of no value) for seeing the
Pope is not Lord of this spiritual treasure of the Church, but only the
distributer thereof therefore this distribution he cannot make without a just,
reasonable, and lawful Cause.

The Party receiving the benefit of an Indulgence ought (at the time of
receiving it) to be in state of grace (since otherwise he can reap no benefit
by any Indulgence) to which state he is brought by true Contrition of his
former Sins, although not perhaps forgeuen (in respect of eternal damnation)
in the Sacrament of Confession: And hear is discovered the trissling vanity
and falsehood of our Adversaries: in affirming, that the Catholics teach, that
the Pope can give (a fore hand) an Indulgence to any Man for any sin, which
hereafter is to be committed. Since we see, that the object of an Indulgence
is the temporal punishment only (and not the punishment of damnation) and this
for a sin already committed (and not hereafter to be committed) of which a
Man being in state of grace (and consequently not one, who bears a present
resolution to commit any sin hereafter) is remitted by his Indulgence;
applied to him, upon just and reasonable Causes.

We are further hear to admonish, that the Party receiving an Indulgence,
ought to perform entyrely and precisly all things enjoined him by his
Indulgence; Whether it be prayer, Alms, fasting etc. According to that usual
saying: Indulgentia tantum valent, quantum sonant.

Wheare it is taught, that the Merits and sufferings of some great Saints as
of our Blessed Lady, S, John Baptiste, and some others, do concur to the
increase of this spiritual Treasure of the Church (which is the foundation of
Indulgences) this is to be understood in this sense; to wit, that because their
Meritts, works, and sufferings have their virtue and value only from the
Meritts of our Saviors Passion: And that they only concur to the increase
of the treasure as they depend upon the meritts of Christ therefore it may be
truly said, that primatiuely and Originally only the Meritts and Passion of
Christ, do make this spiritual treasure, from whence Indulgences do flow.

Ad hearto, that if S. Paul might truly say in a researued sense: Ad imple ea,
quae desunt passionum Christi, in earne mea, (g) Colo^. 1.
pro corpor^^ius, quod est Ecclesia I do fulfill those things, that do want of
the passion of Christ, in my flesh, for his body, which is the Church (words,
which if any Catholic should have auerred of any one Saint, without the
warrant of the Apostle, he should have been mighrely calumn^ated and wronged by
the Protestants) then follows it, that the afflictions and sufferings of S.
Paul (as receiving their force from Christ's Passion) may be said without any
indignity to Christ, to encreasse this spiritual treasure of the Church. For
these former words do not import, that there was any defect in the Passion of
Christ; but that the sufferings of S. Paul, did fulfill the plenitude of
Christ his Passion, and his members for the benefit of those, to whom they are
to be communicated For as Christ, being the invisible and supreme head of his
Church, does with his Church, make but one mystical body; so his sufferings
with the sufferings of his members (receiving all their force and efficacy from
the Passion of Christ) do make (as S. In psalm. 61.
Austin affirms) one common and publ^ke We^le, or one public treasure. And
according hereto it is, that we find, offered S. Paul's afflictions sometimes
for the Colos. 1.
Colossians at other times for the Corinthians Cor. 2. Cor. 1.
: he desiring at one time to dye for the Romans Row. 9.
; at an other time, to become an A^athem^ for them.

To proceed further. The Old Testament it self warranteth this mutual
communication of one suffering for an other; And in this sense it is said of
Gods Church (there entitled Jerusalem, that it is, Psalm. ^21.
as a City, whose participationes in it self. That is: As in a public City
there is a general traffic, for the public benefit of every particular
Citizen; So in the City of God (which is his Church) there is a communion or
participation of all the spiritual works thereof, to the general benefit and
behoo^e of eich particular Man. And upon this ground it is, that David said (in
respect of the communication of one Man's sufferings for an other) Psalm. 218.
I am made partaker of all, that fear the Lord.

Now this former doctrine, touching the sufferings of one to be applied to an
other, being the undoubted, true, and ancient doctrine of Christ Church (upon
which ground Indulgances are builded) it from hence appears, how idly and
impertin^ntly our adversaries do urge some texts of Scripture to the contrary;
As where it is said: The Ezech 18.
soul, which sins, ^^en that shall dye. And again: Ad Galat 6.
Every one shall be are his own burden. And more: No Psalm. 49.
Man c^^ redeem his brother, or give a price to God for him. All which texts
are spoken of the state of eternal damnation, (and therefore impertinently
alleged) in which state a Man depar^eth out of this World; but they are not
spoken of temporal punishment only, which is reserved, after the guilt of
eternal damnation is remitted; which is the point here controuerted.

If it be urged against this doctrine, that the actions of the Saints,
deceased, were meritts to themselves; and therefore cannot be applied, as
satisfactions for others. ^o this I answer, that one and the same action may
be (in a different respect) both meritorious, and satisfactory; Meritorious, as
it proceeds from supernatural grace; satisfactory, as it is performed with
pain, labor and difficulty; According hereto we read in Scripture, that
alme^deeds do both merit, and satisfy for sin: For thus we read: Marc. 9
Whosoever shall give in my name a cup of cold water, etc. he shall not loose
his reward. Here is merit. We also read of Alme^deeds Job 4.
in this sort: Almesdeeds deliver us from sin and death; and again: As
Eccles. 3.
water quenches the fire, so Almesdeeds extinguish sin. Here is
satisfaction. Here also we are to concea^e, that though the same action may be
meritorious and satisfactory; yet a man meriteth only for himself, and not for
others: but satisfy he may both for himself, and for others: only Christ (our
Savior) has merited both grace and glory for us all, and also has satisfied
for the sins of all Men, Yet the worth and price of his merits we can apply
only to ourselves, (by our meritorious actions) and not derive it to any other;
but the benefit of his satisfaction we may derive (by our own satisfactory
works) not only to our selves, but also to others.

Where it is vulgarly objected, that Iuduigences are oftentimes granted for
more thousands of years, then the World or Purgatory are like to endure and
continue; And that therefore they are ridiculously and foolishly granted. I
answer, this argument proceeds from mere Ignorance. For here the years are
not to be understood of the years or days of penal satisfaction, which are to
be imposed in Purgatory; but of the number of years, which were more or less
in number proportioned (according to the diversity of the crime) by the
Canonical Decrees of the Church. And here we are further to know, that God in
the space and compass of an hour or some such short time, may by the bitter
pains of Purgatory expiate that, which (in this life) a remiss and slow
penance or satisfaction would scarce redeem in the compass of many years.

Now touching the antiquity of Indulgences; we find them practiced by S. Paul,
who thus says of the incestuous person: Whom 2. Cor. 2.
you have pardoned, I also pardon: for that which I have pardoned, in the
Person of Christ, for you I have done it, that we be not circumuented of Satan.
Here now we are to remember, that the incestuous person (to whom the Indulgence
was here given) being in great contrition and sorrow for his sin, was
excommunicated by S. Paul, who at the request of the Corinthians did release
him of his excommunication, for fear he might faule into despair. Now in this
example, we find all things necessary to an Indulgence or Pardon. As first, the
authority of the granter of the pardon; to wit, S. Paul, who affirms to do it,
in the person of Christ. Secondly, state of grace in the Receauer of the
Indulgence; as appears by his Contrition and sorrow for his sin committed.
Thirdly, the temporal punishment remitted; to wit, his Excommunication.
Lastly, a just and sufficient cause for giving this Indulgence or Pardon: Which
was, lest the offendour should faule into despair, or be ouerplunged in sorrow.

After the Apostles times, we find that the Bishops of the Primative Church
gave pardons and Indulgences to many: and this was done by the mediation of
Confessors or designed Martyrs, as is witnessed by Lib. ad Martyr.
Tertullian and Cyprian. epist. 13. 14. 15. and sermon. vlt. de Lapsis.
Cyprian.

We also find, that Pardons and Indulgences were given by sundry ^^opes in
other ages: as by Luggerus epist. de S. Swiberto. apud Suriu^.
Leo the third, by Thom, in 4. sentent dis. 20. q. 1. art. 3.
Gregory the Great, by Anton. 2. part. histor. tit. 16, cap. 1.
Urban the second, by Abbas Vlperg. in Chronic.
Innocentius the third, by Paschalis the first, and by others. All which
dispensed and distributed out of the common treasure of the Church.

Besides the former authorityes, the doctrine and use of Indulgencs is
warranted by Counsels, both General and Provincial. To wit, the first
Council of Can. 11.
Nice, the Council of Can 9.
Ancyran, the Council of Leodice, Can. 2.
the Council of Claramontane, the Council of Lateran, of Vienna, of Constance
and of Trente: as appears in the Counsels themselfs. Now if the former
ancient Popes and Fathers, as also these alleged Counsels should err in the
doctrine of Indulgences, then two main absurdityes should follow; first, that
the Primative Church should most foully err in a dogmaticall point of faith;
contrary to the judgment of the more sober and Leared Protestants, among whom I
will (for breuity) hear set down the judgment only of Kempnitius, touch^ng
the Primative Church, who thus says: Cempnit. in his Examen. Council. Trident.
parr. 1. page 74.
I dowbt not, but the Primative Church received from the Apostles and
Apostolical Men: not only the text of Scripture, but also the native sense
thereof. But this the Primative Church could not receive, if it wholly erred in
so main a matter of Christian doctrine, as the doctrine of Indulgences is. The
second Absurdity, is that in regard of the said Fathers and General Counsels,
defending the doctrine of Indulgences, the whole Church of Christ (supposing
the doctrine to be fa^se) should err in matter of faith; contrary to the
Promise of Christ, who has promised ever to be with his Church till the end of
the World; which said Church of his is styled by the Apostle (for it greater
certainty of faith 1. Tim. 3.
columna and firmamentum veritatis; and therefore incompatible with error.

And thus much concerning the doctrine of Indulgences; ending this discourse
with the Confession of Kempnitius, (touching the antiquity thereof) who plainly
acknowledges, and says Kempnitius examen. part. 4. p. 329.
that the beginning of Indulgences is not clearly enough set down in
histories.

The Catholic doctrine touching Communion under one Kind, defended.
THe true state of this question is not, whether Christ did institute the
Eucharist under both kynds; Or whether himself and the Apostles did at the
first institution, receive it under both kynds: Or whether the Apostles and the
Fathers afterward at sundry times did minister it to the Laity, under both
kynds (for all this is confessed for true) But only the Question hear is,
whether Christ our Savior did give an absolute Command, unto his Apostles and
their Successors of administrating the said Sacrament under both kynds, (to
wit of bread and Wine) so as the delivering of it to the Laity under one kind
only, should be a breach of our Lords precept therein.

The Protestants affirm it to be an absolute transgression of onr Saviors
precept; The Catholics deny it; mantayning, that our Savior in the first
institution of the Sacrament, did leave no precept, touching the manner, how it
is to be administrated to the Laity.

The Catholics do further justify, that the Protestants in this place do
ignorantly confound a Precept with an Institution between which two, theare is
great difference. For example, God did first Institute and ordain Mariadge;
yet he gave no precept or command thereof: For if he had, then all Men should
have been bownd to marye.

The Catholics prove this their doctrine; first from our Lord and Saviors
own words; Who, as he some times makes mention of both kynds: so often does
be mention but ore Kind only, as wheare he says: He, Joan. (...).
that eats this bread, shall live for ever. Again: This vbi supra.
is the bread, that comes down from Heaven: in both which places (besides
diverse others) be makes no mention of the Cup.

Secondly, the some doctrine is proved from the practice of our Savior
himself; Luc. 24.
who being at Emaus with his two Disciples at supper, did take bread, and (as
S. Luke relates) and bless and break it, and did reach it to them. Wheare S.
Luke mentions not the Cup. That by this bread is understood the ^ucharist,
is taught by S. Lib. 3. de consensu. c. 25.
Austin, and even by some Protestant Melan(...)on Apolog. Co^(...). Aug. (...)
de vtraque specie.
Writers.

Thirdly, from the Apostles practice, after Christ's time. For werea^^, that S.
Luke Act. 2.
^eaking of the beleiuers and the faithful) thus says: They (f) were
perseuering in the doctrine of the Apostles, and in communication of breaking
of bread, and in prayers. Hear is no mention of the Cup to the Laity; And yet
^eare, by breaking of bread is understood the Eucharist; both because it is
joined with doctrine and prayers, as also by the testimonies of the auncien^
Author operis imperfect in Math. homil. 17. Beda ad c. 20. Act.
Fathers, and the Protestants. Luth. setm. de Fucharist. Calvin. l. 4. instit.
par. 17. Kempnit. exam. Council. Tride^^. sess. 21. part. 2.
Concerning which place of S. Luke, we are to conceive, that S. Luke related
not what the Apostles did (who, no dowbt, did consecrate in both hynds) but
only, what the Laity did, and under what kind they did receive.

Fourthly, the foresaid doctrine of the Laity communicating under one kind or
both, is confessed by diverse learned Protestants, as a matter of Indifferency
only, and not of Necessity: For Luther thus writes heareof: De captiuit
babylon. l. de Eucharist.
They sin not against Christ, who use one kind; seeing Christ has not
commanded to use both but has le^f^^t to the will of every one. In like sort
Hospinian Hist. Sacram. part 2. fol. 112.
(the Protestant) relates, that certain Protestants (as houlding it a matter
of indifferency) did actually communicate under one kind. To be short,
Melancton thus writes heareof: Cent. epist. theolog. epist. 74p. 25(...)
Concerning both the kinds of the Lords supper etc. The Pope with out any hurt,
might easily healpe these inconveniences; If taking away the prohibition, he
would leave the use free. And this liberty would noting hurt us: Of such
indifferency (we see) Melancton makes this point to be

In the next place, we will examine our Adversaries, chiefest arguments
produced out of the Scripture to the contrary. And first, they object the
words of our Savior: Joan. 6.
Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you.

To this I answer; first, that according to diverse learned Luth. de capt.
Babil. c. 1. Swinglius de vera and falsa religione. c. de Eucharist. Calvin
Instit. l. 4. c. 17. par. 33.
Protestants, these words do not concern the Sacrament of the Eucharist* But
that by eating and drinking in this place, is understood beleiuing in Christ.

Secondly, admitting the same words to concern the B. Eucharist; and withal
supposing them to include a precept (as indeed they include no precept) yet
this precept rests not in the Manner of receiving, but in the thing received;
to wit, the body and blood of Christ. But the body and blood of Christ are as
fully received under one kind, as under both; as hereafter shall be showed.

Our Adversaries further object those other words of our Savior: Math. 26.
drink you all of this. Which words they will needs extend, as spoken to all
the La^ty.

To this I first answer, that the word: All, is not ever taken in the
Scripture Universally, for all Men, or all things; but often for all only of
some certain kind; And according hearto we thus read: Romans 3.
All Men sinned; and yet from hence Christ is excepted. Again, we also read:
Math. ^7.
(...) cried, Crucifye him: And yet the Apostles were exempt out of this: All.
And so hear in the former words: Drink you all of this; The word: All, is to
be restrained only to all the Apostles, who then were with Christ: For if it
were to be extended to all Men universally, and without restraint; then should
the Sacrament of the Cup be given to Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Children; all
which not withstanding are exempted from thence, by the confession of the
Protestants. Moreover Drink ye all of this was spoken only to those to whom
was said do ye this in remembrance of me. But this was spoken only to the
Apostles and in them to Priests their successors.

Now seeing (as above it is proved) Communion (under one, or both kynds) is a
thing of Indifferency; The Church of God out of her authority, has debarred
the Laity from the Cup; moved thearto (besides some other reasons) out of a due
reuerrence to this high and venerable Sacrament. For if the Laity should
drink of the Cup, it would not (morally speaking) be otherwise, but that
through the negligence of diverse of the Laity, theare would be frequent
spilling of the Cup upon the ground; a thing most indecent and irreuerent; and
which the ancient Austin. l. 5. homil. 26. Cyrill Catech. mystag. 5. Origin
homil. 13. in Exodu^.
Fathers had a special care to prevent.

Neither can it be hear replied, that to the Laity (as being retained from the
Cup) but a half and imperfect Sacra meant is given; and that thereupon the
Laity is depryued of much grace and fruit, imparted by receiving it under both
kinds: To this I answer. First, the Protestants have small reason to urge the
want of Grace or fruit, by giving it under one kind; seeing by their doctrine,
this Sacrament actually gives no grace or fruit at all, but only by
representation or signification; But this representation of our Saviors death
is perfectly accomplished under one kind only; As we see, it was fully figured
in the old Law, in the Manna alone, and in the Paschall Lamb alone.

Secondly and more particularly, I say, that neither is this Sacrament given by
halfs only (as our Adversaries suggest) neither is less fruit imparted by one
kind, then by both; the reason hereof is, because the Catholics do jointly
teach, that under either kind, is truly contained whole Christ; to wit, his
Body, Blood, Soul, and Divinity.

That this doctrine is true (ever presupposing the Real Presence of Christ in
the Sacrament, which all Catholics do) is proved from two other Principles
of faith. The first is, that Christ after his Resurrection, shall never dye
again, according to that of S. Paul: Rom 6.
Christ rising from the dead, now dies no more. From whence it immediately
follows, that under the form of Bread, the Body of Christ is not without
blood and Soul; seeing otherwise, it would be without life, and consequently
dead. The second Article is, That Christ is one Divine Person, subsisting in
two Natures: from whence it follows, that seeing the Body of Christ has no
other subsistence, then that of his Godhead; That therefore where his body is,
there also is his Divinity. Both which Articles being true, and acknowledged by
the Protestants, it unavoidably follows, that (once supposing and granting
the Real Presence for true doctrine) neither the Sacrament is maimed or
imperfect under one kind; nor that lesser grace or fruit is given under one
kind, then under both. And thus far of this point.

The Catholic Doctrine touching Relics of Saints Bodies; the sign of the
Cross; Praying upon Bea^es; Benediction of Creatures etc.
FIrst touching Relics of Saints Bodies. Whereas the In prae^^t. 6. Ce^t.
Centurists do charge us Catholics, that the Relics of Saints bodies are
worshipped by us, with divine honor; and that we do pray unto them, as if they
did hear us, or were living. To this I answer. It is a most impudent and
lying slander, fitting to proceed from the tongues of such falfe Apostles.
For which of us Catholics have ever inuoked the Relics of any Saint? Or who
of us was ever heard to say: Holy Relics pray for us?

The honor we do to them is this. We worship Relics with the same inferior
worship, as we do to other religious things: And this we do, as reputing them
the holy pledges of our Patrons; and as being parcells of those bodies, wherein
the Holy Ghost did vouchsafe to inhabit; and which hereafter at the day of
general Resurrection of our bodies, shall be reunited to their glorious souls
now in Heaven: But we neither honor them, as God: nor inuoake them, as
Saints. And this is the very answer, which S. Lib. (...)tra V^^ilantium.
Jerome made to Vigilantius (the Heretic) denying (as Protestants now do) the
lawful worship of Relics.

The worship of Relics given by us Catholics, is warranted by the authorityes
of the second Act. 3.
Nicene Council, by the Council Can. vlt.
Gangreuse, as also by the practice of the ancient Fathers: to wit In vita B
Antonij.
Athanasius, In psalm. 115.
Basil, Sermon. de Sanctis Inuentio and Maximo.
Chrysostom, Sermon. 93. de Sanctis Nasa^io and Celso.
Ambrose, Lib. aduers. Vigilantium.
Jerome, and (to omit diverse others) Austin. de Eccles. dogm. c. 73.
Auttin himself: who thus writes hereof: Sanctorum corpora and praecipue
Beatorum Martyrum reliquias, (ae si Christi membra) syncertssime honor anda
credimus: si quis contra hanc sententiam venerit, non Christianus, sed
Eunomianus and Vigilantianus creditur. We do believe, that the bodies of
Saints, and especially the relics of blessed Martyrs are to be honored, (as
the members of Christ) And who impugneth this sentence, is not to be reputed a
Christian, but an Eunomian and Vigilantian. Thus S. Austin.

The euidency of the ancient rathers judgments hereof, appears from the open
confessions of the learned Protestants. For O^^ander the Protestant thus
reprooueth S. Jerome. In epitom. Ce^t. 4. page 506.
Jerome did foolishly contend that the relics of Saints are to be worshipped.
In like sort, where Jerome thus writes: Cont^a Vigilant(...)ant med.
Constantinus imperator sanctas reliquias Andreae, Lucae, and Timothei
transtulit Constantinopolni, apud quas dae(...) rugiunt. Constantin the
Emperor did cause the holy relics of Andrew, Luck, and Timothee to be
carried to Constantinople, whereat the very Devils did roar or rage. Now
Bullenger (the Protestant) thus taxes Jerome. De Origin Erroris printed
^^guri, 1539. fol. 67.
S Jerome is ouerfall, in that he says, the Diuills did roar at the holy
relics of Andrew. The said B^^lenger Bulenger vbi supra.
confesses, that many holy men of God (he styling them, Sancti Dei homines)
did hold the doctrine of worshipping of Relics: and in lieu of answer, thus
says: studium Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam.

Touching Pilgrimages to the bodies and relickes of Saints, the Centurists do
thus write: Cent. 4. col 457.
De peregrinationibus ad loca sacra, caeperunt hoc seculo primum sub
Constantino, locaterrae Sanctae in praecio habert: Helenama^er Imperatoris
(mulier superst(...)sa) illuc profect a ador andi carsa etc. Touching
pilgrimages to Holy places, the places of the holy Land did begin first in
this age under Constantin, to be had in estimation and respect; Helen the
mother of Constantine (being a superstitious Woman) did go thither, to the end
to worship them. Thus the Centurists. The said Centurists do in like sort thus
condemn Constantine himself: Cent. 4. col. 15^9.
plane simili superstitione, Constantinus reliquias quasdam de Cruce (ab Helena
reperta) Constantinopolni dicitur transtulisse, vt esset eius Verbis
conseruatrix. ^ust with the like superstition, Constantiue is reported to have
translated certain relics of the Cross (found by Helen) to Constantinople:
that they might be the (...) of the City.

Touching Miracles, wrought at the Sepulchers and bodies of Saints, the
Protestants do no less acknowledge the same for first Luther thus confesses:
In purgat. quorundam. articul.
Who can deny those things, which God to this day works miraculously and
visibly (ad diuorum Sepulora) at the Monuments of the Saints? In like sort
Cempnitius thus confe^eth: Cempnitius exa^. part. 4. p. 10.
Apud Augustinum, in translatione Reliquiarum Stephan^, mulier caeca
illuminatae est; and aliquando quaedam miracula ad reliquias edebantur. Austin
records, that upon the transl^tion of the Relics of Steven, a blind Woaman
was restored to sight, and that sometimes certain Miracles were wrought at the
presence of Relics. And the Centurists affirm the like, thus writing: Si
Cent. 4. col. 457.
Ambrosio credimus, agri, qui vestes Sanctorum manu contigissent, sanabantur;
obs^ssi liber^bantur etc. If we believe Ambrose, Sick^ persons, who touched
with their hands the vestments of Saints, were cured, and persons possessed
with evil spirits, were theareby freed of them. Finally D. Whitakers gives a
full allowance and approbation of all such relations in these words: Contra
Durae um. l. 10. p. ^66.
Nec illa miracula vanafuisse put^, quae in Martyrum monumentis facta
narrantur. I do not hold those Miracles, as vain or idle, which are related
to have been exhibited, at the monuments or sepulcres of Saints.

Thus much ton^hi^g ^^licks, the true and Catholic doctrine whereof may
receive it most full and vndowbted prouffe (if all above spoken, were false)
even from Gods holy writ. For do we not find, that Moses Exodus 13.
used great reverence to the bones of Joseph the Patriarch? As also did not
Josias Reg. 4. cap. 23.
the like to the bones of an other Prophet? And were not Miracles wrought, by
the dead bones of Elizeus, Reg. 4. c. 3
by the shadow of S. Peter, Act. 5.
and by the Nappkin of S. Act. 19.
Paul? Therefore if the Protestants will ad wit the old and New Testament;
they must consequently admit the Catholic doctrine of Relics.

In this next place, we will come to the sign of the Cross; which we make
upon our foreheads, which is so much disliked by the Protestants.

When a Catholic signeth himself with the sign of the Cross, be but only
implicitly des^^eth that by this sign; which ex(...)citly and by mediation of
words, he desires by prayers. For seeing the sign of the Cross does figure
out to the eye our Saviors Passion; and seeing the secret desires of the heart
are manifested and made known, as well by signs of the body (as dumb Men,
and such as cannot speak, are accustomed to make) as by prayers and words of
the tongue: Therefore if it be lawful for me with the tongue to pray, that God
will forgive my sins, through the Meritts of Christ his death and Passion; It
must needs then consequently be lawful for me, to pray to him to the same end,
without words, by making the sign of the Cross: Seeing the making of this
sign, with an intention of internal Prayer (the Cross being the badge and
remembrance of our Saviors death and Passion) is all one, as to pray in words
by virtue and force of the same death and Passion; Since the hand in this case,
by making the sign of the Cross, does supply the place and office of the
rongue.

The lawfulnes of this sign may be taken and proved. from the signs of the Old
Testament; So the Blood of the Exodus 12
Lamb, sprinkled upon the posts of Howses, did signify nothing else, but the
sign of the Cross upon the foreheads of Christians, by the authority of S.
Lib. de catechis. rudibus c. 20.
Austin.

In like sort, the sign: Tau, Ezech. cap. 9.
which was commanded to be drawn upon the foreheads of those, who lamented,
was a manifest sign of the sign of the Cross on the foreheads of Christians,
by the judgments both of S. Lib. aduers. Demetrianu^.
Cyprian and S In Comment. Ezechiel.
Jerome.

The making of the sign of the Cross was ever practiced and justified by the
Fathers of the primative Church; of which point see, De Eccles. Hierarch. c. 4.
5. 6.
Dionisius, Lib. 4. epist. 6.
Cyprian, Catech. 4.
Cyrill, De Incarnat. Verbi.
Athanasius) who says: Sign^cru^^s omnia magica compescentur, by the sign of
the Cross all Magic is suppressed) De Spirit. Sancto. c. 37.
Basil, Sermon. 43.
Ambrose, Epist. ad Demetriadem.
Jerome, Tract. 18. in loannem ad finem. vide lib. 1. Confess. c. ^1.
Austin, besides diverse others of the Greek and Latin Church: The words of S.
Austin I will hear set down; Thus then he writes: Quid est, quod omnes
^^uerunt: signum Christi, nisi crux Christi? quod signum, in si adhibeatur sieve
frontibus credentium etc. What other thing is the sign of Christ (which allmen
know) then the Cross of Christ? Which sign of the Cross, except it be made
upon the forehead of the faithful beleiuers; upon the water, by the which,
they are regenerated; upon the oil, with which Crisme they are anointed; upon
the Sacrifice, with which they are nurished, not any of these former mysteries
are duly performed. Thus S. Austin.

Ad hearto, that God has vouchsafed to work diverse Miracles by the sign of
the Cross, as appears by the frequent testimonies of the Fathers; to wit of
Initio Scorpiaci.
Tertullian, Haeres. 30.
Epiphanius, Orat. in Iu^ianum.
Nazianzene, In vita Gregorij. Thaumaturgi.
Nysse^e, Iu vita Antonij.
Athanasius, In vita Pauli, primi Eraemitae.
Jerome, Lib. 22. de ciuicare D(...)
Austin and others: All which authorityes to contemn in this point, were most
insolently to traduce so many learned and ancient Fathers (and consequently
the whole Church of God in those pure and primative times) as superstitious,
blind, and ignorant.

Now that the testimonies of the former ancient Fathers (though their own
words, for breuity, be not at large set down) both touching the worship given
by them to the Cross, (I ever mean, such religious and inferior worship, as
is given to things consecrated to religious ends: far different from that
given to God) and touching diverse Miracles wrought by the said sign, are most
clear^, evident, and unanswerable, appears from the acknowledgments of
learned Protestants in this behalf: And thus concordantly hereto, D^nae^s
(that learned Protestant) thus writes: In prime part. altera part ad Bellarm*
Co^trouers. 5. p. 1415.
Cyrill and sundry other Fathers were plainly superstitious and blinded with
this enchantment of the Cros^es adoration. The Centuris^^ thus write of S.
Ambrose: Cent. 4. col. 302.
A^brosius multa comme^crat superstitios^ de cruce (...)nta: Ambrose relates
many superstitious things of the Cross, which was found. In like sort the said
Protestants thus tax Ephrem: Cent. 4. vbi supra.
(...)is signationi nimium viditur tribuere: Ephrem is thought to ascrybe too
much to the sign of the Cross And yet Ephrem lived within little more then
three hundre^ years after Christ. The said Cent^rists, speaking of the age of
Tertullian, (who lived not much more, then two hundred years after Christ) thus
confess: Cent. 3. col. 121.
Crucis Imaginem, seu in locis publicorum congress^um, s^u domi priuatim
Christianos habuiss^ indicare vide(...) Tertullianus: Tertullian seems to
show, that the Christians ai^ cause the sign of the Cross^ to be made in
places of public meetings, as also privately in their houses: D. Fulke,
speaking of Paulinu^ thus writes: against Heskius, Sanders, p. 657.
By the report of Paulinus the Cross was by the Bishop of Jerusalem brought
forth at Easter, to be worshipped of the People. The said Doctor thus writes
of Cy^ili and Ruffinus, saying: D. Fulk vbi supra.
Ruffinus and Cyrill had a superstitious estimation of the sign of the Cross.

Now touching more particularly the miracles wrought (in the Fathers judgments)
by the sign of the Cross, we find these confession* following.

And first, we find Osiander speaking of Julian, thus to write: Iulianus metu
perculsus, illico ex consuetudine Christianismi, (f) In Epitom. 326.
frontem cruce signat, ^ibi Damones subito disparent; Julian being stricken with
fear, according to the custom of Christians, did presently sign himself
with the sign of the Cross; and thereupon the Devils did vanish away.

M. Burges (an English Protestant) with exception only to the worshipping of
the Cross, thus writes of the Fathers in this point Extant in D. Couels
breife answer to the said M Burges.
There is nothing ascrybed to the Cross (in or out of Baptism^) by the rankest
Papists, but the Fathers are as deeply engaged in the same; so as if we will
use it, as the Fathers did etc. we take the Soul to be fenced by crossing of
the body, and the Cross to have virtue of consecrating the Sacrament, dryuing
away Devils, Witchcraft etc.

To be short, Doctor Couel, speaking of those ancient times of the primative
Fathers, thus tr^ly and ^ngenuo^sly confesses: In his answer to M. Burges.
No man can deny, but that God (after the death of his Son) manifested his
power to the amazement of the world, in this contemptible sign; as being the
instrument of many Miracles. And thus far touching the Fathers judgments of the
worship due to the Cross, and the Miracles, which God has vouchsafed to work
by it, as his instrument; an (...) all this confessed by the learned
Protestants. And with this I end; putting the Reader in mind, that when a
Cross is made in Paper, wood, or stone etc. It is made to put the behoulder in
remembrance of our Sauiours' Passion and death; And therefore that Man, who
calumniateth thereat, shows great ouerture, that he cannot willingly endure
to hear of our Saviors death and Passion: The Cross being but to the Eye, as
the Words are to the ear.

In this next place, we will briefly touch praying upon beads, benediction or
blessing of Water, Sali, Aches, Candells etc. against which many Protestants do
mightily inueigh, as charging the Catholics the^rein, with Superstition;
affirming further, that the Catholics do place a kind of Divinity in these
matters. Into such strayts (we see) the Protestants are driven, that whereas
they are not able (by any forcible arguments) to overthrow the Catholic
faith in the greatest and chiefest articles, they therefore bend all their
stenght to impugn these small rytes and Ceremonies.

And first, touching praying upon beads. All Men know, it is but the
repetition of the same prayers, several times; the beads serving only but to
number or count the times.

This Custom is warranted by the ex^mple of our Savior himself, who being in
the garden, did repeat one and the same prayer, to wit, Math. cap. 26.
If it be possible, let this cup pass from me ^hree several times. Now if it
be lawful to iterate one and the same prayer thryse; it is lawful (by the
same reason) to iterate it many scores of times together. Again, if it be
lawful to repeat the Lords prayer seven times in a week (for I presume,
every Protestant will confess, he says it once a day) why then may he not
repeat the said Lords prayer, or any other good and spiritual prayer, seven
times a day: and if seven times, why not then any greater number of times?
Again, once granting the prayer to be good; the goodness of the Prayer (by
force of all reason) does warrant the often repetition of it.

The precise number or times of repeating one and the same prayer (among
Catholics) has a mystical reference, either to the number of David's Psalms;
or to the number of the years, that our blessed Lady lived hear upon earth:
or to the number of our Saviors wounds; or to the number of the Persons in the
most blessed Trinity: Or to some other such Mystery.

The Antiquity of praying upon Beads, is confested by the Cent. 4. col. 1329.
Centurists and by Epito^. Cent. 4. page 454.
Osiander, to have been twellue hundred years since. In like sort, the
antiquity is recorded by Hist. l. 6. cap. 29.
Zozomene, who says, that Paul (the Monk) was accustomed to pray by counting
the number of little stones, in time of repeating his prayers; Which is all one
as to pray upon beads. The words of Zozomene are these: Indi^s singulos
trecentas orationes Deo, velut tributum quoddam, reddidit: ac neper
imprudentiam in numero errant, tr^centis lappillis in sinum contectis, ad
singulas preces, singulos inde e^ecit lapillos: consumptis igitur lapillis,
constabit sibi orationes (lapillis numero pares) abs se explectos esse. And
thus much touching praying upon Beads.

We will next de^^ende to the consecrating or blessing of Creaturs (used in the
Catholic Church) the lawfulnes whereof is warranted by the example of Christ
himself; Math. 14. Luke 9.
Who intending to multiplye the breads, did look up toward Heaven and blessed
the breads; and from that blessing of his did multiplye them. But certain it
is, that what our Savior did, is free from all reprehension.

Again, does not the Apostle say: That 1. Tim. 4
every Creature is sanctified by the Word and prayer

The Antiquity of Hollowing or blessing Creatures (and particularly of holy
water) is very great. For Lib. 8. Apost. co^ stit. c. 35
Clemens, De Eccles. Hierarch. c. de Baptismo.
Dionysius (both who lived in the Apostles times) Catech. 3.
Cirill, Lib. 1. epist 12.
Cyprian, Lib 4. de Sacram. cap. 5.
Ambrose, Lib. 16. in ^ul^anu^ c 8. sermon. 19 de Sauctis.
Austin, and others co make frequent mention of Holy Water, and the religious
use thereof. And hence it is, that the Cent. 3. col. 28. and 148.
Centurists do charge the Fathers (living in the third age after Christ) with
superstition in blessing and hollowing of water; among which Fathers S. Cypr.
lib. 1. epist. 12.
Cyprian, thus says: Oportet mandari and sanctificari prius aquat a Sacerdote.

Benediction of Oil is mentioned and approved by Clemens, and Dionisius (in
the places above noted) by Lib. de Spirit Sa^cto. c. 27.
Basil, Austin, Tract. 11. in Ioannem.
Cyprian, who thus expressly Lib. 1. epist. 12.
says: Olium in Altari Sanctificatur by the Council of Can. 48.
Leodice, by the second Council of Can. 3.
Carthage, by the third Council of Can. 36.
Carthage, by the first Council of Can. 20.
Tole^^: Finally (to omit the testimonies hereof of other Counsels, and vz.
Damasu, epist. de Corepiscopis. Leo epist. 88. ad Episcopos Germaniae and
Galliae.
ancient Fathers) the antiquity of Hollowing of Oil (and that particularly by
a Bishop (is acknowledged by the Cent. 3. col. 143. and Cent. 4. col. 865.
Centurists, and by In Exa^. part. 2. p. 58.
Cempin(...)s.

Benediction of breads (and this besides the ^se thereof in the consecration of
the Sacrament,) is proved from the authority of S. De peccat. merit l. 2. e. 26.
Austin, S. Epist. ad Alipiu^ and Romanianum inter epist. Augustini.
Paulinus, and S. In vita Hilarionis, post med.
Jerome; the words of which last Father are these: Coneurrebant Episcopi,
Presbiteri etc. vulgus ignobile, potentes viri and Iudices, vt benedictum ab eo
panem vel ^leum acciperent. This point of the benediction of bread is so
evident to have been practiced in those ancient times, that D. against
Heskins, Sanders etc. page 377.
Fulke thus speaks thereof: It was a superstitious bread given (in S. Austins
time) to those, that were Catechumeni, in steed of the Sacrament. And Philip
Mornay in like sort thus charge the Liturgy of S. Basil: It In his book of
the Mass. page 51.
allows holy bread to be distributed, after Service to such, as had not
communicated.

Benediction of Candells is acknowledged by the fourth Council Can (...).
of T(...)ledo, by Pope In Po^tifical.
Zozimus, S Lib. (...). epist. 28.
Gregory, In benedict. Caerei Paschal.
Prudentius, and Cap. 30.
Strabo: and according hearto the Centurists Cent. 5. col. 744.
do confess the antiquity of this Ceremony to be great: and withal do
further confess, that Candells did burn in the Church in the day time, in
Constantyns days: thus writing hereof: Cent. 4. col. 497.
Accensiones candel^rum interdiu in templis Constantinus instituit; The proof
of which custom is further evident, out of the fourth Council of Can. 6.
Carthage, Hist. lib. 6. cap. 8.
Eusebius, and Contra Vigilant. cap. 3.
Jerome.

The benediction of Palms and Ashes is proved from the authority of S. In
homil. de die Cinerem and Dominica Palmarum.
Maximus. Now to reject the authorityes of all the former Fathers, touching the
benediction of Creatures, is to charge the Primative Church with superstition
and error: Which no Man either of humility, Charity, or learning, will do. Ad
herto, that the Protestants themselfs do practice this consecration of
Creaturs: For they do consecrate their new builded Colleges, and Ch(...)ches,
or Chappells: yea (which is most ridiculou.) It has been observed of late,
that in some places of England. If a Catholic has been buried in a Church
(^otwithstanding the Church was first builded by Gotholicks) the Church (as
supposed, to be propha^ed by the dead body of the Catholic) has been by it
Person and Ministers of new consectated and hollowed. Spectatam admissi
^isumteneatis.

Now in this next place we will show the end, why Creatures are blessed, by the
prayers of the Church. Which end is threefould. First to signify spiritual
effects: Thus the sprinkling of Ashes signifies penance: Palms signify
victory: the Paschal Candell betokens the glory of these Resurrection And
thus they are used to stirrup our devotion The second End is to take away
venial sins: of which point S. 3. part. quaes. 87. art. 3.
Thomas and In 4. S(...)nt. did. 15. quae. 2.
Dominicus a Soto, fully dispute. Now hear we are to conceive, that as the
blood of Christ does cleanse us from all sin, if so it be applied to use by
the Sacraments of Baptism and Pe^nance: so these Consecrated things and our
Lords prayer do apply his blood for the taking away of venial sin from him,
who is in state of grace. The third end is to drive away wicked spirits, and to
cure diseases, as appears from the prayers, by which they are consecrated.
Never the less we are hea^e to know, that these consecrated things do not any
work these effects, as the Sacraments (wheare no let is) do infallibly work
their effects. And the reason hear of is, because these consecrated things
have not their force from any express covenant made by God (as the acraments
have) but from the Prayers of the Church, and denotion of the parties using
them: Besides, sometimes it is not convenient, that we should be freed from
sickness or diseases, or from the molestation of the Devils.

And according hearto we find, that the Marc. 4.
Apostles did use to annoint the sick with oil, and they were cured. In like
sort. Haeres. 30.
Epiphanius relates, how Joseph by holy water, did dissolve inca^tation and
Magic. And Lib. 5. cap. 21.
Theodoret records the same of Marcellus Apameensis; and Cap. 19.
Palladius of Macharius.

Again S. Jerome testifyeth, that S. Hilarion did cure diverse diseased Persons
with holy bread and holy oil. The like did S. In vita cius l. 3. c. 5.
Bernard. S. Lib. Dialog. c. 10.
Gregory witnesses that one S. Fortunatus did cure one of a broken thigh, only
by sprinkling holy water upon it, and his own prayers. Finally In vita
Malachiae.
S. Bernard affirms, that S. Malachius did cure one, that was ph^anticke, by
the means of Holy Water. Now these Examples do show, that it is not
Negro(...)cy (as the Protestants sometimes do term it) to seek to produce
(with the help of prayers) supernatural effect, by applying of holy water or
holy oil.

That the Church of God has authority to bless Creaturs for the former ends,
(and for the furtherance of Denotien) is proved from her greater authority,
practiced in changing the Saboath day, from Saturday to Sunday; And now it
being thus changed, is (...)erable. So teaches D. Whitguift in his defense
page 89. D. Willet in Synops. p. 382. Cartwright, vbi Whitguift supra.
Which point by the confession of learned D. Whit^uift in his defense p. 88. D.
Fulke in reuelat. 1. Bullenger in his Decad, englished. Decad. 2. sermon. 4.
Protestants, was wrought by the sole authority of the Church; and is not
warranted by any text or passage of Scripture.

Now thus far of all these former points. And here I am to end; aduertizing
the Protestant Reader, that what is here set down, contaynes (for greater
breuity) but short discourses of the said controuersyes here handled; and
assuring him, that scarce the fifth part of the prooff, and authorities, drawn
from Gods holy Word, from the testimonies of the Fathers, from the practice of
Gods Church, and from the confession even of our Adversaries are here
alleged, which might be produced, in warrant of the said Catholics doctrines.
And therefore I refer the Reader (these be(...)uen, but for some delibation
and taste aforehand) for his greater satisfaction, to the many learned
Catholic Treati^es, written upon the said subjects.

L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Michaeas. What do you reply hereto? Are these discourses of
your own framing? Again; If they be, how can you then free your self from
that infinite Wrong, which you (being a stranger) offer to our state, in
seeking thus by supplanting the Gospel, to plant your own false Religion?
And lastly, what were the Motyues, inducing you rather to diuulge these
particular doctrines, then diverse others of greater weight and consequence,
which are still in Question between you and us? Belike there was some reason
or this your election and choice.


MICHAEAS. My very good Lord. I will answer you to all your demands; And
herein my Tongue shall be a true Interpreter of my Heart. First, concerning the
Author. I do here freely grant, I was the Man, who penned them; who taugh
them: and who through Gods grace and assistance, will be ready to seal the truth
of them (if need should so require) with my blood. Concerning the choice made
of these Controuersyes, among many others of as great, or greater importance,
now ventilated between the Catholics and the Protestants. Your Lordship may
be aduertized, that the true reason was; because I do find by experience, that
the common and ignorant Protestant of meaner conceate, and whose understanding
is usually immersed in sense, seems to take more exception at these
Catholic doctrines, then at others, here not discoursed off. The cause
hereof I take to be, in that most of these consist in practice (and
consequently, are daily subject to the outward sense) Whereas those other, for
the chief part, do lie inspeculation; and thereby are further removed from
the apprehension of the vnlgar; whose understandings herein are commonly like
to boisterous Instruments, vnportionable and insutable to work upon any fine
and curions matter. For I grant, that though they were principally written for
foam students of the university of good talents; yet secondarily my intention
was, the instructing of the unlearned Protestant, in the said Catholic
doctrines. That they are here handled so briefly, is in regard of the
multiplicity of the Questions: each of which, if it were at large disputed off,
would require no small Treatise; And therefore I have rather undertaken to set
down (besides some few prooffs of them) the true state of every such
Catholic point (so to vindicate is from the foul mistaking of the Adversary)
then in the fullest manner by authorities, to confirm and fortify them.


LORD CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Well touching these two former points, you have answered
(and in part sat s^yed) me. But what say you to the injury by you wrought, not
only against the university; but even against the whole state? Which cannot by
our own stat^ts and Decrees, brook such tumultuous proceedings in any Man,
much less in forayners; as to labor to disioynt the beautiful (...) me of
that Religion, which the whole Realm for these many years, has so peaceably
enjoyed.


MICHAEAS. Most Reverend ludge. Give me leave without offense, to use the words
only al(...)uely, not comparatively* of that great Apostle; who like my self,
was once a Jew, but after a Christian: Neither Act. 2^.
against the Law, nor against the temple of God, nor against Caeser, have I any
thing offended.

It is true, And this I confess with comfort (for discomfort is the ordinary
attendant of a faulty guiltines, that I much labored (and to that end chiefly
penned these short Discourses) to dissem(...)ate the true faith of these points
in the minds of the Scholars of my acquaintance; And why might I not? Since
the value of an a(...)yleable faith is so great, as that without it no man;
with it all men may stand grateful in Gods eye: Sine Hebr. 11.
fide impossible est placere Deo.

Consider my L. the price but of one Soul, which our Savior has ransomed out
of the Devils hands, with so high a reate: (humiliauit Philip. 2.
semetipsum, factus obediens vsque ad mortem; mortem autem crucis) And then
think, what grief it were, that this Soul through want of true faith, should
return to it former thraldom. Alas my L. Is(...) not great pitye, to see
diverse young students of elevated Wits and apprehencsions, either to receive
their Religion (which they believe to be true) from the bare affiance and trust
of their Readers and Masters, without any further examining or trial of it;
Or else little to pryze any Religion at all? And thus in this later manner, this
poor Materia Prima being Forml^sse, is ready indifferently and without choice,
to entertayne the impression of any Religion. Now is it not great pitye (I say)
to suffer these Souls to perish eternally, as not having an articulate and
perfect Christian faith? Which faith ought so to be qualified; seeing it
avails little to believe in Christ, except we believe truly in Christ: For
though faith be hear to be required; yet a false faith is as prejudicial, as a
meare Misbeleiffe: So light is more necessary to the eye, then darkness; yet not
being well proportioned, is more dangerous to the eye, then darkness. And indeed
(my L.) I must confess, that I do more fully glass their danger in my own
former want of faith, when I continued a lew; And am in this respect more ready
to imparte the benefit of that to others, of which my self have already so
fully tasted.

Now for this my attempt (my self being an Alien) I must shroud it under the
wings of the like atte^mpts of S. Peter, and other the Apostles; who were not
afraid to go (by our Lords commandment) into strange Countries, to preach and
teach the faith of Christ: Marc. 16.
Euntes in mundum vniuersum, praedicate Euangelium omni Creaturae.

And my good Lord: I must therefore further say, that though a Zeraphicall and
burning zeal in this kind, may in an humane eye, seem to be but a kind of
madness; And that high Virtues of this Nature (through want of due
consideration) do rather offend, then please; yet since the Apostles did first
tract this unusual path, their example has more emboldned me to tread herein
their stepps.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Good God. See unto what an assent of impiety Man's nature is
arrived. I mean here, not only to do evil, but to make the Holy Apostles
patrons of the said evil. No Michaeas: As soon may the Idol Dagon stand by
the Arc, as your pernicious Machinations bear affinity with the actions of
the Apostles. You preach not Christ, but Antichrist; and you must remember,
that Christ himself said: Who Math. 12.
gathers not with me, scatereth.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour, I see, you much labor to have the advantage of
the day against me: so willing you are, that I should lie prostrate with the
basest shame. Yet my comfort is that Innocence (though oppressed) still
continues Innocence. But to come to the point. What have I done, which the
glorious Apostles may not seem to have done? They went into forayne
Countries, without any peculiar license of the Princes of them, to preach the
Gospel of Christ: I hear (being a stranger) have adventured to initiate some
students in the faith of Rome, which is the sole true faith of Christ. They
preached peaceably without raising of tumults, or teaching disobedience against
the Prince of the Country: I did yet never intimate in my words or actions the
least spote of disobedience, against the supreme Magistrate; since I hold it a
mighty error, to seek ^o order things by disorderly courses. They most
happily pulled thousands of Souls out of the jaws of the Devil: I do
confess, my sole end was to do some good in that kind, if so God would
vouchsafe to bless therein my endeavors; And most joyful I should be, if
through my own labor (under Christ) I might say, but of any one straying
Soul, with the good Father in the Gospel: This Luke. 15.
my son was dead, but is reuyued; was lost, and is found.

Briefly, the^ for such their accheiuements, finished their days in most
bl^ssed Martyrdomes: O that might be so happy, as to ^ede^me ^y maninfold (...)
with so glorious a death: so true is that sentence; The blood of Martirs is the
key of Paradise.

Here now my good L. If you condemn me, how can you free them? Therefore
either absolve me with them, or accuse them with me: Since all of us be either
guilty, or all Innocent. If guilty; I glory to have such Precedents of this my
imaginary Crime; If innocent; Why then do I stand at this woeful bar of
Justice, pleading (if not for life, at least) for Liberty?


LORD-CHEIFE JUSTICE. Although these your molitions and endeauours [Mich^as]
may seem to proceed from a fervor and zeal; Yet I fear, this your zeal is
branded with those words of S. Paul: Romans 10.
Aemulationem Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam. Since diverse Men have
certain impetuosityes and violent straynes of Nature, which (because in their
own private conceats, they mean well) they fear not to guild over with the
fair title of Christian zeal. Again [Mich^as] wheare you seek to sheyld
your attempts, under the example of the Apostles, your mistaking hear is over
gross: since they preached the incontaminated and vnspoted faith of Christ;
and wear therefore not only excusable, but even warranted by the Holy Ghost;
Whereas you do teach a religion, mixted with diverse errors, and humane
Inventions; and therefore far different from that, first planted by the
Apostles.


MICHAEAS. My Lord. What colors soever of disgrace and contumely may (in an
other Man's eye) be laid upon these my actions; yet to my self I am best
privy, that they proceeded from my sole desire of advancing the faith of
Christ, and from the bent of a strong affection, and love toward him: Amor
Austia.
meus, pondus meum; illo feror, quocunque feror. Which love and promptitude
ought to be so intense and vehement, as that indeed it cannot transgress any
bounds, within which it may seem to be limited. And therefore I hear hold it
an extreme, to seek in these actions to avoid the Extreme; where the Excess
(if any such can be) puts on the nature of the Mean. O my Lord, when the
Apostle did write those fiery words: 2. Timoth. 4.
Praedica Verbum, insta oportune, importune: argue, obsecra, increpa etc. No
doubt he taught us thereby, that in the preaching of the true Christian faith,
we should perform it with all improperation, speedines, and alacrity; not
loosing the time in any ceremonious delays. Now my Lord, where you say, that
the faith taught by me, is different from the faith first planted by the
Apostles; I hereto answer (though most briefly, since this time is not capable
of any long Discourse:) If that Christian Religion, wherewith Rome was first
cultiuated and tilled by the labors of the Apostles, did never since that time
to this day, suffer the least change in any dogmaticall and material point;
Then follows it ineuitably, that our present Catholic Religion is the same,
which was preached by the Apostles; and consequently, that I (contrary to your
L. supposall) do here instruct the Academians in the same faith and Religion,
which first flourished in those primative times. Now that never any change was
made at Rome in points of faith and Religion, your Lordship may be fully
satisfied, by perusing the former Dialogue, between the Honorable Cardinal
and Doctor Whitakers.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. My Lord. Michaeas will tire you with his wearisome speeches,
and (if you would suffer him) will perorate whole days together; for he has
a peculiar delivery of himself in seeking to decline his accusations, by
framing his tedious discourses, touching the supposed honor of his own
Religion; wholly impertinent to that, for which he now stands arraigned.
Therefore to cut off all such exhorbitancyes of speeches, I now in your L.
presence (to the greater accumulation of his former crimes) do in this last
place, accuse him of being a Popish Priest: a pernicious state of Men, and
such, as your Lordship well knows, is incompatible with the Laws of our
Realm. Thus we may observe, how the ouershadowing Providence of God has
disposed in these matters, that if (by supposall) his former faults might pass
uncorrected, yet this last breaks through the bounds of all Commiseration and
Pity.

Therefore your L. may do well to examyne him strictly hereof, and cause him to
answer without any reserved sense of equivocation; the peculiar Dialect of the
Papists in like cases.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Perceive you not here Michaeas, how in your accusation one
crime is ever at the back of an other; like waves following one another, till
they all ouerflow and ouerwhelme you? You are here lastly accused to be one of
that state of Men (I mean, a Romish Priest) which are insufferable in our
Nation; and whom (as guilty of many foul transgressions) our Laws do most
severely punish: Tell me therefore directly, whether you be a Priest, or no.


MICHAEAS. Sweet Jesus, what sallyes of Malice has your tongue [M.
Vice-Chancelour] made in this your long Process of my accusation? First by
charging me with real disobedience to the supreme Magistrate, then with
penning the foresaid Catholic Treatises; and now (for the close of all) with
being a Priest: Where I see, howsoever my cause be good, yet I must be reputed
Evil. But leaving that, and to answer to my Lords last Question. Since then I
am demanded thereof, I will not conceal my greatest honor. I grant, I am a
Catholic and Roman Priest, created by the reverend hand of the most
illustrious and learned Bellarmine. But is the very name of a Priest (though
otherwise, not to be charged with any fault) so distasteful in this place? Or
shall it be at any time here asked, Cur de solo nomine punitis facta? (c)
Tertul. aduers. Gentes.


Your Lordshipps judgment (no dowbt) would hearein be altered, if so you would
vouchsafe to take into your Consideration, the antiquity of the holy Order of
Pryesthood. since our Savior himself was the first Priest in the time of
Grace; typically adumbrated by that of Melchisadech: Tu Psalm. 109.
es Sacerdos socundum ordinem Melchisadech; Of which point the goldentonged
Father thus writes: Videns Chrysostom. homil. 35. in Genes.
typum, cogita (oro) veritatem: Thus Christ was the supreme Priest; Man, but
the Ministerial Priest. O how reverently do the ancient Fathers speak of
Priesthood? Nazianzene terms a Priest, the Mediator between God and Man.
Chrysostom (h) Epist. 8. ad Simplicium.
honored Prieshood so much, as that he did write a book, entituling it: De
Sacerdotio; among infinite other passages of which subject, he thus says: Non
Angelus, non Archangelus, non alia quaeuis creata potentia; sed ipso Paracle^us
Ordinem eiusmodi disposuit: Neither Angel, nor Archangell, nor any created
Power; but only our Advocate and Comforter (Meaning Christ) did institute this
Order of Pryesthood. Ambrose in like sort did write of this subject; styling
his Treatise: De dignitate Sacerdotale; In which book, speaking of the manner
how a Priest is created, thus writes in the first Chapter thereof: Homo
imponit manum, Deus langitur gratium; Sacerdos imponit simplicem dexteram, Deus
benedicit potenti dexiera: Man does impose the hand, but God gives the grace,
The Priest does lay his humble hand (meaning, upon him, who is to be made
Pryest) But God does bless with his pouerfull hand. Leo the first, thus
worthily writes hereof: Omnium Epist. ad Anastasium.
Sacerdotum tam excellens est electio, vt haec, quae in alijs membris Ecclesiae
vacant a culpa, in illis tamen habeantur illicita: The state of all Pryests is
so noble, as that some things theare are (meaning, mariadge of Pryests) which
being lawful in other members of the Church, are nevertheless prohibited in
them. To be short, Pac^nus thus amplifieth upon this point: Epist. 3. ad
Symphronianum.
Plebi vnde Spiritus, quam non consignat vnctus Sacerdos? How can that Society
or company of Men receive the Holy Ghost, if the anointed Priest does not
sign and bless them?

Thus far in general of the dignity of Pryesthood, which I hope in modesty,
and without the lest tuche of Vanity, I may allege; forbearinge many more
authorityes of like nature; lest my producing of them might be misconstiued (my
self being a Priest, and therefore interressed in them) by some one or other
deprauing tongue.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. What you have hear [Michaeas] alleged out of Antiquity in
honor of Priesthood, we willingly acknowledge; since it was then meant, and now
is truly applied to the Ministers of the Gospel, and others of the faithful
(in regard of the spiritual sacrifices of Prayer, daily offered up by them)
who therefore in a metaphorical and improper acceptance of the word: Pryest
(and as the phraze is,) are termed Pryests.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour You are fowly mistaken herein, and willing (it
seems) you are to vendicate to your own Ministerial function the praises due
to Priesthood. But I hope, you will stand to the judgment of S. Austin and
other Fathers herein. S. Austin then thus speaks of this point: Lib. de
ciui^. Dei 20. c. 10.
Soli Episcopi and Presbiteri proprie vocantur in Ecclesia Sacerdot s. Thus
Austin by expressly calling Bishops and Presbyters only Priests, excludes
this secondary and improper signification of the word Priest, which you seem
hear to mantayne; and which in your sense may be truly extended to Weomen, who
offer up the Sacrifice or prayer to God, as well as Men. And according hereto
it is, that Ireneus, Lib. 4. c. 20.
acknowledging with you, that in a restrained sense all just Men may be called
Priests does further teach a peculiar Pryesthood of the Apostles (different
from the former kind of Pryesthood) which (says he) daily attends upon God and
the Altar. And hence also it is, that the greek Word: (...)ereus, which
properly signifies: Sacerdos, is applied to Christian Pryests by Lib. 3. c. 32.
Eusebius, Lib. de viris illustrib.
Jerome, In epist. ad Smirnenses.
Ignatius, and finally (to omit others) by De Eccles. Hierarch. c 5.
Dionysius Areopagita. I may ad in further warrant of this Truth, that the
ancient Fathers do make frequent mention of Altars, now to be in the Church of
Christ. But the word: Altar, has even by the confession of D. In his
Conference with M. Har^. p. 55.
Raynolds a necessary and inseparable reference to the words: Pryest, and
Sacrifice, as they are taken in their proper and natural signification; since
they are Relatiues, And seeing every Altar has a relation to a true and real
Sacrifice, and to a Pryest, as the Word is properly taken, and as the said
Pryest does offer up a true and real Sacrifice. That the Fathers do often
mention Altars, now to be in the Church of Christ, you may [M. Vice-Chancelour]
peruse, De ciuitat. Dei lib. 8. c. vlt. and l. 22. c. 8.
Austin, Lib. 6. de Sacerdotio, and homil. 53. ad populu^.
Chrysostom, Lib 6. co^tra Parmen^anu^.
Optatus, Cap. 3. Eccles. Hierarch.
Dyonisius Areo pogita, and finally the Cano^. 3. and 4.
Canons of the Apostles.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Howsoever the Primative Fathers may take the word; Priest, It
is not much material to us, who here rely only upon the pure word of God,
interpreted to us by the Holy Ghost: yet sure I am, that Those Priests, (who
come into England) do arrogate unto themselves a dooble Prerogative, of which
all Antiquity was wholly ignorant. The first is, in undertaking to reconcile men
to the Pope, (our states designed enemy.) And so by this means, to alienate
them in their allegiance from their own native Prince and sovereign: The
second, in assuming to them power to offer up in the Mass, the body and blood
of Christ: Which once for all was offered up for the whole world upon the
Cross. Now both these attempts are deservedly punished by our Laws, for their
acrocityes therein committed; And to the danger (decreed against them) your
self [Michaeas] rests obnoxious; seeing you (being a Priest) have no doubt
often practiced them both, since your arrival into England.


MICHAEAS. It is wonderful to observe how Malice (taking the place of
Ignorance) seeleth up Man's judgment for I presume [M. Vice-Chancelour.] You
cannot be ignorant of the untruth of these your assertions. Therefore for the
better satisfying of you (Myreuerend Judge) whom in all reason and duty I am
bound to satisfy. You are here to know, that what M. Vice-Chancelour calls
reconciling to the Pope, is nothing else, but an incorporating of one into
Christ Church (if so before he was no member thereof) by Confession of his
sins, (accompanied with a resolution never to sin more) to a Catholic
Priest, and absolution thereof given by the said Priest; Or if he were before a
branch of the said Mystical Body, then is this M. Vice-Chancelour reconciling,
a mere penitent Confession of our sins to a Catholic Priest; attended on
with an absolution from the said sins: By force of which Sacrament, we
overcome him, who is invincible, and restrain him, who is Omnipotent.

Now hear I demand in all sincerity, how these spiritual Actions of a
penitent sinner may be reputed prejudicial to his Loyalty to his Prince? Or
what necessary reference has the one to the other? Or shall we think, that in
Catholic Cou^tryes (for the reason is the same of Catholics, living either
in Catholic or Protestante Countries) one renounceth his Loyalty to his
Prince, by recurring to this spiritual physic, for the curing of his souls
disseases? Alas (M. Vice-Chancelour) I much greiue, to see you thus drunk (as
I may say) with malice, as to forge such strange and forced interpretations of
the Priests and Catholics proceedings hearein. And I pray you, how can it be
conceived (M. Vice-Chancelour) that our prop^^quity toward God (for such a
nearnes is wrought, by a true and penitent Confession) should be presumed to
cause a greater distance of our obedience from our Prince? and that our state
of grace in the sight of God, should be censured as a state of Disloyalty in
the eye of Man? No. The case is mearly contrary to your supposall. For since
absolute Princes are the Vicegerents of God, and in that respect are termed
Gods: Psalm. 81
Ego dixi dij estis. And since we are bound to obey our Prince, even propter
Romans ^3.
conscientiam: Therefore we may truly infer, that a fearful Conscience,
loath to offend God, or through f(...)ty offending; yet willing by the
Sacrament of penance and absolu^ion to expiate it sins, is ever most ready to
perform it d(...)y ((...)en for fear of Gods displeasure) to (...)
sovereign. And that such Men, as want this ten ^ernes of conscience, ^^e
loyal subjects so long only, as their own temporal and humane respects do
comport with this their loyalty.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. You speak much [Michaeas] of your Priestly function, in
absoluing of sins, confessed. But you should prove (if you can) since it is
most material; that such Men, as were termed Priests in the Primative Church,
did hear the confessions of other Men's sins, and did give absolution of
them, so confessed. And if you cannot make this good, from the Precedents of
those firster and purer times; we must then rest assured, that this your
assumed authority, is but a mere Innovation, engendered between the pride of
the Priest (taking upon him Gods person herein for we read: Quis potest
dimittere peccata, nisi solus Deus? Marc. 2.) and the scrupulous superstition
of the confessed Penitent.


MICHAEAS. It is true, that only God originally, primatiuely, and immediately
remitteth sin; and in this sense the Scripture speaks of only God remitting
of sin; yet is his divine Majesty pleased to use Man, as his instrument
therein, according to those words of our Savior to the Apostles: John. 20.
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven; and whos^ sins you shall
retain, they are retained. From which passage we further infer, that seeing
some sins are to be retayne^, and not remitted; it follows inauoydably,
that we are obliged particularly and distinctly to confess our sins to the
Priest. For how can the Priest know, what sins are to be retained, and what
sins to be remitted, except he know, which the sins be in particular? Ad
heereto, that if God vouchsafest to use Water (a creature much more base, then
Man) as his instrument, for the taking away of Original sin; then much more
may Man, as his instrument, and receiving his authority herein from the words
of Christ, and from his Passion (which give force and efficacy to ^ich
Sacrament, now in the time of grace) practice without sacrilege the same
authority.

that the ancient Fathers of the Primative Church (contrary to your former
bold assertion, M. Vice-Chancelour) did concordantly teach and practice our
Catholic doctrine herein, is most evident. I will not ouerwhelme you with
multitude of their testimonies (though all of them are most luxuriant in such
their sentences) therefore th^^e or four of them, and such as are most
ancient, shall serve. Here then first, I will produce the words of Saint
Basil, thus writing: In quaestionib. breu(...)b. interiogat. 288.
Necessario peccata ijs apperiri debent, quibus credita est dispensatio
mysteriorum Dei* si quidem rationem hanc in paerite^^ia etiam veteres illos
^ernimus secutos fuisse. Our sins ought of necessity to be revealed to them,
to whom is committed the dispensing and distribution of the mysteries of God;
And th^s^ ou se in Penance we do find, that the ancient Christians did
follow. Thus we see, that this authority and words of Saint Basil simply a
necessity of confession of our sins to the Priest; and consequently a
particular relation of them. Saint Leo thus conspireth with Saint Basil: Cum
Epist. 88 ad Episcopos Ca^paniae.
reatus conscientiarum sufficiat solis Sacerdotibus iudicari confessione
s^creta etc. Seeing it is sufficient; that the guiltines of our consciences be
made known only to Priests, in secret confession etc. where you may see, that
confession of sins in those days was made secret, and only unto Priests.
Saint Austin thus agrees with the former Fathers: Non solum Lib. homil. l
homil. 41.
post paenitentiam etc. Not only after Penance is prescribed, a Man ought to
keep himself from those vices; but also before penance, whiles he is sound;
who if he should defer it all his last end, Nescit, si ipsam p^nitentiam
accipere, and De^, and Sacerdoti peccata sua confiteri poterit; He knows not;
whether he shall have power to receive his penance, and to confess his sins
to God, and to a Priest.

S. Cyprian thus writes of this point: Sermon. 5 de lapsis.
quanto fide maiore and timore meliore sunt, qui quantum^^uis nullo sacrifi^ij
aut libelli faci^ore constricti; quontam tomen de hoc vel cogitauerunt, hoc
ipsum apud Sacerdotes Dei volenter and simpliciter confidentes, exomologesni
conscientiae faciunt; animi pondus expenum, salut^rem meaelam paruis licet and
modicis vulneribus exquirunt? How much more greater faith and better fear have
they, who though they be not guilty of any crime touching Sacrifice, or giving
up a Libel; yet because they had such a conceate or thought, they do with
greiffe and simplicity confess this to Priests etc. Thus do they disburden
their consciences, and seek to apply a healthful remedy to their small
wounds? Now here by the words: Sacrifice, and Libel, are to be understood,
sacrifizing to Idols in the times of the Heathen Emperors, and giving up
their names in a book, that they were content to sacrifize.

To be short, Tertullian thus says of this custom of confessing our sins to
a Priest. Plerosque hoc opus aut subfugere, aut (h) Lib. de Penite^tia.
de die in diem differie presumo, pudor^^ magis memores, quam salutis; velut
illi, qui in partibus verecundieribus corporis, contracta vaxatione, scientiam
Medentium vitant, and ita cum e^^bescentia sua pereunt: I do presume, that
diverse do either anoyd this work (meaning of confessine their sins) or do
defer (...) from day to day; being more mindful of their shame, then of
their health: They being herein like to those Men, who having some dis^^se in
their more secret parts of their body, do flee the cure of Physicians; and so
they perish through their own shame. Thus Tertullian, from whose testimony is
necessarily euicted particular confession of our private sins, even according
to the nature of his similitude here used.

This point of the ancient Fathers judgment touching confession of our
particular sins to a Priest, is so dear and manifest, that the Centurists
discoursing of the use thereof, in those former times, thus plainly
acknowledge: Cent. 3. cap 6. col. 127.
Si quis paenitentiam agebant peccatum prius confirebantur. ac enim
confessionem magnopere Tertullianus vrget in libro de P^nitentia; and
institutem fuisse priuatam Confessionem, qua delicta and cogitata praua
confessisunt, ex aliquot Cypriani locis apparet. etc. If any in those times did
penance; they did first confess there sinn^e: for thus does Tertullian
mightily urge Confession in his book de Paenitentia: And that private
Confession was then in use, by the which sins and even wicked thoughts were
confessed, appears from certain places of Cyprian; to wit, out of his fifth
sermon de Lapsis, and lib. 3. Epist. epist. 14. and 16. Thus far the
Centurists (all eminent Protestants) who (we see) do grant, that in those
times, even private thoughts (much more particular actu^ll sins) were
accustomed to be confessed. Which Centurists do further witness, that the
Priest did in those times, absolve the penitent (besides by pronouncing the
words of Absolution) with the Ceremony Cent. 3. col. 127.
of imposing her hand: a ceremony, which at this very day, is used by the
Priests. And thus (My Honorable Lord, and you M. Vice-Chancelour) you both may
from hence perceive, how near to the Apostles days Confession of particular
sins (even by the acknowledgment of the Protestants) was usually practiced:
Which point being granted, it must by force of all Reason follow, that Christ
did first institute this Sacrament of Confession, and the Apostles did first
exercize their authority therein, given to them by Christ. Since otherwise it
cannot probably be conceived, that a dogmaticall point of faith and Religion,
so cross and repugnant to Man's nature (as Confession is, could in so short a
time, invade the whole Church of God, without any contradiction or resistance.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. Michaeas, you have spoken much in warrant of Confession and
Asolution, given by the Pryest. But the question (in regard of your former
alleged authorityes) is not so much, whether Confession of particular sins
was generally taught by those ancient Fathers; as whether they had just reason
and warrant so to teach? But I will pass no censure of them, touching this
point. But [Michaeas] what do you say to that assumed authority and privilege,
which you Pryests vendicate to yourselfes, in the sacrifice of the Mass?
Wheare you bease the people in hand, that you sacrifize and offer up the true
and natural body and blood of Christ to his Father. I am assured, that the
ancient Church of God cannot affoard you any example hereof; And the rather,
since it is manifest, that the doctrine of Transubstantiation (upon which your
doctrine of sacrifice is grounded) was first brought into the Church, at the
Council of Lateran by Innocentius the third; Which Council was houlden anno
^215. And therefore it was celebrated many hundred years, after the Period of
the Primative Church.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour The sequ^le will show of what Antiquity the
doctrine is conce^ning the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. Which is
daily offered up by the Priest. But first, I will take away your stumbling
block, touching the name of Transubstantiation, imposed by the Council of
Lateran. For the better remouall whereof, you are to conceive, that the
doctrine of the re^ll being of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the
(...), and Sacrifice of the Mass was taught, in all the precedentages; though
the word: Transubstantiation, (for the better explicating of the doctrine, was
then (and not before) invented: Even as the doctrine of the Trinity, was eue^
in the first infancy of the Church generally believed; yet the word; Trinity,
was first imposed upon the doctrine, by Council of Nice.

But to proceed further, touching the Antiquity of the doctrine of the
sacrifice of the Mass. We first answer herto, that it received it first
institution and beginning, even from the night before, the Creator of all
flesh did suffer in flesh. For our Savior being at his last suffer, did then
first institute it, when ^e delivered to his Apostles his own body and blood,
saying: This is my body. This is my Blood etc. With reference to which
institution, the Apostle calls the table (upon which this sacrifice is made,
Heb^ 13.
(...) to wit an Altar, being derived of the verb. (...) signifying: Sacrifice.
But let us see in what dialect Antiquity speaks hereof. Some few places
(among infinite) I will hear select: first then we find S Austin thus to say:
Quid Lib. 4. de Trinitate c. 1^.
gratius osserria^t s^scipi possit, quam c^r^ sacrificij nostri corpus effectum
Sacerdotis nostri? What can be offered up, or accepted more thankfully, then
the flesh of our sacrifi^ being made the body of our Priest? Chrysostom thus
writes: Per Lib. 6. de Sacerdotio.
id tempus and Angeli Sacerdoti assident etc. At that time the Angels draw
near unto the Pryest, and the whole order of the heavenly Powers causes
great voices, and the place near unto the Al^^r is full of q^ears of Angels
(in illius honorem, qui in^molatur) by reason of the honor of him, who is
theare (...)d or offered up; which thing we may fully believe, (vel extanto
illi sacrificio, quod iunc peragitur) in regard of so great a sacrifice then
performed Gregory Nyssene: Dominus Orat. de resur^e and.
praeoccupans impetum iudeorum etc. Our Lord preventing the violence of the
Jews, being both Priest and Lamb, made himself a sacrifice. But thou
demandest of me when this did happen? Even then, when he gave to his disciples
his body to eat, and his blood to drink.

Optatus Miliuitanus thus discourses: Quid est tam sacrilegum, quam altaria
^ei, in quibus aliquando nos obtulistis, (o) Lib. 6. co^tra Parmenianu^.
frangere, radre, and (...)e? in quibus vot a Populi, and membra Christi
partata s^ni etc What is so sacrilegious, as to break, or scrape, or to remove
and take away the Alt^^s of God? upon which your selfs somtymes have offered;
in the which the vows of the People, and the members of Christ are borne. And
further the said Father: Quid Optatus v^^ supra.
est altari nisi sides corporis and sanguints Christi? What is the Altar, but
the seat of the body and blood of Christ?

S. Ambrose: Etsi in psalm. 38.
nunc Christus non videatur offerre: ipse tamen ^ffertur in terris, cum corpus
eius offertur. And again: Cum In c. (...). Lucae.
Sacrisicamus, Christus est presens, Christus immolatur: When we do sacrifize,
Christ is present, Christ is sacrifized or immolated.

Ephrem: Quid De Natura Dei min(...) scrutanda cap. 5.
scrutaris inscrutabilia etc: Why dos^ thou search into things, not to be
searched after etc. Be thou faithful and innocent, and participate thou of the
immaculate body of thy Lord, with a most full faith: being assured, that thou
do eat the whole Lamb.

Cyprian: Caena Sermon de caena Domini.
disposita inter Sacramentales epu^as etc. The supper being prepared, the
ancient and new Institutions did meet together among the Sacramental (...)
eats; And the Lamb, which ancient Tradition did set upon the table, being
cons^med, the Master does give to his Disciples an inconsumption meat.

Tertulian Lib. de pae^iten^a.
and Dionisius Cap. 3. Eccles. Hierarch.
make frequent mention of Altars, and consequently of Sacrifice:

To conclude this passage (as avoiding prolexity) Eyppolitus Martyr introduces
Christ speaking to Bishops and Pryests in these words: Orat. de An^christo.
Venite Pontifices and Sacerdotes, qui praeciosum corpus and sanguinem meum
quo^die immolastis: Come hither, you^ h^^fe Pryests and other Pryests, who have
daily immoluted and offered up my precious body and blood.

Now (M. Vice Chancelour) in regard of the perspic^ity of these sentences of the
former Fathers, and of diverse others such authorityes of the said and other
^athers of the Primative Church (hear through br(...)y prete^nitted) It is the
less wonder, that your own learned Protestants do ingenuously confess the
truth of those Fathers judgments hearin. For (to omit, that the Cent. 4. c. 4.
col. 295.
Centurists do particularly charge S. Ambrose, with this very phraze: Massam
(...)ere, used by us Pryests at this very day) do we not fine Calumn himself
thus to acknoledge of them in general? Lib. 4. Instit c. 18. sect. 12.
Veteres illos video etc. I do see, that those ancient Fathers did wrest the
memory of the Lords supper otherwise, then was agreeing to the institution of
the Lord. Since the Fathers supper did bear the show and resemblance of a
renewed Oblation etc they imitating more nearely the (...) manner of
sacrificing, then either Christ did ordain, or the nature of the Gospel would
suffer. And hereupon it is, that Calvin in an other place, thus charge the
Fathers: In omnibus Pauli Epist. in Hebr. c. 7.
The Fathers did adulterate the supper of the Lord, by adding of Sacrifice unto
it. Neither can these words of Calvin be restrained to those Fathers only, who
lived either in the midest, or toward the end of the Primative Church: First
because they are delivered (without exception) of the Fathers in general;
Secondly, by reason that other learned Protestants do charge the Fathers (some
of them living immediately after the Apostles; others (...)g even in the days
of the Apostles) with the said doctrine of sacrifice. Thus (consorting hearto)
we find Sebastianus Francus (an eminent Protestant) to use these words: In
epist. de a^rogandis in vniuersum omnebus statut. Ecclesiast
Statim post Apostolos, omnia inuersa sunt etc. Presently after the Apostles
departure, all things were inuerted etc. Et caena Domini in sacrificium
transf^rmata est, and the supper of the Lord was changed into a sacrifice. But
Hospinian (that famous Protestant) uses higher in time, thus confessing:
Histor. Sacrament. l. 1. c. 6. p. 20.
I am tum primo illo seculo, viuentibus adhuc Apostolts etc. Even in the very
first age (the Apostles yet living) the devil labored to seduce Men more about
this Sacrament (meaning, touching the ^athers supposed adding of sacrifice to
the Sacrament of the Eucharist) Then about Baptism, withdrawing Men from the
first former thereof. Thus far of the Fathers clear sentences, and of the
learned Protestants confessing no less, touching the doctrine of Sacrifice.


VICEC-HANCELOVR. It l^tle preiudizeth us [Michaas] who profess the Gospel
though the Fathers did teach the doctrine of the sacrifice of the Mass. For
seeing it is granted, (both by us and you Papists) that diverse Fathers erred in
other paticular points, why might they not alyke err in the doctrine of the
Sacrifice? And seeing we are not obliged to embrace their other acknowledged
Errors; why should we be forced to entertain this their error.


MICHAEAS O [M. Vice-Chancelour,] the difference is great, and subject (b) Vide
August. in Haeresi 43. and 46. Hieronym. in lib. contra Iouinianu^ and
Vi^ila^tium. Vide Epiphanium lib. de Haeresibus.
even to a vulgar judgment. For we grant with you, that some particular Fathers
did e(...) certain points; yet were those their errors presently condemned
and written against, by other Ortodoxall Fathers. Thus for exemple, did Austin,
Jerome, and Epiphanius write against Origin, teaching that the Devils were at
the last day to be saved; against Tertullian, denying second Mariadges; against
Cyprian, mantayning Rebaptization.

Now hear we grant, that such particular Fathers might and did errein such
particular points. But the Case (...) otherwise, When many of the chief
Pastors and Father (...) several Ages of the Primative Church do concurrently
teach a point of doctrine, as an Article of faith; And that they are not
contradicted by any other of the Fathers, for their mantayning of the said
doctrine; And in this sort is the former doctrine of the sacrifice of the
Mass, taught without any opposition at all, not only by the former alleged
Fathers, but by many others (or rather all othors) for breuiuy hear omitted.

Now in this Case [M. Vice-Chancelour] we Catholics do hold, that such their
doctrine so jointly by the Fathers taught (without any contradiction) is most
agreeable to Gods word. For seeing the Fathers of the Primative Church, were in
those days the chief Pastors of Christ's Church; If they should jointly ^rre^
in faith, then would it follow, that the whole Visible Church of God should
err: an assertion most repugnant to the promise of our Savior: Math. 16.
Super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam; Et portae Inferi non praualebant
aduersus eam) and to that honerable title given to the Church by the Apostle
styling it: 1. Tim. 3.
columna and firmamentum veritatis.

Now what reverence and respect we are to give to the Primative Church, and how
we are to conceive of the authority of it, I will (for the closure of this
passage) refer you [M. Vice-Chancelour] to the sentences of your own
Brethreh, being most learned and remarkable Protestants; and from whose
judgment therefore herein, you cannot without great branch of modesty decline.
First then we find Kempnitius thus to advance the authority of the Primative
Church: We Exame^ Council. Trident. part. 1. p. 74.
doubt not, but that the Primative Church received from the Apostles and
Apostolical Men, not only the text of the Scripture; but also the right and
native sense thereof. The confession of Bohemia thus magnifyeth the same: The
In the Harmonyes of Confess. page 400.
ancient Church is the true and best Mistres of Posterity; and going before,
leads us the way. Finally D. Jewel is no less sparing in his praises
hereof, saying: In his defense of the Apology^.
The Primative Church, which was under the Apostles and Martyrs, has e(...)r a
been accounted the purest of all others without exception. Such transcendency
of speeches (you see) your own more sober and learned Brethren are not afraid
to ascrybe, to the Fathers of those primative times.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. Michaas, I grant, you have spoken fully in defense of your
own state, and of the several offices thereof, practiced by you (...)) Act.
(...).
Priests. And though I will not say like to Agrippa: (h) A little you have
persuaded me, to become a Catholic; yet I must ingenuously acknowledge, I
never heard a cause of this Nature, with stronger and better arguments
defended; Yet for the more perfect balan^^g and weighing the force of your
authorityes (my self not being conversant in the written Monuments of the
ancient Fathers) I must remit this point, to the more mature disquisition of
our learned Deuins.


MICHAEAS. Though your Lordship will not apply to your self, the foresaid
words of Agrippa; yet I will make bold to reply to you (such is my charitable
wishing of your chiefest good) in the phraze of S. Paul to Agrippa: I Act. vbi
supra.
wish to God, both in little and much, that your L. were such as I am, except
this my wat of liberty.

But my worthy Lord. Here now begmneth the Tragedy of the disconsolate and
mournful state of Priests and Catholics in this Country. You have heard [my
L.] of the Antiquity of Priesthood; of the like antiquity of the Sacrament of
Confession and Penance; and lsstly of the antiquity of the most holy sacrifice
of the Mass. And yet notwithstanding all this, it is decreed (as your L. well
knows) by the pennall laws of this Country, that Priesthood shall be Treason;
the releiuing of any one such Priest, death to the Releiuer; Confession of our
sins to a Priest, and absolution of them, reputed to be in the Penitent a
renouncing of his Loyalty; and the hearing of Mass, attended on with a great
fine of silver. And thus by these means, every good Priest and Catholic are
(at the first sight) become Statute traitors. And indeed such is the case
here, that neither Priest nor Catholic can (with safety of conscience) give
any yielding obedience and satisfaction to the Magistrate, touching those
laws; since here not to offend, were to offend: Act. (...)
Obedire oportet Dee magis, quam hominibus.

And touching my self, and other Priests in particular; your L. is to take
notice, that (not speaking of our Blessed Savior, who was the first Priest,
nor of his Apostles, succeeding him therein) most of the ancient Fathers were
Priests, enjoying the same Priesthood, practizing the same function in hearing
of Confessions, absoluing the Penitents, and saying of Mass, which the meanest
Priest of England at this day does. Therefore your Lordship may truly suppose.
That before you at this present, stand arraigned (only for being Priests, and
exercizing that their function) S. Austin, S. Ambrose, S. Jerome, S Cyprian, S.
Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ignatius, and many more of those primative
blessed Doctors. What I am, they were: I stand but here, as their Image; and
they are personated in me. Neither can you impleade or condemn me, but that
your sentence must (through my sides) wound them: so indis^oluble an union
there is between their stares and mine; no other difference between us, but
difference of times.

But my good Lord. To pass on further to the despicable and detected state of
Lay Catholics (a theme not unseasonable at these times) I will not insist in
particularizing the pennall statuts decreed against them. Neuerthelesle my
tongue (under your L. license) can hardly pretermit one point in silence.

Among then so many Calamityes and vexations (wherewith on eich side they stand
plunged) Not any one pressure is more insufferable to them, or more opprob^^ous
in the ears of strangers (who are ready to trumpet forth the same, to the
irreparable dishonor of this noble Nation; otherwise famous throughout all
Christendom) Then to observe the houses of Catholics, to lie open to the
search of the Common and base Pusu^uants: Who under color of looking for a
Priest, do enter their houses at most unseasonable times, even by force: And
there opening their Trunks and Chests: perusing their Evidences of their
Estats: taking the Masters of the houses, bound in great sommes of money, for
their after appearance in Courts of Justice: and violently breaking down, what
may seem to withstand their present furye; do by strong hand, carry away any
gold, silver, Jewels, Plate, or any other portable thing of worth; And all
this under the pretext of them, being forfeyted through Recusancy; And the
least resistance against these men here made, is punished as an Act of
Disloyalty. Neither are any English Catholics (the Nobility excepted) free
from these Indignityes; the dead pittylesse law herein promiscuously taking
hold of all without difference. Now my Honorable Lord, Is it not a thing
deserving astonishment and amazement, to see in a most noble Country (where the
Gospel, which forbids all Rapine, is presumed to be truly preached) that
men free and not borne Bondslaues, should thus in body and state (only for
fear of offending God, and desire of saving their souls) lie prostrate, to
the depradations and robberyes of certain hungery Refuse and Outcasts of men?
who make show at least (though wrongfully) to warrant all these their pillages,
by force of the statute Law; though otherwise prohibited by all Divine and
humane Law: Thren^ (...)
Si est dolor, sicut dolor horum? And if it fortune, that any Priest be taken,
or Recusants do appear; then is the Pryest assured, and the Catholics in
danger, to be committed to a dark and loathsome prison; there to remain (the
Priest sometimes in fettars) so long, as it shall please the subordinate
Magistrate; His Majesty, who is most prove to mercy, pity, and commiseration,
being wholly ignorant of such outrages and proceedings.

But My Lord. How base so ever the Priests and Catholics of England seem to
be in the eyes of their Adversaries; yet no doubt their state is most grateful
(through this their imprisonment) in the sight of God, and honorable in the
judgment of all foraine Catholic nations; who in regard of the others
endurance, may justly apply to the said imprisoned Priests and Catholics, that
sentence of a most ancient Father: Tertul. ad Martyrs.
Carcer habet tenebras, sed lumen estis ipsi; habet vincula, sed vos soluti Deo
estis; triste illic expirat, sed vos odor estis suauitatis.


LORD CHEIFE-IVSTICE. These exorbitancyes of proceedings (Michaeas.) whereof
you speak (if any such be) the Law chastizeth, and the Offenders are
punishable; neither does the supreme Magistrate give allowance of them. Yet
hear (Michaeas) you are to remember, that though wrong be not to be
recompensed with wrong, and Cruelty, with Injustice, The times have been (I
mean, in the reign of Queen Marie) When the Professors of our Religion did
not only suffer loss of Goods, but even death itself. And therefore there
appears less reason, why you Romanists should so tragically complain at
your present afflictions: Since in so doing, you are like to those Men, who
perpe^rate impietyes, yet expostulate of Wrong.


MICHAEAS. Indeed (my Lord) I grant, that this is the vulgar recrimination,
often urged and reinforced by the Protestants, for the more depressing of our
pressures in the eye of others; yet though I will not undertake the defense of
all the procedures of those times (myself being a stranger both to the Nation,
and to the affairs of those days) Nevertheless let it not be offensive unto
you (my honerable Lord) if I unfold the reason, why such actions in that
Queens time, may stand less subject to the censure of an iniustifiable
punishment, then these in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and since. The reason
is this. In Q. Mar^es time, the Professors of any Religion, different from the
Catholic and Roman Religion, were punished by certain Canon and Imperial
Laws, made by most ancient Popes and Emperors; they not then having any
forknowledg, that Protestancy should rather sway in these days, then any other
erroneous faith. And this they did, in regard that all such different Religions
were reputed and ^oulden, as Innouations, and most repugnant to the ancient
Catholic faith. Now that Protesta^cy was to be accounted in Queens Maryes
reign a mere Innovation in faith, (as well as any other sect) appears even
from the free acknowledgment of the learned Protestants; who teach expressly,
that for these fourteen, or fyfteene hundred years, the Protestant faith
was never so much as heard or thought of, till Luthers days. I will hear
content myself (for greater breuity) with the authorityes of two or three
Protestants. Do we not then find M. Parkins thus to confess hereof? For In his
exposition of the Creed.
many hundred years, our Church was not visible to the World; an universal
Apostasy over spreading the whole face of the Earth. And does not Sebastianus
Francus (the Protestant) confess the same in these words? In epist. de
abrogandis in vniuersum omnibus statut. Ecclesiast
For certain the external Church together with the Sacramenti vanished away,
presently after the Apostles departure; and that for these fourteen hundred
years, the Church has not been external and Visible. In like sort D. Fulke,
speaking of the Protestant Church, does he not thus write? In his answer to a
Cou^terfeyte Catholic page 35
The true Church decayed immediately after the Apostles times: A verity
confessed by Luther himself, thus vaunting of his own supposed true faith:
Luth. epist. ad A^ entinens.
Christum anobis primo vulga^um audemus gloriari; We dare boast, that Christ
was first preached by us. Thus then we see, that Protestancy was punished in Q.
Maryes reign, as an Innovation in faith and religion, never before that time
dreamed of. But now the case is far otherwise, touching the afflictions laid
upon the Catholics, for professing of their faith: since they are punished by
certain Parlamental statuts only, decreed not past some threescore years
since, by the authority of a Woman Prince, against a religion which (by the
learned Adversaries like acknowledgment) has possessed all Christendom these
many hundred years; and indeed so many hundred years, as the Protestant Church
is confessed by them to have been latent and invisible; And therefore those
stat^^s were decreed not against the Catholic Religion, as against an
Innovation; but as against the (till then) only and sole Religion, professed by
all the Christians, through out the whole world. To this end we find M. Napper
(a learned Protestant) thus acknowledging In his treatise upon the Reuelat. p.
68.
Between the years of Christ 300. and 316. the Antichristian and Papisticall
reign began, reigning universally without any debatible contradiction one
thousand, two hundred, and sixty years. And as conspiring with the former
Protestant herein, the Sea of this point the Centurists, in Cent. 4. and so in
every succ^eding Century.
Centurists do even from the times of Constantyne, charge both him, and every
age and Century since, till Luthers days, with the Profession of our present
Roman Religion.

Thus now your Lordship may clearly discover the great disparity, between the
proceedings of Queen Mary, and Q. Elizabeth. Since in the former Queens time,
the Laws, wheareby Sectaries were punished for their Religion, were instituted
many hundred years since: In this later Q. reign the Statuts were first made
at the beginning of her coming to the Crown; which is yet in the memory of
eich Man, being but of reasonable great years. Those laws were enacted by
Popes and general See Council. Laodicens. can. 31. 32. 33. Council. Cartha.
canon. 16.
^ouncells (to whose charge and incumbency the burden of Religion is peculiarly
by God committed) secunded otherwise by the secular authority of L. Ariani, c.
de Haereticis. L. cuncti Haeret. L. Man^chaei
Emperors, and particularly of ((...)) Valentinian and Marcian: These were
first invented by a Woman, and a Parliament of Lay Persons: the incompetent
judges of faith and Religion. Briefly, by the former Decrees a Religion,
confessed by the chief Professors of it, to be never heard of, at lest for
fourteen hundred years together (and thearefore to be an innovation of faith
which is held by Catholics to be a destruction of faith necessary to Souls
health) is interdicted and prohibited: By these later, a Religion (confesse^ly
by it greatest Enemies) (3) Valentinian and Marcian decreed obstinate Heretics
to be punished with death of which Law see Council. Chalcedo^. Act. 1.
practiced universally throughout all Christendom, the space of the aforesaid
fourteen hundred years and by the learneder sort of Protestants granted to
be sufficient to Salvation is punished with loss of Goods and (...), in
p(...)sonment to the Professors of it, and death to the Priests and (...)ers
of them: Psalm 103.
Quantum did at Orius ab Occas^? And hear I cannot omit to rehearse, how the
said Queen Elizabeth, among other her like pious and charitable deeds (that so
theare might a sutablenes in her Actions) was not afraid (contrary to the law
of God, contrary to the law of Nation, contrary to her own solemn vow and
promise before given in that behalf, contrary to the pitiful flexure of her
own Sex; and finally contrary to all Nature, Honor, and Religion) to detayne
by force, to imprison, to be^cade, her own nearest kinswoman and immediate
Successor; A Princes, a Catholic Queen of incompatable excellencyes and
virtues; Mother (and therein the other Q. greater atrocitye) to the late
deceased King of famous Memory, and Grandmother to his Majesty; that now is.
-- Virg. Aenad.
Quis talia faud^ Myrmidonum, Dolopumue, aut ^uri milles Vlyssis, temperet a
lacrimis? Since hear this most worthy Princes descent was her only fault; her
birth, her crime; And thus did nearest in blood occasion the effusion of most
innocent blood, and proximitie in Nature produce this barbarus Act, even
loathed in Nature.

But does your Lordship think, that the other Q. then height of state and
fastigious Dignity, could be a Sanctuary (without final repentance) for such
her immanitie? o no. Sapie^t. cap. 6. vz. potentes potenter tormenta pati^ntur.
Potentes potenter etc. But I will conceal, what follows.


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. That most deplotable Act (Michaeas) by you now mentioned,
was rather to be ascrybed (perh^pps) to certain of the said Queens
Councillors of state in those days, then to the Queen herself. But since
she was a Princes of great parts and perfections, I could wish, that (as free
from ill reproach) she now being dead (through of never dying memory) might
rest in Honor, who governed with Honor.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. my L. Judge. Michaeas is come hither, not to declame thus at
large, or to make excursions of long discourse, (is hitherto he has been
permitted) but to suffer condign punishment for his former Misdemeanors: The
time is almost spent, and therefore I would entreat your Lordship, speedely to
proceed to sentence against him.


MICHAEAS. Most Excellent Judge. o let not my gray heirs become discolored
with any imaginary Crimes; nor suffer my ruinous and decayed bones to be
attended to their grave, with any iniust punishment; and therefore, Psalm.
(...).
In virtute tua iudica me. If I desearne evil, let me have my due recompense:
If I be faultles, I ought to be assoyled: It is the law, and my own demerits
(not this Man's viperous tongue) that must make me, evil.


LORD-CHEIFE JUSTICE. I will descend to your sentence [Michaeas] And first,
seeing I well obsearue, that great and vnaccustoined Examples of Justice must
ever in the eye of the multitude, be presumed to have some what of Wrong, at
least of Rigor; therefore for the better avoiding of such an aspertion; I will
call to mind of what particular offenses you hear rest accused; and will pass
my even and impartial judgment of them; not respecting, how they are amplyfied
in words, but what they desearue (ail collateral respects considered) in
themselfs: S(...)ce one and the same Action (the circumstances being v^rie^ is
with the^ also varied.

You arr hear then Michaeas arraigned (as far as my memory may seaiue to
suggest; and if I do forget any thing, I hope your charitable friend, M.
Vice-Chancelour, will be my Remembrancer) of three several Offenses.

First, of diuulging and mantayning Positions of Disloyalty of the subject,
agaiust his Prince. Secondly, of spreading short Treatises in the University,
containing diverse points of your own Romish Religion: Thirdly and lastly, of
being a Priest, and exercizing your Priestly function within this Realm.

Touching the first, I can find no prouffs against you, but only M.
Vice-Chancelour bare and naked assertion; to the which I have less reason to
give so far credit, as to ru^ish you for the same; not only, because you do
as peremptorily deny it, as he did confidently auerre it; but also in that you
made a voluntary and earnest protestation (in the name of your self, and all
other Priests and Catholics in England) of due allegiance to his Majesty: so
whereas M. Vice Chancelour did thearein speak words, you did speak matter.
Besides I should hold it no small oversight, to chastize you publykely for that
presumed fault (though most weakly proved) with the which (if your
formerrelations be therein true) our own Brethren do stand (in a far higher
degree and measure (chargeable.

Touching your Pryesthood and exercizing of it in our Country (the great
antiquity whereof, if you have truly discoursed of it, has party awakened my
Spirits) though you be much blame worthy in so doing; Yet I cannot but
confess, that our Satuts made in that business, have particular reference to
those Pryests only, which are borne in our Country, and not to Aliens or
strangers, as you give your self out to be: And therefore our Laws thearein
cannot take any full hold of you.

That third fault then it is, whereunto you lie more dangerously subject; Which
is, touching the diuulging of your Treatises, and persuading others to your
own Religion. The which, as it is prohibited by our Laws, for every urgent
reasons (as begetting turbulency in our settled and quiet State) so the
offenders thearein stand highly punishable. Nevertheless [Michaeas] since in
the whole procedure of your Arraignment, you have showed great temperance in
your deportment, and loyalty to our Sovereign; by the which we must conjecture
the integrity and candor of your Mind (for though God do judge the words by
the heart; yet Man must judge the heart by the words) since Old age, a Scholar,
and a Stranger (even in all Countries) desearue special commiseration and
pittye. Finally, since he, who through any great offense committed, is dead in
the Law, if after the rigor thereof be to him dispensed, is become the Child of
Mearcy, enjoying (as it were) a second Birth; in which kind of dispencing with
rigor, the Highest chiefly glories: Psalm. 144.
Suauis est Dominus, and miserationes eius super omnia opera eius. Therefore my
sentence shall be against you in the most gentill manner (yet with due
consideration of all circumstances) And it shall be this. You shall continue in
this Nation, as long as your self shall think good, enjoying your full
liberty of body; so that hereafter you forbear all persuading of others to
your own Religion, and do persevere in your former obedience to his Majesty,
you shall at the next Act or Commencment at Oxford, be ready there publykly (in
the eye of that University) to defend your own doctrine, mantayned in these
your written Treatises; at what time M. Vice-Chancelour here (as being a
Professed Divine) shall be in those disput^, your chiefest opponent and
Antagonist. And if any of our Doctors shall by writing impugn your said
discourses, you shall give your faithful promise, to reply thereto. And
lastly you shall pray for the welfare of his Majesty; under whose happy and
clement government, your former Transgressions are so mildly chastized.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. My Lord. I willingly accept of the Disputation; Where I doubt
not, but to lay open at full the superstition of that Man of sin. But what?
Must in the mean time, Mich^as (a member of Antichrist) be freed from
imprisonment, and pass thus unpunished? Must the Whore of Babylon be
entertained among us (in her followers) no worse, then a chaste and inte^erate
Virgin? Shall the words spoken in the Dragons voice, be so preuayling, as to
enchant the ears of the faithful with her pleasing (yet poysenous) music?
Briefly, shall Heresy, Superstition, and Idolatry (the worst of all evil)
endeavor among us (and that in our University) to take place in the Souls of
Christians, with all impunitie, and as exempt from control? If so; then come
(O Lord of heaven) hasten thy approach; Ouerrunne the earth with an
irresistible prosternation of all Creatures: and reduce all things of their
last Period and dissolution: for now it seems, the time is, that Ezech. 28.
Apoc. 20.
Gog and Magog (the forces Vide August. l. 20. de ciuitate Dei cap. 11.
of Antichrist) are let loose, to ceaze upon the faithful (without any
gainsaying or opposition) and to beget in man's soul, a giddy dissipation of
all his intellectual powers.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour: Horat.
Proijcis ampullas, and sesquipedalia verba. You mouth it over loudly, and use
very turgent and swelling words, against us poor distressed Priests and
Catholics: Whose shyeld, in the mean time is Patience: whose armor, our
Confidence in God: and whose recrimination, rests in words of myldnes and
charity: 1. Cor. 4.
Maledicimur, and benedicimus: blasphemamur, and obsecramus.

But my very good Lord. To turn my speeches unto you: Touching this your
sentence (how innocent soever I am) I do undergo it with all humblenes of
mind, and without the least reluctation: for I have red: Eccles 8.
Non iudices contra iudicem. And I embrace it the more willingly, since I hope,
that by this means, the radiant and most shyning Truth of the Catholic
Doctrine in the former discussed Points, will in the fight of so noble and
worthy an Auditory (as the famous University of Oxford is) more easily dispell
the mist of all contrary Nouelis(...)e.

Touching my Loyal duty to his Majesty, my prayer is, (and this I speak, not
in a Dialogizing and feigned manner: but plainly, sincerely, and seriously, in
the sight of God and his Angels) God pres(...)ue King Charles and his Royal
Queen, with a prosperous and blessed Domination and government over this
Nation: Grant to them the happynes, to branch themselves forth into many
dis^ente and Progenyes, from generation to generation: And finally
vouchs(...)fe (most merciful God) that the greatness of this their temporal
(...)ity may serve as a Type, or ^dumbration, to figure out their greater
eternal Beautitude in the world to come. And thus with bended knee, and heart
prostiated in all du(...)full humility, and with all remonstrance of
thankefulnes, for this your ^l(...)ency and myldnes of Judgment and sentence, I
take my last fare well with your good Lordship.


VICE-CHANCELOVR. My Lord, must your former judgment pass unaltered? and must
it not be accompained with any chastizement at all?


L. CHEIFE-IVSTICE. M. Vice-Chancelour. Content your self with my former
sentence: It shall stand: Math. 20.
an oculus ^uus nequam est, quia ego bonus sum? I hope, you will have advantage
enough against him, in your future disputation: and it is more honor for you,
to have the Victory over his Cause, then over his Person. And indeed, it is
inhumanity to depresse and weigh down a poor old Man and a stranger, with
multiplicity of miseryes: your self is a Scholar: and therefore you are the
^ore to commiserate him, being a Scholar. And so with these my last words,
both of you may depart from this bar, at your own pleasure.


VICE C-HANCELOVR. My Lord. Since such is your resolution, I must rest
satisfied therewith: and so I take my humble leave of your Lordship.

As for you [Michaeas.] I will not take any formal farewell with you: because
I hope according to my L. sentence delivered, I shall meet with you in our
University this next Commencement: at what time, I will anatomize and dissect
that Wh(...)re if Bab(...)lon, and strike her in her Master vey^e: and will
(to your irreperable disgrace) display the falsehood and absurdities of all your
former dispersed Popish doctryres; when your Auditour shall easily perceive,
that you in your former wrytings, did much partake of the byrd, that owed the
wing, from which you borrowed your pen: And so till then, I bid you: A(...)eu.


MICHAEAS. M. Vice-Chancelour. I do contemn these your Lucian and scoffing
vaunts; unworthy to proceed from the mouth of a grave and learned Man. At the
time appointed, I mean to be present in your University: where I trust through
the aid of him, whose cause I am then to mantayne, to make good and justify
all my former Catholic doctrynes.

Touching your malignant demeanor (for I can term it no better (against me,
throughout the whole Process of this cauillous accusation; know you, that as
all Christians in general, so Pryests and Catholics more peculiarly (of
which number I am one) are bound to requyte good for evil; imitating therein
our Lord; who, Cum 1. Petri. 2.
malediceretur, non maledicebat: cum pateretur, non comm^nebatur. Therefore in
2 Thessalonians. 3.
charitate Dei, and patientia Christi; I freely forgive you: and will affoard
you my daily Prayers for your Conversion, and saving of your Soul. And with
this [M. Vice-Chancelour] until the time set down of our future disputation.
I leave you.


FINIS.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
THE CONCLUSION to the Academicks of both the Universities.
LEARNED and worthy Academicks Now Michaeas (the Converted law) has acted his
last Scene; And new he hear pulls off his visard, under which in the former
Dialogues he masked, and takes his last farewell with you in the plain and
natural Dialect of an (...) Pryest, the Author of the said Dialogues. You
have hear perused the points discussed. It has in the former Dialogues (I
hope irrefra^ably (been proved, that since the Apostles days even to Luthers
revolt, Our Cathelicke faith without chan^e, has even been professed; the
Protestants faith has never been professed What demonstration more choking?
You also have seen, with what disadvantage diverse of your Professors (in
regard of the most just retorting of it upon themself^) have in great wast and
profusion of words, wrongfully and promis^uously charged all Catholics with
the hateful Crime of Disloyaltye. Lastly, hear has been laid open before
you, (besides some (...) discourses of certain Catholic doctrines) the
venerable Antiquity of Priesthood; the like antiquity of the Sacerdotal(...)h
(...)tie of remitting of sins in the Sacrament of Confession; and of
celebrating the most reverend and incruent Sacrifice of the Mass: subjects
against which, many Protestants so bitterly (...) both with tongue and pen.

Now if Gods (...) W^^t, partly delivered in a prophetical spirit, and partly
by our Saviors (...) and Apostles, touching the former points. If the
uninterrupted practice of Gods Church, answearable to those divine Oracles. If
the learned Monuments of the Primative Fathers in the Churches Infancy,
contesting (or rather, deposing) the same. If the Ecclesiastical Historyes
recording the euen^s, sorting to all the former pro^ffs and authorityes.
Finally, if your own Brethrens free Confessions in their wrytings to their
own irreperable prejudice) warranting the same, cannot induce many of you, to
believe the truth of the Articles above discussed; then can I but despair of
your bettering by perusing the former disputes; and can but co^miserate your
irremediable states in the words of the Prophet, spoken to Israel: Jeremy. c.
30.
Insanabilis ^ract (...)a, pessima p^^ga tua. but if you be such, as I have
fi^ured out to my self: Men professing Candor and ingenuitie; thirsting after
your own Salvation; desirous to embrace the Truth, once found out; and*
chornin^ any lon^er to live and implicit and blind assent (without further
(...) and search) to your grand Masters Theorems; then I am in good hope, that
these my Labors may wunne some ground upon your judgments; and that you will
make good in yourself that sentence of our Lord and Savior: Math. (...).
Iustificata est sapientia a fill(...) suis. I will speak plainly unto you,
because I affect you in true Christian Charity and pity it is, that
such-transcendent Spirits should for ever perish. You are created to enjoy
Eternitye: Spurn there at those temporary illaqueations; whearwith the soul i
accustomed to be detayned from her chiefest Good. You are (through the force of
Christ's Passion(...) borne Cohey^es to the Kin^dome of God: Why then will you
longer seed with the Prodicall Son, upon the husks of wordly deli^hts and
pleasures? say eich of you rather, with an ancient Father: Terr. co^tra
marcione^. l. 5.
Mihi ^amulo Create is, murd(...)us si non tamen Deus mundi; Et igo Mundo, non
tamen Deo mundi. Pray with in ^^slant and feruerous eiaculations of spirit (by
which means, he will no dowbt, of new become present to you, who at all times
is God is in every thing and place, per essentiam, potentiam, and g^ortam.
present) that his Divine Majesty would vouchsafe to remove from your eyes (as
he did from the corporal eyes of the Act. 91.
Apostle) the scales of partiality and prejudice in matters of faith: the most
dangerous rock of the souls eternal naufrage.

Do not still persevere in up ^raidin^ the Catholics, with Superstition,
Idolatry Antichristianisme relyinge on humane inventions, and disualewing of
the most precious sufferings of our (...) no. These are but our Adversaries
impostures and Calumnyes, forged to ensware the ignorant. For we all most
willingly acknowledge, that the bloody wounds of a sinful soul are cured, only
by the bloody passaues of Christ his Passion: thus we teach and believe, that
blood hear stancheth blood and Death (through overthrow of death) raise Men
from death: So says the Catholic Church, in the office of the Holy Cross.
Mors ^ortua tunc est: in ligno quando mortua vita fuit.

But to return more particularly to the former Dialogues. I do probably
pre^age, that perhaps some one or other of your learned Professors will
undertake to answer these my Wrytings. Therefore let me premonish that man
chiefly of three Things.

First, that whereas theare are in the three former discourses, almost a
thousand Testimonies of all sorts of authorities, produced (some immediately,
and others by necessary inferrence, proving the Catholics Points above treated
of) That therefore he would not (forbearing in policy to answer the
authorities) flee a new to the state of the question (being already
acknowledged on all sides) and to other extrauagancyes of discourse; and all, to
with draw (by such subtle transitions) his Reader from the point issuable;
which is, whether the former Con^rouer^ed Questions do receive their full
prousse, from my alleged testimonies, or no (...) Secondly, that whereas the
greatest part of the above alleged authorities, are taken from the protestants
Confessions and acknowledgments, (they mainly thearby wounding their own
Religion) That the Replyar for the avoiding of the force of their authorities,
would not seek to oppose other Protestants denying that, which they confess;
since this Kind of euading^s most weak (as is intimated already in the second
Dialogue) in that the Protestants alleged by me, are the most remarkable
Protestants, that ever did write, and do confess to their own prejudice, and
against the (...); which they never would do, but that the euidency of the
Truth enforces them thear to. Whereas thus others (which perhaps the Replyar
may pro(...)ce) are Men of meaner rank, and speak in their own behalf; and
therefore as compacted of impudency and boldness, their ton^ues and pe(...)ns
stand at all times ready charged, to speak and write by affirming of chings
(thou(...) never so false) for the supporting of their own Cause. Thirdly and
lastly, that in answearing to the testimonies and Confessious, he would take
them in order, as they lie, and not omit any; as otherwise hoping, that is
regard of the ^^ltitude of the testimonies the sluggish yauning Reader would
easily swalow such ouersights of Omisions. For hear I aduertize the Replyar a
forehand: That presently upon the first coming out of his Answer, I will
make a short Cathalogue of all the testimonies and Confessions omitted by him
(if any such he) showing to what end the said Testimonies were particularly
produced; And will cause this Cathalogue within few days after, atleast few
weeks (for I will not stay for months) to be printed and d(...), for the
present s(...) of the Readers thirst, till further opportunity be given for
confuting of his answer at large* And thus I dowbt not, but the Sun of the
Replyars same end worth, which may seem perhaps so gloriously to rise at the
first appearance of his most learned answer (forsooth) within th(...) time
after (if any of the former premonished ^lei^hts and collusions be used
thearein) will be forced to set in a Cloud of his own disgrace and disreputation.

Neither let that Man think, that the s(...) of his, Book with greek
sentences, or the hayling in of certain mysapplyed and g(...)beaded Apotheges
of some one or other old and outworne Philosoph^^ (an Idiome peculiar to most
Protestant Writers) must carye the ma^ter: But it must be a(...), and sincere
coa^s of answearing, which at this time can satisfy.

But now (Cel(...) Academicks) taking my last leave of you all I will hear
cease, but will never cease, to power out my daily prayers to the most Blessed
and v^deuided, for your increase of all virtues; but particularly for true and
orthodoxall faith; that ^o (you being grateful in the si^ht of the three
divine Persons) God the Father, would vouchsafe you the Power, Christ his
Mearcy, and the Holy-G(...) rection and spirit, for the (...) your souls with
so (...)able a ^ewell: Ter^. l. de Anim^.
Cut veritas comp. (...) si^^ (...) cognitus, (...) Christo ^cui Cr^^us
exploratus, ^ine Spiritu Sancto? cui Spiritus, ^anctu* accomoda^us, sine si^ei
Sacramento?

Laus Deo, and Beat Virgini Maria.

