HENOCH CLAPHAM His Demaundes and Answers touching the Pestilence:
Methodically handled, as his time and means could permit.

1. John 4. 1. Try the spirits whether they are of God.

1. Thessa. 5. 21. Try all things, keep that which is good.

1. John 3. 16 Hereby have we perceaved love, that the (namely Christ) laid
down his life for us: therefore we ought also to lay down (our) lives for the
brethren.

Phil. 2. 4. Look not every man upon his own things, but every man also on
the things, of other men.

1604.

To the Church of God wheresoever dispersed, Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father unto Sanctification of the Spirit, through
obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, (apprehended with true
faith) Grace and peace be multiplied unto you all, Amen.
CHristian Reader, it was wy lot to light upon these few leaves. And being
perused by some that had in times past bin acquainted with the author him self,
And so finding in this canvasing conference such sound satisfaction for matters
of doubt, which in the other Epistle of the pestilence, were short and brief,
learned and scholerlike reasons, still striving to bring out the kernel of
knowledge, which lay couched under the shell of obscurity. And the further he
ripped and reached, to make Gods glorious power known, which others so long
had masked: it caused many questions to be moved, which in this canvasing
conference is answered to the full. I my self being an eare-witnes, to some part
of that doctrine: which was as strange to many at the first, as it was to the
men of Athens in Mars street, which counted Paul but a babbler, because he
preached unto them, Jesus and the Resurrection.

But I hear the Author is in prison, And why? Because some Ministers complained
that he preached a doctrine (which they could neither begin nor end) past the
bounds of their knowledge.

But Henoch where are thine accusers? has the finger (of John. 8. 6.
God) written their faults easy to be read, do they not stand out to accuse
thee? Then I hope the learned will not condemn thee, that have trod out the
corn before thee in the same path.

So was the doctrine of possession likewise distilled out of the clouds, and
so high past every lay man's reach, that the layety were driven to their Pastors
for satisfaction in the doubt of that doctrine (because the Priests lips
should preserve knowledge) but they being found nonresidence in those studies,
one made answer thus: I am no Prophet, I am no Apostle, Miracles are ceased,
etc.

These hearers could not be at the beginning and ending of all these Sermons,
which was the cause they rested unsatisfied, One made that answer.
and so they began to expound the doctrine them selves according to those
parcels which they had gleaned by piece meal from the author, never
understanding the Author as he meant. But whosoever thou be, that will take
upon thee to say all, before thou hear all, shall be sure to lie all.

And so damnable speeches were bruted abroad, before either of the doctrines
were finished: but the last Sermon of possession, made all plain, and so
plain, that since that time (to the glory of God be it spoken) I never heard
of any about London nor elsewhere that were so extraordinarily possessed. But
ordinary wicked persons that are never dispossessed of a wicked tongue: like
the Athenians which gave them selves to nothing else, but either to tell, or
hear some News. but in the end M. Marbery set in foot* to maintain the same
doctrine, upon Christ's Temptation in the Wilderness, affirming that [ Ergo no
possession.
If no going in, no coming out.] So did the last Sermon of the Pestilence make
all attentive hearers satisfied.

These circumstances considered, I took it for duty, once toward the Church
[who is the pillar and ground of truth] as also for profitable acquaintance
heretofore had with the Author: I could do no less but diuulge it. And so much
the rather, for that therein is cleared, what in all points is to be held
touching the Pestilence: A doctrine hitherto, over-confusedly and slenderly
handled of many, If my judgment fail me not.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Amen. P. R.

The Author to the Reader.
THE last great Pest-time (I speak of the Great plague in London, for
otherwise, it is now the greatest Pest-time in the country, and throughout his
Highness Dominions) it pleased God to give me affection and strength to continue
and hold out my Ministry to the end, publikelie teaching, and privately
comforting the Lords poor flock abiding in the City of London (as occasion
here and there, night and day was administered) what time the City was much
infirmed for Civil government, and well-nigh emptied of due ecclesiastical
cure.

Satan Revel. 12. 10.
The accuser of our brethren, maligning the happy success of my labors, he
gets some unwise Spirits to brute abroad, that Clapham taught The plague not to
be infectious, and that All that dyed of the plague were damned, as dying
without faith.

The first accusation came readily to the present Lo. Bb. of London, but the
second (it seems) not so. For about some 34. wekes after my first Co^mitment,
the said Lo. BB. and Sir Edward Stanhope in Court did publicly affirm, that
they had not heard of that brute before: what time I my self then first
uttered it in their court, that so then in the face of all bystanders it might
be checked, so well as other slau^ders, forged only for obscuring mine
innocence.

The BB. believing the first tale, he (without sending for me, or talking with
me) caused me to be taken (even presently upon a Sermons ending, wherein I had
opposed to such insensible reports) and so was conveyed to the Anno Do: 1603.
November. ^4
Clinck prison. Passing by some inter-currentes (which in some other my writings
are laid down) he at the eleven weeks end convented me, the^ signifying that
I had been imprisoned for teaching, That the plague was not inf^ctious; as also
for publishing An Epistle concerning the Pestilence; and that in contempt of
the book of Orders for the Wednesdayes fast, authorized by the King. To both I
answered Negatiuely, if so by Plague they understood not that stroke of the
Angel termed of the Holy Ghost Deber; but that which grew from corruption of
the Creature. Well to the Gate house prison I was sent, and to my book and the
contents, I should answer in another place.

To pass by the second Convention, it being to no other end then the former,
the week before the Archb. death, I was called to Lamboth. There, after
assurauce had of certain Articles their compass, I took my oath to answer
truly to them. The next Monday at the Registers office I did so. The answer
was sent to the BB. of London. He seeing it made not to his purpose, did not
convent me, but (without all ado) he let me ly in prison still as before. My
words nor writings prevayling any whitt, I complained to the King on 1604.
Easter monday, who appointed the same to be conveyed to the BB. And he thereto
to give in his answer. Hearing nothing more of that of 7. weeks, I on the day
of Pentecost ensuing, complained to his Highness again. Thereto, Sir Julius
Caesar in his Majesty's name subscribeth thus. The Kings Majesty has eftsoons
referred this petition to the Lord Bishop of London, who is required by his
Highness calling other of the Hycommission unto him, withal convenient
expedition and according to the Law, to proceed to judgment, either with or
against the party, as his cause shall deserve; that his Highness may not
further be importuned herein. So far the Kings command.

To the Bishop I sent it, but hearing nothing from him, a fortnight after, I
sent to the King again. About a week after, I was convented. And after much
talk to no purpose, the Bishop concluded thus: you may do this at least; the
Doctrines being put down as supposed to be taught of you, you may subscribe
herein, I was truly or not truly understood. I answered, let that be done, and
I shall do what I ought. Doctor Stanhope then said, Master Deanes of
Westminster and Pawles are appointed to that, who (at their convenient leisure)
will send for you. So the Court broke up. This was the eleventh of July last;
and then the first time also of excepting at the doctrine of Faithes
apprehending deliverance from the plague, taught in the foresaid Epistle.

Being thus left to the two Deanes, I writ to them sundry times for speedy
proceeding. One of them sent my messenger to the other, backward and forward.
At the Months end, Doctor Androes sends me word, that he had put the matter
from him. And so he never sent for me, according to the Courts Depute.

Passing by inconvenient repeates, about three weeks after, I was sent for to
the Registers office. Coming thither, his man lets me see Doctor Androes his
months work. And what was it? A flat recantation, and nothing answerable to
that which the Court (in mine hearing) appointed as before. So much I signified
to the Bishop, as also to the Doctor, But other answer since I could have none
but this: put in bonds so to protest, When and Where we shall appoint, and so
depart prison. So my cause at the penning hereof stands.

The several points, for the which I am thus handled, in the sequent
Discourse I do treat of, by way of Quere and Response; that is by way of
Question and Answer. Wherein my cause is unsound, reject; wherein Orthodoxall,
accept: and so far be Gods instrument for my Good.

Art thou a Magistrate?
Then hearken what Solomon says: Deliver them that are drawn to death;
Prover. 24. 11. 12.
and will thou not preserve them that are ledd to be slain? If thou say,
Behold, we knew not of it, he that Pondereth the hearts, does he not
understand it? And he that keeps thy Soul, knows he it not? Will not he
also recompense every man according to his works? Thus let the Magistrate take
heed how he pleades ignorance, and wincketh at the fall of the innocent. For
such a looking through the fingers, may fill the earth with innocent blood,
till it roar again for heavens judgment. And so not only such, but also the
whole land shall fare the worse for injustice.

Art thou a Minister?
Then hear what Moses and Solomon say: Leuit. 5. 1.
And if any have sinned, namely, by hearing the voice of an oath, and he can be
a witness, whither he has seen or known of it, he do not utter it, he shall
bear his iniquity. Prou. 31. ^.
Open thy mouth for the dombe in the cause of all the children of destruction.
Some of you are reported to say that Clapham has a good cause, but it is to be
doubted, if so he have sufficient learning to defend it. That I have, I have:
God make me faithful in that I have. But thou that art able to give in thy
Testimony, art bound also to do it. If thou will not be a Procter for Christ
in his members, one of the two Thieves executed with lesus, shall turn
Preacher, and give in s^fficient evidence, to thy condemnation.

To the People.
Also Brethren, I beseech you for our Lord Jesus sake and for the love of the
Spirit, Romans 15. 30. etc.
that ye would strive with me by prayers unto the Lord for me, that I may be
delivered from the disobedient, and that my service (which I have yet to do)
may be accepted of the Sanctified: that I may come forth to his people with
joy, by the will of God, and may with you be refreshed. Thus the God of peace
be with you all, Amen.

Yours, Henoch Clapham.

Qu. Is the Plague infectious?
CHAP. I.
Answer. EVery Answer is to be made, either by Affirmando. Negando
Distinguendo. Retorquendo.
Affirming or Denying, or Distinguishing, or by Retorting. Affirm it to be, or
not to be I cannot, for reason ensuing. For retorting an answer I could, by
urging a Quere of like nature, thus: Is the crab restoritiue, yea or no? If
answer be made, tell me whither you speak of the fruit crab or Sea-crab, and
then I will satisfy you: even so I say, tell me whither you speak of the
Natural Plague, or the Supernatural Plague, and then I will say it is, or it
is not, infectious. The doubtfulnes then of the answer, does arise from the
doubtfulnes of the question. The question is doubtful by reason of the word
Plague, for that it has sundry significations. For the better understanding
whereof, let us first examine the several senses.

Plague, is a word taken in the evil part, and spoken of any harm inflicted
upon any Creature. All diseases are termed plagues, be they inflicted upon
mankind, or others. So be Crosses in Common Wealths, Ch^rches, Famelies: So
be some Winds, and Weathers to Trees, herbs, flowers, etc. And so Egypt had
his ten sundry plagues. But passing by all such inferior sorts, it is in this
dispute taken for a special kind of evil inflicted on mankind. The Divine
Prophets Canonical do term it in Hebrew DEBER. The divine They were 70.
Hebrews that turned the law into greek, at the appointment of Ptolomy
Philadelph the Egyptia^ king, under whom Daniels people were capti^ed.
Septuagint^ do specially term it in Greek Logos. The Ancient Heathen
Physicians do term it Loimos. The Latins call it Pestis, and Plaga: whereof
do come our English words, Pest. Pestilence, Plague: but Plaga in plain
English, A Stripe or Blow: and therefore how many stripes, so many Plagues.

Quere. That plague which is so straingly mortal at this time throughout
England, is it infectious, yea or no?
CHAP. II.
Answer. I understand that plague, or pest not to be single, or of one kind.
And so far as I conceive, no learned Divine or Physician, is otherwise
minded. Thereof it is, that sometimes they urge textes of scripture for making
the Angel Agent, according to that speech of our King in his Parliamentall
Oration, who terms the Pest the viol^^lence of Gods devouring Angel: and
sometimes again they discourse of Corrupt air in suing Constellations and
fuming corruptions. In which respect, natural political Orders are urged; as
for the other, Fasting and Prayer. In regard of the first, one (speaking of the
Plague in David's time) writes thus: W. Cupper, on 2. Sam. 24. page 78.
This Plague came not by any Caryer or Travailer, or by any infected persons
travayling from place to place and infecting the people where they came, but it
was sent suddenly from God, as the revenger of sin. He afterward grants,
that such a plague is not at this day for vniuersalit^e and quick dispatch, but
yet still that God has the same mean at his pleasure, so to do. And this
writer must be remembered, to have been authorized by the Sea of London: and
the same Book applauded with the Preface of an ancient paynfull Stephen
Egerton.
Preacher. For the other sort of Pest, namely derived from some corruption of
the Creature, and not immediately from the Angels stroke, any learned (skillful
in nature) do grant. And for that, take a Christian Physicians testimony
amongst us. He having alleged some reports from histories touching natural
Contagion, does then conclude thus Doct. Fran Hering in his Epist. to his
Defense, etc.
This may be sufficient to show, that the Plague is not always the immediate
stroke of an Angel. In this Pestilence generally scattred through the land,
there so falls out some stroke Supernatural, some Natural, as I have again
and again taught in my Epistle so much traduced. He that is against me in
this, is so not contrary minded to me, but to our King, to our Divines, and
Physicians also. No marvayle then though another authorized Divine do say with
the right learned Physician Fernelius, See H* Hollands Spir. Preservatiue Page
36.
Hisunt morbi, etc. These be the diseases whereof I have said often, they have
some secret cause. And a little after; the first causes which breed the
Pestilence, are so unknown, so invisible, and so strange to all our senses,
that we are altogether ignorant of them, etc. Necessarily so it follows, that
some thing in this plague be Supernatural; and somewhat Natural, as at large I
have delivered in my Epistle of the Pestilence; without which observation, one
shall deliver Quid for Quo, as have done my Articlers; what is said of the
Supernatural to urge it as spoken of the Natural, ( Et e contra) to the
seducing of the Hearers.

Quere. The stroke of the Angel immediately inflicted, is it infectious, yea or
no?
CHAP. III.
Answ. FIrst let me hear what infection is. A domestic Doctor, signifying
what person is infectious, does write thus: D. Lodge in his book of the
Pestilence, cha. 1.
Very properly (says he) is he reputed infectious, that has in himself an
evil, malignant, venomous, or vicious disposition, which may be imparted and
bestowed on another by. Touching is of sundry natures.
Touch, producing the Same and As Dangerous effect in him to whom it is
communicated, as in him that first co^mmunicateth and spreads the infection.
So far He. It being remembered, that Infection properly understood, is not
that which begets Another but the Same evil, so Argumentate.

That stroke which the Angel inflicteth, is Supernatural, and not within the
compass of Physical causes:

But Infection is Natural and within the compass of Physical causes:

Therefore the Angels stroke not infectious.

For the second proposition, I leave it till anon. Mean time the first
proposition would be cleared, seeing the conclusion dependes primordially of
it. That the Angels stroke is Supernatural, it may appear, once in that He
the Angel (be a good or bad one, Bucer in Mat. 8.
for either may be so imployde) he is a Spirit, and this his Action done by an
immediate spiritual power beyond our reasons pitch. Secondly, we see the
Angel in Aegpit, as also in Judea and Israel (nor else where do we ever hear
the contrary) to be imploide in smyting house after house, and City after City,
even all along the Coasts, from Dan to Beersheba, and not smyting that which
might smite another, which otherwise (if but for instruction sake) would
sometime have been done, and mentioned. And this (no doubt) caused one to write
as before in the former chapter, that W. Cupper on 2. Sam. 24.
The Pest in David's time, came not by any infectious person. Thirdly, by the
Septuagintaes version of the word DEBER, it may be collected to have been then
the Church of Isreal's judgment. The word DEBER in proper English The
Pestilence, they turn by the Greek word Logos in English The word; as if in
the text it were not DEBER but DABAR, this indeed signifying a word; and the
very term that Saint John in his first chapter does give unto the Son of God,
by whom as by a word, the Creature had his beginning and being. So that the
91. Psalm. and third verse, they thus read, He shall deliver thee from the word,
not fro the Pestilence. And why? because that Pest (as the common Creature at
first) had the beginning and being solely by the word of God: and this plague
for contemning the blessed Covenant sealed up in him that is Logos the Word.
Afterward in the sixth verse of the same Psalm, the Hebrue-Greekes read, thou
shall not be affraide [ Apo tou pragmatos] of the thing, in steed of
pestilence. Why? Because it was such a RHEMA, such a PRAGMA, such a Thing, as
they knew not properly how to term it in the Greek language: They well
understood that the Heathen-Greekes did term it LOIMOS, and in respect of the
popular spreading Epidemia, wherefore then in their translations should they so
avoyde these words, and rather choose such a term, as should drive the
Heathen to a Nonplus? No reason I can render, but that thereby they finely
checked the Gentiles, as Ignorant of that plagues cause, and therefore must be
glad (leaving their great Naturians) to come unto the written word of God for
better learning. And in so doing, they shall find that DEBER is indeed DABAR,
which not only signifies a Word, but also a Thing; Yea, a miraculous Thing; as
in Genes. 18. where Sarah thinking the word of promise impossible, the Angel
thus checkes her; shall any DABAR be heard to the Lord? where that miraculous
thing was to be effected by the power of the word DABAR signifying both. Now if
the Pest was such a word, or such a thing, effected by a word, then it is to
be nombred amongst Supernaturalls, and so not infectious, seeing the party
so smitten, could not by all the corruption in his nature send out such a
Word, such a Thing, begetting the same effect in another: for so (which I
think were a petie blasphemy) in steed of Iehovahs Angel, man's beastly
corruption should equalize the Angel, and take the work out of his hands, as
being Iehouahs messenger herein (for Angel is the Greek word, and Messenger
the English) which I have not read of, at least not observed. True it is, that
the Angels blow, rayseth up mudde in man's nature, giving it an head to the
heart; and therefore in Psalm 91. 3. with Logos they join Tarachodes turned
of us noisome, but in propriety, Bemudding, as if by such a stroke, the mudde
of our unclean poole, were stirred up to the poisoning of all the blood and
powers; even as e contra, the Angels Mooving of Bethesda, John 5.
brought sanitie to the diseased. And true it is also, that that corruption may
offend and hurt nature in others, but yet not infect, that is beget the Same
and as dangerous effect in another: for many things ^e noysom, that be not
infectious. Fourthly, that the Angels stroke is Super^aturall, it may appear
from the means whereby it is stayed. The means by Prayer, Rom 12. 1
and the offering up our selves a living Sacrifice, which David ran unto in Sam
24. He seeing the Angel smyting the people in ver. 17. (and not the people
infecting one another) he humbles him self, offering his life ( few such
Governors) for the ransom of his people, who are indeed A Kings glory, Pro. 14
28. Galen in 1. lib. de temp. observed by Doct Katachius in Regimine sanitatis.
That this holy Interpellation (and not Gallens Northeren winds breathing the
Chambers) was the means whereby that Pestilence DEBER was stayed, the Angels
hand staying to smite and longer.

To that purpose, One by authority thus writes: W. Cupper on 2. Sa^. 24. 147.
This noysom^ Pestilence (in 2. Sam. 24.) cease here as we see; but by whose
means? Did time wear it out, or did the Physician cure it? or did a fine
devise remove it? no, no, it was done only by the Commandment of God,
enioyning the Angel to stay his hand. This consideration moves also another
Domestic Preacher upon Nombers 16. 46. not to teach Physical, but
Metaphysicall perfumes for putting away this sort of Pest. Amongst other
things thus he writes: Roger Fe^ton in his spiritual Perfum^.
If the cause of this Infection were Elementarie, why must holy fire be taken
from the Alter? Fire out of the Chimney would purify that: A^terwards. Let
every one therefore bring his Censer, that is, his heart unto the Lord an
hallowed and Sanctified vessel for this purpose, to offer up incense of pray^r
unto God, a vessel laid up in the holy of Holyes. The Medicine so being
Spiritual, Supernatural; it remaynes (as before) that the stroke is not
infectious.

Lastly, Publisher.
the absolute mortality of the Angels stroke, does argue i^ not to be
infectious: For if it were, then every pestilenced person must dye, without
such a supernatural and The Adding of 15. years to his life, and the sun
going back 10. degrees in the Dial of (...): without (...) help, was (...)
raculous, 2. King. 20. 2^
miraculous recoverye, as wherewith Hezekiah was revived. But as none will
grant such a community of Miracle, so all must grant the Angels stroke not
to infect another with the same or like. That the Angels stroke is absolutely
deading in his nature, it may appear, once, in that no one smitten with DEBER
is read to have recovered life. For Hezekiah, he was first a dead man in
respect of his diseases nature [els Isa^ah^ message were vntrue] howsoever the
humbled King was afterward miraculously restored: and yet his malady not
DEBER in the text, but a sickness to death, howsoever not without his Boil,
Isa. 38. 1. (...)
or swelling there termed Shechin, one with the sixth plague inflicted on Egypt
in Exodus 9. 10. But DEBER (for term) one with the first plague, Englished A
moraine; whereof no Beast smitten escaped. Secondly, it is to be gathered from
the 2. Chro. 21. where the Angel is sent to Jerusalem LEHASHCHITHAH to corrupt
it, namely to death; for SHACHATH implies corruption taking head to the death
and grave. Thirdly the Angels stroke appears to be deadly, from the Epithets
given to it in Psalm. 91. where it is termed a Lion, an Aspe, a Dragon, who
naturally devour and poison to the death. Such is the judgment of some Ma.
Holland.
Domestic writers authorized by the Sea of London so to teach and print. For
judgment of foraigners, take the learned Mollerus (approved of the University
of Witteberge, M. Cupper.
and his labors printed at Geneva, who in the 91. Psalm so urges the
Epithets meaning, In specialty (says he) I take the Prophet willingly alludeth
to the Pest in these Appellations. Henricus Mollerus in Psalmo^.
For it is not to be doubted, but he had respect to the nature of these Beasts
[vt vim veneni significantius exprimeret] for more significant expressing the
force of the poison. So far He. Whereby also may appear the stroke not to be
infectious; seeing the corruption in a man so stoong and poisoned of Aspe, or
Dragon, it sends out of that body no such ^avour or power, as whereby the
same evil and so dangerous an effect can be begotten in another, not so stoong
of the serpent. And hereupon it is, that the same Learned Man (so well as Beza
and others her^ at home.
others) does understand that Psalm to be penned upon David's deliverance in
Sam. 24. and the Angel to be that Fowler, in Psalm 91. 3. whose particular
act is, to pitch the same Pest-snare and so to strangle people, as the Fowler
does birds. And so (as before) the stroke deadly, and vn-infectious. But
because our people are so infidelious touching the Angels stroke, it pleases
God somtymes to let the smitten feel a sensible blow, and both he, and others
plainly to see, the print of a blew hand upon the place so smitten. This
indeed was flouted at in my book, as if there were no such thing. But let us
hear another Writer of their own Authorizing, H. Hol. sp^^ preser. p. 33.
thus he writes: Because the Lords power and might more appears and is more
manisest in this great evil, then in any other, I think it not fabulous what I
have heard some report, that they have seen (as it were) the print of a hand
upon the Arms and other parts of the body of sundry smitten with the
Pestilence. So far He. Wherewith would be noted, that no one so printed does
escape death, so far as I could ever hear; nor yet that pest^print beget the
like in any of the beholders, and so not infectious.

Thus if men would have understood them selves (but Nebuchadnetzar had forgot
his dream) Clapham should not have been so unbrotherly, and vncivilly
entreated, for teaching the Angels stroke to be Supernatural, and in his
nature not infectious. But many supposing the Doctrine I taught herein, to have
no proppes from some other Teachers, to whom Sectary-wyse they were addicted
(they holding faith, which Saint James forbids, in respect of persons) they
so in their blind zeal, Ia^. 2. 1.
were helping to hammer my Chains, adding affliction to my bonds. Heavenly
Father forgive them, for they knew not what they did.

Quere. Whither or no is that Plague infectious which arises immediately from
some corruption of Nature?
CHAP. IIII.
Answ. IN his own nature it is infectious, howsoever somtymes bridled of God
from infecting; as the Lions naturally devouring howsoever the Creator did
bridle that Creature from touching of Daniel. And this to be understood, not
only of Corruption following open known natural causes, but also (as before)
of that muddy corruption raised by the vn-infectiue miraculous stroke of the
Angel* for corruption can beget nothing but the same, or the like corruption
or otherwise be noisome, according as the Subject it works upon, be more or
less thereunto affected. This in my Epistle (unjustly traduced) I teach again
and again. In the Addition to the first Section there I say thus; This kind
of plague of pestilence, is of him (namely Galen) termed Loimos, respecting
only bodies bursting out in corruption, which may be cause sometimes of
corrupting bodies; specially such as are inclinable to, and capable of such
corruption. Then to the second Section this, The Angels stroke so is the cause,
the plague sores and marks appearing and arising, are an effect. The first not
infectious. The second is Infectious sometimes more or less. Afterward in the
third Section having said, It is for none to make Physic their staff, nor
yet their first mean, I then write thus: Is Physic then in this, and all
other plagues to be avoided? No, we are not to neglect such natural means, as
reason and experience have found out to avayle against Natural infirmity [ Deo
non obstante] the Lord not crossing nature. Otherwise, we shall be found tempters
of God, leaving our way; rather then faithful keepers of our way. Thus much
there, and much more then this, for approving and enjoying Phisical practice,
in regard of such contagious corruption. How greatly then have they sinned
against the evident truth, who have said, that Clapham taught the Plague not
at all to be infectious, as also that he rejected the practisers of Physical
means for Atheistes? But how deep have their sin been, Publisher, was it
not Doctor Andros that culled the^?
who laying my said Epistle before them, have culled out all spoken of the
Angels stroke, and of pretense have skipped over these aforesaid speeches and
the like, touching Infection and Physical means; and that for so framing
their Articles, as it might be thought, that my said Epistle taught no such
infection, no such use of Physic, and so consequently (as they speak)
Clapham an occasion of the death of thousands. If (as He, that write the
spiritual perfume) I should have skipped over such natural respects (and
why? may not a Divine do it, whose practice is, not to preach Physic) how
would all accusations then have passed for current against me. Yea, the Bishop
knows by a letter writ to him, how in the Pulpit I said, Whosoever dee^es
pestilenced air, earth bodies to be in their own nature infectious; they
deserved rather to be taught it in Bride-well with stripes, then out of the
pulpitt with Arguments. And yet this has helped nothing.

That the Plague (that is, pestilenced air, earth bodies) should be
infectious naturally (for we speak not against Gods providence, sometimes
crossing nature, as once it hindered the Lion from hurtinge the Ass, who
otherwise according to his devouring nature, killed the disobedient Ryder, 1.
King. 13. but we speak of the nature of the corruption it self) it can not be
marvayled at or gaynesayd, when as we find and grant, inferior diseases
amongst mankind and beasts to be readily and sharply infectious, and
ordinarily to be prevented and healed by natural remedy. To particularize them
are over-lothsom and unnecessary this discourse.

If thou say, thou have conversed nearly with such as have been p^stilenced,
and yet that way untouched: I answer, so have I, not by way of tempting God,
but in way of discharging holy and necessary duty, and also I (with all my
famely somtymes so imployde) untouched that way. That this fell out, it is not
because there was no contagion in such pestilenced persons, but because God
bridled it, that we so survi^^ing, might speak of his wonderful works, and
laud him for his mercies.

Of this natural Pest, the Physicians and Clerks of Nature, thus write: Do*
Lod* from Hipocrates de humana nature.
The cause of the General pestilence, which indifferently attaynteth all
sorts of men, is the Air which we suck, that has in it self a corrupt and
venomous seed, which we draw with our^in breathing. By which air, Hipocrates
doubtless meant not Only the common air element all investing all bodies, but
also the Air fluctuated (as Wind) from out of pestilenced bodies. Were it not
for such Gust and Touch, we need not to fear to converse nearely with such as
be taynted with Morbo Gallico, and other such peculiar peccatorious maladies.

But for this work of nature, I leave to the Reverend Students of natures
secrets; contenting my self only with this, that I know no learned Divine, to
be herein contrary minded. And every Master is to be heeded in his own
Faculty.

Quere. Can the Angels stroke by some essential mark be differenced from the
Taint of natural corruption?
CHAP. V.
Answ FOr my part I see no such assured ma^ke. The blew hand and blew spots
(commonly called Gods tokens, and whereof I yet can hear no Physician to give
a reason, and therefore they leave them as vnphysicall, although I take it an
acquaintance of mine in the City was restored of the second) they seem to be
differenced from the other, and the first in a special manner to put us in
mind of the Angel smyting. And whereas now of late, many are killed up (as
report goes) without having upon them, either sore or former marks, as if the
Lord would give us no sign by reason of passed abuse of signs, it might seem
to administer an essential mark; but seeing that cannot be called an
essential differencing mark, which either holds not in all so smitten, or
which falls out besides in another kind of plague (and contrary thereto, I
have no assurance) I leave it with my ignorance: and instead of exquiring, I
reverence before the Lord, crying out, o the depth of his judgments, his ways
are past finding out.

One defines the plague to be, A stroke of Divine anger for the ^^nnes of
mankind. So are a thousand maladies more, and all stripes inflicted on mankind
for sin; and so the Definition a mere Genus without his Differentia,
uttering what is common to all maladies, but nothing formal to the Pestilence
whereof he disputes. Such a definition I could frame to the Angels stroke, but
then I should be as justly derided for it, as he was reported in a leaf or
two, unjustly to impeach my judgment of the Pestilence, Physico, Physica; vt
Theologo, theologia.

The cause why God has not revealed to us a sufficient Difference, as it may
well grow from our sin, so it teaches us in such estate to use and
reverently to esteem of, both Physical and Spiritual remedies; least failing
in one, we be judged for that one; and in neglecting neither, we may have a
good conscience in both. And from this consideration it was, that I not only
taught and prayed, but also (all the time of Pestilence) did use Physic my
self, propounding it also to my family, and some other acquaintance. 1 Tim^. 4
4^ 5.
all the creatures of God are good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thankes-giving; for it is sanctified by the Word of God and
Prayer. And seeing the Angels stroke does leave behind it, bodies wounded to
death (howsoever that stroke, beget not the like naturally in another; more
then the stroke of God upon Ananias and Saphira infected the bystanders and
porters, Act. 5.) yet seeing the Elements in such bodies resolve all into
hateful putrefaction, it should be (at the least, seem to others) an Act over
presumptious to gain say the use of natural preservatiue and medicine.

Quere. Does the 91. Psalm propound deliverance from the Pestilence DEBER, to
some sort of people?
CHAP. VI.
Answ. THat it does at large, as the learned Mollerus thus writes upon the
third verse; Eos qui fide certa in Deum recu^bereut tut^s fore a pestis sevitia
affirmat, the Propher avoucheth that they shall be safe from the Pests cruelty,
which rest upon God with a sure faith. To him take another writers testimony
sent out this last Pest-time. T. C. on Psalm 91.
His words are these: How might God make us a more excellent and fayrer
promise, then that he promises to deliver from the Pestilence, us that be his
Children, and that we need not to be afraid thereof, though a thousand dye of
the same at our left-side, and ten thousand at our right-side; yet shall it not
reach unto us, If we do but believe the promise, Chris. on Psalm. 91.
and let it be our spear and shield. So far He. Of such a believer,
Chrysostom thus writes: Securus habitat at in terra and prolixam vitam
inveniet, he shall dwell secure in the earth and find long life. Afterwa^des
He tells how this is done: totum hoe fit per spem, hope in God bringes all this
about. Other witnesses might easily be produced, but these shall suffice to
show, that very unadvised they were, that said, it was Claphams sole fancy, to
conclude any deliverance from the plague, from Psalm 91. though (being
learned) they might from the reverend Tremellius and Iuniu^ their notes
thereon, have reformed their judgment. Specially if therewith they had
conferred Bezaes argument upon the 9^. Psalm, attributing much there to
Mollerus, desiring the^ also Divines not to take in hand that disputation
(which ought to be sent to the Schools of Physicians) whither the Pestilence be
contagious or no; but rather to beat into the minds of men, the doctrine
which is so necessary and godly set forth in this Psalm. So far He.

But reading not only the promise in Leviticus 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. made to the
obedient, so well as crosses and cursses to the disobedient: and hearing also
the Apostle teach Timothy, in 1. Epistle 4. chap. That godliness is profitable
to all things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that is to
come: and David such an interpretor of the Law as therewith (so well as Moses)
secretly delivering the spiritual benedictions under corporal blessings, and
not the one but both: my adverse-brethren having read all this, I wonder in
what other sense they could read and understand the Psalm. Some new fangled
sense it must needs be. Let any such one now smite his hand on his thighe, and
say, what have I don?

If they had read only the vulgar Latin translation, which (following the
Greek, not the Origenall) does in Psalm. 91. and 3. verse, read verbum
asperum, a sharp word, in stead of Noisome Pestilence* and in the 6. verse
Negotium business, for Pestilence, then they in the ignorance of the Original,
might have intended a deliverance from sharp slaundering tongues, and from
wordly businesses or molestations, As does the^ Papisticall Iansenius. And yet
if they had done so, they had run upon a doctrine which they would seem to
avoid, namely a deliverance from temporary evils, and that from such-ones, as
Believers are no more freed from, the^ Middeber hauoth (turned of Friar Felix
and approved of Pope Leo the tenth A Peste pravitatum. l. confrionum*) from the
noisome Pestilence. Frater Feli^ his translation on the Psalm.
This chapter then I will finish with John Campensis, his Paraphrase Englished
here and printed Anno Domini 1539. The words be these on Psalm 91. 9. It is
not for naught then, that I put my confidence in the Lord. Therefore who so
ever thou be that have understanding, set the Lord (which is above al things)
before thine eyes as ^ most trusty refuge; which if thou do, I that write these
things dare be bold to promise thee, that there shall never any sudden evil
happen to thee, and that there shall no plague v^xe thine household. So far his
Paraphrasis in the person of David.

Quere. What Faith is it, which the 91. Psalm propounds for apprehending
such deliverance?
CHAP. VII.
Ans. FIrst I will propound the sorts of Faith. For though it be said of the
Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians and 4. Chapter, There is one body, one
Spirit, one hope, one Lord, one Faith, he means not that there be no more
sorts in any sense: seeing besides the one body mystical of Christ, there is
another of Antichrist. Besides that one Spirit which gives life to the Church,
the aforesaid body, there is another Spirit, that breaths in the Synagogue
of Satan, and many Spirits rational, etc. So, besides that one, hope, which
is the Ancker-hold of the true Church, there is another of the false. And
besides that one, Faith, which apprehends Christ unto eternal life, there is a
second Faith, termed Historical, which is that Saint James speaks of, when he
says; Iame^ ^. 15
Thou Believes (or thou Faithes) that there is one God, thou do well, The
Devils believe, and tremble. Such, Believing the Bibles history to be true, the
wicked have in common with the Godly. A third faith, there is, termed
Miraculous, by reason wonderme^tes are thereby effected, whereof the Apostle
speaks in 1. Corin. 13. 2. Beza on 1. Cor. 1. 13.
If I had all faith (that is as Beza well notes, the whole of this kind of
faith) so that I could remove mountains, etc. And this faith also the wicked
have in common with the Godly. There is another fatth termed Temporary, whereof
the Apostle speaks in 1. Tim. 4. 1. when he says, That in the latter times
some shall Apostate from the Faith; that is shall fall away from the Gospel,
sometimes meant by faith: for from the first faith abouesaid, there is no
fallinge away, no more then from Election. And this kind of temporary faith is
peculiar to some Reprobate, speaking only of mans-estate since Adams fall.
Otherwise in the time of Innocence, Adam had faith touching the Trinity, their
works and goodness (but not of the Son as a Savior, for yet was no need,
because no Sin) from the soundnes of which faith he [ ecousios] frankly and
freely fell, Hebrews 10 26.
Admitting a right hard conceypt of God, till he was restored (more
miraculouslie then was Hezekiah) to the same and a more Excellent Faith
touching a seed (not seeds) which should arise from woman, for destroying the
works of Satan.

Of these 4 sorts of Faith or Belief, the first is of an Eternal nature, of
a grain or cranell growing in fine to a Tree, having the Root grounded in
Christ. Eternal or justifying Faith.
But as the Vine rises by mean proppes, so this faith arises Gradatim, some
and some by temporary favoures and promises of this life; as may appear
thorough-out Moses, who by such Shadows leads us to the Substance. Temporary
Faith.
In which respect, I approve the distinction of Faith Temporary, and faith
Eternal; not called Temporary for that it self indureth for a time, so much
as for the Object, it eyeth and apprehends, which is some temporary promise,
and blessing: as also the other Eternal, for the eternal promises and
blessings, it eyeth, apprehends, and holds. Both of them meet in the Elect,
as two eyes in the soul, to see by, but often times (as were Leahs eyes) very
tender: yea, with the poor man in the Gospel, do often behold me^ but as
Trees: which caused another to cry, I believe, Lord, help my unbelief. In this
distinction of Eternal and Temporary Faith I here rest as fittest to the
present purpose, as also to the meaning of such writers as already I have
urged, and again must urge.

My Answer so to the second question is, that both these sorts of faith are
commended and called for in the 91. Psalm. The Temporary is propounded in the
first sense, and according to the Letter. The Eternal and Justifying Faith, in
the second sense, and according to the myster^e. The first is the Shell, the
second is the Cranell* (...) having the promise of both, and both the gift of
God, David could teach no otherwise, seeing Moses gave him his Text from Levit.
26. and Deuteronomy. 28. and can be construed no otherwise. Our Savior sends his
hearers to Moses for trial of his words and works; and in Moses they could
never be found, but by seeking a mystery in his History; a Spirit in his
letter; a substance in his shadow, an eternal blessing co^veyed under a
Temporary. They that teach otherwise, must frame a man of only soul or only
body; or invent a Christ with the Familistes, that has little or nothing to do
with the body. When our Savior says, Mark 9. 2^.
All things are possible to him that believes, does he by All things, mean
only the things of the soul? no, he means also, what so ever may be
comfortable to the body. And in that place the point is cleared, seeing by the
Fathers faith, the Child then became dispossessed of an unclean Spirit; that
bodily good being denied upon his state of incredulity. A cloud of witnesses
have their faith extolled in Hebrews 11. and for what? specially or at the
first^hand, for apprehending temporary deliverances, though sealing unto them a
Greater. Hebr* 11. 33. etc.
Daniell so stopped the Lions mouths. Ananias, Azari and Misael did quench the
violence of fire: David by faith escaped the sword; Samson of weak, was made
strong, etc.

But what says a writer authorized by the Sea of London hereto? He shall give
in both Demand and Answer. H. Holla^ds sp. preserva.
I demand (quoth he) whither Gods Ministers, and good people now, may not
receive as great mercies and blessings (as well corporal as spiritual) by
faith, as the people of the Jews did, when Christ was conversant upon the
earth? We know his knowledge, his love, his mercies are not diminished or
changed; his power and might is the same and more glorified. Surely, then,
that which lets the free course of his graces and mercies from us, must be
in our selves, Ignorance, hardness of heart, and great Infidelity. So far He.
If now Infidelity hinder the course of corporeal blessings; yea, of so great
blessings as were vouchsafed to peoples bodies in our Saviors time, then
necessarily it follows, that the Lord in 91. Psalm, and any other such
place, does make such promise. And this was it, which moved another last
pest^tymes to write thus: T. C. o^ Psalm. 91^
If there he now such a faith as gives credence unto God, be shall preserve
him from wicked imaginatio^s and evil sicknesses.

Thus Clapham in Nothing, will be found odd, and singular: let the Accusers
therefore be abashed, and leave of their vnthriving transgression.

Quere. Are they then to be held faithles that dye of the Pestilence?
CHAP. VIII.
Answ IT has been reported, that Clapham should teach, that such so dying, had
no Faith. Hark what his words be whereupon such brute was raised. In his
said Epistles fourth Section he writes thus: But seeing the Lord promises
deliverance from the plague, to all such as rest under his wings, and walk in
his way, it may be asked how comes it to pass, Psalm 91.
that some Believers die of the Pestilence? The answer then is thus there made:
The Lords promise being ever fast to the Believer (for he is faithful that
has promised) There is in Believers so dying, waant of faith, for apprehe^ding
this particular delivrance, this temporary mercy: though they have not lacked
faith, for their eternal justification, and final salvation, by virtue
whereof their flesh rests in hope of an happy resurrection, and their spirit
is gone to God that gave it. So far There. In them words is the former
question plainly resolved; namely, One may die of the Pestilence, having
notwithstanding true faith in Christ, to their eternal Justification, and
Salvation: but such a one so dying, wants that faith, whereby that particular
temporary deliverance might also have been had. It is not said, that they have
No Faith (for the contrary is affirmed, namely, that such a one may have true
Justifying Faith) but that in such a one, there was A want of faith, for
apprehending this Particular delivera^ce, this temporary mercy: the verity
whereof may appear, by that which has been said before, but here shall be urged
further.

Had such so dying, such faith, for apprehending, that temporary deliverance?
If they had it, and yet so dyed, it were to make God a deceaver: for such
faith, so well as Justifying Faith, is the gift of God. I grant that such a
one, may have some swimming conceit, of deliverance, as a Reprobate may have,
his vnrooted conceit, of souls salvation) but virtually and truly, such faith
they had not: for God gives not faith, without the thing faithed. Genesis 17. 1.
Walk before me (says he) and be thou upright, I am EL-Shaddi, the strong
God, All-sufficient, ^or Answering thy faith and obedience. And this was it,
which caused our Savior in the Gospel still to say, According to thy faith
be it. If God in his Justice, Ezekiel. 14* 3* etc.
do answer the wicked, according to the Idol-inventions in their own heart,
even to the brawning of them, in their witchery superstitions; what mravayle is
it, though the same God in his mercy, do answer his Children, according to his
own grace, wrought in their hearts, by his own spirit? But let us hear, one
speak authorized from the Sea of London. H. Hollands spir preser. page 85. 86.


In Psalm 91. it is thus: The Plague shall not come near thee. It may be
demanded (says he) how this can be true, for that we read both in Elder ages,
and s^e daily, that the Pestilence, where it is sent, does not only come near
the Godly, but also smites dead, etc. The answer (says he) is this, that
either they fail, in the This ter^ was flouted, and yet not in mine but in Ma.
Hollands book^
Particular faith in Gods providence, so much commended, and Required in this
Psalm, 91. or they keep not within the bounds of their callings. So far He
with authority, but in me, it must be a Heresy. He says such faith for
deliverance, is required in Psalm 91. And many of our Clergy have deried it
in me. If faith, for deliverance from Pestilence, be not in every Christian,
Required, why is our Church [ in the Collect on Trinity Sunday] enjoined to
pray against All adversity; as also in the Letany to pray directly thus: From
the Pestilence good Lord deliver us? Al true prayer, is to be made in Faith;
(for what is not of faith, is sin) and as Saint James urges, in chap. 1. 6.
to be made without wavering, as we would have assurance, to obtain our
request. This doctrine so, s^ is the doctrine of the Heads of our Church,
enjoined under the pain of Excommunication; and may not Clapham teach it
without inprisonment? As also in far necessarily thereupon, that in the lack
of such faith, the very Elect, may justly perish of the Pestilence? Yea, that
the lack of such says, is cause of any Adversity inflicted upon us? Unfold
this Riddle that can, for I can not.

Augustine is bold (and the scriptures so teach him) to impute the correctorie
cutting off of Moses his life before he came into the promised land, Augustine
on psa. 106.
to Titubatio Fides, the stumbling of faith. And no marvayle that lack of such
faith, should put away temporary favoures, when as it is said of our Savior
(in whom wantes neither Ability nor Will) that he did not many great works,
in his own cou^trey^ for their vnbeliefes sake, Math. 13. 58. What does all
this doctrine tend unto, but to the humbling of us in our wantes, who have made
our selves unworthy of, and insufficient to apprehend promise temporary, so
well as that is of an eternal nature; as also, to the justifying of God in all
his proceedings? The contrary doctrine causes man to arrogate to much to him
self, and to give unto God to little.

But let us hear how another Divine writ last Pest time: T. C. on psalm. 91.
He having said there be two sorts of death, the one after the Number. 16. 29.
common course of nature; the other before the time (stumble not at the latter
phrase, for the Eccles. 7. 19.
scriptures approve it) of this latter he thus says: Another way, death may
happen to a man before the time, by reason of his great and grievous sins, as
the Lord has threatened by Moses, that If his commandments be not kept, Psal^
55. 23.
he will cause Pestilence to reign: Luke 13. 5.
Whereout it is certain, that when they be kept, the Plague bydeth out.
Likewise says the Lord in the Commandments, Honor thy Father and Mother, etc.
out of the which it is certain, that his life, which does them not, shall be
shortened. Afterward, the same Writer speaking of the promise in the 91.
Psalm, he adds thus: Of this untimely Death only speaks this Psalm, and
promises the faith full Christian men, that they shall be free from it. For from
the right appointed death, into the which we have consented in Baptism, we
neither can nor shall be delivered. Wherefore if a virtuous Christian man die of
the plague, it is certainly his very hour appointed him of God, which he
cannot prevent. But doubtless, there die of it many sinners also beside, which
might well live longer if they repented. So far He. From whose words the
collection is evident, namely, that none die of the plague sent out from God,
but upon their disobedience, be they Believers or Sinners. And then every
Divine must grant, that Error in Fact proceeds from error in Faith; as from
want of faith exhibited in his threatenings or promises.

Let this my Judgment then remain good by Authority from Scripture, from
Writers, and the imposed Obedience of the Church of England, how so ever poo^e
I, must therefore be derided, slaundered, oppressed.

Quere^ Have the wicked then at any time such a Faith, as whereby they be
delivered from the Pestil^nce?
CHAP. IX.
Answ. THis d^maund has his Answer, before in the seventh Chapter, namely,
that the wicked may be possessed of any kind of Faith, saving that which we
call the Justifying Faith, the Faith whereby the eternal saving promises are
apprehended. Ma^^. (...)
The wicked may cast out Devils, work miracles, and what not, that bringes
with it only some temporary blessing? but all this not to be so rejoiced in,
as to have the Name written in Heaven. Here I could note (which is not much
observed) that Pharaoh. Nech^ the uncircumcised King of Egypt, was
countenanced of God by faith in a temporary; what time the godly Josiah King
of Judah, was checked by unexpected death for not believing, Pharaoh-Necho,
though he no Prophet nor Prophets son; nor we hear not by what means he
had such skill; but I pass by it: only let it check all sorts of infidelity
in us. And because this position is universally granted of all sorts of
Divines (be their Sect what it shall) it shall not need here any discourse.

In my traduced Epistle and Section 4. I say of the wicked escaping in midst
of strongest Pestilence, First, it is not because they have any promise, but
because it pleases God both to them and us, to be in many things, many times
better then his promise. So I speak of the wicked in general for their
escape, as also of any promise in scripture, as unto them not belonging, that
is properly and blessedly. Afterward in the same Section I add. Secondly,
the wicked so escaping are ordinarily such as have walked boldly thorough the
Sickness, bragging of their faith in God, touching deliverance from the
Pestilence; showing plainly, that they had of faith in God for apprehending
promise of deliverance, though they have not had faith for apprehending things
spiritual and eternal. So far. And herein appears, that the conclusion is
inferred, not in respect of all wicked escaping in midst of the pests-heat,
but of some certain wicked, namely, such as gloried first in their hope and
trust, walking thorough it without fear. Now their speech and behavior
compared with the Event (and the 91. psalm propounding a tempo^rarie cover, to
such as had hope in God) what shall let (seeing I can judge but by externalls)
that I may not think such to have had that faith, which apprehends that
temporary.

True it is, that all promises in propriety and blessedly, are made to the
children of God (whither we respect Christ the son of God by nature, or the
sanctified mankind, the sons of God by Adoption) but yet it follows not,
that therefore; God co^municateh none of the things so promised to the wicked.
God has commanded both sorts of Faith to go together (the one for the good
of the body, the other for the soul, and sin it is to part them) but yet,
as he is called 1. Tim^. 4. 10.
the Savior of all men, specially of the belieuers: so, he saves the wicked
in somti^es of affliction, and vouchsaffeth his temporary Sun and rain to
pleasure and profit them. For there is no grace that can be severed from
sanctification (as may be seen in Balaam, Saul, Iehu, Iscariot, etc.) but it
may be found with the wicked, be it corporeal or spiritual.

If we say; that the Lords disposing of Temporaries, are Then There, and To
whom, he will I answer, ^uen so is the disposing of Eternals, Then, There and
To whom he will: for as the wind blows so the Spirit works at his
pleasure, as our Savior teaches the unlearned Rabbin Nichodemus in Saint
Iohus 3. chapter. How soever then my Adversaries wish it. This their wind
shakes no Hauour.

Quere. Is it lawful for Inhabitants to fly the place of their Habitation,
during such time, as the Pestilence there raignet^?
CHAP. X.
Answ. Some look that I should say yea, such as have at such times given them
selves voluntarily to Flight. But would they have me grant that^ Absurdum
Pecus pecc^tor, There is no beast to the sinner. Grant that liberty and then
(to the exposing of all, to Rogues-ruine, housses, towns, cities, and at this
time, the greatest part of this kingdom) must be dispeopled and left as cursed
Ierush^^lem, desolate. Consider then the Absurdity of that concession. No
common wealths^ man will ever grant that; nor any desire it, that be not mad.

May none then depart? To hold That (it may be) would prove an Error of the
right hand, as the other of the left. Solomon forbids us to be Eccle. 7. 18, 19.
ouer-iust and ouer-wise; so well as ouer-wicked and ouer-foolish. Least I
should seem partial, let us hear some others speak. And first to aunticnt
Eusebius, who handled the Churches history 13. hundred years since. He gives
us an Epistle, written by Dionisius the Episcop of Alexandria in Aegipt,
Merideth Hanmers translat. of Eusebius and in chap 22 after^Y Greek.
running thus, as a Doctor of our own has turned the Greek. Many of our
Brethren ( says Dionisius) by, reason of their great love and brotherly
charity, spared not them selves, cleaued one to another, visited the sick,
without wearines or head-taking, attended upon them diligently cured them in
Christ which cost them their lives; and being full of other men's maladies,
took the infection of their neighbors; translated (of their own accord) the
sorrows of others upon them selves, cured and confirmed other sick persons, and
dyed most willingly themselves, fulfilling in deed the common saying, only
friendship is always to beretained: and departing this life, they seemed the
of-scourings of others. In this sort, the best of our Brethren departed this
life (whereof some were Ministers and some Deacons) in great reverence among the
common people: so that this kind of death, for the Piety and strength of Faith,
may seem to differ nothing from Martyrdom. for they took the dead bodies of
the Saints, whose breasts, and hands, and faces laid vpwardes, and closed
their eyes, shut their mouths, and jointly with one accord, being like
affectioned, Embraced them, washed them, and prepared their Funerals. In a
little while after, they enjoyed the like them selves. For that the living
continually traced the steps of the dead. But among the Heathen, all fell out
the contrary. For scarce had the Pestilence taken place amongst them, but
they contraried them selves, and fled from their most friendly and dearest
friends. They threw them half dead into the streets; the dead they left
unburied, to be devoured of dogs; to the end they might avoyde the partaking
and fellowship of death; which for all that they could devise, They could not
escape. So far Eusebius.

From this record of Eusebi^^, besides other things, I wish these points to
be observed: First, it was held piety, a work of faith, charity, glorious as
Martyrdom, to stand by it, doing service one to another, even to the death and
burial. Secondly, that the persons so holily imployde, were Ministers, Deacons
and others. As for the Heathen set in an Antithesis; First, they fly one from
another, even from their dearest friends, exposing the dead to profane
violation. Secondly, for all their flying so, Gods hand did overtake them:
Such being the judgment and practice of the Church in them purer times: and
such was the behavior of the Heathen; judge now, who last pest-tyme walked as
the Christians, and who as the Heathen.

But let us hear some what out of a Sermon printed last pest-time. His words
are these: T. C. (...) Psal^ 91.
Unwisely, and unchristianly they do, that out of inordinate fear of this
plague, leave their calling and office, maliciously withdrawing the love,
help, and faithfulness, which they out of Gods Commandment, are bound to show
unto their neighbors; and so do sin greevously against the Commandment of
God. For certainly they do but stir up the wrath of God more earnestly
against them selves, that he may the sooner take hold upon them, and pluck
them away with this plague. For men may hear on every side, that some do shun
and fly, not only the sick, but also the whole. Yea, that which is more
foolishnes, even the platters and Candlestickes which came out of strange
houses, as though death did surely stick therein. And out of such fo^de
childish fear it comes, that not only some sick persons be suffered to die
without any keeping, help and comfort; but that Women also great with child,
are forsaken in their most need; for at such times, few or none will come unto
them. Yea, a man may hear also, that the Children forsake their Fathers, and
Mothers; and one household body keeps him self from another, and shows no
love unto him; which nevertheles he would be glad to be showed unto him self,
if he lay in like necessity. So far He. Unto the truth of whose complainte,
the very Poets them selves have subscribed, in variable Pamphlets published
amongst us at this day.

To these let me add a Doctor of Physic his testimony; printed after the
former: Doctor Her. Epist. before his Def. printed 1604.
It remains ( says he) that acknowledging the Pestes contagion, we
notwithstanding (who are Christians) carefully avoid that Faithles and Paganish
fearefulnes, whereby we are made to break all the bonds of Religion,
Consanguinitie, aliance, Friendship, and Policy: the Husband forsaking and
abandoning his dear Wife; The Parents their Children: to sincke, or swim;
the Pastor exposing his flock to every devouring Wolf; and the Magistrate his
people under his charge, to all confusion and disorder. We are apt to rushe
into extremities. This were Incidere in Scillam, whilst we would vitare
charibdim, to avoid one evil, and commit as great or greater. He is to be
reputed a grounded and discreet Christian, who as he will not rush rashly into
every infected and visited house, without just cause, warrant or calling; so,
when he is called, or tied by any bond of Piety, nature, or Policy, he will
not forsake his Station, or detract and fore^ slow any duty or office; though
the performance thereof be with Evident danger of health, goods, or life it
self. So far He.

What have I taught more in this matter, that I must be made A Gazing-stocke
to Angels and men? Look into the last Section of my traduced Epistle, and if
(either by exhorting to duty, or dehorting from breach of datie) I have said
more (yea, but so much) then Let man have no mercy on me. From the Lords love
and lenity, I there exhort to coniunct and mutual humiliation; in checking
some others for abusing the scripture in Levitic. 13. touching Leprosy, for
upholding their Irregular Flight: and if an Authori^ed Divine may not do this,
Actum erit ^ Ministerio, our Ministry will be of small reckoning.

For my doctrine there of the Leprosy, I leave it to be tried by Gods word,
for already it is under the trial of the Bishops sword. Only here thus much.

1. The Leper was not put off; Leuit. 13.
till his disease were thoroughly seen, tried and censured. But our sickness are
shaken off without trial: and often times upon false supposition.

2. The Priest then was tied by duty, to take such trial. But the Priest
ordinarily with us, is of the rest, furthest from that; shaking off not only
the sick, but the sound also.

3. The Priest and people got the Leper conveyed to some place apart, providing
sufficiently for him, that so his lothsom body might bring no grievance to the
Congregation. But the most of our Priests and people have been so far from
convaying forth the sick so provided; as they rather have put out them selves,
providing for themselves, and leaving the sick behind them.

4. The Leprous house and garment came also under the Priests trial and
censure: will our Priests do the like? I will hardly believe it, till I see it.

5. The Leprous garments were to be burnt, and the houses pulled down: will
they deal so with pestilenced houses and garments? Then down with all
England. Have I not (these circumstances remembered) had just cause to complain
of abuse committed against the Ceremonial law of Leprosy? Sub Iudice lis sit,
Let the Church of God all abroad judge it.

As for any Rules of Political decency, or safety to be drawn from Levit.
13. or any other scripture, nether have I (nor I think any scholar) ever
excepted against. And as far from my thought it was Contemptuously herein to
oppose unto the doctrine of Leprosy published in the book of Orders for the
Wednesdayes Fast: besides that my said Epistle was published before that book,
some days, if not weeks, at least in my judgment (as they have under my hand
and oath) nor could I ever from Pawles Churchyard, or otherwise learn the
contrary. But enough of that Parenthesis.

When men be unwilling Tolay down their lives for their Brethren, to give
their lives for their flock; to prefer bodies to souls, and eternal life
to temporary, what Law of God and man will bind them? What evasions will not
be devised? And what transgression will not of such be justified; even somtymes
to the harming of such, as have been conscionable obseruers of the Law? This
chapter then I will finish with other men's words. Doct. He^. in his rules,
page 4.
* One says thus: Let not Gentlemen and rich Citizens by flying (unless they
fly likewise from their sins) think to escape scot-free. Another writes
thus: T. Con Psalm. 91.
It is a great shame for a Christian man to be afraid of the plague of
pestilence, as to fly from them that he is bound to serve by Gods
commandment. Another writes thus: Will. Cup. per on 2 Sa. 24. pa^ 368.
They that fly for meare fear, ought to acknowledge their want of faith, and
to bewail it, as those that consider neither of them selves, nor of the hand
of God that stricketh; persuading them selves, that staying is the only
danger, and that flyinge is the only mean to escape. Such men do as little
Children, that fly from the Fathers Rod, and so make him more angry. Again
another writes so: They must summon them selves unto the judgment feate of
God, H. Holla^d^ pr. preser. page 173.
and look on the plague, as on the messenger of Gods wrath, which can not be
avoided with change of place, but by repentance and amendment of life. So far
they.

From such authorized sentences, let the Reader collect, that howso ever all
departure be not gayn-sayed, yet no such departure is granted, as whereby
Relative duties be omitted and cast aside, or Barbanitie may ensue: for the
least (evil may not be done, to the end that good may come thereby) for to
such ( says the Apostle) Romans 3. ^.
Damnation is just. Act; 15. (...)
From the beginning of the world God knows all his works: and therefore
neither needs nor craves, nor allows, the help of our false finger. Let
us strive in all estates to be helpefull one to another, and blessed is that
servant, who when his master Christ comes, is found so doing. Dixi.

Epilogue.
Equal is that Pentameter, (...). Every forced business, is grievous. Almost a
year is passed, at the penning hereof. So long forbearance, was much and
onerous; specially in so even a cause. If my Adversaries scorpions, have by
lashing enforced this Cry, and thou thereby bettered, Deo gratias, give God the
praise, who out of a flint can fetch fire; and of stones, raise up children to
Abraham. Mean time, be assured, it had been more ease for me, not to have
been so urged. But though I were slain, I must (with Job) hold fast mine
innocence.

Innocence; By how much the more it is innoeencie, by so much the more I should
(by silence) have borne false witness against God, his Church, and mine own
soul. But if it be remembered, what horride reports, were scattered abroad of
me, both touching Fact, and matter of Faith, notwithstanding all orderly
suites, and protestations, subscriptorie, and iuramentall; yea, against the
tendering Royal purpose, of our Sovereign: to the possessing of Magistrates
ears with untruths, to the perverting of Ministers, and people; for bending
all against me, and so the sword of Gods holy Angel ( Never raged this sick
nes so mightily and universally in England, as now it does
yet vn-sheathed) against all; damming up the course of my Ministry, cutting
of my bodies liberty; propounding my life to danger; breaking the heart of my
family, consumed the substance I had paynefully earned: to the gladding of
fooes, sadding of friends, procuring murmurations, etc. and al for praying,
preaching, visiting, and gooddoing, to all sorts, pestilenced: when almost
none else would; if all this be laid to heart, am I Iron, that I should not
feel; or am I lead, that I should not sound? Nay is it reasonable (though I
be therefore committed close prisoner, yea, should die the death) but I should
speak, and write, for clearing of mine innocence?

Wherein I have failed (and who is it, that in nothing sins not) thou that
art stronger, help to sustain me: at least, simpathize so my estate, as I may
be helped, by thy feeling and hearty prayers. And so with reference of my cause
to the judgment of God, his Church in England, Scotland, France, Ireland, and
wheresoever, I end. This 18. of September, 1604.

The Lord most unworthy HENOCH CLAPHAM.

A Letter to a friend.
YOu desire to hear by what Law, I was committed, and so am still continued in
prison? I protest, in the presence of God, I know not, by what Law, all this is
done, There is a Law, that touches some, concerning judgment and doctrine of
the Pestilence. It is laid down in the book called the Queens Orders for the
Pestilence: I speak of our late sweet Sovereign, now gone unto God. The same
book since (as I take it) was published last pest-tyme, in his Majesty's name,
and this is it verbatim.

Order 16. Item if there be any person, Ecclesiastical or Lay, that should
hold, and publish any opinions, (as in some places report is made) that it is a
vain thing, to forbear, to resort to the infected: or that it is not
charitable, to forbid the same; pretending that no person shall die, but at
their time prefixed, such persons shall not only be reprehended, but by order
of the Bishop, (If they be Ecclesiastical,) shall be forbidden to preach: and
being Lay, shall be also enjoined to forbear, to utter such dangerous opinions,
upon pain of imprisonment; which shall be executed, if they shall persevere in
that error. And yet it shall appear manifestly, by these Orders, that
according to Christian charity, no persons of the meanest degree, shall be left
without succor and relief.

Admit now, I had been coulpable, of such doctrine: my punishment should not
have been imprisonment, but some inhibition, to preach. But, as may appear, by
all my writings, I am cleared from all such imputation: and so no Law (that yet
I can hear of) in this matter, violated of me. His Majesty commanded, I
should be proceeded withal; By the Law, intending, that there was a Law to
clear me, or condemn me: and yet (as you hear) I am kept still in bonds,
only upon my L. of London command, (not upon any Law Civil, or
Ecclesiastical, once spoken of) others of the Hy-Commission united with him
therein, who (I suppose) dare not, easily, be in any thing, unto him,
repugnant: and he having imprisoned me, before he truly understood the cause,
does thus go about to make good his imprisonment, by wincking at the truth of
the cause, seeming to plague me for the contrary.

This may suffice, for your question; wherewith I end, desiring Your hearty
prayers unto God, for my good: To whose saving mercies also, I refer you and
your Studies.

Yours HE. CL.

Another Letter.
Beloved; I have maruailed, what may be the cause of your walking thus those.
If because of my daily repair unto the Lords visited people, some months since
you fear to com near me, you must understand, that I have been ayred in prison
these ten months. But in your judgment (it may be) a man may travatle of the
plague, beyond a woman's 4^ weeks. In deed the old woman's fable is, that the
plague will lie 7 years in a mouse hole, and then come out. That Aphorism (it
is like) was cause (as has eftsoons been reported) that a near preacher,
newly beneficed, did plaster the walls fair, tempering the mortar with
vinger, [ In Amo^di Villanovani exegefi super Schol. Sale^n. ^. 4^,
Eamque ob rem, Medici peste grassante, cum in cibo, tum in potu, acc^ivsum
mirifice commendant] but for all that, his hourse was scarf fimished, before
he with plenty of Gods tokens upon him, so well as his predecessor, was
buried.

But if I may conjecture by your pulse, you fear to be known my friend,
while I am in bonds. An ungodly fear, to be ashamed of well doing. Such
irregular walking, may cause me to call in question, whether ever you were a
true friend, seeing one of Gods Canons runns thus: Prover. (...) 17.
A friend loves at all times, and a brother is borne for adversite. Besides,
that such keeping aloof (worse then that of Nicodemus, for he came by night) it
weakens Neophyts, and str^ngthens the hands of the adversary. Would you, in
like case, be so walked with? Do as you would be done to.

In the beginning, you kept of, for some such cause, but now you are impeded
about Episcopal Canons, concluded by the Province of Canterbury: for though
Yorkes province be by Proclamation, enjoined to undergo the same Canon ^ the
Greek: Rule is the English.
Rules, yet (I understand not) that that Provinces voice was called for; and so
used, as to the making of that Cou^. ^ell National, and one of the Canons,
concludes (as I remember) that (...) be the voice of the Church of England,
which has been uttered in ^ Council National, not Provintiall. Even as the
Parliament (...) National, for that every part of the Nation, has his Speaker
in it.

If that be your Case, God and the King help you, for I can not. I am here for
another gates testimony, almost for sake^ of you all as Singular: but if you
would have first understood me, and secondly your selves; all that I did, was
but a bringing of that doctrine, into distinct method, which (for the most
part) was taught over-confusedly. In so much as sundry that heard you teach two
times, upon that argument, could not conceive, but that in the second Sermon,
you were opposite to the first.

If you had been more comfortable to others, in their affliction, then doubtless
you should not be so long destitute of comfort in any your afflictions, for
faithful is he that says, The merciful shall find mercy. Make upright
steps to your feet, and fear not an happy issue out of all tentations. And
so with my hearty prayers to God for your good, I leave you to his guidance,
that never for sakes the faithful.

Your friend He. Cl.

Courteous Reader let me crave in kindness, That what faults thou find, may
not be imputed to the Author: but mere ignorance and oversight in the
Publisher.

Fare well.

Pere Re^

The Publisher and his Friend.
Question.

Is the Plague infectious, or no?

Answer.

That is intricate, more then I know.

To satisfy som-thing, I will not gr^dge,
With some experimentes, then be thou iudg^.
I.
A sucking child, sucked his mothers breast,
Having a filter, 2. or 3. years elder at the least,
The mother absented, the eldest out of thrall,
Not car^ing for the youngest, any thing at all:
The youngest lived, and survived,
The eldest with the mother greeved and died.
II.
A man being marked with Gods tokens,
Looking every hour, when his heart would be broken
Having one child, loath to leave behind him,
Laid it 3. days and 3. nights in bed by him:
The Father dyed, the child survived,
And has ever since prospered and thriued.
III.
A plague fore, within a spanne of a woman's dugge,
Whereat the little child, night and day did lugge,
Some fortnight sick and sore, she was all that while,
The child in midst of mothers grief, at her did smile
The mothers sore made whole, and so she mended,
The child since never sick, nor with grief offended.
Now my friend, if not my fo,
Tell me, is the plague infectious, or no?
Qu. Is there any place in the Scripture, that urges men to be fo^ward in
perfection, and striving to be perfect:

Answer. Yes: Ye shall therefore be perfect, as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect, Mat. 5. 48. Also the great commandment does say: Love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and
with all thy strength. This is the first and the great commandment. And the
second is like unto this: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.

On these two commandments hangs the whole Law and the Prophets.

The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitatable to
teach, to improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness: That the Man of
God may be absolute, being made perfect unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17.

This is a straight gate, yet we are commanded to strive to enter in at the
strait gate, Luke 13. 24.

Now he that despises the Teacher and vrger of this Doctrine, despises the
Author of the doctrine even Christ him self.

Although no man can be perfect in this life, yet it is no reason that the
mouth of the Ox should be moozled, for treadinge out the corn before them:
and telling men what they ought to be, although he knows, that none can be
perfect in this life, no more then a Cammell can go through the eye of a
needle, and though this be impossible to man, yet nothing is impossible to God.

When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

The God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus the great
shepherd of the sheep* through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make
you perfect in all good works, to do his will, working in you that which is
pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever. AMEN.

P. R.


