THE TRVMPET OF APOLLO: Sounding out the sweet blast of Recovery, in diverse
dangerous and desperate diseases.

Experientia matter Medicinae.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London by P. Short, dwelling on Breadstreet hill at the sign of
the Star, 1602.

To the courteous and well disposed Reader.
Having at the length as well out of mine own manifold labors, charge and
experience, as also out of the learned and industrious practices of sundry my
well affected friends unto the chimical and spagirical art, obtained many rare
and excellent medicines for the health of man's body, whereof I have here g^uen
some taste, reserving a further satisfaction for those who upon just occasion
shall at any time hereafter require the same. I have now presumed out of the
fullness of my affection toward my natural and well deserving place and
country, to present and offer the best and most approved remedies, which by
my 17. years practice, I have gotten either out of mine own workehouse, or
from other men's Laboritories, which have spent some time in Pellicanes,
circling glasses and furnesses both calcining and reuerbaratorie, etc. and such
like as well as my self. Hoping, that those Gentlemen, who in great kindness
have conferred both their receipts and cures upon me, will not be offended
though I shall rashly publish the names of some of their patients together with
mine own, which they had happily purposed to reserve only for their private
remembrances. I am here also to crave pardon of the patients themselves, whose
names (for the better credit of the medicines, and comfort of others that shall
happen to fall into the like diseases) I have adventured to disclose: My
offense herein I hope will be the more tolerable, because my end and scope is
charitable, aiming principally at the health of man, without the which no
honor, no wealth nor any other worldly pleasure can give any true contentment.
Herein I have also had a special and honest care not to nominate any, whose
infirmity might work either disgrace or reproach to the patient; neither can I
justly be taxed with a vainglorious and vaunting humor in blazing out these
cures by a Printers proclamation, saying in all Christian humility, I
challenge no part of the glory to my self, but acknowledge as I ought, that
omnis salus a Domino: and likewise for that in cases either of death or torment
unto men as these are, I think there can be no means so general or so
sudden, but they will come far short of their desires, that have cause to use
them.

Neither am I singular in this course, for men of great judgment* and learning
have heretofore also made public observation of their cures, and diverse of
mine own countrymen have long since commended their special labors in this
kind to the world: As that painful practizer I. Hester, who Printed a large
Catalogue of his oils and waters, under many strange and stately names: and
Giles that anncient Chimist, who having blown away his wealth in the smoke of
Alchimie, did yet at the length light upon a Balsamum which remains to be
sold at this day, commended for many rare and excellent uses. The credit of
Moses diet-drinke lasted a long time, and was generally used in the scab of
Venus. And an other ancient and skilful distiller of my name does at this
present make great profit of that his excellent aqua bezoartica, with the which
I dare boldly compare (be it spoken without offense) my aqua comfortans
stomachu^ for the strengthening of any weak stomach. Neither can I forget that
full and foule-mouthed physician D. Burcot who sold his general purging
drink so many years together for 10. groats the quart beshite the bottle (for
so he usually pronounced the word beside.) These and many more instances in
this kind I could produce, to prove my self to be no Author of novelties.
But what need I so much to insist upon examples, seeing the medicines
themselves are such as were first derived from the sacred closet of nature, and
are now long since ratified and confirmed with that sure and autentique seal
of experience. We see that Indian weed Tobacco, has now found out both
learned and honorable patrons, being first made known by public impression,
and afterward by continual practice even until this day: and without all
respect of age, sex, complexion, method or other circumstance. And why should
not English simples truly and chimically prepared by English Artists have also
their free allowance, and be made familiar with English bo: dies? I rest then
gentle Reader in the expectation of thy favor, whose infirmities I pity, and
whose recovery I desire and hope to perform. I will sell nothing, but that
which I dare and will take my self in the same disease, for which it is
commended. And for thy better safety and satisfaction, I have here contained
my self wholly within animal and vegetable medicines, wherewith I will at all
times (God willing) bereadie to furnish thee* at reasonable rates, out of my
shop in Sheere lane near Temple bar, faithfully and workmanlie drawn
without all sophistication or adustion.

Thine in all christian love, JOHN CLARKE.

PLAGVE.
A Notable defensatiue Cake against the plague, being first practiced in
Millain upon a general infection there, about the year 1579. by M. D. Siring,
and after brought over and practiced in England in the great year of
visitation An. 1593. by N. Romero Gentleman, commended and graced by Rodulphus
the Emperor, with many honorable terms of favor under the great seal of
the Empire.

I Am bold to front my Pamphlet with this defensatiue, because I understand by
many secret informatio^s of my friends, that diverse Physicians and those of
great reading and judgment (whose grave censures I do greatly reverence) do
expect a fearful and general infection of the plague this summer, by reason
of the unnatural and intemperate season of the spring, which has already
showed both his deadly and dangerous effects in the bodies and lives of many
thousands of her Majesty's subjects: which if it shall please God the great
Governor both of heaven and earth, in his unspeakable mercies to turn away
from us, I hope it will prove a strong motive to stir us up to a general and
christian thankfulness. If othewise, so that our sins do call for vengeance and
visitation from heaven, I have thought good in my tender love and affection
toward my native country to publish this preservative, which in five weeks
space (by the great blessing of God) did clear that famous City of Millain
being so grievously infected, as that in some one week there died three
thousand persons. And the citizens in their great love and thankfulness
toward D. Siring bestowed a gratuitie of fifty thousand crowns upon him.

Observations in this Medicine.
IT is made in the form of a little round cake or tablet, and the dose is two
drams.

It is most properly given to such as are free and not possessed with the
sickness, although abiding in visited houses.

It is an excellent and easy purge, being wrought up with many cordials and
antidotes.

If these cakes be kept between papers in a close box and near some fire,
they will last good for seven or eight months.

Two drammes is a good dose or proportion for all such persons as are sixteen
years of age, and upward to fifty or sixty; so as they be strong of body:
but weak men of fifty five, or sixty; or children between eight and
sixteen must take only the half proportion.

The cake may be eaten, and a cup of burnt wine drunk after it, or else
dissolved in white wine.

The said Romero has also given the same with good success in many burning
feauers.

The practice of the aforesaid defensatiue in the latter end of the Plague, An.
1593. in London.
THere were dispersed abroad within London and Middlesex, great numbers of
these defensatiue cakes unto persons whose names are not here remembered.

It pleased the right Honorable Lords and others of her Majesty's privy
counsel to have five and forty of these cakes.

Doctor Fletcher that learned Prelate then Bishop of Worcester bought to the
number of fifty of these cakes and dispersed them in the then visited houses
of the said City, and it pleased God to preserve all the inhabitants of them
from the infection, as he himself reported at the counsel table.

The right honorable Sir John Puckering knight, then L. Keeper of the great
seal of England, appointed certain of these cakes to be conveyed to the town
of S. Albons by Ma. Belfield, for the clecring of the infected houses against
the term, which was then kept there.

Mast. Richard young Justice of peace in Middlesex and one of her Majesty's
customers, delivered abroad many hundreths of them, and made one especial
trial in the parish of S. Marie Abchurch where he himself dwelled, upon nine
visited houses in which there aboade three and thirty persons, which trial gave
great contentment unto the Lords of the counsel, who sent for the true note
unto him to be fully informed thereof. And thereupon Sr Romero should have
proceeded to a general trial in one of the greatest Wards in London, by her
Majesty's pleasure signified in the letters of the right honorable the LL. of
her Majesty's privy Counsel, and directed to the chief Magistrate of this
honorable City, in whose hands upon what reason the stay was made, I do here
forbear to utter, because I would have the dead to rest in peace: only it
shall suffice, that himself by the opinion of diverse (scorning and disgracing
the medicine) died within three weeks after, either of the plague it self or
of a burning fever his Cousin German, as I have been credibly informed.

Thomas Bland of the patish of Alhallowes-barking, had defensatiues for
himself, his wife and one servant.

10. Smith of the parish of Creechurch, had for himself, his wife and four
servants.

Frauncis Bradborne of Saint Swithins parish, had for himself, his wife and
two servants.

Mast. Merick preacher in crooked lane had for himself, his wife and two
children.

The daughter of goodman Hawes being infected and taking it, escaped.

Mast. Iarfield preacher at Saint Marie Abchurch going usually amongst the
infected of his parish and others, and having taken this medicine together with
his wife and maid, were all (thanks be to God) preserved.

The maide*seruaunt of one Mopsey

Flax-wife, having the plague upon her, was cured by one of these defensatiues.

John Webster a Purse-maker dwelling at the entrance into Gutterlane, he and
his man both took the same.

Mister Ear a maker of gold lace in Gutterlane, he and his wife had each of
them a defensatiue.

Mistress Hunt a victualer in Gutterlane, she and both her maids took of this
defensatiue.

A Servant of Master Deacons the Queens Sergeant Plummer, having an extreme
burning fever, was cured with this medicine.

A dutch Goldsmith dwelling amongst the feather dressers in the Blackfriars
took one of these defensatiues.

A Ruby-cutter lying at the Dolphin in Gutterlane, having the plague upon him
took one of these and was cured.

Goodwife Russell an hearbe-wife in Cheapside, having buried her husband of the
plague, she and her maid were both preserved by taking this defensatiue.

Mast. Heywood a Copper-smith took one of these cakes.

The wife of Rowland that excellent Artisan dwelling in Southworke, took one
of these defensatiues.

A French gentleman being Cousin to Monsieur de la Now lying near the
Exchange, took one of them.

Sr Romero that brought the receipt from Millain, being then bedfellow with
Doct. Siring, took the same twice himself.

Mast. Crauen a Draper in Watlingstreete, and now a grave and well reputed
Alderman of this City, bought one of these cakes.

A servant of Mast. Cordals in Milkestreete took one of these defensatiues.

Mistress Bradshaw an ancient gentlewoman and a Cousin of hers then dwelling
with her, took of these cakes, she being then at her house at Stebon^eath.

Mast. Gamedge, a man much troubled with the gowte, and dwelling in Saint
Tantlins parish, took one of these cakes to clear his body of bad humors, and
commended the working thereof greatly.

Mast. Colfe th'apothecarie dwelling at the Artichoke in Cornhill sold diverse
of these cakes: so likewise did one other of the same faculty being a man of
special note amongst them, whom I forbear to name at this time.

Mast. Moulton secondarie of the counter in Woodstreet, bought two of these
defensatiues.

Mast. Shepham of the parish of Saint Thomas th'aposte bought two cakes.

Mast. Richard Wilbraham Esquire, and late common Serieant of this honorable
City, though preserved by this defensatiue Ann. 93. from the contagion; yet by
a violent fever this last year, to the unspeakable loss of this City, to
the incredible grief of his friend and loving spouse (though to his own
immortal glory and comfort) was in the flower of his age, and in the highest
hope of his advancement taken from us to his everlasting peace and rest.

Mast. Chambers a merchant of good account bought two of these cakes.

Mast. Swaynes man bought one of them.

Mast. William Nichols a draper in Watling street bought two of these
defensatiues.

Mast. Culuerwel citizen and mercer of London, had 30. of these cakes for
himself and his friends.

Mast. Linford a draper in Waltingstreete, a man greatly beloved whilst he
lived, and as greatly lamented now he is dead, had one of these defensatiues.

Mast. T. G. had four of these defensatiues.

A servant of Mast. Archers had one of these defensatiues.

Ma. Paumer of Woodstreet had three of them.

Mast. Dauenant in Bowlane had four of these cakes.

Henry Ienkes a servant at Bishops hall took one of these cakes.

Mast. Susans the Barbary merchant had one of these defensatiues.

Mast. Scales dwelling at Dowgate had one of these cakes.

Mistress Duttons man of Woodford, had one of them.

Mast. Albanie a Draper in Watling street, had one of these cakes.

The Author hereof and his men took of these cakes, and were all preserved.

John Ailswoorth of Redding Clothier, took one of these cakes.

Mast. Vrie Babington had two of these cakes.

Mast. Edwin Babington his brother had also two of them.

Mast. Haruie a Grocer, had for him self and nine others.

Peter Peerson Clothwoorker, had one of these cakes.

Mast. Filkins a Scriuener, had two of them.

Susan Perches being sick of the plague, took one of these defensatiues, and
recovered.

John Dauison of S. Michaels, took one of them being infected, and it helped
him.

The wife of Garret James in S. Michaels parish, had one of them.

John Iackson in S. Michaels, had one of them.

John Stokeley and his wife of the parish of S. Michaels, either of them had
one of these cakes.

William Haruie in S. Michaels parish, had one of these cakes.

George Goodall Cook, had one of them.

Mast. Elcoks maid at the Faulkon in Cheap side, took one of them.

An Vpholsters man at the Stocks being sick, took one of them and was
presently well.

Mast. Cotton a merchant dwelling in Colman street, took one of these cakes.

Mast. Heyward a Merchant, took one of them.

Master Atmore a Pewterer (and if I be not deceived) the most exquisite
workman of his trade, had one of these cakes.

Mast. Street had one of these cakes.

Mast. Gardner had four of these cakes.

Mast. Bland had three of these cakes.

Mast. Philippus of the custom house, for himself and his family bought five
of these defensatiues.

Given to the Bishops man of Worcester two.

Smith, M. Richard Youngs man took one of these cakes.

M. Saundersons men had two of these cakes.

Mast. Shaw a Cooper, had for himself and his family three of these cakes.

Mast. Collet dwelling at Hackney had four of them.

Mast. Chune dwelling with M. Hacket a Draper in Candlewick-streete had two of
them.

Mast. Thorpe the Vintner dwelling at the Miter on Breadstreet hill had four
of these cakes.

Ma. Westwraies the Grocers maid dwelling near the Stocks had one of these
cakes.

Mast. Greenham preacher of Christchurch had for himself and his family three
of these cakes.

John Blackstone constable of Abchurch parish had one of these cakes.

Mast. William Marsh of the parish of great Alhallowes had one of these cakes.

Richard Parnam of Sherborne lane had one of these cakes.

A Ropeseller near the custom-house had three of these cakes.

Mast. Smart the sword bearer had one of them.

Mast. John Ellis Esquier had one for his man.

A Baker dwelling without Algate bars himself infected, took one of these
cakes and was preserved.

Mast. Henricke the Gunmaker without Algate had for himself and his family six
of these cakes.

A linen Draper dwelling over against the Dukes place near Algate, had for
himself and his wife two of these cakes.

Mast. Kilwell a Diamond-cutter, having buried his wife and two children of the
plague, was preserved by taking one of these defensatiues.

A brown Bakers wife without the bars beyond Algate, being deadly sick of a
burning fever, and keeping her bed three weeks, was cured with one of these
cakes.

Hauns van Street a Diamond-cutter in a little alley in Woodstreete having
buried a daughter of the plague, he a^^ his wife took this defensatiue.

Mast. Law a Scriuener in Gutter-lane, he and his maid took of these cakes.

John Todde a Tailor in Gutter-lane, having buried four of the plague, the
next day he and his wife took this medicine, he had afterward three other of
them for his friends.

A Gold wier-drawer at the Cock in Gutter-lane, he and his wife being both
sick of an extreme burning fever, took of these cakes and were soon helped.

Mistress Rundell a Gold wier-drawers wife in Kerry-lane, having a plague sore
upon her, was preserved by one of these defensatiues.

Judith Hatfield dwelling with her mother in Dees alley in Gutter-lane, having
a plague sore, was preserved by this medicine.

See some cures of Agues performed with this medicine in the title of Agues
following.

AGVES.
Having found by manifold experience the singular and eflectuall use of diverse,
both delicate and extraordinary Medicines for the rooting out of Agues of all
sorts (although in burning feauers I have no pleasure to practice, because they
prove oftentimes deadly and always very dangerous, and therefore I leave them
wholly to the grave and professed Doctors) I have thought i^ convenient to offer
my poor skill also i^ this kind, which if any man shall at any time
contradict (because I am no graduate in Physic, though happily I have been as
bold with natures Cabinet and the forge of Vulcan as some of them) I will at
all times be ready to redouble any reasonable sum that shall be delivered,
upon the fail of any cure in any one patient which I shall undertake, not but
that I may sometimes miss in some strange bodies and strangely possessed with
these furious Fiends (for then I should be more then a man, cuius est aliquando
errare) but that having found already that my faithful medicines have hitherto
scarcely deceived me in the twentieth patient (I durst not write thus boldly of
my cures if the statute of 34. Henry 8. were not my warrant for Agues) I hold
it no great adventure, where the odds is so apparent on my side, to make this
offer in defense of my medicine to all such as shall either ignorantly or
maliciously oppose themselves against it.

And here leaving the multiplicitie of Agues to the several writers that have
so curiously defined and determined of them, I will contain my self within
those few names and number of Agues only, which are most usually known to the
common sort of people, viz: a Quotidian, a Tertian, a double Tertian, a
Quartane, or a double Quartane. For the rest I refer all men to my Ancients
and Signiors in Physic, who are better acquainted with their names and cures,
then my self.

These medicines, because they are costly and hard to be gotten, are reserved
only for such as make some good valuation of their health.

The most of my medicines are given in small dose, viz: half a dram or
thereabout in powder to be swallowed in wine, beer, ale, or some appropriate
liquor which shall be disclosed upon the delivery of the medicine.

In all these cures I do neither use clister, bloudletting, vomit, nor purge,
happily in some deep rooted Agues, a larger sweat will be provoked then in
others by this medicine.

Neither the taste, nor the smell, nor the working (in my experience) has bin
any way offensive to the patient, they are all either vegetable or animal
medicines, and not mineral, although for my part I think as well and much
better of mineral then of any or all the rest being truly and philosophically
prepared, and hope to be a means one day for the publishing of some of them to
the general good of this land, and the credit of our English Physic: that
Master Bostocks obtestation to almighty God long since written, may at the
length receive some answer from the clouds, if God shall think it good to
bestow such a heavenly favor upon us.

The patient retains his full strength during this cure, which seldom or
never falls out in ordinary cures.

THE PRACTICE.
THe late Lord treasurers Barber (who as I take it does make the Gregorians for
bald heads an invention proceeding from a sharp and quick spirit) was cured
of an extreme Tertian very strangely and very suddenly, by one of these
medicines about seven or eight years past.

Ann. 1593.
Nurse Pace dwelling in Whitecrossestreete was cured of a Tertian by one of
these medicines, and within fourteen days after, she fell into the like
again by relapse, and was recured at the first taking.

Mast. Robert Albanie of Lincolnes Inn was cured of a Tertian at the first
taking.

The wife of Ma. Nichols a Draper in Walting-streete was cured of a Tertian at
the first taking.

Goodwife Harsley dwelling at Bishops haul took one of the defensatiue Cakes
and was cured of an extreme Tertian (...) the second taking.

Robert Betterton a servant dwelling at Lewsham was cured of a Tertian at once
taking.

John Dawley the Millers man dwelling at Lewsham was cured of a Tertian.

Reynold Rowse a Clothworkers son in Trinity lane of the age of ten years,
was cured of a Quotidian by one of these medicines.

Mast. Thorpe a Vintner dwelling at the sign of the Miter on Bredstreete hill
was cured of an extreme Tertian, whereof some fits held him 24. hours.

William Brook of Bromley in Kent a Colemaker, was cured of a Quartane at the
first taking.

John Glouer a painter dwelling in Grubstreete cured of a terrible Tertian; he
took the medicine but twice.

Elizabeth Rogers dwelling on the bankside having a double Quotidian, was cured
with one of the defensatiue cakes.

Mast. Filkins a skillful Scriuener and an honest man, having had two fits of a
Tertian, took a defensatiue cake and was helped.

Mistress Lee dwelling with Mistress Brett her mother at Edmonton, having had a
double Quartane a long time, was cured with one of the defensatiue cakes.

William Brook aforesaid possessed of a Quartane by relapse, was cured at the
second taking of the medicine.

Ioane Gwin a poor widow possessed of a Quartane, was cured thereof by one of
these medicines.

A Gentlewoman dwelling at Bishops hall, was cured of a Tertian at the first
fit, and afterward she was also cured of a second Tertian.

Ann. 1594.
Mast. Prescot a Goldsmith dwelling at the spread Eagle in Cheapeside, cured of
a Tertian at the first taking.

Samuel Sheafe M. Albanies man in watling street, cured of a Tertian at the
first taking.

Mistress Norman the midwife dwellin^ in Bow-lane, was cured of a Tertian.

Mistress Gore a merchants wife of good account dwelling in Bow-lane, being
great with child, and having a Tertian Ague, was cured by one of these
medicines.

Ioane, sometimes servant with the Author hereof, but then dwelling at
Brainford, was cured of a Tertian.

Mast. Susans a Barbary merchaunt, then lying at his house at Bishops hall,
was cured of a violent Tertian.

Mast. Iohnes of Radcliff being a Master of a ship, was also cured of a
Tertian at the request of the said Master Susans.

I cured Nurse Price of two several Tertians, she then being nurse to one of
my children.

Anne Mason (Mast. Pemmerton the elders maid being a Goldsmiths) was cured of a
Tertian.

Mast. Brook dwelling within Ludgate, having had diverse violent fits of a
Tertian before, was cured very strangely with one medicine.

A Cutlers boy in Holborne, was cured in the same manner of a Tertian.

Mistress Wamslow a merchants wife was cured of a Tertian.

T. G. Esquier was cured of a Tertian in a most easy manner.

Ieffrey Norman the midwifes son was cured of two Tertians at two several
times.

Chapels wife the Ioyner a most excellent workman dwelling in woodstreet, was
cured of a Tertian.

Ma. Barnes the Mercers wife in cheapside, was by her own confession cured of
an ancient and inueterate Tertian; and after walking abroad a far off from
her house at Battersey in an extreme cold evening, she fell into it again:
at which time upon some good respect, I forbear to cure her the second time.

I cured Mistress Shaw a Coopers wife in Saint James parish of a violent Tertian.

An. 1600.
I cured a Courtiers wife a Gentleman of good place of a Tertian, in so strange
a manner, as I neither had nor deserved any thanks, and yet she was helped at
the first fit having been long before most terribly vexed with a Tertian.

An. 1601.
In June or July last, I* gave a red powder in a cup of wine to a Carpenter
that wrought at Teddington with a most dear and worshipful friend of mine,
having had a long and violent Quartane, whereby upon his ill day he was not
able to work, and yet was able to perform his labor well at his next fit. I
doubt not, but that a second medicine would have made a perfect cure; which I
did forbear to send, because I heard no more from him.

In September last I cured nurse Wetherleis father in law dwelling at Hiegate,
of a long and extreme Tertian with my red powder at twice taking.

In January 1601. I cured a knights son of an old Quartane with my Mummia at
once taking, he had only a small fit or two after.

In February I cured Edmond Sawer, servant with a worshipful neighbor of
mine of a Tertian.

I cured the same person again of an other Tertian in March after, at the
first taking.

See diverse agues cured with my defensatiue cakes ante Tit. of Plague
dispersedly.

A general purgative and opener of obstructions both of the Spleen and Liver,
with the rare and approved uses thereof.
IF you would root out any disease therewith, then use no other drink to your
meals nor between meals, but such as is mixed with this opener according to
such direction as shall be given.

A quart or three pints every day a^ the most is a reasonable portion of th^^
compound drink for the patient to take* during his cure, the drink it self
wherewith it is mixed is only beer or ale which is strengthened thereby.

Hold half a spoonful of this medicine a pretty while in your mouth in a
morning fasting, and then spit it out, to dissolve a great stopping in the head
arising of cold, it works from the brain and stomach more kindly in my
opinion then Tobacco.

It is a very likely medicine to help deafness, arising upon obstructions
in the head.

It is a present remedy against a surfeit upon any excessive eating, to take
half a spoonful of the opener simple without mixture.

The compounde drink cures any dropsy that is not inueterate, and so
likewise of the French pocks being taken ten or twelve days, or rather till
the humor be spent, especially concluding the cure with a strong bath made of
the decoction (...) Guaicum.

It is also exceeding good against the Palsy being an obstruction of the
Nerves (as diverse learned Physicians do hold) whereby the spirits cannot have
their free passage. It also cures the yellow iaunders, it disporseth all wind
and all diseases arising upon cold Rheumatique causes, it comfort the
brain, and in a few days it procures a good stomach to him that refuses
his meat, and causes a kindly and natural rest.

It agrees with all complexions, as often experience can witness, only I find
the choleric man the unfittest patient of all the rest.

It never leaves working till it have rooted out the cause of the disease (if
it be curable) so as you take the same long enough. It works only upon
superfluous humors, not spending or wasting the balsame of life, or humidum
radicale at all, as ordinary purges do. And if in four, five or six days
taking, it happen to give ten, twenty, thirty, or forty stools in a
patient that has a full body, and well replenished with gross humors; he shall
find himself no weaker at the last stool, then he was at the first, so as he
leave before inflammation or pricking in the fundament.

If the patient having some extreme disease find himself heavy or
melancholique (but sick it will not make him) the first, second, or third day,
let him not dismay himself, for this is rather a good sign of comfort that
the medicine now is in contention with the disease, seeking to vanquish the
same.

A small and slender diet is best during all the cure, if the disease be old
and rooted, wherein, butter, milk, pottage, broth, salt, and all fattie meats
would be forborne, and the most nourishing meats, and such as be of lightest
digestion would be used: let the patient during his cure keep himself out of
the air, having a ^^e in his chamber, according to the season of the year;
and let him be careful that he take no cold, nor use Venerie (as he loves
his life) either during the cure, or in one month after he is in good health.

This compound drink is an excellent remedy against the green sickness.

According to the strength and weakness of your patient or of his disease,
make your drink stronger or weaker, and give more or less quantity
accordingly: for here discretion must guide you.

There is not any one of the common or ordinary purgatiues used in this opener.

This medicine being taken a few days at the spring and fall of one year in
a young gowte, or for two or three years together in an old and inueterate
gowte, will either make a perfect cure thereof, or bring the same to be a
very easy and tolerable gowte unto (...) patient.

This compounde beer or ale taken some reasonable time does cure an vlceration
in the stomach.

Where there is also occasion of Surgery offered, there first take away the
cause of the disease inwardly with this medicine, and then the Surgeon shall
after find an easy cure.

In the pocks anoint the Nodes and other sores with the simple extract.

This opener cures any green wound beyond the natural Balsamum, it is also
excellent for a bruise.

You may give this opener in Endive or fumitorie water, or some other cool
distilled water in hot bodies.

For accurtation in a long disease after 14. or 20. days if the patient be not
perfectly cured, let him use a strong bath of the decoction of Guaicum twice a
day, and before he go into the bath, let him take a warm draught of this
opener mixed with beer or ale, then let him go into the bath that he may
sweat.

During all the time wherein you take this mixed drink, warm your bed when
you go into it, and your clothes when you put them on.

This extract purges very gently and without any conuulsions, and without
leaving any drought in the body after, as ordinary purges most commonly doc.

If you take four draughts of a stronger mixture in the day time besides
mealdrinke, viz. at six in the morning one, and at nine another, and the third
at three in the afternoon, and the fourth going to bed, it will commonly
prepare the body the first day, and purge sufficiently the second day. This is
a good course for all such as cannot spare any longer time about their
Physic. But otherwise if a man do only take it at meals with a mornings
draught something stronger, whereby it may only give two stools every day
after the first day, or if that proportiou will not procure two stools every
day, then if the patient do also at bed time take an other draught of the
stronger mixture, by this means in longer time, according to the deep rooting
of the disease, he shall clear his body of all obstructions, and procure unto
himself a good stomach in a most delicate and easy manner, without any
offense unto his body, either during the cure, or after: and if the patient
please, he may only take so little thereof and that in his meal drinks, as
that after he finds himself to have sufficiently purged to his own desire,
it may serve to keep his body soluble as long as he lists, and find no
inconvenience even until all the superfluous humors that offend him, be wholly
rooted out and extirpated.

To ease the raging pain of the gout, take the simple extract vnwarmed, lay
it on gently with your hand upon the place grieved, and warming your hand at a
cha^ingdish of coals placed by your foot or hand, which paineth you, work it
in gently by little and little til you have spent a spoonful or two upon it,
one quarter of an hour at the least, the longer the better; and in the end
drive it with your hand till it be in a manner stiff like vernish, then lay on
a linen cloth, least it happen to stick to your hose or glove, lap the
member warm, and go into a warmed bed, and so it has been often proved to
give ease in less time then one hour, and the patient has slept well all the
night after. You may leave the cloth on til it will come off easily: note the
pain is easiest to remove upon the first approach, before you have vexed the
humor, and therefore good to have some of this always ready before hand.

If the patient be troubled with the running of the raines, first stay them by
some apt medicine, before you give this compound drink by way of diet.

This simple extract heals any itch or scabbes applied outwardly and rubbed
well in, but if the skin be broke or the flesh raw, it will smart for a
while, but heals the sore speedily, and at a few dressings: qre of Serpigo,
tetter, ringworme, etc. to be cured with the same.

This medicine will never decay, only you must keep your glasses well
stopped, that the spirits thereof do not euaporate.

This is an excellent medicine to prevent the gowte, sciatica, iaunders,
greensicknes and all diseases arising of rhumes, superfluous humors or
obstructions, and so I have both used it my self, and persuaded diverse of my
dearest friends to take it. It will also cure the same speedily being taken
before they be deeply rooted, and howsoever they be rooted it will greatly
qualify and ease them, and if it procure a perfect cure take it for an
advantage.

This medicine is not yet of so ancient a date as to yield many patients, and
some of those which have found benefit hereof, I know are veire unwilling to be
^amed, but the medicine is so safe both for sound and sick men to take; as
that the exposer or seller thereof will at all times be willing either to
begin or to pledge a health thereof unto his patient.

EYES.
Having my self been often troubled with a thin filme growing over mine eye,
and sometimes even ready to cover or clowd my sight; at the lenght I happened
upon a kind gentleman, who by earnest entreatie did first, bestow an excellent
water upon me for the cure of mine infirmity which did then exceedingly grieve
me, and afterward gave me the receipt thereof, which had been most carefully
kept as a sacre^ relic within the possession of one na^^ for a long time.

With this water I have helped diuets having filmes or skins, and white
specks in the eye, whose names I did not observe.

It tickleth a little, but it smarteth not being dropped into the eye: and
therefore the youngest child may well endure the same.

It lasts good a month or six weeks after it is made.

THE STONE.
THis medicine was obtained at the hands of a Jew being the Popes Physician in
the time of King Henry the 8. who curing an Italian in Rome, being then a
companion with an English knight there employed in the service of his prince of
his deadly pain and torment, by reason of great abundance of gravel in his
kidneis; did for his cure and ^he receipt of his medicine, receive a ^^ule of
the knight, which with his costly ^rappings and other rich furniture was
esteemed worth seven hundredth pounds: from this knight by mesne degrees it
came at the length into the possession of the publisher hereof.

THE PRACTICE.
ONe Ioane an hearbwife dwelling in Chatterhouse lane, and keeping her standing
commonly over against the Star in Cheapeside on the market days, was helped
with this medicine.

Mistress Wentwoorth dwelling in the whitefriers, having taken this medicine
twice did void either a bone or a stone like a bone and sharp pointed, being
also of such greatness, as that in man's reason it seemed impossible that she
should have expelled the same at so narrow a passage, the bone is yet to be
seen.

Goodwife Reynolds dwelling in the Church lane in Saint Martins has two stones
as yet to be seen that came from a child being of the age of three years,
who had not made water in four days before.

Diverse other persons, but of better account have also found ease by this
medicine, whose names for fear of giving offense unto them I do willingly
suppress, and have thought it more convenient to give a private testimony of
them to such as desire for their own good to be better satisfied, then by
public impression to make the^ generally known to all men.

Strangurie.
THere is also good proof to be made of cures performed with this drink, but
because it is such a disease, as no man of good sort would willingly either
have or be known to have, I do therefore refer my experience herein to
private satisfaction.

For the Hicocke or deadly yexing.
I Have also a most sovereign water to help the same, and that presently, and
can show good proof thereof.

Sundry other drinks and waters of rare use and virtue, which the said I.
Clarke will deliver at reasonable prices to such as have cause to use them.
AN excellent Aqua vita to be drunk upon a surfeit. 2. A drink whereof one
spoonful at a time does ease an old cough that tickleth in the throat. 3. A
notable diet-drinke to root out any ache arising of any Rheumatique cause, or
of the French disease, often proved. 4. A most singular Gargarisme to purge
the head speedily of all superfluous humors, often proved. 5. An assured
remedy both for the yellow and black iaunders. 6. D. Steuens water. 7. Aqua
mirabilis. 8. The water of life. 9. The Electuarie of life. 10. Aqua Calestis.
11. Aqua imperialis. 12. Aqua confortans stomachum* whereof some late
experiences do here ensxe.
MAster Robens a Gentleman of Lincolnes Inn, having an exceeding weak
stomach, was helped therewith: a very late cure.

Mast. Forest a Gentleman lying in Salisburie Court, not being able to digest
any meat which he did eat in three months before, at the first taking of
this water, was able to digest a piece of powdered beef to his dinner: a very
late cure also.

Mast. Monk a Gentleman of the temple always casting up whatsoever he did
eat, was perfectly cured at the second taking of this medicine. This was
performed in the last Summers vacation, being the most ancient of all the cures
here remembered.

Mast. Nigh an Attorney dwelling near Croydon, having surfeited upon a piece of
raw beef was presently eased with this water: a late cure.

Mast. Streets wife in Holborne, having her stomach very unapt to digest her
meat, found a perfect remedy with this water* late cure.

John Winningtons wife dwelling over against the house of the publisher hereof,
being given to a continual casting had her stomach perfectly strengthened with
this water: a very late cure.

13. Spirit of wine perfectly rectified. 14. Cinnamom water. 15. Rosa Solis.
16. Aqua vitae. 17. Aqua rubea. 18. An approved water to be held in the mouth,
and to procure a flux of Rheum. 19. An excellent Fucus for Beauty called a
Pigeon water. 20. A notable water for a stinking breath. 21. A Water to help
the Morphew. 22. A water to whiten and fasten the teeth. 23. An assured remedy
for the running of the Raines. 24. An excellent and approved remedy for the
collique. 25. A present remedy for the Mother. 26. An excellent water for
rheumatique or gummed eyes.
OINTMENTS.
AN approved ointment to take away hair from any place speedily, and without
pain.

28. An assured ointment to cure a red face that is full of heat and pimples,
without pain or smarting.

I Have here also thought it not impertinent to the subject which I have in
hand, after many references to set down some true and approved receipts,
which every man according to his own inf^rmitie may safely use or apply unto
himself, if he have just cause.

Approved remedies for the toothache, if the tooth be hollow.
POwder, a little of sal Armoniake, and according to the bigness of the hole,
apply your remedy in a small ragge of lawne bound about with a thread, and dip
the same in a little strong Aqua vitae, or rather spirit of wine; or if the
pain be very extreme, in a little of the oil of Vitrioll, then cut away all
the superfluous lawne and thread: and having put the same into the tooth, close
it up with linte, and commonly it gives ease in half an hour. Some do use
to stop the tooth with linte dipped in the oil of Origanum, or oil of
Thime. The hollow tooth being stopped with Pellitorie of Spain first bruised,
does often times leave aching. Also a good quantity of featherfew bruised and
applied behind the ear, has often been ^ound a good remedy. A little
Laudanum put into a hallow tooth, does sometimes help. Also take Henbane
seed, and boil it in Wine-vinegar, then take the syrrup of white Poppy and
mingle it with the vinegar and gargle both first warmed toward the tooth that
aketh. This is an excellent and approved remedy. I have set down diverse
receipts that the patient might have choice, if one or two should happen to
fail him.

Approved remedies for Corns.
FIrst pare the corn very low, then take the fat of a rabbets kidney, apply it
to the corn, binding a fine cloth about it, renew the same every night, and
at a few dressings it will so supple the same, that you may easily pluck it up
by the root. sapius probatum.

The soft roe of a red herring incorporated with the pulpe of figs in equal
proportion, and spread upon leather, and then applied to corns, first we^
pared, will help them at a few dre^sings: an excellent and approved receipt.

Mix the powder of calcined or burnt Allom with red wax, pare the corns and
apply it: often proved.

Fasting spittle mixed with powdered chalk and applied to a corn, and then
leaving it two days, and pilling off what you can with your nails every time
before you use fresh chalk and spittle, will soon root them out.

Some do labor to dig the corn up by the root, and then they drop one
drop of the oil of Sulphur in the hole to prevent it for growing again, but
this is a painful way.

Diverse excellent vomits with their singular uses.
INfuse upon Elleborus albus Brionie roots and Panis porcinus some spirit of
wine for two days, then distill the spirit over, then reinfuse and distill
again, reiterate this work three times; then take a few drops thereof, put
them into a cup of wine or other drink, or dippe a feather therein, and stir
the wine therewith, and it will give an excellent vomit. Take this vomit two
days together, each morning, if you feel your self ill at ease, or find any
great repletion in your stomach. This being used once every month or in six
weeks will keep a man's body in a perfect state of health. As it was assured
Mast. Rich of Lee by a most grave and learned Physician, who for many courtesies
conferred upon him, during his aboade at his house, gave him the receipt as a
great testimony of his love and requital. This, Mast. Rich by his own
confession continually used the space of thirty years after, and even till
his dying day without feeling any touch of disease.

I have also found by often experience in my self, that a vomit taken once in
a month or six weeks has prevented diverse infirmities in my self, and to be
an excellent means to clear an ague, being taken upon the first approach
thereof. But this vomit which I mean is very pleasant and works very easily,
and without any violence, and for mine own opinion, I am verily persuaded that
if it were generally used, it would save 20000. pounds a year in Tobacco, and
perform all or most of the effects which Tobacco does, and that in a more
easy and familiar manner, especially in such bodies who by nature have any
facility in casting with small provocation; for it clears the head and
stomach exceedingly of all superfluous, rhumatique, cold and undigested
matter; it is made in this manner.

Make an ale quart of posset ale, clarify the same, and put therein a small
handful of fresh Camomill, let it boil therein a few walmes, divide the same
into three parts; drink one third thereof fasting at two several draughts,
and after a little pawse, force your self with your singer or a feather to
cast: then take the second part doing as before, and dividing it into two
draughts; and after this, take the third part likewise. So shall you both cast
up all your posset drink, and clear as well your head as stomach of a great
deal of phlegm and crude humors, which you shall easily perceive to lie in
the bottom of the basin by the stubbed end of a broomesticke folded therein,
which will bring up the phlegm roping there at in great abundance.

Diverse excellent and approved ways for the staying of blood.
I Have often stayed bleeding at the nose by receiving a few drops of the
blood in a linen cloth and burning the cloth, the reason whereof I leave to
better Philosophers then my self.

Dry a little of the parties blood in a fireshouell over the fire, blow it up
with a quill into the parties nostrils, this seldom or never fails. Some
blow up bole Armoniake in the same manner. The dried blood of the party does
also stay the extreme bleeding of a wound, when all other remedies have failed.

The dry moss gathered from an Ashen tree or billet, and powdered, does
presently without all fail stay the bleeding at the nose, or of any wound;
this one remedy has saved the lives of many.

It is an ordinary means to stay bleeding by letting of blood, as it is to
stay a great looseness by some apt purgative.

John Clarke the publisher hereof will also be ready at all times to draw any
other waters, oils, spirits, extracts, salts, tinctures, etc. both faithfully
and according to Art for all such persons as shall at any time upon reasonable
warning require the same. His dwelling is in the midst of Sheere-lane hard by
Temple bar leading into Lincolns Inn fields.

FINIS.
1602. printer's or publisher's device

AT LONDON, Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bred-streete hill near to the
end of old Fish-streete, at the sign of the Star.


