A BRIEF METHOD OR WAY Teachinge all sorts of Christian people, how to serve
God in a most perfect manner. Written first in Spanishe, by a Religious man,
named Alphonso. And reduced owte of Latin into English in manner of a Dialogue
for the easier understanding and capacities of the simpler sort.

By I. M.

TO THE RIGHT WOORshipfull, and virtuous Cathol^ck Lady, the La. M. C.
ALbeit mankind, by the stinge of original sin, be deadlye wounded in body
and s^ule, as spoiled of immortali^^e and all divine graces, brought into a
woeful state of all miseries, and naturallye inclyned to do evil, to the
greater increase of his own damnation: yet the grace and mercy of God, haith
not altogether abandoned nor forsaken us, but (without any our good desert)
haith left us in this exile and vale of woes, diverse helps, remedies, and
means, whereby we may attain to his graceous fanoure again, and (after this
transitory life) be advanced to high glory and the eternal joys in heaven.
These means are his holy graces and virtues by which we may be moved and made
able to serve him, and to conform our selves to his will in all things. Our
perfect sanctity and frendshipp with god stands in this point, that we be of
same spirit with him, in every thing we do. And though he be a most graceous
and bountiful Lord, and exceedingly desireous of our eternal happy estate:
And haith moreover abundantly provided whatsoever may be necessary or
convenient for our welfare: yea and through the excess of his divine love,
haith left nothing undone that might help or do us good: yet haith he left
it in our own choice, and free liberty, whether we will accept and use his
graces, endeavor to get perfect holiness, and serve him as he desires for our
good, or not. Great ruin and destruction of all good, is made in our souls
by sin, but it is in our own power to repair again this loss and
calamity, and to obtain perfect holiness, which we may do, if (cooperating
with gods grace) we suffer our selves to be moved in all our actions only by
gods holy spirit and will, as S. Paul says his children to be.

To instruct this, many devout books and Treatises have been written by learned
and holy men in all ages, teaching what we ought to do, discoursing at large
of the natures of all virtues and vices, and yelding sufficient matter for all
sorts of holy Meditations touching the majesty, goodness, and other perfections
of god: Touching heaven, hell, Judgment, death, sin, virtue, and the rest:
Persuading to good life and terrifyinge from evil: All commodious works and
commendable trauells of good men. But among them all I never found hitherto
any comparable to a little book, deuulged by a religious man named Alphonso, in
the Spanish tongue. In which goulden Treatise, he gives us an exact and
perfect way, how we may repair again the ruin and woeful state of our
souls, by sin: and by rightly seruinge God, attain to the perfection of true
holiness and love of him. This Author leauethe the large and goodly discourses
of virtues and vices, their reasons, examples, persuasions, and allpoynts of
Meditations, (as all being sufficientlye Taught and handled, by others
innumerable and to be found every where,) and breefely touching the end for
which God created and placed us on earth, what bound and duty we have of
seruinge him: what abiection and misery our souls and bodies are brought unto
by sin: He shows a brief, yet a most exact way and manner, how by the
instruments and powers of our soul, namely our understanding and free will,
helped by godds grace, we may put in practice and execution, to his most holy
honor, and our own greatest profitt, whatsoever is taught and contained in
other books, how we may repair our state again, cast of all wicked
customs, expel all vicious habitts, enryche and beautify our selves with all
virtues, make all our woorks most preceous, acceptable, and meritorious, in
gods sight, become holy change our selves out of poor, naked, and abject
persons: into most glorious and divine creatures: And finally be united to God
in most perfect manner of frendshipp and love.

This preceous Jewel, I send you, as a token of my good affection, toward
your spiritual welfare, which I have translated out of latin, not yelding
word for word, but (cullinge out the principal points and pithe of every
Chapter) have reduced it into the form of a Dyalogue, thereby making it more
easy and plain, for the capacities of the simpler sort, whom also I wish,
may take commodity thereof, as I assure my self, your La. and every one may
do, that read and diligently practice, what is taught therein: without which
practice, all knowledge is unprofitable and vain. It is not written for vicious
persons, such as delight to live and wallow in sin, without regard of God
or their own souls health, for these will take noe benefit hereof, but the
Author haith prepared and directed this work, for the great good of virtuous
souls who are resolved to serve God: and standing in battle against the
world, the flesh and the devil, have a sincere defyre, to live well and
work their own salvation. This good every one that readethe it, may reap:
that knowinge thereby their own poor and imperfect state, and behoulding how
far of they are from that degree of perfection they should and might arryue
unto; They may abase them selves in their own conceyte, carry an humble mind
before heaven and earth, of their own imperfections and unworthiness, which is
a good stepp to further virtue: and be moved now and then, to work some
particular acts after the manner hereof which assuredly will be most pleasant
to God, and most meritorious to their own souls above all other works they
shall do.

Now in your afflicted state wherein you are tossed too and froe daungerously,
by the enemies of godds holy church, for your constancy in the catholic
Faith: Alphonso will teach you how to fraught your shipp, with all sorts of
virtues, more preceous then the Indian Treasures, that you may come well laden
to the port, when your Lord shall end your voyage.

How also to endure patiently, the raginge and furious storms of Godds
enemies: And how finally to keep allow sale, and an humble conceit of your
selves in all the good you do, and to referr all the honor and praise thereof
unto God the owner and geuer of all good gifts. For it is a most certain way
to loss and shipp-wracke of all, to impute any good to your self, or to carry
a high conceit of your own well doing.

Many virtuously disposed souls, delight greatly in variety and change of
their spiritual Exercises, and embrace with great affection every noueltye,
seking to know many ways to serve God: and ever think that to be preferred as
the best, which is strange and unknown to them, and that which they thoroughly
know and have used, they either loath or little esteem, such is the inconstancye
of our nature. But this newfangled mutabilitye, exceedingly hinders all
spiritual good and the progress in all virtue. And with out comparison better
it were diligently to keep and practice one (though it be a meaner) then to be
either negligente in the best, or to be always inconstantly flitting from one
to an other: for so should a man neither go forward, nor grow perfect in any.

Be familiar therefore and stay your self with Alphonso (good Madam) for so
shall you profitt greatly. And beware you be not content with the virtue you
have already gotten: For our Lord and God was made man, and vouchsaifed to
dye, for to advance us to a higher and perfect state of holiness in this life:
For this same end also he would that Angels should minister unto us: And
finallye for the same end he haith g^uen us the use of heaven and earth with
all his creatures in them. Remember me I beseech you in your devotions. And
thus I committ you to God.

Your servant in our Lord. I. M.

THE PREFACE OF The Author Alphonso.
Saint Ambrose says, that ignorance of the order and manner how to work,
greatly troubles the quality of our meritt. Neither is it to be thought (as
the same Author affirms) that we have full knowledge of a thing which we
know we ought to do, unless we know withal the order of proceedinge in the
same.

Whereupon it is manifest, that it profits very little, if one know what is
written for serving God, and be ignorant in what manner and order it is to be
done. And albeit art and knowledge of every good thing, flows from God the
supremest artificer, and many be illuminated by his goodness, and prevented with
benedictions of delighte and sweetenes: yet for all that we must not omit to
do what is in us, to seek (as we are bound) his commandments and will, and
other things which be necessary for doing perfectly whatsoever is pleasing
unto him. For which purpose the brief form and Method which here we set
down, will be profitable, that we may know and work those great things,
which the holy scriptures teach us. The which to do it is noe less needful
that some art be sought owte, then for doing any other thing which we covert
rightly to know or work. To find owte this art, the holy Doctoures have
spente much time, and have left it written at large in diverse volumes: of all
which, we will gather a brief conclusion or sum. But this short work being
chiefly ordained for the Exercyses of the soul: it will seem somtymes very
obscure to them which have not been exercysed in the knowledge and operations
of the powers of their soul. Yet we shall show after a while in the
prosecution of the book this Method to be so far from obscurity, that it
brings great light to all other books of like argument.

Neither let any think it superfluous or vain, that we give Documentes
whereby we may be helped to serve God, when as all the Scripture witnessith
such to be necessary. And S. 1 Cor. 3
Paul says, that we are helpers or coadiutors of God: but he either helps
not rightly, or not sufficientlye, that helps not as much as he can and
ought. Neither is it any other thing in us that we help God, then that we
move our soul in all our works, according to the prescripte rule of this
present art, as sacred divinity at large declares.

The Philosopher in his Metaphisicks affirms, that mankind live the by art:
in which place he seems by this property to distinguish man from unreasonable
creatures, for that all these are moved only by natural instruct without
art: but man is ruled by art and reason: Wherefore he may be said to serve
God as it we are only by natural instinct, like to creatures void of reason,
that is moved to serve him that way, by which he feels greatest consolation
and sweetenes without regardinge by his understanding and reason, whether
there be any other manner, whereby he may be able, to serve God more excellently.

Moreover there is noe cause, why any should allege the unction of the holy
Ghost, to teach us in all things, and therefore any art or Method where by we
may learn to serve God, isneedeles: which saying is true, presupposinge that
we our selves also be his coadiutors or helpers, endeuoringe to know and
work, as we are taught in the sacred scriptures, and in this art which we
are to give. For the unction of the holy ghost, teachethe not them that are
unwilling to learn, nor them that are idle, or make resistance.

Furthermore lest the sweet yoke of our Lord seem heavy to any, let us
consider that it is not a thing to be merueled at, if some days are to be
spent, for getting so high knowledge and wisdom, as is hear contained and
taught in this art. For if in learning Grammar or Logic (arts far
inferior to this) one consume and spend 3 or 4 years, yea all his lyfo, if
he will be perfect in any of them: how much better is our life bestowed (yea
if it be wholly spente therein) for the perfect learning of this art most high
and divine of all other arts, which our supreme master Jesus Christ, came
to teach us, with his so great toil and pain.

Moreover, he that beginnethe to learn this art, must consider, that it will
happen to him, as it is wont to happen to infantes, who having perfect
souls, yet want the use of reason: and having in their bodies hands and
fecte, yet can not go or work: but when they once begin to wax and to move
their limbs, they go, yet with great difficulty, and with fallinge now and
then: but growing elder, and vsinge daily Exercise, they go so freelye, that
they can run at their pleasures.

The same happens in these Exercises, whiles one desyrethe purelye to serve god
aster this Method: For albeit our souls be perfect and intyere, yet so
mightily are we bound and oppressed and without strength to move our selves
in the perfect way manifested in the holy gospel, and declared in this art
which we set owte, that at the first, we can not walk or go at all, or if
we be moved or attempt this, it is with such difficulty, that our goinge is
well near nothing. Yet notwithstanding let us manfullye endeavor to do what
is here prescribed so well as we can: for whiles we shall scarce dare, to hope
to get the perfection taught us, we shall by practyse yea so run by these
high paths that it may be said truly, our motions to be rather the motions of
an Angel flying, then of a man walking on earth.

None ought to pretend any excuse why he serves not God after the manner we
have here set down, co^tenting him self with the litterall observation of some
religious rule, or the commandments of God, as sufficient to salvation. For
as the Apostle says, Gods will is that we be holy and perfect. Saying
therefore riches already gotten, do not suffyce nor co^tente the lovers of the
world, but always they wish and covet more, yea often contrary to Gods
commandment. Neither in like manner ought we to be content with these
spiritual riches we have allreadie: but labor to increase them dailye, and
augmente the reward we expecte, saying God does vehemently desire that we so
do. But if our appetite covet not this, for the profitt we may gert thereby, at
the least it should extend it self to desire it, because we know it to be
gods will that we be magnifyed and enryched in all things, as the children of
so eternal and glorious a Father in heaven, who admonishes us saying, Be you
holy, because I your Lord god and Father am holy.

This book may be entitled, The Way, Art, or Method, of fitly serving God:
which may be divided into three parts. The first conteyneth certain
universal documents, instructions, or rules, whereby we may be directed in all
our actions. The second part co^teyneth certain particular Exercyses, in
which the servant of God must be exercysed, that he may repair the ruin and
corruption which sin haithe brought into his soul.

The Third part treats of the love of god, and those things which he
commands to be loved, in which love consistethe the fulfillinge of the Law,
and of all our good. And let him mark that shall read this, how much labor
and diligence he bestows, that desires to be conninge and furnished in some
profane art, and how meet it is, that more diligence be used in this affayre.

These considerations therefore had and chefely relying upon the assistance of
our supreme master Jesus Christ, our eternal God and Lord, we will begin the
foresaid art and Method.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. HOW THE PILGRIM and the Ermit met, and of their conference.
IN Mantua, there once dwelled a Knight called Probus, who for his valor,
wisdom, and other virtues, was much renowned in his country, and of all states
very dearly beloved. He was of a most devout and religious disposition,
studying more to serve and please the omnipotent king of heaven, then the
world or any earthly prince.

About the solemn feaff of Easter, he would go on pilgrimage, to visitt
Jerusalem and other devout places of the holy land. And as he traueled
through a deserte in Siria, he missed his way and was benighted: And wandering
too and froe, he espied at the last a candle shyninge from the side of a rock:
thither he went with all have, and called of them within. By and by there came
forth a fatherly oulde man named Alphonso, and asked who he was that called so
vntymelye at his Cell? I am a pilgrim for the holy land said Probus, and
goinge astray in this wilderness, I espied by good happ your candle, and am come
to crave harbor with you this night. All that come in godds name be welcome to
me said Alphonso. I thank you good Father said Probus.

When they were come within the Cell and set down, each beheld other very
earnestly. And Probus said, I meruell good Father, how you can endure to live
this austere life in your comse attire of sack cloth, with slender fair in
this uneasy hoale. I have endured it said Alphonso, these many years I thank
God, and during this mortal life, I desire noe change. In what sort I pray
you said Probus, have you spent your life in this solitary place, and what
business have you had to keep you here thus long? This manner of life seems
very horrible to man's nature. Man's nature indeed my son said Alphonso,
would not endure this, if it were not drawn on and fedd with greater comforthe
an other way.

The only business wherein I bestow my self in this place, is continually to
serve my Lord and God: which trade of life, is to me so sweet, pleasant, and
profitable, that it ouercometh all the horror, pain, and other difficulties,
which the frailty of my nature fyndeth. What exceeding joys also I have by
the hope of mine eternal reward with God for serving him as I do (if by his
grace I persevere to the end) my tongue can not express.

It seems said Probus, your serving of God is more then ordinary: For I serve
him also as I think, yet have I not any such joy therein as you speak of. My
dyetr is dainty, mine apparel rich, my house sumptuous, and yet with all
these, I find small pleasure or ease in serving God.

These temporal commodities said Alphonso, I want voluntarilye, because it
best pleases my Lord that I so do, and that I be content with necessaries,
without encombring my self with such superfluous things as you speak of,
which if I had or desired, would pethapps much hinder me in godds service, and
are assuredly nedelesse, to my life, health, or good estate: But the perfect
service of God, which brings to man true comforth delight, and beneftte in
this life, and a joyful hope of inestimable reward in heaven, consists not
in the want or having of these temporal commodities: For you also in your
wealth and abundance (if you knew the way) might perhapps serve God with as
much pleasure and benefit, as I do in this poverty wherein you see me live.
For our Savior said: Blessed be the poor in spirit, because theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Which happy blessing and poverty not only they may enjoy
that want all earthly treasures and commodities: But also the greatest princes
in the world, in the midst of their wealth and abundance.

If this be so said Probus, I beseech you teach me the way, for I confess I
know it not: and if I can learn this lesson, I think I have great advantage
of you, that live thus austerely in this desert. Perhapps noe great advantage
said Alphonso, for it is noe less grateful and acceptable unto god and noe
less meritorious to our selves, to forsake all temporal commodities for his
service, then to possess and use them to the same end: yea the frailty of
man and the corruption of our natures considered, it is much less peril to
want them then to have the^. For the more we encomber and distract our small
abilities about earthly thigs the less able are we to attend and wholly yield
our selves to heavenly.

But I shall willingly teach you the best way of seruinge God that hitherto I
have known. Set aside therefore all other thoughts; and mark well what I
shall say. When you conceive me not, ask bouldly what my meaning is: For it is
lost time to us both, if I proceed, and teach more then you understand. Good
Father said Probus, seeing you give me leave, I will make bold to interrupt you
when either I conceive you not, or doubt in any point. So do in godds name
said Alphonso.

First then I must lay you down a few considerations and instructions, of
great importance, and which are the foundations and groundwork whereon we must
stay and raise up all the frame we are to build. And you must often and verey
carefullye call them to mind, if you think to profitt in this way of serving
God I shall do my best endeavor therein said Probus.

THE FIRST INSTRVCTIon, showing to what end God created Man, and placed him
upon earth. CAP. 2
THe first instruction said Alphonso, and the foundation of all often and
seriously to be considered, is, that God (as the holy Scripures and Fathers
teach) created and sent us into this world, not to enjoy and rest in the
transitory commodities and pleasures thereof: but that (taking of godds
creatures so much as may suffyce our necessities) we occupy and bestow our
selves and all the rest we have, in serving and honoring our lord, who haith
prepared for our reward, the bliss of heaven, wherein we shall possess for
ever, God him self, that is, an infinite good, and in him, all good things
more abundantly then we can imagine. To honor and serve God therefore (my son)
are we come into this world. All we do besides this is nothing else but lost
labor, vain and hurtful tryfling, dishonorable to the noble children of
such a father as God is. No doubt father said Probus, but we were created to
serve God as you say: But what kind of service does God require of man, and
is by man of bound and duty to be performed.

THE SECOND INSTRVCtion, of two manners how to serve god, and how Man is bound
unto them. CAP. 3.
THere be two sorts of seruinge god said Alphonso, and two ways in like
manner are we bound to serve him. The sirste is in the observing of godds
commandments, which we are all bound to keep under pain of eternal
damnation to hell fire. The second is more perfect, and is this, that
(forsakinge all earthlye things, and withdrawinge our hearts from the love
thereof) we cast our affection wholly upon our heavenly Father which is an
infinite goodness, and in all things labor to be of the same spirit and will
with him, according to the example which our Savior the natural Son of God
left us whiles he served here on earth, not for any need of his own, but to
instruct us how we ought to serve our Lord. This way Christ taught the young
man which had kept the commandments when he said, If thou will be perfect,
give all thou have to the poor, and com and follow me. How are Christians
bound to this manner of service said Probus?

Not under pain of eternal damnation said Alphonso, as in the first way, but
by a Law of frendshipp with god of equity and gratitude, wherein all the
children of God that would not be reckned base-minded, ungrateful, and
foolish, should most carefully keep them selves, that they may appear the
worthy children of so graceous a Father. For to all it is given in
commandment, that we love our Lord with all our soul, with all our heart,
with all our mind, and with all our strength. And to all he said: Be you
perfect as your heavenly Father is.

As he deserves much blame that going to some place for dispatch of some
weighty and necessary affairs, and neglecting and leaving the thing he went
to do, trifleth away his time in vile sportes and abject things: so likewise
is he much blame worthy, that being borne into this world to serve the high
majesty of God with all his powers and abilities, (which service is most due
unto God, and most profitable to the servant) yet omittethe it because it is
not commanded him under pain of death, bestowing him self in the mean season,
in a meaner and more abiecte kind of service, mixed with much worldly
vanity, that most swiftly passes away, and bringethe with it much evil. And
albeit God haith left it in our free choice and curtefye, yet the bound of
frendshipp, equity and gratitude, requires that we endeavor to serve him (to
whom all honor and service is most due) in the best manner we are able. The
first way to serve God said Probus, is plame and manifest to all Christians,
but the other apperteyneth only to you Eremites, to religious persons, and
Clargie men.

As the first said Alphonso, is common to all Christians, and taught every
where: so there is no Christian but he may be taught, learn, and perform the
second. I can hardly think so said Probus, for we may not all forsake the
world and cast all our hearts upon this perfect seruinge of God you speak of.
No person said Alphonso, is made a Christian, before he first solemnly renownce
the world, with all the pompes and vanities thereof, and yield him self to the
obedience and service of God. And therefore the profession, not only of
Ermits, religious persons and Priests: but of all true Christians also, is to
forsake the world, and serve their Lord with all they are and have. For as I
said God created man for this end, and for all temporal and earthly things,
no man does rightly use them or can have them, but to his exceedinge harm,
unless he turn them wholly to the service, and honor of his Lord, whose in
truth they be and not man's but for a little time to use as god haith ordained
and commanded, which service we ought to yield to God, not only in keeping his
general commandments, but in the perfectest manner, as Christ our Lord by
his own exawple haith taught us all. And this second is that, which now I
purpose to teach you, that is, how rich men, artificers, and all sorts of
people, may serve their Lord and God most perfectlye. This will be most
comfortable to us of the world said Probus, but it seems a most difficult
thing to be done.

THE THIRD INSTRVCTION Of the woeful ruin and destruction made in man's soul
and body by sin, by reason whereof, he fyndeth great difficultye in seruinge
God. CAP. 4
YOu must know moreover said Alphonso, that if man had continued in the happy
state wherein God created him at the first when he placed him in paradise, it
had been noe difficulty for him, to have served God in most perfect manner,
and to have wrought any good. For the^ by original justice, his sesuality and
inferior powers were kept in most semely order and perfect obedience to his
reason and will. And these again were guyded and assisted, by singular and
abundante graces, easily to obey and serve God and work any good. But after
once by the evil use of his free will, he sinned and transgressed the
commandment of his Lord: he with all his progeny were spoiled of those
graceous gifts and cast out of that happy state and place into the banishment
of this miserable world. His appetites, his will, and whole soul, became so
infirm and diseased, that (loathing the infinite good for which he was
created, as a thing wherein now he took noe delight or pleasant taste, and
auerst from all good) he is ever since inclyned to evil, and can desire or
love scarsly any other things, but abject, viceous, and hurtful. By reason of
that greauous loss and woeful change, mankind ever since haith found much
difficulty in the service of god, or doing well.

Our concupiscence and inferioure powers, being now for want of original
justice, let loose and set at liberty: never cease mightily to repugne and
disobey, the reasonable parts of our soul: yea and to draw them to any thing
they like, withowt regard what either reason or God commands.

We have still left us said Probus, the powers of our reason and free will, and
God geuethe the assistance of his grace to all that call for it: by these the^
we may serve God in the best manner he requyrethe, notwithstanding the
corruption and repugnance of our inferior powers. We may serve him so indeed
said Alphonso, but not with such facility, promptnes, and alacrity* as we
might have done in the state of our innocence. For not only the inclinations
and motions of our sensuality be very disordered and contrary to our reason,
yea excedinglye importune and vehemente to draw us from good to evil: but our
reason also is much darkened, by that fall from original justice, and our will
sore weakened and wounded, yea and of them selves quyte disabled either to
resist the continual assaults of our sensuality and inferior parts, or
effectually to work any good. The grace of god indeed enableth us to do
well, but yet (as it is ordinarilye bestowed on men) it takethe not from them,
nor quite ouercometh, the repugnancy and difficulties, which our corrupt
natures have in doing well. Can we not said Probus ouercom this difficulty by
any means? Yea in great part said Alphonso, by singular and extraordinary
graces given by God, and by the good habits of virtues which we may plant in
our souls, by diligent exercise of our superior powers as I shall tell you
hereafter. But now remember that this great confusion and perturbation in our
souls, our auersio^ from good, our inclination to evil, with difficulty of
woorking well, came all from sin: and yet the same bound of doing well and
serving God which we had before this destruction, is not taken away from us.
For though we not do our duties but with much difficulty, yet do them we may
by the assistance of godds grace, and by little and little, repair again the
loss and wrack we have gotten by sin, in our soul and appetites. How may
this reparation be made said Probus, for I think the nearer we bring our souls
and powers to their former state, the better shall we be disposed, and with
more facility shall we be able to do our duties in serving God. Yea moreover
said Allphonso, we may profitt so much herein, that we may obtain wel-neare
the same facility to work with great delight in this corruptible life, which
we should have had in the state of innocence.

THE FOVRTH INSTRVCtion, by what powers of our soul, we may repair our ruin,
and of the way how to use our understanding and will. CAP. 5
IN what manner said Probus, is this Reparation to be made? It can not be made
otherwise said Alphonso, but by the powers and abilities of our soul helped
and assisted with the grace of God. Wherefore you must understand, that as man
is made, and consists of a body and soul: so haith he infirmities in them
both to work with, as the body haith feet to go, hands to labor, tongue to
speak, and the like. In the soul, there is the understanding and will, with
diverse other sensual powers. The corporal instruments and their actions of
them selves, are of small wotth and little profitable, as S. Paul said to
Timothy. But the understanding and the will, may of their own natures, be of
excellent dignity and profitt, as if we occupy them to know God and love him,
or to consider any good thing, and to desire it, or to know what is evil, and
to hate and shun it: which operations of these two powers, are greatly
commodious, though the body rest all the while and do nothing. For by the
Exercise of such actions abowte any particular virtue, we should produce and
bring forth good habits in our soul and destroy the evil, which is a
commendable thing, though it be done but only for the love of virtue, as the
heathen Philosophers did: much more when a Christian does it having faith: but
most of all if such a man do it with actual intention, for the love, honor,
and service of God, as I shall declare anon.

These two instruments therefore, the understanding and the will, and their
operations, are the means (gods grace ever concurring with us) wherewith we
may perfectly serve God and work the reparation of our soul.

They be indeed said Probus, the chiefest and most noble powers that man
haith, and therefore fitteste for such an end: but in what sort should we use
them rightly? Our sensual appetite said Alphonso, naturally desires the
thing which it is inclined unto, that is, what soever seems unto it pleasant,
delectable, and sweet for the present, to these naturally it is carried
without further respect: And in like sort it flees whatsoever seemethe hard,
sharp, and vnpleasante.

But our will is not moved in this sort, for before it desire or shunn any
thing, it consulteth with the understanding, whether the thing be conueniente
or not, and according as the understanding, judges, so the will freely
desires or refusethe it: So that the understanding, is as it were, a light
and guide to the will, shewinge the truth of every thing as it conceive the it,
and directinge the will how to work.

Wherefore above all other things we must be careful, that our understanding
do not err or be deceived in any thing we go about to desire or shun. For
if it be blinded by ignorance, passion, or malice: it can never judge rightly,
nor consequently the action of the will ever be good.

But again, though the understanding be without error and judge truly what
the thing is, or show rightly what is to be done in any occasion: yet so
marvelous is the power of ma^s will, that it stands in free liberty, to
follow, and woork as the reason judges, or to refuse. Only it of all other
powers and abilityes in man, haithe fredom and perfect liberty. It is subject
to none, and commands all the rest: yea and in a marvelous sort the same
power can predominate over it self, both freely command and enforce it self
to obey: so that hereupon comes all our evil, if either the understanding
err, or (it judging rightlye) the will by reason of her lidertie, will not
work accordingly. In this sort therefore we must proceed with these two
powers for the reparation of our souls.

And first for the understanding, in every thing which either by our natural
teason, or by the light of our faith, we know to be good, or disposing or
furthering us to virtue, and nevertheless we find great difficulty, horror,
and auersion in our selves to do or desire it as were for our good: we must
presently use the power of our understanding, and with it, consider and
apprehende, those same things (which seem so sharp and grievous to our
natures) as things most preceous, and to God also most acceptable, and which
may further us also, to eternal life and joys: And after once we have
considered and known them to be such, the will which had auersion and horror
of them before, may now be encouraged to love, desire, and embrace them, and to
work them in effect.

When they are thus considered and known to be such said Probus: yet is the
will free to choose, to do them or not. You say truly said Alphonso, the will
ever remains free, and haith perfect dominion and liberty to do, or not to
do: but yet often it is terrifyed with the difficulty and sharpnes of the
thing which is offered to it, and thereupon cease to work, and so sins
or omitteth the good that it might have done. But if we endeour by our
understanding, to prepare the way in manner abouesaid, it will take such
courage upon the knowledge of the excellencye of that work, that (be it never
so painful) it will love and desire it, and do it also with as much
facility and delighte welnere, as any other thing which it coueteth
naturally. Mark this point well my son, for I assure you that he which would
work and use his understanding in this manner, should easily and in short
time, come to great perfection of virtue, and woork with much delight and
comforth. I think it well said Probus: But may I entreat you to deliver me
this by some example?

With good will said Alphonso: but it will fall more conuenientlye after I have
showed you how also you must use your will, for this is the chiefest point of
all. Then proceed I pray you said Probus.

THE Use of the will.
SVpposing said Alphonso, gods holy grace ever to assist and concur with
ourfree will (for otherwise we were not able to think any good expediente for
our salvation, much less to desire and work the same) you must know that it
is in our own power to desire or leave to de desire, any thing judged good or
evil by our understanding, and the same we may do for this or that end, and
as often every day as we will.

Now to wake the will desire to do a good thing which naturally it does
abhor, by reason perhapps it is painful, hard, or vnpleasante: we must (as
I said before) consider and apprehende the same thing, as most preceous and
grateful to God, and commodious to our selves: and then incline our will
(enforcing it after a sort) to desire and covet that thing, as a sick man
desires a bitter potion, because he apprehends it as wholesome, the which
narurally he does loath and abhor. In like manner also is produced the act of
refusing or not desiring the evil, which we naturally covet or are inclined
unto; that consideringe it to be ungrateful to God, evil and hurtful to our
selves, we incline our will, and as it were violently enforce it, not to desire
that thing. For example, to covet to be despised, contemned, or little esteemed
among men, is a thing horrible, unpleasant, and difficulte to our nature: And
in like manner to forsake all sensual delights and pleasures.

Now he that would have an act of desiring such contempts and wantes of
pleasures; must first consider and apprehend them, as most excellent and
worthy things, most grateful to God, and greatly meritorious to him self,
and then compel as it were and enforce his will, to accept and desire them. In
like sort also to be honored, highly esteemed, and be loved of all men, to have
sensual pleasures and other things delightful, sweet, and pleasant to our
nature: He that would make an act of refusinge and hatinge them, must consider
and judge them with his understanding, as things of base value, displeasant
and ungrateful to God, and hurtful to him self. And then upon this true
conceit of these harms in them, cease to desire them and make an act of
hatred or contempt of them, as the sick person does abhor and refuse a most
sweet potion or other meat pleasing his appetite, because he knows it to be
hurtful unto him, though otherwise he had a vehement natural desire and
inclination to the same.

In using our understanding and will in this manner said Probus, shall we feel
noe repugnance in our sensuality? Yes said Alphonso and that often very
great, but this not-withstanding, our act is a true desire or refusal of our
will: As we behoulde in the sick man, that will not eat the meat to which he
haith a great affection and appetite, because it is unwholesome for him, and that
same will of his not to eat it, is profitable unto him, though his inordinate
appetite be not taken away. But by often woorking with the will in that sort,
the repugnance and all difficulties, will be lessened daily by the good habitts
we get by our particular actions. And albeit we seem little to profitt or go
forward, and to find small pleasure in woorking thus, by reason of the
contrary vicious habitts, inclinations, and customs in our soul, which make
ouractions seem weak and could: yet must we not cease to do them, for by
practice and exercise, we get dailye more strength and readiness, and we go
forward with great meritt.

Is this all said Probus I am to learn about the use of these two powers?

This which I have toulde you said Alphonso, is the way to use them: but one
thing more I must tell you, which all that would perfectly and assuredly
repair their souls, must with great diligence, carry in mind and practice:
for it is as it were the key of all our reparation. What is this I pray you
said Probus? My son said Alphonso, it is that besides the continual study
and care we ought to have of exercisinge the will, in desyring the good things
we should desire, and omitting the desire of evil things, thereby to destroy
evil habitts in our soul, and plant good, that besides this I say, we be
diligent by the use of our will, to repress and resist the first thoughts,
motions, and appetites, which often assail even virtuous persons, and which
may be consented unto withowt mortal sin. As for example, to be delighted
that our deeds or words, be well esteemed, or to be sorrowful and displeased
for injuries, and auersion of other persons from us, and such like: In all
which, though it be not a mortal sin, that we be occupied or co^sente to
them, yet few know what great loss and harm they bring to us, for by them
our soul is made dull and heavy toward good things it should do. He
therefore that desire the to be lord over his own actions, and be able with
facility to work well: ought presently with his will, to resist these first
motions or suggestio^s: That where he was assailed with a motion of grief for
such injuries and auersion, or such like: he presently oppose him self and
resist such sorrow and grief, with an actual desire of injuries, vexations,
contempt, and contradiction. And contrari-wyse in the motions of honor,
creditt, favor, and all other sweet, and delectable things, whereupon
presently arryseth in us a complacency and delight: We must be ready by and by
to work with our will an act of not desyring or delighting in such things
as naturally we are inclyned unto and couett. For by so doing, we shall not
only escape vanity and sin but by often practice, and use, obtain excellent
habitts, and expel the evil. Mark this well, and it may suffice for this
point and instruction.

I perceive said Probus, those good habitts would take away all or most of
our difficulty in woorkinge well: What way then may we get them?

I shall teach you this also by and by said Alphonso, but first I must tell
you what intention and end you must have in the use of your powers, and in all
your actions; for without knowledge of this, all you can do, will be to small
purpose or commodity.

I pray you let me here it then said Probus

THE FIFTH INSTRVCTION, What end, scope, and intention, the seruante of God
should have in all his actions. CAP. 6.
YOu must know therefore said Alphonso, That in all things which we desire or
do, the end, intention, and motive, why we do it, makes the act good or
evil preceous in gods sight and meritorious, or vile and sinful: In so much
as a good woork done for an evil end, is evil, though otherwise of it own
nature it were good.

Does a good end in like manner said Probus, make an evil work good?

Not so said Alphonso, For as a good work must be every way void of evil,
as well, in it own nature, as in the end for which it is done: So an evil
work is made evil, either for that it is evil of it own nature, or done for
some evil end. For which cause the Apostle said, that it was unlawful to do
evil, for a good purpose. Go forward said Probus for I understand this.

Every woork said Alphonso, that is good of it own nature, or that is
indifferent, that is, which being neither good nor evil of it self: may yet
be made good by a good end or inte^tion, or evil by an evil end. Every such
work I say, may be done or desired for diverse good ends, as for the love of
virtue, or for the benefit of our selves or our neighbors, or for the
imitation of our Savior and his Saints, or finallye for the love of God, and
thereby to serve, please, and honor him.

Now as one end is better then an other: So consequently, that work is
better, which is done for a better end, and that the best, which is done for
the best end. Wherefore because god is an infinite goodness, that work is the
best which is wrought purely and whollye for his sake, or to yield him honor
or service, without respect of any other end. The servant of god then that
desires in the best manner to please and serve his Lord, must do all things
both in body and soul, for God, to please, serve, obey, and honor him
thereby: That (forgeating as it were the good and glory that may come to our
selves by doing any act of virtue, and mindful only of God which desires
our well doing, and delights in it, and is most worthy to be served and
honored by us in every thing) we be moved to woork only for pleasing and
honoringe him, and for fulfilling his will: Like to a man, that for recovering
his own health, haith prepared a medicine, and before he take it, perceauing
his dear friend to be fallen sick, and to have greater need of the same: In
this case (forgeating as it were his own infirmity, and the desire he had to
that medicine, and mindful only of his friend) he rejoices to forgo it
himself, and to bestow it for releeuinge of his friends necessitye: So should
we I say again, serve God, and ever (forgeating our selves and all other
things) desire and work only, because it is godds will we do it, and
because his majesty requires it at our hands. For this end and motive we
should covet to love god, desire virtues, desire and pray for pardon of our
sins, for graces, for glory: For this end we should flee sin, fear hell,
abhor damnation, and desire or refuse whatsoever. It seems hard and
unpleasant at the first, but after a while, it will be easy and delightful.
And such as have their wills enflammed with devotion and the love of god, at
the first hearing of this way, can woork thus without difficulty: and in
short time come to exceeding great perfection.

But how said Probus, shall beginners which have but could devotion, and weak
love of God, com to get this motive actually in all they do?

They may get it said Alphouso by the use of their understanding and will in
this sort. Let them consider, apprehend, and set God as their chiefest friend
and most worthy Lord on the one side, and them selves on the other. This done,
when their will is moved to covet any virtue, or do any good work: Let them
consider for what end they are moved, and they shall find it usually, either
for fear of punishment, or for their own benefit, or for the love of virtue,
or desire of heavenly bliss. None of these motives should suffice or content
the servant of God, though they be not evil: But saying his will is so free
(gods help ever presupposed) that it may refuse any one end, and choose an
other, as I told you before: And saying also he beleeuethe godds will to be
more excellent and worthy, and that it should move him rather then his own: He
must violently enforce him self to omit and refuse to desire or will any
thing after his wonted manner and, bring his will to desire the same thing for
a better end and motyue, that is, to desire to do it, for fulfillinge the
blessed will of God and pleasing him, and for that he (worthy of all service,
obeisance, and honor) would have him to do it.

This lo is the way to get this divine motive in all our actions, which so
incomparably excellethe the motives of our own natural desires, and all other
motives (how good and virtuous soever they be) as noe tongue ca^ express. For
the perfection of all our holiness and charity, consists in this point, that
we conform our selves in all things to godds will, and be of the same mind
with him. For which cause, and for that it is Gods high pleasure and desire,
that upon this motrue we ferue him: we should endeavor to have it in all our
works both corporal and spiritual both great and small: yea in those also
which we are naturally to woork according to gods ordinance, as to eat,
sleep, etc.

For as we can not leave these undone: so doing them for the love of God, they
help us much to the increase of our spiritual life: And so the least work
that we do in Godds sight, as to eat, sleep, recreate, and the like: shall be
of more dignitye, then the greateste work which he does that haith not the
same end: as to fast, to watch, to give alms, to afflict the body, and such
like, for the kingdom and joys of heaven, or any other end be it neuerso good.

Thus may we excedingly enriche ourselves every day: thus may we be made as it
were divine, when we are moved in all our actions, only by the spirit and
will of God. And therefore when we are about to do any thing we should not
pass unadvisedly from on thing to an other, nor ever begin any thing, without
casting of our eyes before upon God: nor be content and satisfied with this
neither, till we feel our selves to will and desire the work for pleasinge
God, who excedinglye ioyeth and delights in our well doing, which once
perceived and sensiblye known, let us set upon the woork we are to do,
without thinkinge upon any good of our own. For it is fit and due, that his
omnipotente and blessed will that created all wills, have such precminence and
dominion over all wills, that not only they obey him in all he haithe
commanded them: but moreover, that they do every thing they are to woork,
for the fulfilling his holy will, without any further respect. At the beginning
it will seem very difficult and hard to work upon this motive, and small
devotion or joy will appear in this Exercise: and the reason ^s, for that we
work not now, nor love not, for any good of our own, as we were accustomed
to do, and as it is natural to us: But woorking only for the love of God, we
as it were remove away from us, the root from which all joy and delight, was
usually and naturally wont to spring, that is, we leave all respect of our own
proper good and rest, and take for the rest and end of all our labors, an
unusual or strange good, that is, the service, pleasure, glory, or love of
God: which being a supernatural motive and end, and strange to us at the
first, noe meruell if this change, bring unto us great pain and trouble at
the beginning: But by daily exercise, and frequent actions, we shall get an
habitt thereof and work readilye, with much delighte and comforth.

I believe it well said Probus, for all beginnings of good things, are ever
difficult and unpleasant: and diligent use and practice, make promptnes.

But I pray you Father, let me ask you two questions, first how shall I know
and be assured, that it is godds holy will and desire, that I work in this
manner, and serve him upon this motive, and for this end in all things?

This may you know said Alphonso, both by your natural reason, and the light
of our Catholic Faith. For God created us all to serve him, and greatly
desires, yea most strictlye charge us to love him, with all our hearts and
abilities. And because his dreadful Majesty, is worthy of the chiefest and
best service and in the best manner also that his creatures can deuyse, to
yield him, which is, to be moved in our actions, and to do all we do, for his
love, will, and honor, as him self does in all his works: It is manifest
that his will and desire is, that we imitate him, working and serving him in
all things, for the same motive and end. For nothing can be more acceptable
to his majesty, then that we conform our selves to him, and do all for his
sake. What is your other question now said Alphonso.

Why then said Probus, is not this end and motive (being the most perfect of
all other) commanded or taught us in the holy Scriptures, but for the most
part, they threaten us with punishment, or muite us with rewards of heaven?
etc. The Son of god our Savior Jesus said Alphonso, as he condescended for
our good, to take upon him our infirmities, as to be hungry, weary, to fear,
to be sorrowful, and the like: So would he also have his eua^gelicall doctrine
written in such words, as our base condition and frailty required: which for
the most part is moved (now after the corruption of our natures by original
sin) either by hope of good rewards or for fear of punishment. But withal
we must consider, that as our redemer took upon him those infirmities of our
nature, with the cheefeste perfection and charity that might be, in fulfilling
the will of his Father by doing and sufferinge all for his love and glory: so
he would have his servants to follow his example: And (that hearing godds
threats or promises) they be indeed woued with them, and do their best to
escape the one, and get the other: but all this, not for the pains and
punishmente threatened, or the rewards promised: but because they proceed by
them, that it is godds will and desire, they labor to escape pains and
damnation, in which state they can never serve God more, nor do his will: and
to obtain the reward of heaven, where they shall be with God for ever, and
have noe will, but to honor and praise him. So the sinner once brought to
grace, fears godds threats, because his will is, that he fear them: He does
penance, because it is godds will he do it: He does good works for heaven,
because it is godds will he so do: By reason of which end and motive, in his
actions, they are of most high perfection and meritt. And so the holy
scriptures though they show that owtwardly, which is agreeable to our
infirmity: yet with-all they conteyne inwardlye, their highest perfection in
this point, as is manifest in the commandment given, that we love our Lord
with all our hearts and strength in all things, Mat. 12
which is perfectly kept, when we desire godds will to be fulfilled. But
because out natures are much inclyned to evil, and by reason of our vicious
habitts and evil customs, we wax soon weary of well doing: I must teach
you how to extirpate such evil habitts out of your soul, and to engraft good:
For unless you learn this, all we have said hitherto is to little purpose, and
you shall never work with alacrity of mind, nor proceed with profitt. Do so
I pray you said Probus, for in all your speech hitherto, I have perceived that
good habits would take away either all, or the most part of difficulties,
which are to be found in serving God this perfect way you have taught me. They
do so said Alphonso, and more-ouer, the whole reparation of our soul,
consists in them, as the wrack and destruction of all our good, is by the
evil habitts.

THE SIXTE INSTRVCTION. How to plant good habitts in our soul, and extirpate
the evil. CAP. 7
YOu must know therefore said Alphonso, that as these habitts be in our souls:
so the actions whereby they are gotten and made, are wrought principally, by the
powers or instruments of the soul. And unless we diligently use and exercise
these instruments, especially our understanding and will, we shall never get
the habitts of any virtues. As for example, if a man be impatient or testye,
and would have this vice amended in him self, and obtain the habitt of
patience, this man how much soever he be wronged with injurious words or
deeds: how much soever he desire the habitt of patience, yea how much soever
he refrain from words or deeds of revenge: yet shall he never produce or
bring forth in his soul, the habitt of patience, except he help him self by
often mouinge his understanding, to consider the great good of patience, and by
stirring his will as the necessary instrument to bring forth this habitt by
inclyning it (as I said before) to desire to suffer injuries and persecutions
for the love, pleasure, and glory of his Lord, that exhorts us all to it,
and haith suffered the like for us.

Living among good and civil people said Probus, and Christians especially
that have the fear of God: we shall very seldom, have any such occasions of
impatience offered us by injurious words or deeds, and so shall we have small
exercise, and consequently, be long in getting the habitt of patience, or never
get it at all. In like sort also may we say, of the habitts of other virtues.

Not so said Alphonso, for where or with whom soever we live, we may woork, and
exercise our selves at all times, to get any virtuous habitt, and get it in
deed. How may this be said Probus.

At all times said Alphonso, you may produce it thus. For example, the habitt
of patience. Cast at any time, your cogitation upon some injury that you much
abhor, and think what you would do if it were offered or done to you:
Presently you shall perceive, a great repugnancy and horroure of that injury
arise in your mind, by reason of the evil habitt of impatience in you.
Forthwith therefore call to mind the great good that follows, and how is
pleased in the patie^t suffering of such injuries: and then enforce your will
to desire them. And cease not to enforce your self to this though it seem but a
constraint and compulsion, for there is ever some part voluntary therein. And if
you practice often these actions, that which seemed to be but a little voluntary,
will increase, and you shall come to suffer injuries and tribulation most
willingly: and withal the habitt of patience will be planted in your soul. In
like manner may you at any time plant and enriche your self with habitts of
humility, of poverty, Temperance, Chastity, and other virtues, ever
consideringe the great good that is in the exercise of them, and compelling
your will to desire them upon this motive, because it is the desire, will, and
glory of god that you have them.

But yet you must understand again said Alphonso, that by this forethought and
acceptance or desire of injuries, which indeed are not done us; this habitt of
patience is not so quickly nor so well gotten, as it is when some injury or
disgrace is actually done, and this before others, if then you compel your
will to accept it: Because the actions of our will accepting such present
injuries, are more vehement, and more subdue the soul, then those which are of
accepting an injury offered only by our thought, and may happen, but does
not. And a few vehement actions, work more strongly and effectually to the
producing of an habitt, then many which are remiss and weak.

This is the way, to root out evil habitts, and to plant good. For working of
which effect, it is moreover greatly profitable, to keep always a very firm
will and purpose, in the desire and love of good, and in the hatred of evil,
to which end serve greatly the high considerations, and weighty reasons which
many books yield, why good things and virtues are to be loved, and vice to be
hated.

Now hereby you may perceive how the mightieste Princes of the world, may
enriche them selves with the habitts of Patience, of Poverty, Humility,
Temperance, and of all other virtues: and beautify their Souls in godds sight,
noe less then a religious person, if they be willing and diligent to do as I
have told you.

I perceive it well said Probus, but after we perceive our selves to have
gotten these good habitts, may we not assure our selves to be in good state and
holy? Albeit said Alphonso, a man have gotten excellent habit^s of virtues,
yet can he not be sure that he haith gotten the grace of god, without which, a
man can be in noe good state with him, or in truth holy.

Godds grace is given infalliblye unto them that have all which I have told
you already, and which follows after, but naturally we can not know in this
life, whether we have these things as godds will is we should, and consequently
we can not be certain, that we have his favor and grace. But a chief sign
that we have it is, when in the same manner we behave our selves toward
those virtues whereof we have gotten habitts, as we do toward the virtues of
other men, that is, if our hearts be not extolled or any whitt proud for them,
but praise and thank God, whose is every thing that good is: And joy as much
in other menns virtues as in our own, because godds honor and glory, are
equally manifested in them both.

But my son said Alphonso, I forgeat my self, it is good time now, you rest a
little, and make collation.







Fourthly how we may repair again this calamity and destruction in our soul,
by the powers thereof, woorking with godds grace: and of the use of our
understanding and will, to the same end.





After we have made collation, I shall instruct you, how to exercise your self
in a sew principal things, which are necessary for the reparation of your
soul, before you can be rightly disposed, to love and serve God, in such
manner as he requires.

THE SECOND PART.
THE SECOND PART, Containing certain sperituall Exercyses, whereby the soul
is adorned, bewtifyed, and rightlye disposed to the perfect acts of loving and
seruinge God.
THE first Exercise how the servant of God should purge his soul from all
sin.
AFter they had refreshed them selves with bread and water, which was the
Ermits usual fair: he begann and said. My son, the first thing and
Exercise, wherein a man must occupy him self, to get a fit disposition, to
love and serve God, is to extirpate or root out of his soul, all evil, that
is, the silthe of sin: that when he would do any service to his lord, there
be nothing that may offend the eyes of so high a Majesty. This done, he
must adorn and beautify his soul with good habitts and virtues, whereby he
may appear grateful and acceptable to him in his service. Of these two
things, I will therefore now speak, and first how to root out and destroy
sin.

You must know then, that sin is the most vile and detestable evil that can
be devised, and bringethe to any reasonable creature that commits it,
unspeakable harms and mischeues. For by sin, we loose God, who is an infinite
goodness. By it we contemn, dishonor, and injury, our louinge Lord, in the
fowlest manner that may be. By it, we frustrate in our selves, the effect and
fruit, of Christ's painful life, and most bitter passion, and conculcate or
tread under foot, his preceous blood. By it we defyle and make most lothsom
and abominable our own souls, washed and sanctified with the blood of our
Savior, and chosen to be the sacred temples of Godds Majesty. By it we pollute
our hearts, the Altars and Tabernacles of the holy Ghost, where he delightethe
to dwell. By it we loose godds favor, and all his graces, the eternal joys
of his kingdom, with all our right and title thereunto. By it only we are made
the boundslaues of the devil, the fellows and companions of all wicked men
both alive and dead, and of the damned spiritts in hell. By it, we are made
the reproachful enemies of God, the most abject, contemptible, and
dishonorable of all his creatures. And finally by it we purchase assuredlye to
our selves, endless damnation, eternal woes, and the horrible torments of hell
fire.

All which evils and miseries, are justly dew to him, that by sin commits
high treason against his supreme Lord, who vouch-saifed to dye for him.

Now the sorrows and tears of all gods creatures are not sufficient to
destroy or take away one sin: much less the penance and tears of one man
that haith committed the same.

But the mercy and clemency of our Lord is so great, that he will not have us
to despair: And desireous of our weal, haith provided us a remedy, and is
content to pardon and forgive our sins, as soon as we for our parts, have
hearty sorrow and contrition for the same: What besides is needful or
requisite, he supplieth it of his own, and restores us again to his grace
and favor. It is meet therefore that we lamente and sorrow for out sins,
consideringe we have done so many evils by them both against God and our
selves.

How should we do this as becomes us said Probus?

The way is this said Alphouso.

With your understanding present to your selves, the cuills which come of
sin as before: and then compel your will (principally for the offense and
dishonor of God, and because it is his will that you sorrow for them) to
lament, and to desire that you had not committed them, nor iniuried godds
majesty: which act of your will, you must often labor to produce; now in
general for all your sins: now for one particular sin, now for an other,
and this with the greateste endeavor you can, to have hearty grief and
contrition, notwithstanding you feel your self sometimes void of sensible
sorrow or pain, for this is in godds hand and not in your own, to have at
your pleasure, but doubtless he will bestow it also on you, if you endeavor to
get it as you may.

I understand all this said Probus.

Then will I pass said Alphonso, to the second thing, which I told you was
requisite, for the expellinge of our corruption and evil habitts.

What is that said Probus?

THE SECOND EXERCISE necessary for them that would serve God, which is the
hatred of our felues.
IT is the hatred of our self said Alphonso: And this Exercise among all
other, is of greatest weight and importance for them that desire perfectly to
love God and to serve him: For from self love, spring innumerable evils, by
which are engendered viceous habitts: And this self love seasinge at the
entrance of that holy hatred (which the holy scriptures much exhort us unto)
all sin will be destroy ed in us, with all other wicked habits.

How may we com to this holy hatred of our selves said Probus?

First said Alphonso, of all things which may bring us delectation and
pleasure, as meat, sleep, recreatio^, rest, apparel, and the like, we must
take or desire no more, then that we can not omit or leave untaken withowt
offense of god, that is, only necessaries: And necessaries also must we take,
not for our own consolation, or for satisfaction and contentment of our own
appetites and sensuality, consideringe how unworthy we be of all delectation,
through the greuousnes of our sins: but only for fulfillinge godds holy
will, who haith ordained and appointed that we use and take such things, to
able us more in his service, for which cause we admit them willingly, for
relief of our necessities: otherwise we would notadmitt them at all. What in
these necessaries is sufficient, a man's own experience with a devout mind,
will tell him.

Secondly all things which be painful and grievous, as labors, toils,
abiections, contempts, injuries, afflictions, and the like: We must take unto
us, and desire or will they be done to us as much as may be without offense of
God, our own or neighbors harm.

Thirdly if we would serve God, and hate our selves in most commendable
manner, we must not only refuse delectable things, and desire painful and
grievous as I said: but more over we must joy and be gladd, when any adversities
or sharp things happen unto us, and when we are depryued of pleasant things,
yea of necessaries, and this chiefly, when they are done by some others against
our wills, or upon evil intention: which yet we ought not to judge withowt
manifest signs, noe nor then neither with absolute and full determination: but
pray for our persecutours, and love them with all our hearts, because in truth
they do us much good: and otherwise we should loose the inestimable reward
we are to receive for suffering patiently persecutions and troubles.

All these three things necessary for the holy hatred of our selves, the Son
of God taught us, both by his word and by his own example, as S. Peter says
he suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2
leauinge us an example to follow his steps, whose most blessed soul was
free from all sport of sin, and therefore his holy body should not have been
entreated sharply, or have suffered any greua^ce at all: Yet would he for our
example (who^ he most tenderly loved) refuse and set nothing by all delectable
things, and consent that his body and soul should suffer exceeding torments
and gretues, as it is manifest in his holy gospel. Wherefore much shame and
reproach it is, to all that profess them selves to be Christians and scholars
of Christ, not to learn this holy hatred, neither by his word saying: He
that hatethe not him self, can not be my Disciple: nor by his example, but
stand ever unwilling to suffer any pain or iniurye for his service, or to
hear of it either.

I confess said Probus, it is great reproach and dishonor to a Christian in
this lesson, to forsake and not to imitate his Lord and God, considering he
suffered all for our sakes and instruction, and the commoditye of our labors
being all our own. But what reasons besides this can we consider, why we
should thus hate our selves? For unless our wills be animated and encoraged
by our understanding in this point, chiefly, which (for the natural love we
bear to our selves) seems terrible and horrible to be thought upon, we shall
never desire this hatred, much less exercise our selves to get it.

The doctrine and example of our Savior said Alphonso, should suffice, but I
will give you two or three reasons more. The first is, because what soever evil
is in us, with all our want of good and virtues: all I say, comethe because we
hate not our selves, but love and desire things either against the
commandment of God, or contrary to his counsels and advise.

Wherefore self love being so hurtful to us, and hatred of our selves so
commodious, we have good cause to desire and labor for this later, and to flee
that other.

An other reason may be, because by sinning, we have been traitors against the
majesty of God: Wherefore it is meet and just, that we yield him all
possible satisfaction. And seeing that satisfaction should be answearable in
greatness, to the greuousnes and malice of our sins, and we our selves can
yield but little, and also in that we can do, are very negligent and slack, to
use our own bodies hardly any way for making what satisfaction we are able: At
the least for this cause we ought to hate our selves as is declared, and to
desire and be joyful, that every one hate, persecute, and afflict us as much
as they may without the offense of god that thus at the least we may satisfye
unto him, considering I say our own abilities otherwise suffice not.

The third and most high reason of all why we should hate our selves is, that
our souls being void and empty of self love, as far forth as may stand
with Godds pleasure: They may be filled with God him self, whose goodness in noe
wise can suffer, that being empty of self love, we should not be filled with
the love of him, and consequently his holy will, reign and bear all sway in
ours. But of this principal reason I shall tell you more, when we com to
speak of the love of God.

How shall we said Probus, use the instruments of our soul, to obtain this
holy hatred of our selves?

When we would said Alphonso, refuse and not admit, things delectable and
pleasant, or desire and accept hard and painful things, as contempts,
reuylinges, iniuryes, and the like: we must forgeat a little these things, and
not offer them thus nakedlye to our will, but turn our mind to consider the
innumerable good things which com to us, by refusing the one sort, and
accepting the other: And principally the infinyte treasure of gods love,
which we get by hatred of our selves according to his will. And then upon
these considerations, move and inclyne our will to reiecte the pleasant and to
embrace the grievous, as necessary means to obtain these inestimable goods,
ever with-all being mindful that you do all this, for the service of your
Lord, and for fulfillinge his holy will and pleasure.

But touching the joyful acceptance of paynefull things and adversities: I
shall tell you more, in the matters of Humility and Patience.

There is no more then to be learned said Probus, for the hatred of our selves.

Yes one thing more said Alphonso, which meruelously helps them that are
desireous to obtain this holy hatred, which is, that continuallye and without
ceasing, we persecute certain innumerable little desires of our own, which if
we mark, com runninge upon us in every moment, and inclyne us to self love.
Wherefore we must in all occasions, be watchful over our own actions, and
very circumspectly mark, whether perhapps we desire any thing which is not
belonging unto God, or not furtheringe us toward him: And incontinent so
soon as we espy any thing to delighte us withowt God, we must incline our
will, to contradict and refuse it. And when we perceive any thing to happen
grievous and displeasant: We must by and by, enclyne our will to couett and
accept it. If you be diligent in this, you shall both much sooner get this
holy hatred, and withal such dominion and government over your self, as can
not be expressed in words. Mark therefore this well I say again, and exercise
it, for assuredly this point is the key and gate to chief perfection.

This hatred said Probus, seemethe contrary to Chatitie, whereby we are all
bound to love our selves.

Not so said Alphonso, but so soon as a man hates him self in this sort, and
not before: he haith all the love that he ought to have toward him self, and
which is most profitable and glorious to him, and that which God would he
should have. For then haith he the love of God, of virtues, of eternal glory,
and of all things which help him thither, which love does not suffer with it
the company of any vice.

But now let us go to the second thing, that is, to know how we may adorn
and beautify our souls with virtues. As it pleases you said Probus.

THE THIRD EXERCISE. How the servant of God, should behave him self in prayer.
YOu must know therefore said Alphonso, that he is said to have his soul
adorned and bewtifyed, that haith his natural appetites conformable with his
reason and godds will and Law. And this conformity is none other thing, but a
certain heap of virtues, which placed orderly in the soul make it bewtifull,
and direct it as is convenient for the great dignity thereof, mitigating and
repressing, all false and evil concupiscenses, which had stook in the soul by
sin, and disposing it to serve, and withowt all contradiction, to yield
grateful obeisance to the will of him that created it.

And because our own strength and powers, are very weak and unable to
obtain such things: I will reach you first, how to call for help from God
by prayer. Secondly, how by many particularactes: you must build these habitts
of virtues, speakinge of some few which be principal. Thirdly, how you must
subdue and keep in semely order, your four natural passions, Joy, Sorrow,
Hope, and Fear.

OF PRAYER.
FOr Prayer then, you must know that Gods pleasure is, that we stand need
of his supernatural help, because the end and felicity whereto he haithe
created us, is supernatural, that is the bliss of heaven. His will also is,
that we ask and demand it of him, not, but that he desyrethe more to give it
us, then we to take or ask it: But first that we may possess and enjoy the
thing with more honor, which we get with greater endeavor and labor in
suting for it, and that we may as it were meritt the same: And secondly, that
as importune beggars, we may the oftener present our selves before him, and so
come into more knowledge of his Majesty's greatness, pre-eminence, and
perfections, and more joy in him, and love him with a true knowledge and
contempt of all things, which either are not God, or not furthering to him,
and finally, with a perfect love of virtue, and an hatred of all sin. By which
our necessitye of praying to him, he keep the us with him as with a pledge:
For unless we stood ever in need of him, we should quickly without doubt,
forgeat him.

To present our selves often before our Lord by prayer said Probus, must needs
bring to us, many good things you say: But in what sort may our prayer be
acceptable to god, and commodious to our selves?

That our prayer said Alpho so, may be grateful in Godds sight, meritorious
and effectual, it is not so much needful, that the thing we ask, be of
great valewe, as that in our prayer we have an high motive or end. For if his
motive that prays for the kingdom of heaven, and his that ask the bread to
eat, or health of his body, be all one or equal: their paayers be of equal
meritt, not-withstandinge the things they pray for, far excede, the one the
other.

What motive and end said Probus, should we have, to make our prayer most
excellent and acceptable?

We should ask or pray for every thing said Alphonso, because it is Godds
blessed will that we ask and have it by prayer, and that obteyning it, we may
be more disposed, and better abled, to love and serve him.

Thus the prayer for bread, or any other mean thing, is of excellent
meritt, and so disposed should we be in our hearts, when we come to prayer, that
if we thought it displeasing or ungrateful to God, for us to have the thing:
we would forthwith, neither defire nor ask it. The hungry man commonly is moved
to pray for bread, in releef of his necessity: but the servant of god that
rightly prays, ought not to ask meat, virtues, grace, glory, or any other
thing, for his own necessity or benefyte, but for fulfilling the will of his
Lord, who much desires that he have them, expecting only his petition, that
he may give them: so that the will of god (desirig that I have the good I ask,
and that I pray for it, and that by it I may be better disposed to serve him)
must more move me to desire and pray for it: the^ any joy or good I look for
thereby.

May we not said Probus, pray for Grace, virtues, forgeuenes of our sins,
the joys of heaven, or other good things, for some other good end besides
this? A praeir said Alpho^so, may be devout and good, which is for any good or
indifferent thing, to a good end, but there is none end or motive, which can
make it so perfect and acceptable as this, in which I am moved to pray only
for the love of God, and for fulfilling his blessed will and pleasure, and not
upon any love to my self, or to the thing I ask, or for any other respect.
And yet may we in our prayers for this end, keep also a love, to the good
thing we ask and wish to our selves also with great perfection and meritt:
so that we actuallye referr it thus, that therefore we love the thing and wish
it, because it is godds will we love it, and defire to have it. And so we make
God, and neither the thing nor our selves, the end of our prayer.

I will give you an example of this said Alphonso, again, and withal let you
see, how to use your will rightly in praying.

A man may ask any thing of his friend, either for the love he bearethe to it,
or for his own commodity, or for the love of his friend: Vsuallye men ask it
for their own good and benefit, and not for the love of their friend. Now the
servant of god should refuse with his will to ask any thing, for the love he
bears to the thing or for his own commodity: and ask it only for the love
of his Lord, because it pleases his Majesty that he ask and have it, that he
may serve and please him the more: As he that prays for pardon and remission
of his sins, and soroweth for them, should do it more, because he seethe that
to be in his soul which offends God, and for a desire he haith to have it
pure, that so he may yield grateful and acceptable service to his Lord: Then
for any fear of punishmente or other harm or loss to him self whatsoever.
And again, as he that prayethe to escape tribulations, ought to feel in his
heart a desire, and accordingly to pray to escape them, not chiefly for avoiding
danger, harm, or trouble: but for that tribulations may be to him, an
impediment to serve God, carryinge ever withal, an vnfeaned desire and will,
that godds blessed will be done therein, if at any time it please him to be
served by his troubles and pains. And so finallye in askinge any other good,
that we ask it, not for our own consolation, but that having it, we may
thereby be more stirred up and furthered to serve and love God.

It will seem easy to you, if you remember what I told you before concerning
the use of your will, and the end that you should have in doing all things:
and the example I gave you then, of him that regardinge more his friends
necessity then his own, bestowed on him the medicyne, which he provided for
him self, will serve here also.

I remember well said Probus, what you said there.

Remember it said Alphonso, and be diligent to produce according to those
instructions, many acts: and in short time, you will find great sweetness to
pray upon this motive, though in the beginning, you seem to be dry or
without comforthe and devotion, happens, because you leave your own self love,
which ever moved you before to pray. But Godds love increasinge in you:
devotion and sweetness with exceeding great meritt, will also increase.

See therefore you pass not from asking one thing, to ask an other, before
you first inclyne your will to ask it, because God would have you to ask it,
and that you inte^de to serve him by askinge it.

I understand all this said Probus.

If you so do said Alphonso, then may we speak of getting virtues for
adorning our souls.

THE FOVRTH EXERCISE. How to get the virtue of Humilitye, which is one of
them, that our Savior willed us to learn of him self.
ALL virtues said Alphonso, may best be redd, and learned in the book of lyse,
and fountain of wisdom our Savior Chirst. And let none hope nor think they
can be enriched with virtues, unless they learn them of the Son of God made
man, and principally of his sacred passion, for this is given unto the world by
the Father of heaven, as a most plentiful gould-myne, that out of it we may
gather all treasures, see and hear the excellency of every virtue.

Therefore happy is he that by continual meditation, entrethe into the hidden
and inner secretts of this mine: for there he shall find stoared up, all the
treasures of God.

What virtues said Probus, will he that we first learn of him?

He haith willed us said Alphonso, to learn of him self two, which are,
Humility, and Patience, saying, Learu of me, that I am patient, and humble of
heart: which two, when we have learned: we shall be full of true wisdom and not
before. Of these two therefore, I will tell you how they may be gotten.

Many have written of the stepps and degrees of Humility, for it is a virtue
which reaches very high, and descends very low: and without stepps let no
man hope to clyme to the topp thereof: but he that once arryue the thither,
shall presently come into such knowledge of himself, and all things: that
thereby he shall most clearly see how of him self, he is and haith vetie
nothing, and that only God is the thing, that truly is. For which cause he
desires that all the thoughts and powers of men be bente to praise and
magnifye him only, whose is every thing that is. Moreover he wishes (because
Humility coueteth no more then is it own) that the whole world entreat and
esteem him as he is, that is for nothing: And that menns hearts be not
occupied, yea for any little moment, in esteming that to be of some worth, which
in truth is nothingor a vessel of iniquity which is worse then nothing, as
every sinner is.

Herein therefore consists the key of Humility, that this which I have now
said, may be fixed in our hearts, by many acts of good consideration:
couetinge with-all, that they which harm or dispyse us, and that they also
which see it, may think us to suffer, not upon humilitye, but because we can
not otherwise do, as S. Bonauenture says, that he which laboreth to please
God, must endeavor to be thought vile and abiecte, not humble and modest.

Me think said Probus, it were good to show our Humilitye to others, for their
edification.

If a man said Alphonso, were of such perfect virtue, that without any
repugnance or difficulty, he could wish to be esteemed of all men vile, abject,
and nothing, as I said before: such a one might desire, for the edification of
his neighbors, that they should think him to suffer injuries willingly, and
with joy, for the love of God and humility, and this were heroycall humility,
which was most perfect in our Savior.

I pray you Father said Probus, declare to me the humility of our Savior,
saying I must have it before mine eyes as a pattern to imitate.

The humility of our Savior said Alphonso, conteyneth in it, most high and
unspeakable mysteries, and better may all creatures admire it, then com nigh in
following it. For our Savior being God omnipotente, of infinite goodness, and a
most perfect man, did choose and will with great joy, to be esteemed for a
most mean thing, yea almost for nothing, and for such a one he would be hardly
entreated with injuries, contumelies, reproaches, and tribulations, from the
first day of his birth till he suffered a most sharp and shameful death. All
which he did, not for that they wear needful for him self: but that we who
have great need thereof, might learn the manner of humbling our selves by
his example.

Now the servant of God must study and do his best endeavor, to frame his
humility, like to this of our Saviors: that is, consideringe his own
vylenes, abiection, and unworthiness, he ought to covet and desire, with great
joy (I say again with great joy, for for this is the pith of all) that in the
eyes and hearts of all men, he be reputed as worthless, and accordingly to be
entreated, for of our selves we are none other, nor deserve better. This is the
humility which our Savior would have us to learn of him.

Why does God said Probus, require of us so great humility and contempt of our
selves; and why would he teach it us with so great cost and harm to him self?

He requires it of us said Alphonso because in truth it is convenient for us,
and because that of our selves we have no good, nor deserve any at all, thoe we
receive many good things from the magnificall hand of God, from whom we ought
to acknowledge to have received them, and therefore glorify him and not our
selves. Again he requires it, because it (being voluntarily taken) is the
perfect medicyne of our mortal infirmity, which comes by pride. Neither
shall any man ever be soundly cured of that disease, withowt perfect humility.

And the more we want of perfect curinge, the more also we shall want of the
purity of our soul: and the more we want of the purity of our soul, the
more shall we want of godds graces and benefits, and so much the less shall
we be his. Now that he would teach it us with so much harm to him self,
proceeded from his infinite goodness, and from his most tender and ineffable love
to us, not appointing men, or Angels to this office, but delighting him self
to be our instructour and guide, notwithstanding any harms or inconveniences,
that might befall him therefore.

How may we said Probus, come to get this Humility, and to rejoice in
contempts, injuries, and tribulations, for it is very hard to desire these
things?

We may obtain all this, said Alphonso, by much considering the Humility of
godds Son, which I toulde you of before, and the profitt that comes to our
selves by it: and cheefely because we are so abled and made fit, to yield
acceptable service unto God, and to please him. Wherefore we must very often
inclyne our wills, to covet and with joy desire, abiections, contempts, and
injuries, which are so preceous and so profitable.

O how deservedly ought he to be humbled, or to be humble, and to desire to be
despised, that so often haith been traitorous against his eternal lord yelding
his soul to the devil by sin, and taking it from god, that so lovingly dyed
for it. Surely if we would seriouslye mark this, we should receive honors
(if at any time they were offered us) with much grief, considering they hinder
us of the inestimable goods which we might get by imitating and accompanying
the King of heaven, in contempts, dishonoures, contumelies, and the like.

May not a man with humility said Probus, desire sometimes to be esteemed and
honored?

Yes said Alphonso, he may desire this in some cases, as when (without respect
of his own estimation) he haith his eye, respect, and intention only to some
service, and honor which he sees, may redownde to god thereby.

But in this case also he ought to desire such estimation with fear and some
sorrow, that he must be honored, and with great circumspection, that he be not
deceived with self love.

How may I know said Probus, whether in such case as this I keep humility,
with that desire of honor?

You may know and discern this said Alphonso, if you joy noe whitt in that
estimation and honor, but only in the service and honor which is done to god
by it. And again, if you feel in your heart an vnfeaned desire or disposition,
that leaving all honor and estimation (if so it might please God) you had
rather for your own part, chose to yield him your service, by suffering
contempts, dispysinges, disgraces, and injuries, then by that estimation,
credit, and honor.

And lastly, if you find your heart as desireous and joyful, that other me^ be
esteemed and honored for the service and honor of God, as your self, or that
they be preferred before you: without any emulation.

When a man said Probus, haithe received benefits and good gifts from God, why
may he not delight and rejoice in them?

He may joy and delight in them said Alphonso, so he keep humility withal,
and fall not into vayne-glorye: for otherwise he should turn all gods gifts
to his dishonor, and his own grievous ruin. I must therefore by the way, give
you warning of vayn-glory, which is a vice that defiles and destroyethe, all
our virtues and good deeds, unless we avoid it well.

I pray you said Probus, teach me to escape it.

THE FIFTH EXERCISE. HOW to ouercom the vice of vainglory, which is a mortal
enemy to Humility and all virtue.
VAin-glorie said Alphonso, is the Mother of all evil, and it above all other
things, hinders the increase of Humility. It is a complacency or delight and
joy, which one takes of some thing he ought not, or in some sort as he ought
not. And there be diverse kinds of it: As first a man may glory and rejoice
for his own wicked factes and evil deeds. This kind of glory and joy, is not
among Gods children and servants, but proper to graceles and most wicked
persons, and therefore I will let it pass.

Again one may glory and joy for some good thing or gift which he haith not:
This also is most foolish, vain, and ridiculous, yet is it often incident to
the good, as ordinary to the badd, procedinge from a disordered self love, and
a proud mind, delighting in it own praise and flaterye.

Again, one may glory and rejoice vainelye, for some good he haith or does, or
hears of him self: This is that kind, which assaultethe much godds
servants. Now a man may well joy in the gifes which he haith of God, so far
forth as he seethe and hops thereby, some service to God or profitt to his
own soul. For God haith left it in our own liberty, that we may so much joy
for every good gift of God, as we know it to be from God, and to redownd to
gods honor and service: But when it once passes this ordinance appointed by
god, by and by it becomes vainglory, or vain joy exceeding the limitts
appointed by God, as glorying and reioycinge in our selves, where we should
glory only in God.

How may we discern said Probus, when our glory and joy is vain, or true and
spiritual as it should be?

This vain-glorie said Alphonso, is so deceyptfull and subtle: that one yet a
nouice and weak in virtue, may often think him self to joy in God for the
good he haith, and nevertheless much vain-glorie is mixed therewith. Wherefore
till a man evidently know, and have thoroughly tried virtues to be in him self,
he should ever flee all kind of joy and complacency whiles he calls to mind
the benefits that he haith received from God or the good gifts he haith or
hears spoken of him self, and rather accustom his heart to motions of fear,
at these times, as suspecting vain glory which very secretly uses to creep
upon us in such occasions. And surely he ought to suspect o^ think it
vainglorie and joy which he haith of godds gifts given him: so long as he haith
not as much joy and glory in the gifts and benefits, which he knows other
men to have received from god, as he haith of his own. For albeit we ought to
desire and choose virtues for our selves, before other, and also to joy that
(seeing it is godds will and ordinance that both we and others should have
them) it haith pleased him to bestow them upon us: Yet when both we and they,
have received gifts from godds bountiful hand, seeing god him self equally
ioyeth in both: our joy and glory in like forte, ought to be equal for them
both in God only, and that his blessed will is fulfilled.

I understand this satd Probus: but teach me I pray you, how I may avoid this
foul sin of vainglory, and vain joy.

You may said Alphonso, by the use of your understanding and will, ouercom it,
and escape all the danger thereof. For by the assistance of gods grace you can
hate that, which you once know to be vain and false. Consider therefore the
vanity and falsed thereof by this example or comparison.

You will confess it to be a foul thing, if some courtier would esteem it
for a matter of great value or worth or would glory in his heart, that he had
offered him self to a little danger for the service and love of his Prince, who
had yielded him self before, to most grievous torments and cruel wounds for the
courtiers sake and cause.

But if the same courtier, did not only in his own conceipte, highly esteem
that little he had done for his Prince, to whom he was so infinitely bound and
behoulden: but moreover before others, would prowdly vaunt him self thereof:
it were most ridiculous, to-too gross folly, intolerable pride and leuitie:
Yet were it more abominable vanitye by far, if that Prince had suffered all his
torments and wounds voluntarily and without any comforth or succor of his
courtier, but the courtier contrari-wise, had suffered his little with great
favor, assistance, and comforth, of the Prince, and having promise also before
his labors, of great benefits and rewards, and received the same afterward:
So in like manner he falls into noe less abominable vanity, yea and into
worse incomparablye, that folowethe after vainglory. For our high God, and
King of incomprehensible Majesty, of infinite power and honor, through his
own goodness only withowt any bound, behoulding our extreme necessities, for
our sakes and saifties, exposed him self, to a most sharp and ignominious
death: In which we not only gave him noe comforthe nor succoure, but
more-ouer we yielded him noe thanks, yea all that were with him, fledd and
forsook him: and we also more forsake him now through defect of our virtue,
when his godhead, mercy, and goodness, are manifested unto us. Which things
being thus, let us acknowledge how vain it is for any man to glory for his
service he does to God, omitting in the mean season, to glory and joy in god
only. And moreover let us consider how exceeding vain it is, to desire for
this small service, to be highly esteemed with others, whereas for that time
whiles their hearts are occupied, in iudginge us to be of some worth, they
cease to be occupied in worthily esteming and praysinge God, of whom we have,
and whose is, all our good.

God forbidd, that the heart which is not occupied in highly esteming and
praising God, to whom all praise is due, should be occupied in judging of any
worth, to whom noe such thing is due. And he also deserves much blame for his
consentinge, that thinks other to occupy their hearts, in praising and
esteming him being so vile and abject, seasinge in that mean time to magnify
god for all his goodness and gifts, and is not ashamed nor grieved, for so great
disorder and abuse of things. It augmenteth also greatly our vanity, that
whatsoever we do, or suffer, all is by the mighty grace and help of our most
high God. It is said Probus, a thing both glorious and meritorious, that we
accept the gifts and graces of God, and not reject or resist them: and then why
may we not glory and think well of our selves that we accepted them? We never
saw man said Alphonso, that would vainly glory and boaste, only because he had
accepted benefits, done him by a Prince, but rather it would have been judged
plain madness, to have refused the^. And it is great folly for a man to glory
and boaste, that he would not be madd when he might, or proudly to behave and
esteem him self, because he would not leap into a pit and drown him self when
he might have done it. Much less cause surely haith any man to glory,
because he accepted godds gifts and refused them not, considering that their
very acceptinge and will to receive them, is not done by their own power and
ability or nature, 1 Cor. 4
but principally by the grace and help of God, as S. Paul says: What have
thou that thou haste not received? and if thou haste received it, why do
thou glory?

Now after your understanding haith had these and such like considerations of
this vice: move and incline your will as I taught you before, to refuse and
hate it: And standing firmly in the true conceipte of your own baseness and
unworthiness, yield all praise and glory to God to whom it is due, and in him
only, let all your joy and glory be, and rest.

The actions of your will, you must diligently use in all occasions, where this
vain-glorie would creep in, and draw you to delighte in your self, or in any
thing you have. This may suffyce concerning the evil vice of vainglory. Now
will we speak of patience which is the second virtue we are to learn of our
Savior Christ, unless you test unsatisfied in some thing I have said.

Go forward said Probus, I pray you, for I understand you well, and have
nothing to replye.

THE SIXTH EXERCISE. HOW to plant in our souls, the virtue of Patience, which
is one of the two virtues, which our Savior would have us to learn of him.
PAtience said Alphonso, is so dear a sister and companion to Humility, that
commonly they are found together: And by what ways and paths the one is found,
you may find the other also. And as we said before that to get Humility, it
is necessary we set before our eyes, the humility of godds Son: so must
we do also the same here, for obteyninge this virtue of Patience. For who can
complain or repyne insufferinge injuries, or any tribulation (having deserved
them as we all have) when he considers with how great mildnes and patience,
his Lord god voluntarily did choose to suffer so many and so great injuries,
contumelies, persecutions, and torments, together with a most bitter death:
who (besides that he was true God and Lord of all) was also a man of more
noble, delicate, and tender complexion, then any other man in the world, and
more feelinge, any affliction.

Who will not patiently and myldly sustain for curing his own sins, any
toil, vexation, or distress that may befall: if he consider his God to have
sustained far greater for the sins of other, and to bring remedy to our
evils.

The example of our Savior said Probus, should indede move and suffice us to
take any adversity patientlye: but our frail natures, can not away with
trouble or affliction.

Naturallye indeed said Alphonso, we are inclyned to flee and abhor the^: But
godds grace preventing our wills and cooperatinge with us, we may be brought in
short time, to accept and embrace them, and this the rather, if we consider,
not only this example which our Savior haith given us, but more-ouer cast our
eye, to the great commodity we get thereby, which our Lord also is desireous
we labor to obtain.

For persecutions and tribulations, are as it were a hammer or fire, wherewith
the rust or canker of our souls is taken away: or as a launcinge knife, thrust
into our souls, to let out the poysen of our self love, which festreth there
and drawethe us from all good; that once freed from that filthe, we may work
the high woork of God, that is, love and serve him as we should.

For which cause, we ought heartily to love and pray for our persecutours, and
thank God that provides us so good surgeons.

Teach me the way said Probus, I pray you, to get this virtue.

If you remember said Alphonso, 1 P. C. 7.
I taught it you before, when we talked of the way, how to plant virtuous
habits in our soul. For there I put the example of Patience, which may suffice
also for this place.

I remember it very well said Prohus.

That also which I taught you said Alphonso, of the hatred of your self, 2
Part. 2 Exer.
you must call to mind again in this matter, for the reasons I gave you why
you should hate your self, may serve fitlye, to move you to suffer patiently,
any adversity or affliction. Now let us propounde one example of some odious
matter, that may befall.

You either suspect or certainly know a man to speak or report some evil of
you, which you never committed.

Hereby three darts are cast at you to wound your soul: from all which the
soldier and servant of God, must clear and acquyte him self, that by his
fight, his Lord may be served and honored, and his own soul bewtified.

The first is the dart of evil suspicion or judgment, against the man, or
against his intention. From this dart you must withdraw your self, and let it
pass, inclyninge your will, not to accept or deal with it, as consenting to
any such suspicion or judgment, but to referr it wholly unto God, who is the
high Judge of all, and haith willed us not to judge. For fulfilling of whose
will, we ought with great joy to forbear to judge, and not to usurp or cake
upon us his office.

The second is the darte of grievous impatiencye; To this you must oppose your
self with all your strength, ioying in the pain and injury, which comes to
you by that occasion, and the more you seem to joy of it, the less will the
devil assault you with impatience, lest he give you occasion of so great
meritt.

That you may well demean your self in receiving this dart, remember what I
said of the hatred of your self.

The third is the dart of hatred, of him whom you suspecte or know, to have
done you wrong. To this also you must oppose your self, inclyninge your will,
to produce some singular act of love toward him, because it is godds will,
that you love and pray for your enemies. And in truth as I said, they do you
exceeding great good, if your self hinder it not, and they be as surgeons, to
cure the festering wounds of our soul.

Thus in all occasions of adversity, the servant of God should be watchful,
and ever stand prepared patiently to endure, what-soeuer it pleasethe his Lord
to let befall for his trial, that in so doing, he may honor his Lord,
benefit, and (as our Savior said) possess his own soul, which remains as
void of all good, captive to the devil, and quite lost, if it be spoiled of
this virtue of patience.

Now if you think good, let us speak of the four affections or passions of
the soul.

THE SEVENTH EXERCISE. HOW to moderate and keep in order, the four natural
passions of the soul.
THese passions said Alphonso, be Joy, Sorrow, Hope, and Fear: and they be
natural to every one, as to joy for a present good, to sorrow for a present
evil, to hope for a future good, and to fear a future evil.

I will teach you how to guide and bridle them conveniently for the service and
honor of God, and the repayringe of your soul. For they may bring us much
harm if they be left at liberty vnrestrayned, because they never cease
ranginge up and down in our souls, now one, now an other.

And we may well say, that all our evils come upon us, because they are
permitted, to wander abowte, and run unbridled. Yea they bring much
annoyance and hurt to spiritual persons, how lightlye soever they walk in
them.

He only may keep them in good order and great moderation, that works all
thnges, as well internal as external, for God, as I toulde you before, and
walks in the hatred of him self, as you have hard.

When are these affections said Probus, kept in due order and moderation?

When we yield said Alphonso, no consent to any of their motions, further then
we know pleases God, and whereby he may receive some grateful service:
Otherwise, we ought ever to repel their motions and banish them from us, if
we desire to walk a saife way toward God.

May we not said Probus, be glad and joyful for any good thing that happens
unto us, and in like sort be sorrowful for evil?

The servants of God said Alphonso, should be gladd and joy in nothing but God,
or things which belong or direct and further them to him. The reason is, for
that having in God, and in such things, so great cause and matter of joys:
they are very foolish and madd vain, that occupye them selves, in ioying for
any other, considering their powers and force to joy in God and love him, are
the weaker, by how much more they are divided, into diverse joys and business.
And consideringe again, that albeit we yield our selves wholly to joy in God,
yet are we not able to do it sufficiently: How much less can we do it, if we
distract our selves to joy in many things?

Wherefore by the use and power of our will, as I toulde you before, we must
do one of these two, either presently so sone as it offers it self, repel
and putt away all joy and gladness which is not in God, or things belonginge
unto him: or direct and order it for God, as the end thereof, so it be not
some vain or unlawful joy.

And thus shall we do as the Apostle wills us saying: Phil. 4
Joy in our Lord at all times: I say again, joy. For he which cause, we must
look warelye about us, for daily innumerable things of small weight, occur
and ofter them selves to us, bringinge occasions and causes of joy and gladness:
from which forthwith we ought to vnwynde our selves, knowinge all joys which
are offered unto us by the world, are assured harms, and noe good to us at all.

In a most potent and rich King, you know it would be judged, a very base and
vile disposition, to make so great reckning of a penny, that the winning of i^
would make him very joyful, and the loosing of it, very sorrowful and
greiued: But far greater is our baseness and vilitye, if when always we have
present, the infinite goods which God possesses for him self and us, in which
we ought incessantly to joy: we turn our selves to joy in other tryflinge
things which occurr in the world, when especially we ought to love our Lord
more then our selves, and more to respect his glory then our own, which yet he
will give us most aboundantlye, if we faithfully and sincerelye serve him, in
this our banishment.

OF SORROW.
IN like sort may we speak of him that soroweth for any thing of this world
that may happen, except sin and things inducing thereto. For it may be well
judged great baseness, to sorrow for any such temporal thing of this life,
whearas we have before our eyes, so great glory and inestimable goods as I
said God haith provided for us, for which we ought ever to rejoice and be
gladd. Wherefore the servant of God, must suffer noe sorrow nor heaviness to
stay in his heart, but that only which is for sin: because this sorrow being a
passion which respects some present evil, or some good lost, and true evils
and losses can not happen, but only for sin: He ought with reason to sorrow
for none other thing. And having present so infinite an evil to sorrow for as
sin is: he does most foolishlye, if deuyding his force and strength, he
sorrow for any other thing besides, considering especially, that all his powers
and abilities collected to this one woork, suffice not to sorrow so much for
sin, as he should do.

These sorrows which offer them selves daily to us upon any tribulation or
adversity, we may easily repel, if we consider, that we be gods more then our
own, and that he haith more tender care over us, then we can have of our
selves, and best knowethe what is expedient for us. And therefore what
painful thing or adversity soever happens, it ought to be welcome to us, so
long as it endures, and we must take it ioyfullye as from the hand of our
louinge Lord, and as a thing fit and convenient for one that is godds, and
sorrow no more for it, then God (whose we are) wills that we sorrow, speaking
thus within our selves: Why have I greater care of my self, then my Lord god
wills that I have, seeing I am not mine own but his, who loves me tenderly,
and can not but continually behold me.

May we not then said Probus, seek means to deliver and free our selves from
suffering such paynefull things and aduersyties, or we should bear them
still with joy, and let them alone to godds care and providence.

As it is godds will said Alphonso, that so long as we have them, we ever
suffer them with joy, how painful soever they be, and take them as from the
hand of our most loving father (which joyful patience, will greatly mitigate
their pain) so it is also his will, that we procure and use with joyful
moderation, such means for our remedy, and deliverance, as we know he haith
left us, and would have us to take, as physic in sickness, meat in hunger,
peace and saifty in persecution, and the like: But all this because it is his
will we do it, and that our frailties may serve him the better, being
delivered from such molestations and troubles.

How shall we said Probus, drive away and expel, these motions of sorows and
greiues, which the miseries of this world bring hourly upon us, and how shall
we get this joy, whiles we are in the pains of them?

The servant of God said Alphonso, must be always provident and watchful, and
so sone as the passion of sorrow or grief begins to rise by occasion of any
adversity presently reject and refuse it by the act of his will, as I toulde
you in the use of that power, in the first instruction: Yea he must endeavor
to move and enforce his will to covet and embrace the things whereupon those
pains, greiues, and afflictions, grow. For whiles these things be desired the
sorrow cease as it rose at the first, because the same things were dislyked
or hated. He should therefore acquaint and accustom him self, to joy and be
gladd, in all painful and sorrowful things, and contrari-wyse, to sorrow in
all things which are joyful and bring delight, as it is said. Sorrow for joy,
and joy for pain.
Keep with thee as a certain gain.
Why should we said Probus, covet these things, whereby such grief and
molestation come to us?

First said Alphonso, Cap. 2
because they come all from the hand of God as Job says. Again because we
deserve them by our sins. Lastly because they bring to us many commodities,
and cure the festred ulcers of our soul.

OF HOPE.
Now by Hope (not as it is the third supernatural virtue, but a natural
affection or passion, common to all mankind) we expecte and look for many
things of this life either pleasante or commodious to us. Yet nothing we hope
for, should settle it self or take place in our hearts, but only God, and
these things whereby we think our selves, to draw nearer to him and serve
him. Whatsoever is besides, we ought to esteem it as nothing. And if we
perceive the Hope of any thing, to be more fixed in our heart, or to occupye
and delighte our minds, then the bliss of heaven or virtues, which we hope
from God: it must forth-withe be expelled, as a most hurtful and disordered
thing.

OF FEAR.
IN like manner also all fear is to be left that is not of God, as our
Savior willed us, not to fear them that kill the body, and can do noe more:
but God that can cast both body and soul into hell fire. And David said, God
is the protector of my life; whom shall I fear. All the moments of our lives,
with all things belonginge unto us, are in the hand of god, and can not
happen to us, otherwise then he will permit. And therefore we should rather
wish our own eyes to be pulled owte, then advisedly co^mitt any thing that
may displease his Majesty: For all other things, there is no cause why we
should fear them.

For though all the calamities of the world fall upon us: yet if we fear
them not, they can do us noe harm nor true evil, but rather if we encounter
them corragiously and bouldly, and receive them joyfully, because it is our
Lords will we suffer them in memory of those he suffered for us: they will
increase in us, eternal meritt of glory and honor.

Wherefore we should be prepared always to repute as nothing, or rather to
este me as most preceous Jewels and ornaments: all troubles and molestations
of the world. And if at any time some fear creep upon us: presently with our
will, to encounter and repel it, lest it occupye the place, in which the
reverent fear of God most necessary for us, should be harbored.

He that can moderate, rule, and subdue, these passions in this sort, shall
enjoy great peace, and arryue shortly, to high perfection of virtue, and be
able rightly to judge of all things, as the christian philosopher Boethius says.

If thou will the truth behoulde with light most clear:
Away with Joy, Sorrow, Hope, and Fear.
Having declared, what way you may repair the ruin and destruction of your
soul: it remains now that we speak of the love of God, which Exercise is
the most principal service can do him, and the end of all which we have
spoken of hitherto.

Take your rest now, for you are weary with travel: in the morninge God
willing, we shall make an end of this matter.

THE THIRD PART. CONTAINING the way how to love God, our neighbors, and our
selves.
OF THE LOVE OF GOD.
AFter they had slepte a while, and Alphonso finished his usual devotions:
they came together again, and Alphonso said.

Now my son, if you be satisfied in all things we talked of yester night: Let
us go forward as I promised you. I rest fully satisfied said Probus, in all
you have said hitherto: Therefore I pray you proceed to teach me how I may love
God.

The love of God said Alphonso, is a fire, which God would have always
burninge, on the Altar of our soul, and if you throughlye knew the worthiness
and excellency thereof, all would seem little, that hitherto we have said, of
the reparation and adorning of the soul, by which so high a work is to be
performed. For the act of loving God is of so great excellency, that not
Saint in heaven, nor any thing that is or can be created, can do any woork
more high or perfect. For which cause the son of God him self, Mat. 22
calls this the greatest and first commandment. Yea if all the endeavors
and strengthes of Angels and men, were heaped together in one Angel or man*
he could do nothing more worthy, then is the act of loving God. And nothing
that is or can be made, by the omnipotente power of God: can be sufficient to
love God with that perfection which his infinite goodness and worthiness does
deserve.

This love of God, incomparably excels all other supernatural virtues or
woorks, and without it, none other gift or qualitye that man haith, profitethe
him anythinge at all, or is to be esteemed, 1 Cor. 13
as S. Paul says larglye. This is the incessant and eternal work of God
him self: For he being of infinite goodness and excellency, is infinitely to be
loved, and is continuallye occupied with all his infinite power, in lou^nge his
own infinite goodness and ioying in the same. And nothing being more consonante
to equity, nothing so profitable or glorious to our selves, then that we love
him, who is an infinite good, and infinitely to be beloved, and whom we ca^ not
sufficiently love as he deserves, albeit our strength and abilityes were
insinite: His most holy and righteous will is, that we do the same thing,
with all our forces, which he does continually with his: that is, love him and
joy in him with all our hearts, power, and strength. Yea and so greatly he
requires and desires this most divine woork of us, that he would yield him
self to a most cruel death, that so he might procure and provoke us to love
him, and all this for our good, and not for any benefit of his own.

All other things besides this love of God which are commanded us, or in the
holy scriptures required of us, are but for that they be helps to this love,
and to omit them, would greatly hinder the same. Vices and sins forbidden
us, are nothing else, but a^ inordinate love of vain things, which occupye the
place of our hearts, deputed only for God. Neither do virtues serve for other
end, then fitly to dispose the soul for this love: Which virtues
notwithstanding, are so necessary for this love of God, that it were great
presumption, to think we could obtein it, without great exercise in them.

To love God said Probus, must of necessity be a work, of great excellencye
and worthiness: but I pray you tell me what this love is, and how it may be done.

I must tell you first said Alphonso, how there be two sorts of loves, or
lovers of God. The one loves him, for that he is a sweet and bountiful
lord, most liberally communicating his goodness to his creatures: These are
also much delighted in his service, and they ask many gifts of him, and pray
with great contemplation of his Magnificency and knowledge of the excellency of
virtues and graces which they pray for. Often also they come to him, as to the
fountain of all sweetness. And by reason of the great delight and consolation,
which they feel in their soul, they imagine this love of theires to be most
perfect and of highest meritt.

This seems said Probus, to be a perfect lover of God.

I wish said Alphonso, that all they which love not God: would love him at the
least in this sort. But the Majesty of God permits not his true lovers to
be content with this kind of love though it be good, and may suffyce to
exercise beginners and nouices in for some time, because from this they easily
pass, to the highest and most perfect love, whereof by and by I will tell you.

How may we know said Probus, that this kind of love, is imperfect and frail?

They that love in this manner said Alphonso, forthwith when this sensual
sweetenes is wantinge and depatteth, go with an heavy heart, and dull courage
about things which belong to God. And they are so overcome with the frailties
of their own nature, as almost if they had not had any such love at all. For
they procure and seek for corporal delights, as to eat and drink daintely:
They desire and accept worldly favors, frendshipps, honors, praise,
estimation, and other vain things, pleasing their sensuality (yet without
mortal sin) as much as other persons, that never had tasted of things
perteining to god. Yea and often in the very time when they are visited with
such swetenes: they are entangled with certain vain affections, and such as be
sometimes not a little sensual, as delighted with the sweet natures,
conditions, familiarities, and beauty, of some persons. Again, these lovers
commonly covet to be seen and accounted devout, and they are grieved when they
perceive, they are not reputed for such, neither do they joy when they
perceive other persons to be reckned more devout and better qualified then them
selves. These and such like sports and imperfections they have: All which be so
abject, that the high love of God (which we are to speak of) does not brook
them with it, no not when it wantethe that sweetenes in the sensual appetites:
whereby we may rightlye conclude, this kind of lover, to be frail and
imperfect, as loving cheefely for his own commodity or delight.

If this love will not serve: to what purpose is it said Probus?

It is very profitable said Alphonso, first, because he that haith it, may
easily cast from him the forsaid imperfections and spots, with the love of
vain things.

Secondly, because such a lover, is in a verieneare disposition, to produce
many acts of the higheste and most perfect love, when he knows it.

Which is then this second kind of love said Probus?

It is said Alphonso, A certain act or woork of our will, vehemently (and
somtymes also with sweetenes) loving or desyring, that God be that infiuite
goodness he is: And possess as much glory, dominion, and power, as indede he
possesses to him self, over us and all things. And again, that whatsoever is
or may be, love him, serve him, and glorify him, for his infinite goodness and
worthiness only. And all this is done for that the excellency of his Majesty
requires that we do it, with all our ability and strength.

He therefore that would truly and perfectly love God, must often meditate and
call to mind what God is, and delight in him. Moreover think what great glory
he haith, and what dominion over us and all creatures, and joy for it, as men
are wont to joy for the dignitye and dominion of their dearest friends. And
with this also be must wish, that all things may serve and love him, desiring
this a thousand ways, and procuring it ten thousand, and all this for God and
his goodness only. For it is meet and just, that we love his infinite goodness
and power, in most excellent manner that may be devised. And saying noe end
is higher then God him self, who is the beginning and end of all things; it
folowethe, that he ought to be loved principally, not for that which we
receive or hope for of him, but for him self which is infinitely amiable.

Wherefore we should accustom our wills, that they be moved to love and to
be delighted, in the perfection, glory, and treasures of our Lord, not
because we feel swetenes in this love nor for the gifts we have received or
hope to receive hereafter, but forgeating as it were these things, love him as
most worthy to have all the wills and powers of Angels and men occupied, in
desiring and delightinge that his Majesty have all the infinite good it haith
without respect that any part thereof, may redownd to us, though indeed so
much the more shall com to us, by how much more we love him without respect of
our own good.

By what certain mark or sign said Probus, may we know, when a man haith
this love?

He haith it said Alphonso, that loves god as much when he shows him self
severe and sharp, as when he is sweet and my I Would; as much when by justice he
punishes, as when mercifully he gives benefits: as much in adversity as
prosperity. Such a man loves not God because he is dulce and sweet: Yet he
loves sweetenes, because it is given by God, and brings him courage to serve
God more diligently: He is not terrifyed nor affrighted with chastisments, but
takes them with that love which the holy hand and fatherly will of God that
scourges does require. He praiethe not, as drawn with love and sweetenes of
the gift, but that his soul enryched thereby, may wax stronger and more
fervent in godds service. He is not offended or troubled to see him self
desolate of consolations, yet he soroweth if any thing be in him which haith
displeased or does offend, the eyes of so high a Majesty. He asks not
forgeuenes and pardon of his sins for escapinge pain, or recovering his lost
grace, virtues, title, and right to eternal glove, but that his soul (having
obtained pardon) may be more grateful and acceptable to God, and may love and
serve his highness in purity.

He haith noe affection, that may withdraw his heart any other way from God. He
does not remember or regard, whether men think of him or not. He is not
grieved, when he is contemned or rejected. He shunneth and is sorrowful for
creditt and honor offered him, fearing lest they be unto him, hindrances to
humilitye. He ioyeth for the good and honor of others, thinking that they
accept or desire them, without ambition or vanity, for the better service of
God and help of his people. Such a lover haith all things, and yet haith
nothing.

He submits him self to all, and all serve him. He shunneth all sweetenes,
and he feelethe nothing but that is sweet. In God whom he loves, he knows
what he ought to do, to speak, to think: and for him only he thinks, he
speaks, he does every thing. He living, is not he that lives, but it is
Christ that hueth in him, geuinge him to live a divine lyse. In loving him
self, he louethe not him self, but he louethe God allmighty, for whose sake he
desirethe all good things. He ioyethe in nothing, but that whereby his Lord
is served, and that he thinks grateful in his sight. And finallye, he ever
ioyeth in his heart and thanketh God who in louinge him self infinitely, does
supply what is due to him from all his creatures.

How may we get this love of god said Probus?

It is vain presumption said Alphonso, for any man to think, he can leap to
it at his pleasure, withowt making due preparation, and following the same pathe
which godds son haith made us both by his own example and docrrine.

What preparation or paths are these said Probus?

He that would receive this precious liquour into his soul said Alphonso, must
first of necessitye occupye him self for many days in these Exercyses which I
told you of in the second part, but before all, in the holy hatred of him
self: otherwise he shall be deceived and profitt nothing at all.

I understand you well said Probus.

That done said Alphonso, he must woork diligently in this sort, whether he be
prevented by God with benedictions of sweetness or not. He must breefly call to
mind, how unmeasurable and infinite the good and glory is that God
possesses, considering him as the best and most worthy, that all creatures joy
for his goodness, and thereupon by and by inclyne his will to desire, and joy for
so great a good of his Lord, and let him continue in that act so long as he
can. If he be a little distracted or wax could in it, let him forthwith
return to it again in the same manner, his heart ever leapinge with joy, in
consideringe God to be full of infinite perfections and goodness, And by
continuance, he shall doubtless be advanced to this perfect love.

The honor, glory, and perfections of our Lord are infinite and of infinite
excellency, and in like sort, every thing in particular that he woorketh or
creates, does show forth and declare to us, a singular goodness and worthiness
in him. And seeing that all the moments of our life, suffice not fully to hear,
or consider them as they are in him: we ought at the least, under name and
title of infinite goodness, honor, and perfections, to heap them together, and
to produce acts of coveting, that God have them all, and to joy all the
minutes of our life that he haith them considering we owe all this to him as
most due. And so much may we exercise our selves in these acts (although we
want that sweetenes which they call devotion) that in every place and business,
we may often love God in this sort, withowte seking any solitary places, as it
happens daily when one friend ioyeth sodanly withowt more opportunity of place
or company, when he hears or remembers some good to have befallen his dear
friend. That which I toulde you before of the use of your will, and of the end
of all your actions, help much in these acts how you should produce them,
and that you must do all for this end, because God is most worthy of it, and
desires that we do it for him.

Perhapps said Probus, we might get this love more easilye by prayer, doing
as you taught me, when you spoke of it, and by the exercyses of those virtues
you rehearsed before.

He shall obtain it said Alphonso, the sooner and better, that together with
prayer, will help him self with the acts of his will, as I toulde you before:
which he may do both in prayer and without it. For in every such act, there is
a new service to God, and a new increase of the love of God, of grace, and of
meritt.



Wherefore we should deeply consider and condemn our own negligence and
folly: and saying we ought never to cease from this act of loving god (both
because it is dew to his majesty, and the act of it self is of an inestimable
profit) we should most bitterly lament every moment of our life that we let
pass without this love.

And specially we ought to bewail our sins, which (if they be mortal) are
deadlye enemies to it, or (if they be venial) hinder so great a good, and
cool the fervor thereof. In like sort also should we reprove ourselves if we
be not exceeding glad and joyful, of every thing that may further us to it as
injuries, contempts, persecutions, etc. Or if we sorrow not so much when any
impediment is given us to it, as are human favor, sensual and profane
delectation, temporal honors, credit, praises, etc.

Out frailty is such said Probus, and our necessity so great, that oftentimes
we can not be gladd of injuries, tribulations, and the like, nor refuse things
delectable and prosperous.

It sometimes said Alphonso, through weakness of body, or because as yet we have
not gotten so much virtue as were needful for our sufferinge of adversities
joyfully, but we must flee the^ and our persecutoures, or again procure and
receive delicate and pleasant things: In such cases I say, we must look that
we do these things with actual intention for avoiding greater evils, and
sorrow also much, in that by fleing adversities and troubles, we depart from a
thing which should further us to so great a good as is the love of God. And
again that by taking delectable things, we omit and forgo the sharp, which
are most due unto us for punishment of our sins and negligences.

All this moreover we ought to do with humble prayer to our Lord, that he
would vouchsaife to strengthen us in body and soul, for better resistinge our
own frailty, whereby through defect of our virtue, it is needful we avoid
such trouble, or use such delightful things, and that also by his grace, we
may be disposed, notwithstanding these impediments of our infirmity, perfectly
to love him.

What remedy and help have we said Probus, if we find our selves very dull
and heavy, whiles we endeavor to produce these acts of love, and to bring all
our motions, into the obedience and service of God: for so it often happens in
other exercyses of devotion and well doing.

The same may happen also in this high woork said Alphonso, but then we may
assure our selves that it comes because we want the holy hatred of our
selves, which is the foundation and most principal disposition to this love of
God. Or again, because there cleueth in our hearts some inordinate affection to
some earthly thing, as love of need less delectation, or affection to some
person or business not rightly ordered. Wherefore he that feleth him self so
dull, must search out diligently in him self, such defect or affection, and
take it away by contrary acts, as we taught before, and shall more hereafter.

For to inclyne our will to produce acts of the love of God, above all
things, withowt having first gotten the holy hatred of our selves, or whiles
our affection to any earthly thing that may deilght us endures (not being
ordained or referred either actuallye or virtually to God) is much like as if a
man would cut with a hammer, things requiringe a raisoure or sharp knyfe.
For the perfection and excellency of this love (the least act whereof, may
advance a man to a high degree of eternal glory in heaven) does not permit
with it, any such vile and baise thing. Besides this also the servant of God,
must be wary of the assaults of his mortal enemy the devil, who never
cease to molest and hinder them that go forward in any virtue, but most
maliceously goes about to harm and overthrow them, that endeavor to obtain,
this most holy love of God.

What way I pray you said Probus, can he chiefly hinder us?

Among many other said Alphonso, he hindrethe us by one, which is very
secrett, and yet much dangerous and hurtful, that is, by a certain mean
estimation, contempt, negligence, and couldnes of the mind, toward the woork
of the love of God, which some persons have, whiles they think, hear, or
read, the chief point of it to consiste, in the desire of Godds perfections,
goodness, and glory, and in ioying in them as I said before.

How can this said Probus, happen to any man in this holy woork?

It happens said Alphonso, because they little conceive or mark the worthiness
of this thing, and the enemy does assail and trouble them withal: And
principally it chances to them that are not prevented with the swetenes which
this love is accustomed to bring with it.

For they hearing as I said even now this love to consist in this, that we
desire and inwardly feel in our selves, a complacency and joy, for all the
infinite goodness and glory which are in god: and this only for God: they wax
could, thinking this work not to be so high and excellent as it is, but judge
other works as well corporal as spiritual, to excede this, and to be more
beseeming godds servants, as preachinge, disputing gouerninge others,
feighting for the faith, alms deeds, fasting, afflictions, and the like.

Whereupon said Probus, comes this false conceit of theirs?

It comes said Alphonso, first by reason the devil tempts them, and
withal, the taist and appetite of their soul, is distempered and corrupted,
as I toulde you yester night, in the fourth instruction, by the example of the
sick man, that by reason of his infected taist, desires hurtful meats, and
takes loath with wholesome.

What remedy have we against this noysom impediment said Probus?

We must provide first said Alphonso, that our corrupt appetite be cured, as I
said in the fourth instruction: which done, they that feel this couldnes, and
have this wrong estimation, shall incontinent perceive, all other works, how
worthy and marvelous soever they seem, to be very abject and base, 1 Cor
in respect of this love, as S. Paul teaches us. And our Saui ur him self,
being the eternal wisdom of God, (which can not err or deceive us) haith
chosen and commanded the same above all things which may be done in heaven or
earth. A reason hereof you may have also, if you consider that albeit our free
will and the acts thereof (which I toulde you before in the fourth
instruction, to be of greateste dignity in us) be of them selves, little worth
or of small commodity: Yet may we make them of inestimable dignity and value,
if we unite our will and most strongly fasten it, to the will of God, which is
of an infinite excellency, in such manner joining ours unto his, that it be not
carried to any other thing, but what his blessed will desires. For then the
act and desire of our infirm and base free will, grows to be of infinite
valewe and dignity, when (forsaking our selves) we take the desire of that
infinite will which is God, who incessantly wills, loves, and ioyeth, for
the infinite good and worthiness he haith.

Why requires God said Probus, that we should desire love and joy in this
sort: as he ever does?

He would have us do it said Alphouso, first for that his love and goodness to
us, would have our abject free will, advanced to so great nobility and
honor, as to have an act of infinite and divine value. Again, because (seeing
he haith created us to so great a good as to enjoy him self) it is just that
we yield him this service at least as to occupye our selves all the time of our
mortal life, in loving him and ioying for his good and glory, as we see
faithful servants and louinge, exceedingly to rejoice, for the goods and
honor their Lords get. Thirdlye, that hear on earth we may occupye our
selves, and begin that work wherein our eternal glory and beatitude in heaven,
chiefly must consist. For gods holy Saints, clearlye behouldinge his nature
and essence, are replenished with an infinite knowledge, to judge what goodness
and glory his Majesty is worthy of: and also with an infinite desire and
love, that he possess the same. Which burning desire and love of theirs, when
(behouldinge God) they see it fulfilled in more perfect sort then they can
wish, imagine, or comprehend, they are ravished with unspeakable joys and
gladness.

The happy Saints in heaven, have the manifest vision and perfect fruition
of all his goodness, and therefore their knowledge, love, and joy, is perfect. We
sinful worms on earth by the light of our catholic faith (though
obscurelye, yet most certainlye and firmlye) believe the same, which they
behoulde. And therefore God will, that we occupy our powers as much as we can,
in the same love, desire and joy, of the infinite goodness and glory of our
Lord. For the more we love him, and joy in his goodness here on earth: the
more perfect and greater, shall our love and joys be in heaven.

I conceive all this said Probus, but many without doubt, have obtained the
perfect love of God required in this life, without all this ado, or knowledge
of this way you have taught me.

Many have indeed said Alphonso, loved God perfectly, before this way was
either known to me, or taught in this manner, by any that I have hard: but
surely the ordinary way to get it, haith been this in substance. For it is
gathered out of the holy Scriptures, according to the declaration of the holy
Doctoures, which have written of this matter.

Many have thought and think still that they have gotten it very easelye
withowt these reasons and means, but commonly they failed of it, and got but
the weak and imperfecte love which I spoke of before.

If you think good we will now pass to the love of our neighbors.

Do so I pray you said Probus.

OF THE LOVE OF OUR Neighbor.
AS the love of God said Alphonso, required before it, all the exercyses and
considerations we spoke of: so the love of our neighbor and of our selves,
required before the^ the love of god. For it is necessary that these two loves
proceed from the love of god, otherwise they can not be good or well ordered.
You must know then that he which desires to serve and please God: must mark
and observe two things. The first is, what God would have him to do: The
second, in what manner he would have it done. For he should have small
thank, or reward with God, that should do his commandment, if he did it
not in the manner he commanded it. He haith bidden us to love one an other
saying, This is my precept, that you love one an other: and with this, in what
sort also we should do it saying, as I have loved you.

He then that does the first, shall not have the high reward due to that love,
except also he do the second.

Now therefore to know how we ought one to love an other; we must consider how
our Lord loved us.

First by many ways and means, he drew and induced us to the love of god:
Then he taught us by his own example, to suffer patiently, all the adversities
of this world, never sacking the raynes to vain delights, above that which
might be necessary to the sustentation of his body. Then he dyed for us, that
we might have thereby virtues, grace, and glory. In this kind of love he
meruelously exceeded, and was a most vehemente enemy to all vain love which
now passes among us, and is ordinarily very corrupt and infecticus to our
souls, created to be the temples of God. According to this example therefore
of our Lord, we ought to frame our Love toward our neighbors, castinge
away all vanities, which are accustomed to mix them selves with our love, as
to be much affected to some persons, for that we see them virtuous and devout,
and in their conuersat on, to be mylde, graccous, and amiable: In the love of
whom often good menns hearts, are taken captyue, finding grief, disquietnes
and trouble of mind, to be without them, or not to talk with them or not to
be mutually beloved and esteemed of them: All which kind of affection and love
is vain and hurtful to the servants of God.

Me think said Probus, we might well love others in this forte, because we see
them gods servants, chiefly if we do it for God.

If your friend said Alphonso, had a servant, the love of whom, should so hold
captive your heart, and so greatly increase, that it more delighted you, to
conu^se and talk with him, then with your friend: were it not manifest that
now you love not the servant for your friend, but because his conversation and
nature is sweet and grateful to you. For though your love toward that
servant, beg^n for your friends sake, yet now it is become inordinate and
excessive and more for your own pleasure and delight you take in the servant,
then wholly for respect of your friend: Even thus we may speak of that love you
rehearsed. It is plain mockery to say it is love of our neighbor purely for
god, notwithstanding there be perhaps some part of spiritual love therewith.
But he that is truly and wholly addicted to God, takes noe part from him, but
geuethe him all, occupying and bestowing his wholl affection on him, or in some
thing, that is wholly ordered or directed to him, as such vain love can not
be, being more for some thing in a creature, then for God.

Our love should be toward all the servants of our Father, as well our enemies
as friends, with so great affection as may proceed, from the love we have to
him, that all other affections set aside, only that may have place which we
owe unto God.

To avoid and cast of all which supersiuous affections, those things may
help, which I toulde you of before, speakinge of the natural affection of joy,
and of the use of our will.

How then said Probus, should we love our neighbors?

Our love to them, said Alphonso, should spring altogether from the love of
God, that (considering they are so highly beloved of him, that he would yield
him self to death for them when yet they were his enemies) we should love them
all so much, as to help them in all that is good and needful for their bodies
and souls, like as we are wont love them that much delight us: Yea and this
we should do, though their conversation wear molestfull and odious unto us,
entreatinge them courteously, and providing for their necessities, as for them
which are tenderly beloved of our heavenly Lord and Father, who wills and
commands us so to do. All this we ought to do, with as seruent a will as
we ca^, for gratifying, pleasinge, and obeyinge our Lord, how injurious and
noisome soever they be unto us.

It is very hard said Probus, for to bear such tender affection to our
enemies, as we may do to our friends and benefactoures.

Our corrupt natures said Alphonso, find difficulty to love our enemies, but
the children of God must not mesure nor order their actions, by the inclination
and motions of their corrupt affections, but by the rule of gods holy will and
commandment. And a resolute will of serving God, makes them noe less firm
and constante in loving him, whom their own inordinate affections would hate,
then him whom by the abundance of benefits and good turns, they are inclyned
to love.

Yet with all this you must know, that albeit our love ought to be in this
sort equally to every one: yet ought we first to show it in good effects and
benefits, toward them that are virtuous, and them we are behoulden unto. For
godds will is, that our charity be ord^rly disposed, preferringe in these good
benefits, every one, according as we are diversely bound unto them.

God haith also said Probus, commanded us to love our neighbors, as we love
our selves, which is an other manner of louinge them, then as our Savior loved
us.

He haith commanded so indeed said Alphonso, but this manner and the other,
are all one in effect and substance if they be rightly understood. For the
love which we should have to our selves, ought to be the same, and in the same
manner, as our Savior loved us. We will therefore if it please you go
forward, and declare in what sort we are to love our selves.

Do so I ptay you said Probus, for it can not but be a pleasant hearing, and
without all peril of offending any, every one being desireous, to love him
self as much as may be.

OF THE LOVE OF OUR SELVES.
Our natural inclination said Alphonso, to the love of our selves, is so great
and vehemente, that God haith not given us any commandment thereof, yet by
the blyndnes and corruption of sin, we have in most part lost our judgment and
knowledge, how we ought to do it.

He therefore that would truly love himself, must observe three things.

First that by all means he procure any thing wheareby he knows any good
may come to him self.

Secondly that he flee and avoid, whatsoever may bring him damage or evil.

Thirdly that he refuse not to offer and yield him self to any difficulties for
obteyninge his own good.

Our natural reason and the light of our Catholic faith, sufficientlye teach
us, which be true goods and evils, and which be apparent and deceitful. And
we must be verey circumspect and diligent that we err not, in discerning
these, or follow not the unreasonable inclinations and appetites of our own
sensuality, taking that for good, which indeed is hurtful, or fleeing that
as evil, which in truth is our good.

Now he that would enrich him self with good things, must know, that in every
good he desirethe, or may obtain, two things are to be considered. One is,
the good that may come to himself, by that thing. The other is, that it is
godds will and desire, that he have that thing. Of these two he ought little or not whitt, to esteem the benefit or good that may happen to him self of the
thing he desires or does as it is his own: In respect of the second; that
it is the service of God, and the fulfilling of his holy will as I toulde you
before in the fifth instruction, speaking of the end of all our actions and
desires.

Our Lord haith given us a preceous ornament or Jewel, wherewith we may
excedingly enriche our selves at any time, that is our appetite and will, the
which we (as it were) gilde with coper or tin, when we desire and love
anything for our own good and benefit: And again, we adorn and beautify it
with divine goulde, when (forgeating our selves) we desire and love any good
thing, only for pleasing and seruinge our Lord, and fulfilling his will. For
the more we for geat ourselves, and have care of godds honor and glory, the
more care haithe God over us agiane to enriche us with all goodness. Wherefore
he that spiritually loves him self, must ever (as worldly men do) study how
to make better, all his goods and substance when he knows the way how it may
easily be done. What more is to be said of this point, I referr you to our
conference of the hatred of our selves.

For the second also, which is the fleeing of all evil: I need to say noe
more, but he that truly loves him self must este me nothing evil or hurtful
to him, and so flee it, but only f^inne and the occasions thereof.

Now for the third, which is to offer himself to any difficulty or dangers
for getting his own good: I must admonish him diligently to exercise himself in
the things that I have said before, but principally, in the hatred of him
self, in humility, in patience, and in the four natural affections or
passions of his soul.

Is there then no more necessary said Probus, for obteyninge this true love of
our selves?

One thing more said Alphonso, is to be observed and practiced diligently, and
that is. It happens dailye, that we do or say something, otherwise then we
should have done or becomes us, for which they that see or hear, (knowing our
defect or imperfection) may think the worse of us, and the less esteem us. In
which case we must consider, first the confusion that follows us thereby. In
this confusion we must not comfort or animate our selves, in thinking that
others perhaps regarded not what we did or said, or that perhaps they have
forgotten it, or that it should not trouble us, because other men fall often
into the like defects: This I say we should not do, but with great love
embrace that confusion, and think that others marked us very well, and account
worse of us, and worthily contemn us as unprofitable and imperfect men. For in
doing thus, we make a vehement act of patience and humility, and shortly
produce, most excellent habitts of them, and finally, do great service to God,
if we referr it to him.

The other thing we are to consider in such cases, is the evil example we give
thereby, and the dishonor or less glory to God. For this therefore the
servant of God, must produce an act of sorrow, for that he haith been by that
speech or fact, perhaps some occasion of evil, or less serviceable to his
Lord, then he might or should have been, and thus shall he reap commodity
both on the one, and the other.

This is all I have to say of the love of our selves, unless you be
unsatisfied in some thing.

I am very well satissyed in all you have spoken said Probus, and I vetelye
think, that whosoever would frame him self to serve God in this sort you have
toulde me, should not only increase excedinglye his own meritt and glory in
heaven: but moreover lead a most joyful and sweet life in earth.

He should noe doubt find much comfort, joy, and sweetenes said Alphonso,
serving God in this sort, but he must beware, he rest not in this sweetenes,
nor serve God for it, because God gives it not for that end, but that by it
we may come to take delight and joy, in the consideration of that good,
glory, and dominion, which God possesses, and that with great courage, we
laud and praise him.

What is our praising of God said Probus?

All praise of God said Alphonso, is none other thing in us, then a jove that
we have, to manifest and make known to all persons, the wonderful works
and inestimable goodness of our Lord, in whom his servants ought to delight and
joy, as worldly men do, when they hear their dear friends, or them selves
praised.

Now let us end with thanks giving to God for his gifts and goodness.

Tell me this also said Probus, how shall I give thanks to God?

OF THANKS GEVING.
THanksgeuing to God, said Alphonso, is nothing else but an internal act of
the soul, whereby he that haith received a gift or benefit from God, first
recogniseth him to be an infinite God and Lord, from whom flows all good in
heaven and earth, and then ioyeth, not because he is more enryched thereby, but
for the glory and goodness of his Lord, and for that he sees him self by that
gift, more abled to love and serve him.

Is there nothing besides this said Probus, necessary in yeldinge thanks to
God?

Besides these acts of our understanding and will said Alphouso, godds servant
ought upon receipt of any benefit, to offer unto God all he is, abasinge and
annihilating him self in his own conceit and will, that so he may wholly in
body and soul, be devoted into godds service, producing at that time great
acts of joy, for the infinite power and goodness of god, from which that
benefit came. For he that would be accounted grateful, ought to requyte his
benefactour with an other thing of as great or greater value and worth, then
that was, which he received of him before.

And seeing we have received of god all we have: whatsoever we yield to his
service, is very small to requyte, yea, the least of his benefits. We ought
therefore at the least, to render him thanks for them, in the manner I have
said, and this with as much love and force, as possibly we may.

And not only to do this, for the benefits bestowed on our selves, but also
for the gifts and graces given to all his Saints, to our friends, to our
enemies, and all his creatures in heaven and earth. For in so doing, we make
(in a strange and marvelous sort) the goods of all godds creatures, our
own, and without regard of our own commodity, we exceedingly increase the
same.

Now is it time, you were traueling. I will bring you into your way again.

I thank you Father said Probus.

And being come to the way, they embraced each other and departed, Alphonso to
his solitary cell, and Probus toward Jerusalem.

Deo gratias.
A Table of the contents.
How the Pilgrim and the Ermitt met. Cap. 1. fol 1. To what end God created
man. 3. Two manners of serving God. 4. Of the ruin and destruction of man's
soul and body by sin. 6 By what powers of our foul we may repair our
ruvne, and how to use our understanding and will. 8 The use of our will. 12
What end and intention we should have in all our actions. 15 How to plant
good habits, and extirpate the evil. 21
THE second part.
How to purge our soul from sin. 25 Hatred of our selves. 27 Of Prayer. 32 Of
Humilitye. 35 HoW to overcome the vice of vayneglorye. 40 Of Patience. 44 Of
the four natural passions of the soul Of Sorrow. 49 Of Hope. 51 Of Fear. 52
The Third part.
Of the love of God. 53 Of the love of our Neighbor. 66 Of the love of our
selves. 69 Of Thanks geuinge. 72
Faults escaped in the printing
Fol. 9 page 1 lin. 4 Helped. read, ever helped. Fol. 14 page 2 lin. 2 grief,
read, sorrow and grief. Fol. 16 page 1 lin. 11 For god. read for none other
end but only for, Fol. 34 page 2. lin. 27 vnfeaned, read, ready and
vnfeaned. Fol. 42 page 1 lin. 6 hate, read bate and refuse. Fol. 52 page 1
lin. 7 God is, read our Lord is. Fol. 94 page 2 lin. 20 good and glory,
read, infinite good.

