A RECANTATION Of an ill led Life. OR A discovery of the Highway Law. WITH
Vehement disswasions to all (in that kind) OFFENDERS. As also Many cautelous
Admonitions and full Instructions, how to know, shun, and apprehend a Thief.
MOST Necessary for all honest Travelers to per'use, observe and Practice.
Written by John Clauell, Gent.

Ego non, sum, Ego.
-- Quantum mutatus ab illo?
Approved by the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, and published by his express
Command.

LONDON, Printed for the Authous use, 1628.

The Epistle Dedicatorie. To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
THat you may see (great King) you have not done*
A work in which your glory shall not live,
In saving me: the course which I have run,
Behold, deciphred, here to you I give.
In which I do so punctually set forth
Even in the liueliest colors what I know
Of those base ways: that who so has of worth
The meanest spark, will scorn the like to do.
I have not only charactred this ill,
But Actors to; that the least judging eye
Those Locusts, which your Land with trouble fill,
May, in their chief'st disguises, them discrie.
So that in saving me, you have destroyed,
O Heaven knows what; a crew of those vild things,
By whom your better people were anoy'd,
Whose lives may now speak service to their Kings.
And for my self, let my Detractors call,
This course a servile one, and to my shame
Say I have ripped, the bowels up of all,
And to preserve my life, have lost my fame
By such detections; but (great Sir) you know,
Your bounty, without article or tie,
My forfeit life so freely did bestow,
You bad, it was obeyed, I did not die.
This then I pay to you a double debt,
First, to that grace preserved me, (which is yours:)
Next that borne duty I must not forget
The subject ow's to Princes, and their powers.
The last made greater by the first: engage
Both life and duty in a twofold band;
Which may produce unto succeeding age
Stories worth my redemption; which may stand,
With the fair memories of men: so placed,
The times may bless your mercy; by whose grace
This shame and ills of mine are quite defaced,
When virtue shall succeed in vice his place:
So that what after good my life shall bring,
Must needs be called the blessing of my King.
Your Majesty's most humbly devoted prostitute. John Clauell.

TO HER NEVER TO BE equaled MAJESTY, the Queen of Great Britain, etc.
Honors Storehouse, Virtues Story,
Fames best Trophie, Natures Glory.
O may with moss the Muses flood,
Be over grown, damm'd up with mud:
All their holy Hills polluted,
And their Oracles confuted,
If that they strain not all they may,
Now their best vows to you to pay;
And hoarse as Ravens may they sing,
Who dare neglect their offering;
Or find a subject for a Verse,
That any meaner worths rehearse;
You the true Story are, and all
That Is rich, fair, sweet, Maiesticall.
The fullest wonder of our time
For Chronicles, in Prose, or Rhyme.
And like the Rosy morn do bless
Our drooping Land with cheerfulness;
Throwing your bountie's every where
As fresh, and fragrant as the air.
The Woodbines, and the Violet
The Season of the Year forget:
And to attend your sweetness do
Grow every where, you tre^d, or go.
I, in the Autumn of my life,
When guilt, and Justice were at strife,
Was by your royal breath (strange thing)
Vnwithered, turned into my Spring.
Accept this Sacrifice (great Queen)
In which no merit can be seen,
But that your Royal Name do bless
My Muse in her unworthiness.
And though no luster crown my art,
Holy fires inspires my heart.
Obedience, Duty, Zeal, attend
The faithful tribute, that I send.
So the Gods accept of still
Not the offering but the will.
Celuy qui plus honor vos vertus and admire vostre Bonte, and Clemence and qui
est le plus oblige a vostre Maiest^^e.

Iehan Clauell.

To the no less ennobled by Virtue, then Honorable by their Titles, and
Dignities; the Duchesses, Marchionesses, Countesses, with the rest of the most
worthy and noble Ladies, of the Court of that great Queen of Mercy, her
Majesty of Great Britain.
THe hardest heart, with rudest hand,
That is least subject to command,
That fears not God, grimme Death, nor Hell,
Nor ever knew but to rebel,
Seizing by force, and rifling all
That in his greedy Clutches fall,
As you pass by, must in a Maze
(Void of all power) stand and gaze;
Such awe a Ladies presence bears,
Filling a Rake-hells heart, w^i^h fears;
Besides, you always have your guide,
And a safe Conuoy, as you ride;
Not to profect you (there is no need)
Is then this Story, (you may read;)
This chiefly is, to let you see
My good amendments constancy;
Our blessed Queen (moved thereunto
I do presume, by some of you)
Preserved my life; accept you then
Just thanks, from my unskillful pen;
Lo, this I was enioyn'd to write,
But I mean shortly to indite
A perfect, true, and ample Story,
That shall speak nothing, but your glory;
Accept (mean while) what beer you see;
You Will otherwise, dishearten me.
The admired of Virtues, John Clauell.

To the right Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel, and Counsel of War.
Right Honorable.
So vild, and audacious, so public, and rebellious have mine offenses been;
such, and so extraordinary the mercy I have received (of both which I am truly
sensible) that I wish really, and sincerely from my heart, I had suffered the
shameful death was due unto me, then, that now there is a fair occasion, I
should be debarred from regaining my lost honor, and reputation, in his
Majesty's Wars abroad. May it please your Honors, when I saw all my fellow
offenders, and other Delinquents whatsoever discharged and sent upon
employment, I envied not their happiness, but seriously began to consider, how
I (who alone was denied that fairest way of all) might do my Country some
service, even whilst I continued here, an unfortunate, and wretched prisoner.
Thus sadly musing (finding my Conscience burdened,) I resolved to write this
real Recantation of all my evil ways; whereby I have not only disarmed, and
prevented my self, from falling into the same lewd course of life, at any time
hereafter; but also so fully and faithfully instructed all honest Travelers,
that no man that will be pleased to follow my advise, can from hence forth,
(that way) miscarry. Sithence therefore I have yielded so fair a testimony,
both of my contrition, and conversion; I most humbly beseech your Honors to
entertain a favorable, and good opinion of me, and (moved thence unto
commiseration) that you would vouchsafe to grant a Warrant for my discharge,
that I may not spend my youthful days in this miserable and wretched prison,
but may on, upon my Prince, and Countries service; where I am resolved to
acquit my self, by some brave, and notable exploite, or a worthy death; and
whilst I live, I shall at all times rest accountable for my liberty, and the
life that is lent

Your Honors, most embounden, unworthy, and distressed Suppliant, John Clauell.
Kings Bench Prison October. 1627.
To all his Honorable, Noble, and never to be enough thanked Friends at the
Court.
There Is no necessity that can exclude
the poorest being from a gratitude.
And where the strength of Fortune lends no more,
He that is truly thankful, is not poor.
Were I to pay this debt to courser men,
I might despair; and mine own fate contemn;
Their satisfaction only lives in things
That profit, or the Golden tribute brings.
But your far finer souls in Heaven that dwell,
Despise those meaner ends, so near to Hell.
And for your own sakes noble actions do
As well as theirs, they are extended to.
Yours be the bounty then, mine the great debt:
On which no time, nor power can ransom set.
Yours most obliged, I. C.

To the impartial Judges of his Majesty's Bench, my Lord Chief Justice, and
his other three Honorable Assistants.
THose pardoned men who taste their Princes loves,
(As married to new life) do give you Gloves;
But I have chosen rather to present
You, with the offering of a fair intent.
And though your iustest sentence lost it is scope,
Yet I presume, your goodness will find hope
In my vnquestion'd alteration: so
You killed my sin, though my life 'scapt the blow.
And that is justice obiect's fair extent,
To judge the Past, the new ills to prevent.
For were the Bench of men's repentance sure:
None should the strictness of the Law endure.
So thrive this work, as in effect it may
My vice, and true repentance, both display.
Your distressed Prisoner, I. Clauell.

To the right Worshipful the Justices of Peace, and Gentlemen of quality in
this KINGDOM.
Right Worshipful,
Usual, and ordinary is your contribution to the relief of those, that suffer
loss by the Highway side (the Law requiring it) great is your care and
trouble, almost at every Session and Assize, in trial of those, who that way
offend; seriously to be lamented is the loss of many young Gentlemen (well
descended) who have been, for that fact, found guilty, and accordingly
suffered, untimely ignominious, yet deserved deaths; These mischiefs, and
inconveniences I have observed, and seriously considered; so that (partly to
extenuate my own foul offenses, partly to procure ease unto my burdened
conscience, but most especially that the like may not be hereafter) I have
written this Discovery, which I entitle my Recantation; I have hereby not
only prevented the baser sort of people from committing such rebellious
outrages, but also laid open to the better sort (I mean too such as are of
Gentle Parentage) the foulness and baseness of the Act, that who so has the
least relish of a Gentleman, will be no more seduced, and that way misled; now
if it take this good effect (as I heartily wish it may) I shall account my
self happy, although I continue still,

A distressed Prisoner. I. C.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Robert Heath Knight, the Kings Attorney; and
(...) Esquire, one of his Majesty's (...) John Clauell wishes long life, and
prosperity in this, with eternal happiness in the World to come.
IN the relaps of my danger (as I may so term it) when I was thought past
cure, you were pleased to administer, and your undertakings were not in vain,
for the breath, I breathe, is what, you then procured unto me; the motives that
moved you hereunto, (as well as Charity, and merciful disposition) were
(questionless) your good opinions, that I would from thencefoorth become an
honest man; I therefore, that your expectation may not be frustrate, and that
you may not bethink the good Act you did, but rather glory in what you have
done, have made, a real and faithful Recantation, of all my evil ways;
which I here publish unto the World, and (as most especially bound)
perticularly present you with; take it as the inward man, vouchsafe it your
kind acceptance, gentle censure, and favorable protection, but above all I do
desire the continuance of your Love, whilst I shall be, what I here profess
my self

An altered man I. C.

To the right Worshipful, his ever dear and well approved good Uncle, Sir
William Clauell Knight Banneret.
YOur hidden purposes (grave Sir) that rest,
Within the secret closet of your breast,
Have like predomination with my Fate,
I shall be happy or unfortunate,
As they assign me; you may justly take
A fair occasion now; both to forsake
And utterly renounce me; but behold
My God above (whose secrets are untold,
All things on Earth as he thinks best decreeing,
What will my future actions be, foreseeing)
Has lent me life, and mercy, by my King,
Who is his Substitute, in every thing;
Since then their doom is past, O let not me
Be new arraigned, by your severity;
Forget my foul offenses, me, and all,
Until some brave, and noble actions shall
Bring you a new acquainted, if again
I ever take a course, what shall be vain,
Or if of any ill, I faulty be,
O then for ever disinherit me.
Your right sorrowful Nephew, John Clauell.

To all the grave, and learned Seriants and Counselors at LAW.
THere needs no cunning Settor to betray
To his companions, when, nor yet which way
You are to ride, nor need the thieves be told
What store of coin you carry; they all hold
You to be rich, and certain prize, beside
They know when from, when to, the term you ride;
Great is your danger then; which to prevent
Peruse I pray what with a fair intent
Is offered to your view, if by what is here
(When you shall be beset) you get off clear,
My joy shall be, just like the joy you take,
When for your pleading, and good counsel sake,
A poor man still in peace retains his own,
Who otherwise had been, quite overthrown.
Your in all due observance, I. C.

To the Reader.
THe liueliest and best Monuments of men are their actions, and in those, their
memories either die before them in infamy, or survive them unto the farthest
extent of perpetuity in the fullest and fairest Registers of time, and glory;
both of these retain their subsistences, not in the brazen leaves of
Sepulchers, nor in the tongue-failing relation of succession, but in those
Paper Records, which seldom forfeite them to loss, although assaulted by
never so many alterations, as the Stories from the first World, as well
profane, as divine, may wonderfully witness to all Obseruers, This truth may
question my discretion, that have made mine own hand the Character of such
actions as Posterity will blush at, whose memory might easily have lost the
thoughts of men in less then half an age. If thus I had not given it
continuance as lasting as the World; It is confessed in respect of my self the
answer is difficult, but in respect of God, the World, and mine own
conscience, I could contriue no fairer or more real satisfaction. The sins
of the dearest children of God have had their like punishments, Dauid's Murder
and Adultery must have Dauid's written Confession and Contrition, Salomons
Lasciviousness must have his own acknowledgement and recantation, and to
conclude, he that is ashamed to confess the ills he has been conscious of,
argues too palpably that he is a great many leagues from repentance, and is
more in love with his sin, then his amendment. Believe in Charity, this is
my resolution, that mine own free detection of this pernicious and common
vice, might not only kill the fear of my impossible relapses, but be a just
deterrer of all the worshippers of this course. Nor can I fear, that such
Idolatry of theirs can rise in Judgment against this truth of mine, which has
so honestly condemned them, and their actions: or that their reuenges, which
they have already proclaimed against the innocence of my Recantation, can
reach farther then the counsels of Achitophel, Whose effect extended to self
ruin, whilst I shall be happy, to be either censured, or forgotten by them;
for whose amendment I owe my Prayers, and will Religiously inuoke; that they
may, either become new men like me, or else, that they may know my resolution
has built me beyond the aspersion of their poisons Nor can I fear the ill
construing of this work of mine, they that love truth, and reconciliation of
wild youth (to that perfection the first Creation intended) will love my
expression, more then my Verse; and hug my intended innocence, more then they
can in goodness condemn my detected Offenses; The rest, that are Gald, or
prevented by this Discovery must not dare to Judge, because all indifferency
is denied them. Nor can they whose hatreds against my Person, or Actions, have
drawn, into a resolved opposing, of my fairest courses, claim any Language in
the condemnation of my Book, or profession of amendment, since their
splenatiue Souls will draw them into a worse extremity of censure, then ever
my most provoking needs could me, into the high way of this kind of sinning.
How so ever it is taken, it is honestly meant, and will prove (questionless)
a wholesome prevention for the honest traveler, whose satisfaction I covet,
that my ills may find some redemption that way, which is the fullest ambition
and hope of

Your well wisher, John Clauell.
From my lovely sad, and unfrequented Chamber in the Kings Bench, October,
1627.
The Argument of the whole Book.
AN Introduction. Folio 1 A free acknowledgement and confession of my foul
offenses both to God and man, with my preparation and resolution, when I was to
have saffered death. Folio 4 An absolute defiance of all those that follow my
late course of life, living upon the spoil. Folio 8 The highway Law. 1. The
oath every young thief takes, when he is admitted a brother of the company.
Folio 10 2. The order prescribed, or the charge given by the oldest thief, to
the rest, before they attempt. Folio 12 3. The manner of their assault, and how
they behave themselves in the action, and after. Folio 13
How soon and ill they spend, what thus unlawfully they get. Folio 16 Hearty
disswasions with my best endeavor to reclaim them. 1. By showing them the
misery of a prison, which must be their first step. Folio 17 2. By giving them
to understand, how much they are mistaken in other men's opinions of them. Folio
21 3. By putting them in mind of their wretched and cursed ends (which they
fondly jest at.) Folio 2^. As also their reward in the world to come. Folio 28
4. That they must not presume on my example of grace, which was most
extraordinary in many respects. Folio 23
Instructions for the honest traneller, that be may pass in safety. 1. What
he is to take heed unto, before he take his journey. Folio 30 2. How to carry
himself in his Inn. Folio 31 3. The danger of traveling on the Sabhath day.
Folio 31 4. How as he rides he shall know a thief from an honest man. Folio 32
5. An instance, how dangerous it is to grow familiar with any stranger upon the
way. Folio 34 6. When to ride. Folio 34 7. Where to ride. Folio 35 8. How to
ride. Folio 36 9. What is to be done, if he be beset. Folio 37 (A foul fault
where of many travelers are guilty. Folio 39 10. If by chance he be unawares
surprised, how to behave himself. Folio 40 11. Being robbed, how to follow,
which way to set forth Hue and Cry, how to coast, and where to find the
thieves. Folio 42.
An extraordinary charge the Country usually put themselves unto, which is
both needless and hurtful. Folio 44 Diverse instructions for the Inne-keeper,
how to know thieves from his honest guests. Folio 46 The Conclusion. 1. Wherein
I prove my recantation to be real. Folio 50, 54 2. Wherein I answer some
aspersions laid on a guiltless person, to whom I am much indebted, and how.
Folio 52 3. Wherein I humbly beseech his Majesty, to be graciously pleased to
employ me in some service, and not to banish me. Folio 56
A Postscript unto his Majesty for my enlargement: Folio 59
CLAVELL'S Recantation.
STand and deliver to your observation,
Right serious thoughts, that you by my relation
May benefit, for otherwise in vain
I write, you read, unless from hence you gain
The happiness I mean you; blessed is he
That will make use of others ieopardie.
Be warned by me, so may you purchase hence
At a cheap rate my dear experience.
You must not look from me to have the strain
Of your Blackfriars Poets, or the vain.
Of those high flying men, whose rare Muse brings
Forth births, that Gossipt are by Lords and Kings.
For though I often have seen Gadd's-hill, and those
Red tops of Mountains, where good people lose,
Their ill kept purses, I did never climb
Pernassus Hill, or could adventure time,
To tread the Muses Mazes, or their floor
Because I knew that they are lightly poor,
And Shooters Hill was fitter far for me,
Where pas'd releifes for my own poverty.
I never rode on Pegasus (for then
I had fled farther then pursuit of men)
If therefore you expect a lofty strain,
You wrong your selves, and me, your thoughts are vain.
Perchance my Verse may amble, trot, or fly
As if my frights presented Hue and Cry
To dog me still, nor (Poetlike) I faigne
My theme is Truth, my self the subject plain.
I cannot play the Satire; my disguise
Fairly plucked off, I am nor grim, nor wise,
Nor cursed enough to scourge, no Beadle I
To punish you with petilasherie:
I mean to paint my self, and not to be
The Chronicler of others infamy.
I will not aim at Motes within your eyes,
For I confess in mine a beam their lies;
Which I pluck out, and deal as punctually
As if I spoke against mine enemy.
Let this inuit you then, these newest ways
Of self inuectiue writing. Now adays
Each one commends himself, and others blame
Of faults, when he is guilty of the same,
Yea and of worser too, and seeming wise
As folly will the daintest Wits despise.
Such has been my conceit, for I was prone
To blame each action, which was not mine own,
Believing what I did was good, maintaining
That my ungodly and worst way of gaining
Was more legitimate, and far more fit
Then borrowing, and thus I argued it.
Who, in the way of loan, takes from his friend
Whom he finds kind, and ready for to lend,
The maine of his estate, with an intent
(Premeditated basely) fraudulent:
Betrays a trust, and in performance slack,
Breaks both his word, his own, and his friends back,
Who finds no remedy; but who has lost
His purse, repayd is at the Countries cost,
Besides the thief says not he will repay,
Nor is it expected from him, and yet they
That borrow, will a thousand oaths let fly,
And wish they may be damned eternally
If that they fail, and thus the purse they fill,
Make light their oaths, and load their souls with ill.
But hence capitulation, he is not free
From ill, that would by ill excused be.
Such Sophistry as this, and such belief
The Prince of darkness Satan, that old thief
Did prompt me to; he first persuades to sin,
Then firmly that we may continue in
The foul transgressions we commit: he tells
What fair excuse we may allege; which quells
Our good intentions to desist: he says
Unto the quarreller it is a praise
For to affront the meek, and a great glory
To boast thereof, and to repeat the story.
The envious, and the sullen minded man
That aims at blood, and ruin all he can,
He cherishes, and says it is but meet,
Bids him persist, and that revenge is sweet.
Thus Satan pleads, thus he deludes us all,
And then at last he glories in our fall.
But horrid Sire of Hell, I do descry,
And find thou art the Father of each lie,
That a delinquent has for his excuse,
And therein does consist thy maine abuse
Unto mankind, immediately next that
Temptation which made Eve to perpetrate;
For since that damned act of thine, it is true
We sin by nature, but are borne anew
Through Christ, which blessed regeneration
Has notwithstanding no relation
To those accursed, that do want the grace,
For to appeal thereto: or have the face
To justify themselves, and with a lie
As 'twere confront the sacred deity.
Had Adam too, not from his just God fled,
Had he confessed, as otherways he did
Deny what he had done, and had he cried
For mercy, when himself he justified,
I do believe the vengeance for his sin
Had not so lasting, and so heavy bin.
Thus I debated with my self when I
Was first attached, and kept so privately
That none must visit me, and even then
Not being allowed to have advice of men,
To thee my gracious God I did appeal,
To thee (who knew'st before) I did reveal,
Confess, acknowledge, and bewail my sins,
Assertained that whosoever winnes
Mercy and favor from thee, must repent,
That only causes thee for to relent
And stay thy wrath, I said within my heart,
All idle wandering thoughts first set apart,
O God most merciful thou know all,
What is, what was, and what hereafter shall,
If thy foreseeing knowledge does descry,
That if I live, I will live wickedly,
And licking up the vomit of my sin,
The same or a worse way of ill begin
Now let thy thundering hand my cursed days end,
But if my evil days I shall amend,
And by a true conversion yield thee praise
And glory, then, O then in mercy raise
Me from the snares of death, direct me to
Both what I am to speak, and what to do.
Thus I besought my God; what comfort then
And ease came to my mind, neither my pen
Can write, nor you imagine, for that bliss
He only knows, by whom enjoyed it is.
But whilst this contemplation did transport
My ravished mind, behold another sort
O thoughts assault me, that the Devil might
Lose all his power in me in this great fight,
Me thought upon a sudden I beheld
My Conscience frighted with my sins, that yield,
And cried, accusing me, my ills were such,
The glory that I saw, I might not touch;
The World, on the other side, by me offended
Inditing me, with evidence transcended
All trialls here, for who will nor con^esse,
Adds to his fault, and does a new t^an^gresse.
The heavenly Judge knew all, and could inform
The Jury how my passages were borne.
Then Satan that had tempted, next comes in,
And though he fashioned, yet revealed my sin.
So that I conscious, all amazed stood
Betwixt so much of ill, so much of good.
And as my comforts reached at the Crown,
Frozen despair assayes to pluck me down.
At length my sins (me thoughts) like clouds did fly,
And vanished quite, and none accuser by
To peale against my pardon, which sealed stood,
Writ in the Lambs dear innocence, and blood;
And all my ruins were restored in that
He that must judge me is my Advocate.
And thus prepared, induced, assured, I came
To my confession here, resolved to name
And to particularize all my offenses,
My ill got goods, and dearer times expenses,
To satisfy stern Justice in each point,
Vnscruing my disguises joint, by joint.
Not caring though this freeness might deprive
My being here, and take me from the live
To mingle with the dead, if but from hence
My forfeit life might pay for mine offense,
I did not then unto the Judge at home
Deny those ills, which were perhaps unknown
To his inquiry, nor refuse to tell
What ever I had done that was not well.
And at the bar when death and justice stood
Not greedy for, but challenging my blood
As debt to them: I did not faintly then
Before the faces of so many men
That witness my arraignment, or deny
My foulest deeds, nor could the fear to dye
About me houer with a face so grimme,
As not to ease my conscience of the sin
I had committed, that my judgment might,
How sad so ere, be equal yet, and right.
And that the glory unto God might be
More than the pity was bestowed on me.
Nor was it hope of mercy, that my youth
Might purchase favor only for this truth,
Or that the Bench in policy might save
Me from the claws of death, in hope to have
Such freeness from the like offenders still,
When they should see my plainness thriu'd not ill;
And that the law because I vented all,
Would but my follies chide, not let me fall.
No, it was none of these, my wounded mind,
That could no rest, no ease, no quiet find,
But in confession, plainly proved that I
Was less afraid of dying, then a lie:
I knew besides that in concealing so
I strived to keep my ills, not let them go.
And he that in excuses folds his shame
Retains his sin, although he save his fame.
Hence then my ill companion, I no more
Will strive to hide thee, but unlock the door
Where my offenses lie, whose ugly shape
Shall nor the worlds, nor mine own censure escape.
Of all the heinous facts man can commit,
There Is none like this of mine, for it is right
Rebellion against God and man, so foul
That it deserves the loss of life and soul.
Now you licencious Rebels, that do make
Profession of this wicked course, and take
A pride therein, and would be termed by me
Knights of the Rodes, or else at leastwise be
Styled Highway Lawyers; No, I do defy
You, and your actions, I will tell you why;
But first pluck of your visards, hoods, disguise,
Masks, Muzles, Mufflers, patches from your eyes,
Those beards, those heads of hair, and that great wen
Which is not natural, that I may ken
Your faces as they are, and rightly know
If you will blush at what I speak, or no;
As well you may-but that you want the grace
Forlorned men, I pity though your case,
Because it has been mine, and gladly I
Would suffer death, to be a remedy,
And your example, only that I know
It will do better for to live, and show
Unto the world your baseness, to prevent
Others that yet sin only in intent,
Conceiving that it is a gentile course,
Not to be discommended, whilst non's worse,
Or baser on the earth, yet it is true
Some Gentlemen perhaps, before they knew
The poorness of this way, to serve their need
Have more then once attempted some such deed,
But now they see their warlike Prince take Arms,
They scorn to live upon their Countries harms,
But will go on, whence there may Honor grow
To blot out quite their fames first overthrow.
Expressing to the world, that want of Action.
As much as Moneys, made them know your faction.
Which though your courser natures follow still,
The Active spirit leaves, and knows it ill;
But what are you, that nothing can reclaim
From giving to your souls so foul a name?
Who neither fear of heavens, nor earths just Law
Can, into compass of self knowing, draw?
Whose honors, strumpetted to this base course,
Have made you of your selves, take no remorse?
But hugging your own ruin, and foul shames,
Are proud in losing your repute and fames?
Now I consider better, it is not strange
That you this life will for no other change;
For you have got by this vile course of sinning
A kind of state, nere known to your beginning;
And from attending others, are become
The principal, and best men in the room;
Where (like the Ass in trappings) you do awe
The silly beasts, that Beer and Claret draw;
For they you Captains, and Lieutenents call,
And tremble when a frown you do let fall,
For Peerless now your selves are masters grown,
That in man's memory were Foot-boyes known;
And your despair as base as your condition
Makes you believe, if you should leave perdition
In these attempts, you should again be made
From being suns your selves, another shade,
And that your worthless spirits cannot rise
In any course, that walks without disguise,
For bred on dunghills, if unmasked, you fear
You shall too much, in your own filths appear;
And as the witch, and damned Euchaunters pay
Their tributes to the Devil, and do pray
In a loose form, unto that beastly spirit,
From whom they do their wickedness inherit,
Have their oaths, orders, and distinctions so,
As they that in a tract of goodness go:
Such irreligious form, and course you take
For your accursed, damned, Protectors sake.
And fearing that your acts were not enough
To make you his, an oath of such black stuff
You have compounded, as you meant to tie
Yours lues to sin be your own perjury.
For he that truth for swears, but to his ills
Makes conscience of a vow, which conscience kills,
And so is perjured as he swears to be
True to untruths, and false to honesty.
With this you tempt and bind unhappy men,
Who doubting to be damned, are damned then,
And to those vows still stiriuing to be true
Forsake all good, in being just to you.
This hellish oath you minister, and now
Out ere they ride you charm them to their vow,
That if misfortune in your traffic do
Betray you to the Law, and danger too,
You must not tell your Accomplices, nor name
How by this cursed trade, and life you came;
For if you are examined, when you fell
To these lewd courses? Then you are to tell
That you came up here with a full intent
To go for service; ere the forces went
(Which you must ready be to name) you had
Spent ^ll your money; here must you look sad.
And fetch a sigh or two, and then confess
Only for one supply, this wickedness
You fell into so may you move belief,
Whilst you are thought to be a poor young thief
Lately seduced, and hence will pity grow;
Then must you vow you will no more do so:
Thus shall you cousin Justice of her due,
Quickly get off, and to this course anew.
Nor must remorce of conscience touch you, for
Your sacrament relenting does abhor;
And (entered in) you must resolve to grow
Old in your Vice, and keep your contract so.
For you are sworn to use these courses still,
And so indeed are married to your ill.
But be assured our Laws are of that force,
They will on easy suite grant a divorce.
Yet you not minding this, do next agree
Both of the time, and where the place shall be
Appointed for a meeting, scarce in this.
(Though in all goodness slack) will any miss.
So being come together, there you lie
In some odd corner, whence you may discrie
Such booties as shall pass, and then says he
That is the oldest thief, be ruld by me,
And mark what I shall say, thus must you place
Your Maskes and Chin-clothes, thus then you your face
May soon disguise, and what is he can swear
Directly and precisely who we were;
And that your words may yield a differing tone,
Put in your mouths each one a pible stone.
Now must we choose a watchword somewhat common,
As ( what is acnocke) for fear least we should summon,
Their thoughts into suspicion, then be sure
The word once named, each man to deal secure
We that are strongest at the gripe will seize,
Then be assured for to observe me these;
With your left hand to catch the Bridle fast:
And let the right upon the sword be cast,
The one preuents escaping, the other then
Quells their resistance, let our weaker men
That are not thus employed, cry boldly stand;
And with their Swords and Pistols them command,
Whilst you afright we will persuade, so that
By fair or foul means they shall yield, that is flat.
Perhaps Whilst he is talking yet, one cries,
Arm, Arm Camaradas, yonder comes a prize;
If up the hill you meet, if down they ride
You follow after, and then side by side
Each having singled out his chosen one:
And the Coast clear, you jointly seize upon.
And then in troth it is very strange to see
What different qualities in men there be.
You shall have able fellows, strong, well set
As ere your eyes beheld, when they are met,
And set upon (great Boobies) tremble quiver,
And cry like Children at the word Deliver,
Though to affright them there is no weapon drawn,
Nor money in their purses to be taken.
Such cowards there are many, others then
That are as Pigmies to these taller men)
Though they are nere so threatened to be shot,
Or to be straight ways murdered, fear it not;
But fight courageously whilst they have breath,
Not daunted at the present show of death:
On disaduantages yet being caught
(Not yielding though) by you strong thieves are brought
With their sad fellows, likewise in the lerch,
Out of the way, where you begin your search:
Then every place about them you see sift,
That it is impossible that they should shift
A penny out of sight and if so be
You find some gold that is quilted privately,
You call them villains, and dishonest men
For their intended coozenage, happ'ly then
The Traveler cries out he is undone,
Because in that all his estate is won;
Which moves not, for your consciences are gross,
You value gain, and not the poor man's loss,
Then chop you Horses most familiarly,
Exchange you tell them is no robbery.
And next most desperately you make them swear,
That they shall neither follow you, nor rear
The Country with a hue and cry, so vexed,
Robbed, rifled, destitute, amazed, perplexed,
You leave them, and are gone, they know not whither
Nor scarce the number, but you went together,
And that is all they can say, here is poor light
To those that do pursue, yet in your flight
You show your cowardly fear, each Crow you see
Seems like a Constable, and if so be
A Colt or Calfe within the bushes stir,
You think you are beset, in have confer
One with another how you shall get gone
From that so imminent destruction,
Did not I see of late, after a prize,
A strange confusion on such poor surmize;
An Owl which into Sanctuary gat
To shun the ayrie quires wondering at,
Screend in a hollow Tree, so discontent
Began with fatal hoopes the air to rent,
At which you switch'd apace, fearing that hollow
Was of the Country, that your flight did follow,
Thus more a fraid then hurt you often are
The more the pitle, afterward you share
And do divide the spoil, here let me show
Another piece of Knavery that I know,
You play the double thieves, you cheat, forswear,
Reserving the best part, from those you dare,
And curse your selves to Hell it is all; for I
Have found you in your damned perjury,
But makes no matter, vvhither more or less,
It Is soon consumed again in wickedness,
Ill gotten goods can never prosper well,
Nor can they thrive that have no place to dvvell,
The rolling stone can hardly gather moss:
Those that live on, do alvvayes live in loss.
You have no trade, no calling, no vocation
Whereby to live, and save; you have relation
To nothing that is good, vvastfull expense
Is of your lavvlesse gains the recompense.
Thus to be furnished then, is just as tho
A man should thatch his dwelling house with snow,
Which melts, drops, soulters, and consumes away
Even the time of one sun-shining day.
For when to Innes or Tauernes you do run
That note your vvayes, there are you twice undone.
For well they know their bills you dare not chide,
If you presume your actions they must hide,
And so to make them rich, you forfeit all
That men may wife, or good, or honest call.
And as you sinned in gaining, so are feign
To be in spending coozen'd, not complain
Although yon knovv't, so thriftlesse is their way
That do on ruins of their Country prey.
I had a treble income, by the means
Of such as were my men, and yet my gains
Scarce counteruail'd my charge, yet was I wary
Not vvastfull in expense, but alvvayes chairie
In that particular, to blind men's eyes,
For fear that thence suspicion might arise.
Yet (notvvithstanding all this thrift) I could
Never grow rich by saving, nor yet would
The sum I had, when I was doomed to die,
Pay for my burial, and my Coffin buy.
Whence I conclude, though we go late to bed,
And rise betimes, and likewise eat the bread
Of carfulness, the vantage will be small
Unless God gives his blessing there vvithall.
Which he will never do to such attempts;
Your wicked and unlawful course exempts
You from that gracious benefit, and tho
You do subsist avvhile, God suffers so
To try if that you will reclaymed be,
If not, his heavy vengeance shall you see
Out poured in abundance, then too late
You will repent you, cursing cruel fate
When it is past remedy, the Pots you know
That over often to the River go
At last come broken home, O then forsake
This life, least you your Inn the Prison make;
And here arrived, O Heavens; Hell not retaynes
More fuller tortures, torments, vvoes, and pains.
Which were enough to punish all offense
Though with the forfeit life, the Law dispense.
For here no sooner entered, but you meet
A thousand vvretched souls, that loosely fleet
From place, to place, where sighing is their air,
Their comforts coldness, and their food despair;
And ever as they see a Keeper come
They start, as fearing some new martyrdom.
Whilst the insulting Rascal swells to think
The crauen soul should from his power shrink,
And standing on the tiptoes of poor pride
Screwes his ill favored face, on the other side;
As the poor Prisoner with a doleful look
Seems to petition some thing, (as the Book
Of his sad face may tell) the Iayler vild,
His deuillish heart is from remorse exild.
The minutes of your rest (if rest there be
Within the walls of so much Injury)
Are frighted with your cares, or some rude noise
Of senseless creatures, from whose drunken voice,
The night is quartred into Earthquakes sad,
That you would think even the whole World were mad
And you another humorist shall hear,
Cursing the Stars, the Earth, and all that is near,
Another vild, and frantic in his oaths
His blasphemies against God and Angels throws,
Cursing his cruel Creditors, and fate
That makes him beg his food within a grate.
Perhaps some pray, but if they do, it is so
As if the good they meant they did not know,
But as their wants or customs do provoke
They in distraction, do their Gods inuoke,
Who hears as little, for such vows as those
The best effects of true petitions loose.
Here are you mingled with the various strain
Of fainting need, and every humor vain,
And must of force endure the idle way
Of those that do blaspheme and such as pray
At one self instant, here what other ill
Your own corruption knew not, meet you still,
And if a little tainted when you came
Ere you depart you are all composed of shame,
And grow as cunning now in all offense
As he that tempted Man's first innocence.
Nor is that humor which some Parents have,
(Thinking their vilder sons they thus may save
From utter ruin or reclayme from sin,
If but a prison once they are put in)
To be forgiven; for in saving so
They do precipitate their overthrow;
The cause is easy, for examples ill
Purge not, but do adulterate the will,
Too prone to giddie folly, and beside
They that enjoy the air and Region wide,
When from a Kinsman or a friend confined.
They have a Message, or a Letter signed
As if they had him sacrificed to Hell,
Nor know him, nor the place where he does dwell,
Or if they call his mention from the dead,
It is as faint as of those buried.
So that the living deaths of prisoners be
The feelingst Mon^me^ts of misery,
But these are but the Interludes to those
Sad Tragedies writ in your overthrows,
And as the quickest passage in your Scene,
To your Catastrophes, so slight, so mean,
That he that sees your ends, may truly say
The Prison was the best of all your play,
For there your fatal lodging, and sad room,
Presenting to you your accursed doom,
May well instruct you, that abuse of air
Has brought you to this chamber of despair,
Where when the tell-tale Sun through crannies spies
Your day-bard carcass, locked in miseries,
It snatches his free beams from your dull sight,
As who should say, you had abused his light
By doing that it was ashamed to see,
And therefore darkness must your portion be.
The night, which you can scarce distinguish then,
(Whilst your sad thoughts your errors may condemn)
Instead of sleep, should with a thousand fears,
Sound your waked conscience larums in your ears,
Unfold your guilts, and crown your watchful eyes
Not with a dream, but sense of Miseries,
Then death, which or you fear not, or despise
Must coldly in your apprehensions rise,
And teach you truly what it is to die,
Not natures, but the sons of infamy.
But such considerations have long since,
With your worst thoughts, a cruel difference.
For you believe you have deserved to be
Admired, not scorned, for your past villainy,
And that the actions, you have done are such
As pace with honor, can endure the touch
Of cruell'st censure, whilst you fondly deem
That men you brave, and valiant do esteem,
And so are bound with your ills to conniue,
And in despite of Law keep you alive.
So from the Jail unto the halter go
Careless of now, or after overthrow.
Base usurpation, and conceits as vain
As are your lives, expenses, and your gain.
For good and brave men censure right your sin,
And pity you, and the course you are in
Rather in common Piety, then that
Your vilde defeatings should be wondered at;
And since you are discovered thus by me,
If by mistake before a man might be
So cheated with your boastings, and loud talk,
Because he never knew the tracke you walk
With your disguises, now his Judgment may
Be altered, betterd, or quite thrown away.
When all your fained worths, appear to be,
But faint protectors of your infamy
Disabled in the poor things you commit,
Which neither are for worth, nor valor fit.
Your ends besides (if nothing else) might draw
You into fear to break the rigorous Law;
Unhappy he that hangs upon a tree,
The wretched guerdon of impiety.
Nor Dies the shame with him that suffers so,
His family in such an overthrow
Participate and share, whose innocence
Are Dyed in scandal, but for his offense.
And the whole stock, above an age in time,
Is blasted for this debt, he paid his crime.
And yet these senseless Caitiues who inherit
This way of dying by their own demerit,
Laugh at this Judgment, call it a fine thing.
Thus to be pulld to heaven in a stringe,
And that the Apoplex, fleames and Catarre,
More cruel to the souls of Christians are
Then hanging, for these passions take men hence,
Ere they can think of dying, or have sense
Of their repentance, being snatched away
Scarce with so poor a warning, as to pray.
But these have Sermons, prayer, Sacrament,
Psalms, and always to bring them to repent,
And a great audience of the people by.
For whose fair warning they are content to die,
And thus their strong deluder draws them on
To laugh at, and deserves destruction.
What should be their example, and afright them
Do rather please, rejoice, content, delight them,
But you fond men it may be do suppose
Because I escaped, that you shall neither loose
Your sorfeit lives, I wish the grace I found
May not to any of your harms redownd,
I mean to your encouragement, you know
But of particulars no generals grow,
One Swallow makes no Summer, though Noyes flood
Once overwhelmed all the living brood
That strove against the stream, topping the ranks
Of the great Mountains, and the lesser Banks,
With every Crawling creature (not one mist)
Though they Lent all their powers to resist,
Yet God has promised (we have understood)
He will not send us such another flood.
Things seldom are not usual: besides strong
The reasons are, that did my life prolong
You must conclude, that had the time not been
The Iubily of mercy, when my sin
Was called in question, I had president
Bin not in writing, but in punishment:
For that great power by whom we governed are,
To limit my ill courses (straind so far)
Thus took me from my sin, and did contriue
How by strange means I should be kept alive,
For know, just at that instant when the joys
Of great men, good men, old men, young men, Boys,
Had but one object, like the heavenly spheres,
Whose harmony, one note, one burden bears,
Then when each face did like a Bridegroom smile,
And one entire contentment crowned this Isle,
The Birds, the Beasts, the men, and every thing
Presenting their glad Aues to their king,
Who like a Sun new risen on the earth,
Disdaines to view a corner where is not mirth,
So threw a beam on me, whose lucklesse fate
Was then midst all this joy disconsolate.
Then was my apprehension, even just then
As if my faults distinguished me from men
That were ordained for joy, or mine offense
Denied my share in bliss of Innocence.
Yet this preserved me; Barabbas must be
At the great Feast from death and bondage free,
It was no favor to the man, or crime,
That saved his life, his blessing was the time,
Nor could my glorious Sun, that Rose so fair,
With blood infect or cloud the laughing air,
Or die the Crimson of his Morn with red
Of Malefactors blood (so early shed)
His beauty is his own, nor would he shine
At first in Justice, though it is called divine.
Hence grew the Mercy, that my joy so might
Be in respect of all men's tripartite,
For besides this I had an Advocate
Whose virtue could the hardest penetrate,
And make compassion easy, for her smile
Could the sad brows of sternesse reconcile;
Her sweetness can the angry Ocean calm,
And turn the Aspe his poison into Balm,
And stay the thunders heavy hand, just then
When it is threatening ruin to all men.
The Tiger of her yong-ones robbed would stay
But at her presence, and forbear her prey.
The angriest things must at her sight appear
As smooth as August, or the springing year.
She the rich partner of his royal bed
Who wears a triple crown upon his head.
Embraced him, called him Lord, and at that word,
Who could deny a pardon to afford.
She asked, he gave, and my dear fate in this
Got my free pardon, she a bountious kiss.
So sweetly sealed was my remiss from death,
So ratified by this so royal breath.
Presume not yet on this, occasion so
Will not her liberal aid to all bestow,
One thief was saved, that no man should despair,
But one, so that presumptions forfeit are:
He with his Savior died, blessed time for him,
Who else had found no pardon for his sin;
I in my Sovereigns glory was to die,
And that time set my life at liberty.
Note the occasions strange that set us free
Me from this death, him to eternity.
My Prince's crowning, his Redeemers death,
Assured his soul, and did restore my breath.
But every day is not Coronation; Nor
D^d many suffer with our Savior.
And mercy at such times as these extended.
To Judgments turn, if grace be twice offended.
And now you think me happy being free
From death and shame by this benignity,
But if you do a little back reflect
On the recharges of my foes, th'aspect
Of this sun-shining day, you cloudy find
And much foul weather in my face behind,
For now, as I have seen a tired Hare
Of his own swiftness in a faint despair,
After whose fearful feet, the yelping cry,
Of the whole kennell, follow eagerly.
Which spied, some Huntsman or some Shepherd near,
Seeing the weary Wat half dead with fear,
In the Pursuers sight, in his safe arms
Folds the poor creature from their cruel harms,
'Bout whom the angry chasers leap and bay,
Assaulting him that keeps them from their prey,
And with their fearful noyses fright it more,
Then the poor beast was in pursuit before.
Even just thus is my poor life pursu'de,
Whilst I thought danger past, it was renewed
For first they followed with much speed, and cry,
After poor me (that fled but easily)
And when the King of Forests and of Chafes
Thus found me destitute, before their faces,
(Ready to be devoured) snatched me away
Just then, as they were seizing on the prey,
And in his royal arms of grace embraced
My panting life, before so hotly chac'te,
And yet behold my Adversaries rore
With louder exclamations, then before.
And would with horrid clamours him constrain
What he preserved, thus to destroy again.
Appeals and Caueats, and such things they bring
To force me from the bosom of my King.
On which diuinest altar whilst I hold
I cannot be unto their furies sold.
And yet the rarest eloquence in Law
That I could to my causes handling draw,
I was enforced to crave; so strongly they
Did although pardoned against my life inuay.
Here I a new must muster up my friends
Wearied before; to cross their irefull ends.
Make their endeauours such to save me now
As if the King no Pardon did allow,
Thus though my life they cannot take, you see
They make me weary of 't by troubling me.
Thus a Delinquent must of force endure:
He knows not when he is freed; nor when secure.
Behold, the Map of your proceeding here,
A Glass in which to life, there does appear
The form of all your actions; which I know
Are vglier yet in substance then in shovv.
As they are vilde, your Aims are worse, your ends
As bad again, yet these your Hope transcends,
For both in ill designs, it leads you on,
And will most fail, when most you trust upon.
Now then if that you are not quite bereft
Of likelihoods for grace, if there be left
Room but for one good thought, if unto sin
You have not sold your selves outright, let in
This motion I shall make, behold your fact,
Summon your guilty conscience, which is rackt
And gladly would speak truth, that it might gain
Ease to her self in her ensuing pain,
She would account, and be discharged, thereby
The worm a breeding would soon live, soon die,
A hideous horrid sight it must needs be,
When in their ugly shapes, you chance to see
Your monstrous sins appear; yet happy men
You cannot ever be at all till then:
No nor then neither, if it be to late,
It Is some men's cursed and unhappy fate,
That they can never be touched at heart until
The damned bed-roll of their sins o're-fill
Their guilty conscience, in stead of prayer
In vain as they conceive, they then despair,
Not able to appeal to Christ his passion,
They greedily lay hold on their damnation.
If not the fear of this your temporal death,
Let the eternal move, the one's but breath:
The other endless, everliving pain,
Ere it be done, it still begins again,
Pity your silly souls, that else must fry
In burning lakes of Brimstome, never die
Where worse then Egypt's darkness hems you in,
With several tortures for each ugly sin.
Where howles, and hollow groans the coapes-mates be
To this eternal night of Misery.
Where frosts, fires, drownings, sulphur, choakings come
Increasing still, never ending; here is your doom.
And these the torments that prepared are,
Of which (vild men) you must expect your share.
If you will still persist, and not give over,
It Is then in vain for to persuade you more.
I Will cease my fair means therefore, and will try
If I can fright you with an Hue and Cry,
Here would I name both you, and your abode,
But that you vary those, on every rode,
Yo'are East, now West, and next North-Country men,
And then your names as often you change again.
Thus to inform then, were to put in doubt,
Not to give light to men to find you out.
You in another kind I will describe,
That every man shall know you as you ride,
Or to avoid you how, or his purse lost
I teach you a true rule how he shall coast,
And dog you as you ride, how to be sure
To take you, when you think your selves secure.
Because I lived by spoil of Passengers
Thus will I recompense them, this worke's theirs
Meant for their good, the guerdon for my gain
Is to advise, how they may not sustain
A farther loss, come be you ruled by me,
And well observe, these your instructions be,
When as you carry charge, let no man know
Nor of your money, nor yet when you go.
You have a humor when you are to ride
Your Neighbors Kinsmen, or your friends you bid
To sup, or break their fasts, only to drink
Healths to your good return, you little think
There Is any harm in this, yet I have known
A Father thus betrayed by his own Son,
A Brother by a Brother, and a friend
Most dear in outward show, to condescend.
And lay the plot with thieves, bid them prepare
Such a prize comes, whereof he takes a share.
Whilst, but for him they never had bin met.
Another kind of men there is, that set,
Ten times more dangerous, you often choose
Some one to guard you for fear you should loose
Your money by the way, yon do rely
Both on his valor, and his honesty,
Now as you ride together, if he see
You light on any other company,
He rounds you in the ear (as if he took
The greatest care) and says that yon man's look
He likes not, you persuaded slack your pace,
So that alone he brings you to the place
Where his confederates lie, and then surprised
(As 'twas by him and them before devised)
They hacke, and hew against each others sword,
Till threatened to be shot, you give the word,
And bid him yield, (which he seems loath to do)
Nay more he is informed which way they go,
And as you follow with an hue and Cry,
He will be sure to lead you quite awry.
Often in your Clothiers and your Grasiers Inn,
You shall have Chamberlaines, that there have bin
Placed purposely by thieves, or else consenting
By their large bribes, and by their often tempting,
That mark your purses drawn, and give a guess
What Is there, within a little more or less;
Then will they gripe your cloak-bags, feel there weight
There Is likewise in my Host sometimes deceit,
If it be left in charge with him all night,
Unto his roaring Guests he gives a light,
(Who spend full thrice as much in wine and bear)
As you in those, and all your other cheer)
These inconveniences do often arise
For want of heed, and care, be therefore wise.
Forbear to ride upon the Sabbath day,
In which God says, Remember, rest, and pray*
As we our servants oftentimes command,
When many businesses they take in hand*
That chiefly one by no means they forget
Above the rest; just thus much in effect
Imports the word Remember, though our law
Be not of force enough to keep in awe
The Sabbath-breaker, yet God in the way
Often meets with him, and gives him as a prey
To highway thieves, that day they rather choose
Then any other, fittest for their use,
For then the roads are quiet, and they know
None ride but those have great affairs to do,
Which to effect, it is thought, they have about them
Great store of Coin, and this makes thieves misdoubt them.
And as the Cutpurse is in prime of play,
When men at Church do most devoutly pray,
So are the Highway Cutters; for the Devil
Is not content to tempt them to do evil,
But teaches them presumption in the Act,
Which well he knows does aggrauate the fact.
Lastly, if you are robbed on that high day,
It is not fit that then the Country pay
Your money back again, that remedy,
The Judge in conscience will to you deny,
What reason is it men should leave to pray,
To wait upon your thieves that run away?
Noe, ride at lawful times, and you shall meet
Store of good company for you to keep;
Associate though with none, unless with those
That you find rather willing for to loose
Then have your company; for they that still
Press to be near you, though against your will,
Are somewhat dangerous; but I will show
How you shall find if they be thieves, or no;
Take but occasion for to make some stay,
Then mark; if that they keep not on their way
But slack their pace, or else alight and go;
Or if perchance they do refuse to do
As I have said, just then, before your face;
Follow some half hour after, a slow pace;
If so you ouer-take them, then take heed,
For that is the very trick of thieves indeed.
Next of a thief, the usual marks be these,
(Which as you ride you may observe with ease)
They muffle with their cloakes, or else their coat
Hides all their clothes, that so you may not note
What suits they have, a Handkercher they were
About their necks, or Cipresse, which they rear
Over their mouths, and noses, with their hand
Just at the time, when as they bid you stand;
Perhaps since here I have discovered this,
They will now leave them off, that you may miss
Your observation, be you therefore sure
As soon as they come riding somewhat near
To gaze full at their faces, you shall see
Them turn their heads away, as if so be
They had spide something on the the other side,
Which if they do, then keep your distance wide,
But now they will not may be, yet may you
Have by these means a full and perfect view,
And know them when you see them next, or whither
Their great bush beard, and face, agree together.
This above all I wish you for your good,
By any means shun him that wears a hood,
Beware of them that whisper, and those men
That are inquisitiue, for surely then
They but examine you that they may know
By circumstance, whe'r you have coin or no.
You and your friend perchance do ride together,
Your company's increased by another,
A seeming honest man, and you are glad
Where Is two to one suspicion none is had.
You call him fellow-trauellor, and he
Reioyces in your honest company,
About some two miles riding there o'^e-takes
Some three of his companions, then he shakes,
Trembles, and quiuers, and seems sore afraid,
And cries, directly friends we are waylaid,
If you have charge about you let me know,
That I may cock my Pistol as I go,
By those, and such like words, he will soon find,
Whether, or no, your Purse be richly lined,
And whilst you thought, there had been three to three,
Your Judas is on the other side you see.
Had you not need be wary, judge I pray?
Let me persuade you, do not ride by day
With any sum you are afraid to lose
But in the night, but then take heed of those
Base Padding Rascals, for their kill-calfe law
I am not privy to, I never saw
Them, nor their actions, then I cannot show
How to prevent the thing I do not know.
But thus much I assure you, you are free
From any horsemen you shall meet, or see,
For they believe that none will ride at night,
But only those whose Purses are too light,
And hardly worth the taking; next they must
Keep lawful hours, for fear they through mistrust
Be apprehended, that is their chiefest ear;
And then again, I know they hardly dare
Adventure in the dark; for they can spy
Neither advantage, opportunity,
Nor whether you have Pistolls, nor yet know,
Whether that you be likely men, or no,
And you have time your money to convey,
And much more benefit by night, then day.
But since God has ordained this time to rest,
And not to travel in, I do my best
So to advise you, that you shall be sure
What time so e're you ride, to be secure.
This is a general rule, and observation,
Your highway thieves do always keep their station
Upon your greatest roads, that out of those
That do pass by, they may both pick and choose;
And so they cull the likeliest out of many;
But on your petty By-roads, where scarce any
Are wont to travel, they nere use to be,
You may be safe from any ieopardie
If here you coast, which I advise you to
Rather then on your great high roads to go.
But above all which way so e're you ride,
A Butts length distance at the least divide
Your selves from one another, so keep on,
For I assure you they nere set upon
A scattered troop, for fear of somes escaping,
Which may endanger their immediate taking,
Besides, their company they do divide
And set at several stands, and should you ride
All in a cluster, they will sally out
Before, behind, and compass you about.
Now if that following, they attempt, you spy
Their drift and resolution presently
By their division, and have time to shun
The thing intended, ere it be begun.
Besides, they dare not do but altogether,
That they may be at hand with one another,
To help where there is occasion, say they should
Adventure desperately, they never could
Bring you together, nor aside the way,
Without much trouble, and a greater stay;
And peradventure, ere half this be done,
Unto your rescue there are others come.
Now I conjure you that ride by the while,
Let neither threats nor fair words you beguile
Nor yet diswade, from yielding your relief
To those you find in action with the thief,
I do remember I have often been
Thus wickedly employed, whilst I have seen
Some others riding in to this our fray,
I only wished them to keep on their way,
With such persuasions, I found suited best
With their amaze, see fairly thus distressed
And to our mercies, they have left those men
That very easily might have rescu'de been.
Now thus much for prevention, here you see
From point to point, a plain discovery,
Of the thieves policy, I showed you how
You may avoid it, let me tell you now
What you have next to do, If you epsy
(As you may guess by my discovery)
That there are thieves amongst you, do not gaze
On this, and the other side, nor in a maze
Affrighted stand, as if your only hope
Were some to rescue you, that will provoke
And not dishearten them, then mind it not,
But be as though all fear you had forgot,
And look as big as they, and if they proffer
Be sure to draw, as soon's they make their offer
Remember then the cause you have in hand,
Your reputation, and your money stand
At gage in this, and if you dare not fight,
It grieves me much to do you thus much right.
They, (if they find you resolute and stout)
Dare even as wellbe hanged, as fight it out,
Not out of cowardice, but that they know
To their discomforts, that in fighting so
They strive against a Country, Justice, Law,
Right, equity, and these keeps them in awe.
They study most, how they may bugbeares seem,
And who are robbed, but those that do esteem
Their threats, unless you yield without delay,
We shoot you through, they perhaps may say;
But who thus threatened, yet resisting still
Can say unto me that he fared ill.
Some though are somewhat resolutely bent,
It Is true, yet is it far from their intent
To shed your blood, for they in doing so,
Should work their own immediate overthrow,
They could not then subsist, for though they pass,
Sought after slightly for the moneys loss,
Should they take life and all, they could not ride
To any place where they might safely bide,
But through continual search they would be found,
And then pay dearly for each bloody wound.
This the event would be, which they well know,
Rather then hurt you, they will let you go,
And stay a while until they meet with some
Which their fair words, or threats will overcome.
Besides, the right is of your side, and though
You are o're-match'd, God may enable you so
Those Caytifes may be vanquished by your hand;
Then what good service you shall do your land,
Your Prince, and Commonwealth, you may suppose,
Even in the act by apprehending those
Who live upon the spoil, then hold them play
And yours shall be the honor of the day.
But it is a fault of yours, you do consent
And yield too patiently, you are content
Not only to be robbed, but let them go,
And basely wish they may escape, that so
The Country may be liable, for why
If they not taken be with hue and cry,
You must have all restored, and what care you:
One thing more I will tell you, which is true,
You often double and misname the sum,
You know the hundred willing is to come
To composition with you, if they do,
You cosen both the thieves and Country too.
And when you tell the story, then although
You say they were five, six, or at least four,
You were robbed fairly, and but two to two,
And that you fought it out above an hour,
And then you cut and slash your harmless clothes,
And say that in the fight 'twas done by those
That took your money, which God knows you gave
Without resistance (...) they scarce did crave.
Do no more so, nor strive that men may deem
You valiant, for it is a poor esteem
To be accounted, if you be not so;
And they have far a harder task to do
To keep opinion, falsely undergone,
Then those have none, for to atchieue to one.
Be what your Images, do represent,
Men nobly spirited, 'twas God's intent
When he created you, not much unlike
His Image most divine, that you should fight
In a just cause, because he is all just,
And herein failing you betray God's trust,
Neglect your duty, and do animate
Not curb, the vild'ones, that do perpetrate.
But now suppose through negligence you fall
Into their clutches, and surprised with all
You are unthought of, it is no fault of mine
You might have taken better heed in time.
Thus yet I will advise you, if you see
That you must yield and ouer-mastred be,
Strive not at all, but give the fairest words
Your best invention and your wit affords,
Wish that you had more moneys, and withal
Deliver some, and so perhaps you shall
By searching of your selves, and freeness too,
Without a further re-examining go.
But if they make an offer, do not you
Seem to dislike, what they do mean to do
Then will they sift you soundly, do not hold
Your hand upon your money, they are told
Thus where it is, and surely they will guess,
They have not all by your own fearfulness.
I have observed many times, when I
Had taken such money, as did satisfy,
Out of the pocket having no intent
To make a further search, but only meant
To lead the Passenger aside the way,
(Because I knew what danger 'twas to stay)
Fast'ning my clutches on his arm, or thigh,
With a sad look, he would begin to cry
He was undone, if I took what was there,
Thinking I felt (because my hand was near)
His greater sum, which I by that should find
Hid in his sleeue, or in his shirt behind.
But now then, if they find not such a sum
As was expected, they will bid you come,
Into some corner, then protest, and swear,
If patiently a while, you will sit there,
You shall have all restored, that they mistook
You like are, but not those, for whom they look
On these fond hopes you rest, until that they
Have watched their time, and seized another prey.
To which you now are accessaries grown,
But see where are their promises become?
(Nor meant thev otherwise) those rifled to
They take their Horses and away they go,
And leave you destitute, so with the rest
To tell the story whether fared best.
Yet loose no time, but on with all the speed
That possible you can, and then take heed,
It much concerns you, for when they espy
That you pursue, the foremost cunningly
Falls into some by lane, it is vndescride
For you suppose they altogether ride,
So whilst you think, you keep at distance far,
Anew amidst them you surprised are.
Here Is their maine plot, you are forewarned, But say
You cannot overtake them, and that they
Have left the road, and you in a great doubt,
So that you know not how to find them out,
Let me direct you, I will instance thus,
Suppose on Colebrooke way you lose your purse,
The Thieves to Vxbridge road, or Stanes will ride,
And not to fail will there all night abide,
This is the chiefest Maxim in their law,
The Subt'lest surely that I ever saw,
It stands by reason, for they know full well
None use to travel thus athawrt to tell
The Passages, or to describe the men
They rest at pleasure, and are gone again
Ere that the lazie-tithing hue and Cry
Comes to enquire, and the authority
Of some poor silly fellow, who is placed
In that mean office, that he may be graced
For double-diligence, often as he goes
Through wretched wilfulness attaches those
That nere meant harm, yet being apprehended,
They often lose their lives, though never offended.
But to deal safe and sure, without delay
Scour you the next great right and left hand way,
And if at night you miss, a careful spy
Next day shall surely see them riding by.
Grant Now they leave this custom, all their art,
Their wit, invention, never can impart
The like again, I vow, I do not see
Whither they can betake them to be free:
But by the way know thus much, if they light
On a great sum, then will they ride that night
Unto their Rendeuous here in the City,
Which is too sure a shelter, (more's the pity,)
But follow my advise, and mark me well,
For here a cunning plot of theirs I tell,
If you are robbed out in the Eastern quarter,
When you with hue and cry the thieves make after,
Ride not to London in the road you were,
Nor raise those parts, you will not find them there,
But hie to Westminster, Holborne, the Strand,
And for a speedy search there give command,
If Northward they light on you, straightwayes ride
And search both Southwarke, Lambeth, and Banckeside,
Thus they do always plant themselves, for so
They have the City betwixt them and you.
And ere your search comes at them (by the way
Which often dies) there is time at will to stay.
I have observed (and it is still in use,
Nor will it ere reform the vild abuse
It has a level at) a needless care
Wherewith all sorts of people troubled are,
And charged too, when any one has lost
His purse to thieves, then at the Countries cost
There is a watch prepared to guard that place
Where the poor man by them surprised was;
This is like shutting up the Stable door,
When as the Horse was stolen out before,
It Is not to be supposed the thief will come
And make a needless breach, to thank the Groom
For feeding of the best; lo then just so,
Nor mean the highway thieves that way to go
Where there is wait laid for them, say they should;
I do protest here; I did ever hold
(And found it by experience) that highway
That had a watch upon it, best for prey.
For first the honest Travelers suppose
It is impossible, that they should lose
Their money being guarded thus; and hence
They grow more careless, doubting none offense
Can any ways betyde them; whilst alas
A thief may do his list, and freely pass,
The watchmen near the wiser; for they stand
Settled at one place by a strict command.
It is indifferent when the thief lays hold,
His booty singled out, he will make bold
To seize him any where; all places are
All one alike to him, he will not care
So that the coast be clear, and then how can
He be distinguished from an honest man?
I never past by, but the watchmen gave
Me courteous language, wishing me to have
A special care I was not robbed; whilst I
Was a chief actor of that villainy.
But now suppose they had examined me,
I would have answered them so courteously,
That they could not suspect. Now what are they
That are appointed watchmen for the way?
Poor, silly, old, decrepped men, that are
Fitting for naught else, but to loyter there;
Have not I seen a dozen such, all stand
(With each of them a Holbert in his hand)
Amazed, affrighted, and durst never quatch,
Whilst we before their faces all; did catch,
Assault, seize, rifle such as did pass by,
When we were gone (perhaps) then would they cry
Theefes, theefes, (to little purpose) I have known
Some that by way of parley, thus have grown
Familiar with the watch, and as they found
A fit occasion, they have taken, and bound
The silly fellows hand, and foot; then stood
Like a safe guard set for the Countries good,
With brown bills in their hands, and so made bold
(As with authority) to stop, and hold
All that did come that way, I do suppose
A watch of Holbarteers were good for those
Foot-padding-night thieves) but for these you see
Such care, and trouble all in vain will be.
But if you will needs have it so, choose then
Strong, able, stout, and resolute young men,
Arm them with Bow, and Arrows, Muscets, Shot,
And with a Horse or two, that they may not
Be thus abused, but if occasion be
May follow on to purpose; but by me
And mine instructions here, I hope you shall
Be well secured, and need no watch at all.
I think it fitting now for me to show
Unto the Inne-keeper, how he shall know
Such guests from other men, my Host take heed,
To wink at such faults were a fault indeed,
Respect then rather honesty, then gain.
Know well your servants whom you entertain,
Try them, that you may trust, their help in this
Subtle discovery, most needful is.
Your Ostler must observe, and he shall see
About their horses, they will curious be
They must be strangely dressed, as strangelyfed
With Mashes, prouender, and Christians bred;
If this be wondered at, they cannot hold,
Their goodly qualities they must unfold,
Crying, they do deserve it, and that they
By their good service will their cost repay
With ouer-plus, or some words more or less,
By which relation he may shrewdly guess.
And then they will be asking, who is he
That ownes that horse? and whose those horses be
That stand beyond him? what their Masters are?
What kind of men? whither they ride? how far?
And when? so by his answers they surmize
Which of them all will be their likeliest prize.
Next of their Cloak-bags let him notice take,
They only carry them for fashioned sake,
For they are empty ones, in policy,
Because their horses should not laden be.
Your Chamberlain shall find, when as they come
Vsher'd up by him to their Lodging room,
He shall be sent away, let him give ear,
And not to fail, he shall be sure to hear
The gingling of their money, Let him pry
Behind some secret Cranies privily,
And he shall see them share, what they have got,
And every one to take what is his lot.
This they by no means will defer, for fear,
Who has the purse, should cheat them in the share;
This done, they hug each other, next they call
Their ravished senses home, and then withal
They knock again for him, who shall be sheut
For not attending, though enioyn'd he went.
Now must he draw a cup of curious Sack,
Then next mine Host your company they lack,
With farre-fetcht complements they will salute
And bid you welcome, mark from their dispute
What you can gather, you may somewhat guess
By their men's saucy peremptorinesse,
For servants when their Masters ills they know
Cease their obedience, and presumptious grow.
Enquire a part, each ones particular name,
And let your several servants do the same,
And you shall find them tripping, they well may
Forget the new names, that they took that day;
At supper time let some one hastily
Knock at your gate, as with authority,
You shall observe a sudden fearful start,
Mark then their looks (the Index of the heart)
And you shall find them troubled, look you sad,
And ask if yonder Constable be mad?
Bid them say quickly, what their danger is,
Then promise no authority of his
Shall enter there, if they command it so,
By this, into their private thoughts you go,
They will confess for succor, needs no more,
It Is evident what you but thought before,
But say hereafter they should careless grow,
Then are they taken with the less ado.
Now say they come about the noone of day,
You shall well know them, by their needless stay,
Their carelessness of time, for they but bait,
That they may stand at gaze, and fitly wait
For honest passengers, when they have spide
A likely-moneyd booty by them ride,
Then will they bussle, and make have away
With far more speed then tedious was their stay.
And cry yon rides their Uncle, or their friend
With whom some earnest business they pretend;
When in an Inn, they must all-night abide,
They cunningly, sometimes themselves divide
And come as several companies, thereby
To cross the number in the Hue and Cry.
Besides thus parted, they are sure to know
If otherwise then well, the squares should go,
They of each other will no notice take
Of you (mine Host) they will inquiry make
What their companions are? what Countrymen?
Whether you know them yea or no? and then
If they can find you have a Jealousy
Shrewdly suspecting either company,
Having discovered your opinion
With all convenient speed, they will get gone,
But if you do (as well you may) mistake them
And that for honest travelers you take them,
They (as by chance) will in your kitchen meet,
And as mere strangers, one another greet,
There will they drink together, ere they go
From thence, so loving and so kind they grow
That they willsup together, mark them well
And you their cunning knavery shall smell.
Still strangers to each other will they be,
Whilst any of your house are there to see;
But see, and be not seen, and you shall find
Them all familiar in another kind,
They will Embrace, rejoice, laugh at their plot
And at mine Host that he suspects it not.
The fairest Innes they usually frequent,
Out of a wary-politicke intent,
Presuming, for disparaging the man
They will not search his house, and there they can
Rest vnmolested, but since this you know
Let not the subtle thief, escape you so.
Lo here I have vnclasp'd this obscure book,
And full Quotations on those secrets took,
That the plain eye of Judging reason, may
Discover such abuses of the way,
And as it is said, that true repenters must
Their secret sins, and all ills from them thrust,
Lest the vild tainture of one crime behind
Contaminate again the sinful mind,
Thus have I left no nooke, no cranny small,
Which men may cunning or pernicious call
Vn-open'd here, before the curious day
As clear and plain, as is the Champion way.
No act, or use which thieves discover might,
No Art, to make the honest know them right.
Lest by retaining ought, it might be deemed,
My true recanting is not, what it seemed.
But mark my cautions well, and you will know
That these way-riflers must some new way go
Imagination, or their practice yet
Could never reach to, or before you set
Prevention of their worst assaults, their drifts
In their attempt, and their best scaping shifts.
Nor can I fear, but since so freely I
Have here dissected such impiety,
Anatomizing every hidden Nerve
That for the strength of such occasions serve,
The charitable world will hence allow,
That I those men and actions disauow
I make so plain and hateful, nor again
Will I my honor in those puddles stain,
Nor can it be supposed by envy, that
Any relap's of mine be aimed at,
For mine own writ, must then in Judgment stand
And sign me unto death, mine own false hand;
The Jury, and the Judge, in Evidence,
Shall no enquiry need for mine offense,
This book alone against all pittie's plea,
Turns all excuse into Apostrophe,
Whilst dumb as death, with double shame I must
'Count both my ruin, and my sentence just.
Now let detracting censure, pawse, and stay
And turn rank'rous spleenes another way,
And know that now in Censure, they do more
Then I have done in all the rest before,
When my determined Innocence shall be
A Judge severe against their cruelty;
And such whose most unnecessary eye,
Into forbidden acts of others pry,
And when the man they curiously have read,
Must then attempt the secrets of his bed,
To poison all his blessings, nicely draw
The Curtains, whose concealings no man saw
Without a rude intruding, for the bed
Of lawful couples being injured
By base detractions, leads that troubled sense
Into the fullest foulness of offense;
And so my pillowes partner, to whose truth
I owe the best reforming of my youth,
As if she must be sharer of my wrongs,
Though never arraigned* was yet condemned by tongs.
As if of force because she is mine, she must
In spite of all her virtue be unjust,
But I imagine rather this surmize,
Does from the common ground of ill arise,
Or from that Envy, Satan left behind,
When he infected our first mothers mind:
Show me the man whose tendrest, dearest love,
And whose affection in a strain does move
Beyond community, unto his wife,
Who but in her, has neither soul, nor life,
And give me reasons why his should transcend
The debt I owe to mine unequal friend?
Then will I yield my dotage, his love rare,
And thus our obligations I compare.
First, unto you whose marriages intent
Have to the fortune of your choice extent
More then the person, or those fair deserts
Which make the blessedst contracts of the hearts,
And love the purchase more of her estate
Then her perfections, you never leaueld at;
You who were never caught with darting eyes,
Whose best affections in her treasure lies,
And never had your souls with love refined,
Perverting the true use of either kind,
Can yet in this your portions dotage, not
Exceed the Income I by mine have got.
For when I was adiudg'd, and doomed to die,
She only by strange importunity
Melted the hearts of all resolved against me,
Who pitying her, set my life's danger free,
In this my life, my fortune, and my all,
I may her portion, and her blessing call.
And last for other ties, which do obliege
Such as to loves fair fortresses lay siege
The simpathizing liking, and those parts
Of loves religion, which locks lovers hearts
Was thrown on me, and these who can disprove,
Must either have no heart, or know no love:
In pity then, to Citharaea's Shrine
All you that sacrifice your thoughts divine,
Since we are pleased, let none our peace molest,
Nor break the Union of so sweet a rest,
With nice inquiry, after things, you must
Confess you have no business with, that is just,
And we shall be, if you but leave us so,
More happy, then it is fit for you to know.
Yet for my self, believe I have the sense
Of mine own youth's abusing, and offense
Which I have wrought against the Commonweal,
Whose wounds by this relation I may heal,
If my advice be followed, you will see
The soul vnlac'd of highway subtlety.
That who shall suffer now, in such offense,
Has none to blame but his own negligence,
I do besides my precious youth lament,
My reput's forfeit, honors lauishment,
The dear mispences of my fairest time,
Converting all my blessings into crime,
My wit, my Judgment, strength, courage, and all
Unto my Countries mischief, mine own fall.
Nor do I think it half enough that I
Barely confess mine own impiety,
And talking only to the people show
Those guilts, perhaps before I speak, they know
Or with a superficial gloss thus seen
To flatter men into a fair esteem
Of my best promised actions, whose event
Might prove the speakers of a worse intent;
No, naked as first Adam's Innocence,
I strip the deformed shape of mine offense,
Dislodging from my heart that banished spirit,
That can no dwelling there again inherit,
And on just cause diuorc'd from such a bride,
Can hardly now it is memory abide,
Me thinks thus purged, I hate the very room
Which that vild Inmates lodging was become,
And as the bodies glorified, scorn
The thoughts of joys wherewith their frailty's borne.
Despising as it were the fullest things
Which the dull earth to our admiring brings;
So my refined soul, and my clear mind
Can in these vild companions no peace find,
But troubled at the old acquaintance grow,
Thught-sick, that e're such practice they did know.
Or as the Epicure, whose working wish
Is dreaming still vponsome curious dish,
On which, his waking thoughts, and sleep employed
Are busily, until it be enjoyed.
Which purchac'd, his discretion is far less
Then was his couetere he did possess,
For gluttonizing his o're-charged chest,
He neither can vngorge, nor yet digest,
Till surfeited to death, he loathes it more
Then ere he did embrace, or love before.
So I whose easy youth, with fond admire,
Was drawn, at first this ill course to desire,
Hugged it in dreams, and in my waking fits
Doted upon it, to my worse loss of wits,
Whilst esteemed none brave, or good, but this,
But now I know how far I was amiss.
And surfeited, as 'twere to death indeed,
From which by rare ingredients I am freed.
I loath my stomacke-queller, and abhor
What I in too much loving sufferd for,
Nor can profession free me from the doom
Of cruel'st censure and opinion,
These actual ills of mine freely confessed
Must be in act recouer'd, or expressed
My fair intentions cannot be, nor I
Saved from the tax of my first infamy.
O may my fate so well provide as now
That power which knows, may help me in my vow,
And crown my resolutions with some way
Which of the world, and heaven recover may
All my lost honor, by some acts of mine,
That may prove far more welcome to the time.
Then my disastrous courses, and express
I am much better then I dare profess.
And that great king, whose mercy, goodness, grace,
Has fixed my tottering life in a firm place,
Whose royal bounty does I know expect
From my so great enjoying, some effect
Which may a thankful tribute pay to him,
And speak the full redemption of my sin.
You, mighty Sir, to whom my life I owe
As debt to that great grace you did bestow,
May now command it prostrate at your feet
In any danger, (I shall haste to meet)
That so by serving in your enterprise,
You may perceive how true a sacrifice
I Will make again, of what you gave so free,
And that is the offering must accepted be.
I hope (great Sir) it is not your intent
That I shall spend my days in Banishment,
For happier far is he condemned that dies,
Then him you save t'exile from your fair eyes.
For what auailes the blinded man to see,
If that a dungeon must his prison be?
Where doubly cursed to be debarred from light
He dwells, that knew't not, whilst he wanted sight,
O let me live, where every day I may
My most religious offerings truly pay;
And that the life you gave me, be not made
A trouble to me, whilst my thoughts invade
My discontented soul with torments strange;
Not that I must my air, and Country change,
Or (bard inheriting thereby) forgo
The temporal fortunes I am borne unto.
But that the Shryne I worship should not see
The constant sacrifice is made by me.
Me thinks could do more then common men,
(For no such obligation strengthens them)
That my Prince might his own great power know,
In service I could do upon his foe;
So let me live, that vent'ring so to die,
I pay my debt, and suffer happily.
Viuit post funera, virtus.
FINIS.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty, John Clauell wishes a long, and
prosperous reign in this, and in the world to come, a plenteous share of those
peculiar blessings, which God himself (out of his wonderful and abundant
goodness) has provided and set apart (even for the choicest of his elect) which
are far beyond the imagniation of mortal men to conceive, much more
impossible to be expressed.
IT grieves my soul, and wounds my troubled mind,
That only I alone must be confinde,
When others are let loose, that they may gain
The honor they have lost, whilst my foul stain
Blurres both my birth, and fortunes; had I did,
My ignominious death had satisfide;
But to live still, and still to live in shame,
(Within the summons of vpbraiding fame)
Is a worse plague then ever Egypt had;
It may be thought, I that have been so bad
Cannot recant, but very likely may
Fall to my old rebellion, on the way;
First let this treaty plead; then here I call
My God above to witness (who knows all
The secrets of my heart) I do intend
Whilst these your wars endure, even there to spend
My time, in that brave service; when that ends
(If ^ chance to survive) I have then friends,
And a poor fortune of my own, that can
Fairly maintain me, like an honest man;
If so your Highness please, that I may have
My gracious pardon, (you so freely gave)
What is required of me, I cannot pay,
If that the means wherewith be kept away;
Confinde within these walls, is it your will
That I a prisoner here, continue still?
When I was past the cure, and help of men,
You (that could only) shielded me, just then
When death had taken level with his dart,
Was it that I might feel this greater s^art?
O no; I never since have begged that boon,
But you (great Sir) have granted it right soon,
Yet notwithstanding your most royal pleasure,
I am enforced to tarry others leisure,
Like Tantalus, in this my hell I see,
And know the grace you have bestowd on me
But may not touch it, and enjoy much less,
The more's my grief, and my unhappiness,
O free me from this lingering lethergie,
Set me at liberty, or let me die.

