A MONVMENT OF MORTALITY, UPON THE DEATH AND FVNERALS, OF THE GRACIOUS PRINCE,
LODOVICK,

Late Duke of Richmond and Lenox: Earl of New Castle, and Darnley, etc.

Lord of Torbolton, and Methuen: Baron of Settrington, etc.

Knight of the Noble Order of the GARTER.

Lord high Admiral and great Chamberlain of SCOTLAND.

Lord high Steward to the Kings most Excellent Majesty's most Honorable
Household: Gentleman of his Bedchamber: and one of his Majesty's most
Honorable Prini^ Council for ENGLAND and SCOTLAND.

Captain of an hundredth Scots-men at Arms of the French Kings Ordinances.

By JAMES CLELAND Doctor in Divinity and Domestic Chaplain to his GRACE.

LONDON Printed by William Stans by for Ralph Rounthwaite.

1624.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE, ESME, Duke of Lenox, Earl of March and Darnley:
Lord of AVBIGNY Torbolton Methuen: Baron of Settrington, etc. Knight of the
Noble Order of the GARTER.
Honorable LORD,
Lo here A Monument of man's Mortality, erected in haste, to represent the
Death and Funerals, of my good Lord, your Noble Brother; whose heroicke LIFE
requires more leisure to build A MAVSOLE to his Immortal Memory. Mean time J
offer unto your Grace, these mournful Spoils, and funeral Trophies, as most
proper and due unto you; his Successor and Jnheritour; in assurance you will
accept them favorably, and with your gracious aspect, give them, a
speaking-power, as the Suns reflection did on the Image of Memnon. The
Ghostly visage of his Effigy I know, cannot affright your Grace, who is ready
and prepared at all hours for Death; nor (I hope) will the representation of
it, renew your grief, as Joseph's parti-colored Coat, caused sorrow to his
father Jacob, and Caesar's shirt to Calpurnia: But that you will look and
behold in it as a Mirror to see your Fate, as your Fortune; and so esteem me
for ever one of

April 20. 1624. Your Graces Most humbly Devoted in all dutiful observance,
JAMES CLELAND.

IN IVSTA FVNEBRIA, OPTIMI PRINCIPIS, LODOVICI, Ducis Richmondiae, and
Lenoxiae, etc. EPITAPHIVM.
Dum Populum, Proceresque suos IACOBVS in vnum
Cogit, and Europam terror vbique tenet.
Spes populi, Procerumque decus LENOXIVS Heroes,
Non expectato funere raptus obit.
Pro Superi! non haec mors est, sed Publica clades,
Quam Rex and Proceres, plebs populusque lugent.
Egregie factum Funus Moestissma Coniux
Produxit; Ciniri gloria magna fuit.
MONVMENTVM MORTALE, In Obitum Optimi Ducis RICHMONDIAE and LENOXIAE, etc. B.
M. P.
VIde Mortalis quisquis es, hoc te Monumentu^ rogat, se vt aspicias, and
Speculum Putes aut Scholam. Viden' formam mutatam, gloriam marcidam, euanidam
Pompam? Triumphus est Mortis, fati Trophaeum, fragilitatis documentum. Disco
omnia praecipits cursu fluere, lubrico orb versari, raptari, auolare,
vanescere. Fui, non sum: aut quicquid Sum Puluis, cinis, terrae pondus, Parcae
spolium, dum melior pars mei in caelu^^ ascendit, vnde descendit, vbi quiesco,
Quis Fuerim, s^lubido audire est, (...) breus capies. Interim ne mirere
quisquis es, hoc tanto tamque inopinato euentu, neue curi^su^ (...) hic causas
inuestiga, non vis, non casus, non ordo eternus fatorum, Me de medio; sed vnus
Ille Omnium rerum Moderator sustulit, vt post tot exantla^os labores, in
perpetuum cum eo vinam, ac conquiescam. Hac moncre volui, nunc abi, sed heus
tu: Deum Verere, Regem reuerere, hoc tantum. Vale.

A Funeral Discourse, UPON THE DEPLORABLE DEATH OF THE GRACIOUS PRINCE,
LODOVICK, Duke of Richmond, and Lenox, etc.
ALthough Joseph of John 19. 38.
Aramathea, and Nicodemus begged of Pilate the body of JESUS, and on the day of
preparation, wrapped it in a fine clean linen cloth, embalmed it with
odoriferous spices, buried it, and so gave him the last duty of Jewish
Ceremonies, and the first of Christian Funerals: yet Mary Magdalene, and the
other Mary, could not be satisfied with all that was done by Joseph and
Nicodemus for their Lord and Master Christ, unless in the next day after the
Preparation, their poor balm had gone likewise for him. After which imitation
of these two Mary's, I cannot content my self with what has been done by
others hitherto, for my late Lord and Master, the Duke of Richmond and Lenox
(though most sufficiently) except I bring some Sindon of my own now, and buy
some Balm, to bestow upon his Grace. Yesterday you heard how the Lord Keeper
most accuratly and affectionatly expressed my Lord Duke his Heroic life: to
day (with permission) I will represent unto you and others afar off, his
Deplorable Death, and Christian Funeral.

Behold them then both in this Monument, as better to be considered by the Eye,
then by the Ear; by the Grauers pencill, then by the Writers pen; by silence,
then by discourse. In this Monument which may give fear to the Faithful,
amazement to the Profane, and sorrow to all men.

For on the sixteenth day of February last, in the Kings Palace of White Hall,
whiles the Kings Majesty, the Prince, the Peers, and the Noblemen of the
Land, were ready to ride in state unto the High Parliament of England: Behold,
an ancient Statute from the highest Court of Parliament in Heaven, put in
Execution upon this honorable person my Lord Duke of Richmond and Lenox. This
Execution was served upon him, whiles the people expected a pomp, and whiles I
for my part was preparing another Jacob Triumphant, or King James Second
Triumphs, in Executing his Statutes and penal Laws against all Popish
Policies, and:::::: Practices, within his Majesty's Dominions.

But, oh, the sudden change, and strange passage of the peoples expectation,
and my design; from a glorious Pomp on Horseback, to a mournful Hearse
followed afoot; from a Triumph to a Tomb; from the Trophies of joy, to the
Spoils of sorrow; in a moment, all my thoughts turned to a Monument. This is
ever the miserable condition of man, to mix sour with sweet, or else to join
them so inseparably together as a concaue superficies with a conuexe.

In that morning all the Court, and City of London were full of mirth, but
about noone all in mourning; then in pleasure and delight, soon after in
sorrow and sadness. Thus the clearest days have their storms, the evening is
not answerable to the calmnesse of the morning, nor to the cleernesse of the
noonday, but the Sun eclipses, the Clouds ouercast, and the Day is changed
into Night, or darkness.

The Statute that was Executed so peremptorily upon this honorable Person was
first enacted in the upper House of Parliament in Heaven, generally against all
men; All men Heb. 9. 27.
must once die; and then received, and resolved upon of all in the lower House
of Parliament on Earth. Here, Gods Word, Reason, and Experience, the three
States of our Earthly Parliament, have ratified and confirmed it, vna voce,
without appeal.

God said expressly, In that day wherein thou Genesis 2. 17.
eatest of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die. Though
Satan, a liar from the beginning, said to the Woman, Non omnino Genesis 3. 4.
moriemini, Ye shall not die at all; and our Mother Eve minced the matter,
with ne forte Ibid. v. 3.
moriamini, lest perchance ye die; yet Gods sentence passed upon her, and her
husband Adam, and all their posterity never to be repealed, or reuersed. Dust
thou art, and to dust thou shall return Ibid. v. 19.
again. As Leui was in the loins of Abraham Heb. 7. 5.
when he paid tithe or tribute, so were we in the loins of Adam, when he
did eat of the forbidden Tree; his disobedience is in us inexcusable, the
doom and punishment of Death due unto us irreuocable, and all of us, of what
estate, age or degree soever we be, are (without some rare and extraordinary
dispensation, as that of Enoch and Elias was) liable unto the same. We must
needs Die, said the wise 2. Sam. 14. 14.
woman of Tecoah to David: You a Sovereign and I a Subject, you a man and I a
woman, We must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground. David
confessed so much on his Deathbed, I must go the way of all the earth. Which
1. Reg. 2. 2.
the Prophet Jeremy expounds with a threefold Jeremy c.
exclamation, or terrible acclamation, O Earth, Earth, Earth, hear the Word of
the Lord.

We must have ears to hear them of men, but our eyes only will hear that of
God. We understand him in seeing these great and terrible accidents unawares
to us. Earth which come from Earth: Earth which art fed with Earth: Earth
which remainest on Earth: Earth which goes to Earth: Earth in thy birth, in thy
life, and in thy end, behold a Great Man of the Earth returns to Earth.

Emperors, Kings, and Princes, you are but dust, know it; your Crowns and
Scepters depend of God, acknowledge it: your body is but of clay, think and
say it, and therefore you must needs break, and be dissolved. Say Prince, say
pesant, say rich, say poor, say all and one, with holy Job. Corruption thou
art my Job 17. 14.
father, rottenness thou art my mother, Worms and Vermin ye are my brethren
and sisters, say, grave thou art my bed, sheet thou art my shrine, earth thou
art my cover, green grass thou art my carpet, say Death demand thy due, for
thy seizure is without surrender; and from thy decree there is no appeal. It
is not the Majesty of the Prince, or holiness of the Priest, strength of
body, feature of face, learning, riches, honor, or any secular regard can
plead against Death, or privilege any person from the Grave. Nereus the
fair, Thersites the foul; Pyrrhius the Cook, Agamemnon the King, Absalon
with his beauty, and Lazdrus with his blaines, must once Die. For Statutum
est, it is appointed all once to Die. Heb. 9. 27.

It is not eminency of Office, or Dignity can privilege thee: for David who
was a King Ps. 82. 6.
himself, a Prophet, and a man after Gods own heart, sets men as high as
they may go, I have said ye are Gods (nuncupatiue not substantive) and the
children of the most high. This is man's advancement. But he brings them as
low, and has But for them, But ye shall Die like men: and ye Princes, and
Great Ones shall fall like others; here is his abasement where the names of God
and Man here show their great difference. God signifies force support, and the
foundation of all; but M(...) imbecillitie, infirmity, and so feeble a thing,
as it cannot stand of it self: mortal and Divine are opposite and contraries.
God who made the World at first of nothing can mar the Isa. 40. 23.
greatest in a moment: he brings Potentates to nothing, and makes the
Judges of the earth as vanity.

It is not the strength or stateliness of any Place, Palace, or Territory,
Towne-gates, Guardes, or Royal Armies can protect thee from Death. For, pale
Death knocks with the Horat.
same fo^te at the Palaces of Princes, as well as at the Cortages of Clownes;
if it enter not at Ier. 9. 3.
the gates with full force, it will ascend by the windows with great fear.
And we see that wise men Die as well as fools, rich Die as well as poor,
Noblemen as well as vulgar or ignoble, in a word, the good and godly men as
well as wicked and profane. For, Ps. 89. 47.
what man is he that lives, and shall not see Death.

Lastly, as no height of honor or estimation can privilege thee, no safety
and sweetness of place protect thee; so no power or policy can preserve thee
from the fatal dart of Death. The King cannot save himself by the multitude
of his Psalm. 33. 15. Paul. Iouius de vit. Tamberl. Q. Curc. in vit. Alex.
host. Tamberlaine, the terror of the world, Died with three fits of an Ague,
as Paulus Iouius writes. Alexander that famous Monarch, acknowledged in his
own person this humane frailty, when in the Olympike Games falling in the
dust, and perceiving therein the length of his body, he confessed with grief
that seven foot of ground were sufficient to make him a grave. Death only,
Iu^enal.
( Mors sola fatetur) shows how big men's bodies are.

Wherefore be our days never so few, or our years never so full, resolve we
must, according to Gods Word, We must all once Die, wheresoever, or what state
soever we be, no resisting, God alone can say, Sum qui sum, I Exodus 3. 14.
am that I am; and will be what I have been. Plutarch.
Men can say nothing else, but I am and shall not be. Witness this the
Lacedaemonians song of three parts; Wherein the Elders sang, We have been
strong and are not now; The Youth replied, We shall be strong but are not yet;
The Middle-aged sang, We are now strong but shall not be. What shall I say
more? All mankind must needs sing this: Aut sumus, aut fuimus, aut possumus
esse quod hic est: We are, or have been, or may soon be, such as this Our
mournful Object.

Reason, proves the same, as Plato in Timaeo, Plat. in Tim. De Orthodox. fidei
de longit. and breu vitae. Arist. Physic.
Every thing that is composed must be dissolved. Damascen, Every thing that is
made, is subject to be mard. Aristotle holds, that every body composed of
contrary elements, disposed into contrary humors, must at length have a
natural date of corruption. Man is thus, who as he is the King and Master of
all things sublunaries, so is he the most mixed and composed of all creatures.
For he is made of an immortal soul, and corruptible body subject to Death;
his soul ascends from whence it came, his body boweth and bends
downwards: the body is composed of four contrary elements, which in him are
still at Deadly wars daily: his soul has a bright, clear, neat wit, and
understanding in it; so has it a blind will, and foul affections: the one
part of his soul is reasonable, the other part altogether brutish and full of
sensuality; so that Man by Reason of the Philosophers, must Die.

Again, what says Nature? is there a generatur? there must be a corrumpitur;
every oritur must have a moritur; is there an introitus, there must be an
interitus; every beginning must have an ending. We receive a life of Nature,
to render it; we enter into a life, to go out of it. There is not an intrat
without an exit in this life's Tragedy; a very Tragedy (I say) for the most
part, because we are all borne crying, we cry dying; we come in with moan,
and go out with a groan; let life have leave to flaunt and brave it a while
on the Stage of the world, yet all but a flourish, all is but a flash, Death
still plays Rex, strikes all the Actors, one after one, with a mortal blow;
there may be a little mirth in the midst, but Death at the last strongly
steps up and grimly comes in with a terrible Epilogue, and concludes all, and
Death makes an end, so Death in the end is the end of the Play; for we must
all Die. God and Nature are agreed upon the point, her dutiful submission to
his Imperious Must, must needs make all men mortal, all men Die.

All, both good and bad are Actors on this stage of Mortality, every one
acting a part (as I have said) some of less, some of greater dignity; and the
Play being ended Exeunt omnes, every one goes off the stage, and as Chessemen
without difference they are swept from the table of this World, wherein one was
a King, another a Queen, a third a Bishop or Knight into Earths bag; only
this distinction being betwixt good and bad, that the good are Actors of a
Comedy; and howsoever they begin, they end merrily: but the bad, are Actors
of a Tragedy, and howsoever they begin, or proceed, yet their end miserable,
their Catastrophe lamentable. And to conclude this point, as the tree falls,
so it lies. Eccles. 11. 3.
On every man's particular Death, his particular judgment attends, either of
the souls eternal bliss in heaven, or everlasting woe in hell, which all the
praises, prayers, and preaching of men, Saints, or Angels cannot reuerse.

A consideration by the miscreant Atheist much contemned, by the temporizing
Politician greatly neglected, by the carnal Gospeller slightly regarded by the
Popes pardon purchasing, and pickpurse-Purgatorie believing Papist corruptly
entertained, and by very few of the best Professors so sincerely and seriously
thought on and embraced, as it ought to be. For it is the great fault, not
only of great men, whose greatness makes them too often forgetful of
goodness, but even of us all, high and low, rich and poor, great and small,
that we never think on Death, or prepare to Die, till we find and feel we
can no longer live. Yea we so embrace, admire, adore, and dote upon this
glittering World, and are so loath to leave the ruinous Tabernacle of our
corruptible flesh, that we are not content or willing to go to heaven, till
we see there is no remedy, we can stay no longer on earth: yet Die must all.

Experience, likewise teaches us we must all Die, to day our Superiors, to
morrow our inferiors, even now our equals Die while we are living. Look
above us, below, within, without, and round about us, all tell us we must all
once Die. Consider we the things that are about us, we shall see the apparel
on our backs, made of the wool of beasts, that are Dead, the silk we wear,
wrought by worms which Died in the work, the gloves on our hands, the shoes
on our feet, the skins of Sheep or Neat, who lost their lives to cover our
nakedness. The meat on our tables, the members of creatures that have died to
maintain our lives. But what need have we of these demonstrations, and
resemblances to convince us of our Mortality? since we have both a continual
sight of it in others, in our parents, brethren, kinsfolk, neighbors, and
acquaintance, which are gone the way of all flesh before us: and also a daily
sense of it in our selves by the aches of our bones, heaviness of our bodies,
dimnesse of our eyes, deafness of our ears, trembling of our hands, baldness
of our heads, graynesse of our hairs, that very shortly we must follow after
them. Nay, do we not consider that our eyes every night Die to sleep to show
us in last we must sleep in Death: the hair of our heads, the nails of our
fingers calling so often for polling and paring, tell us that the whole body
must shortly be shaued by Death. Our stomach still digesting our meat, and
craving for more, shows us the insatiable manner of the grave, that having
eaten and digested our Ancesters, gapeth for us, and when it has devoured us,
will hunger also for our Successors The worms take possession of us, almost
as soon as we do of life, and have bespoken us even in our cradles, for
their fellows that await us on earth.

Thus Death is already in us and on us, we it on our faces by wrinkles; we
bear it in our brows, whose furrows are the emblemes of the Grave; we put
it on our backs in our clothes, and are clad in Death from top to toe; we
cramme it in our mouths with our meat; we have it in our bones; we carry
the hansell of it in our bowels: show me where Death is not? yet alas, the
Devil does dease us, the World does so blind us, and the sensuality of the
Flesh makes us so extremely senseless, that we neither hear, nor see, nor
feel, what lies so heavy upon us. If we be young, we fear not Death at
our backs; if sick, we feel not Death treading on our heels; if old, we
look asquint and see not Death before our eyes: such is our dullness that
neither Gods Word, Reason, nor Experience can teach us, We must all once die.

The first proof of those three testimonies on earth, should persuade al those
who believe in God; the second, those who follow the light of Nature; the
third, all sort of people. Though we had neither Reason, nor Experience to tell
us, We must die, yet Gods Word is sufficient to euince it: though the Word of
God proved it not, yet Reason and Experience would force us to believe it:
though we had neither the one, nor the other, of Gods Word, and Reason,
Experience alone were enough to open all men's eyes in the World, good or bad,
faithful or unfaithful, wise or fools, We must all dye.

How evident then this Statute is you may easily observe by these three clear
lights of the World, whereof every one of them apart, or by it self is more
then sufficient to prove this sentence, We must all once die. Whereof the first
shows unto the understanding, things that are above Nature, and begets
faith in it: the second, natural things and above the senses, and give unto
them knowledge: the third, which is Experience, the Mistress of Fools as well as
of wisemen, shows unto the senses things that are under Reason and imprint in
them a feeling. A man that cannot, nor will not learn by these three
Arguments, We must all once die, he is a Pagan among Christians, a beast
among men, a Dead man among the Living.

Nay the very Heathen or Infidels themselves Pier. in hierogliph. lib. 45.
page 470. Coel. Rhod. lib. 11. c. 19. Lactant. l. 2. de divine. Instit. de
tribus Parcis. Fusius Eusebius. lib. 6. de praepar. Euang.
acknowledge this Lesson by their Poets, who painted out unto them three
Destinies or Goddesses, Clothe, Lachesis, Atropos, and have fained tha^ at the
birth of men, they do spinne the life of every one, and limit their days,
cutting off their course when they please, either in the beginning or in the
midst without any hope of return. Those three are called Parcae in Latin,
by an Antiphrasis, or contrary speech, because they spare no person: or else,
according to the opinion of Varro Aul. Gell. lib.
in A. Gellius, from this Latin word Partus, that is to say, childbirth. For
as Fulgentius says in his Mythologick, (...), which signifies calling forth,
is she that brings the child out of the Mothers womb: whose sudden
Lachesis, which is lot or hazard receives the child, and draws the thread of
its Life: as Atropos in an instant cutteth the thread of Life without Order,
Reason, or Law; which made Plato call Death (...), inexorable, or inflexible.
So that you see by the very Pagan Poets, our Life is but a bottom of thread,
which the three Destinies wind in their hands to dispose of our Life freely
thus.

Clotho colum bajulat, Lachesis trahit, Atropos occat. Our days cannot be
long depending altogether of a little weak untwisted thread, tenui Ovid.
pendentia filo; and are still in running like a round bottom or a ball.

So the Heathen Authors imagine to themselves a Phantome of bare bones without
skin or flesh, having a Crown on its head, a Sith in one hand, and an
Houre-glasse in the other; thereby to represent the Empire, Power, and effects
of Death, over all the Universe under the Heaven; especially over Kings,
Princes, and Potentates of the World.

To this Crown of Death, appertains that Hieron. ad Eustoch.
degrading of persons, whereof Saint Hierome speaks to Eustochium, You know
not in what time or age Croesus began to obey? At what hour Hecuba, or
Darius his Mother? And this Civil Death of servitude is harder, and more
painful, then Natural Death; and it may be applied that the Prophet John saw
in his Revelation. Apoc. 9. 6.
And in those days shall men seek Death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to Die, and Death shall fly from them. Or the Crown, is to signify,
that Death Crowns the Dead: as Haniball gave a Crown to the body of
Marsellus, Cleomenes to Lidias, Pericles to Paralas, Augustus Crowned
Alexanders Monuments, the Vrne of Demetrius his Ashes was Crowned; and when as
the Emperor Adrian demanded the reason from the Philosopher Epictetus, he
understood that those Crowns did belong to the Dead as Victors over Life, Job
7. 1.
which is but a perpetual Warfare.

Never Monument, or Tomb deserved better to be crowned then this of our Great
and Gracious Prince, Lodouick, who has crowned all the actions of his Life
with immortal Crowns of glory and reputation. Though we should give him as
many as they did number in Ptolomies pomp, and at Scillas Funeral, or as many
as Nero dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus, like unto those which Greece
presented unto Berenice upon Golden Chariots, yet they should not equal his
Merits now after his Death.

Deaths Sithe signifies, All flesh is grass and Isa. 40. 6.
the beauty and gracet hereof is as a flower; and so soon as the Sithe
moweth, or cutteth down all the grass in the Meadow, it spares none, nor
makes any difference, or inequality, but cuts down all alike. If any thing
be more seemly, more amiable, more goodly, more gracious, more glorious, in
man it is but as a flower, which though it be more fair in show, and more
fragrant in smell then grass, yet as grass withers, so the flower fades:
Even so, the greatest power, pomp, authority, estimation, and most
illustrious estate of man, is cut down and decays.

The Houre-glasse in Deaths left hand, shows how much of our life is spent,
how that remains is in a continual running, and there is no stay of it. How
long soever man's Life be, he has properly but one hour, which thrusts forth
his last gasp is his hour; all the rest is no more his. Whatsoever he has
done in his life is considered by this last hour, the judge of all his other
hours, the most difficult of man's Life. He that is Author of the first and
disposes of the last, does only know it, foresees and mockes at man who
thinks he is far from it. Before the last sand of this last hour be run,
he cannot Crown his felicity: We must praise safely after dangers, Navigations
in the Port, and Victory in Triumph. Who can commend his Life and hold
himself so happy, whiles that the time past ministers unto him matter to
lament, and that which is to come, to fear? This My Lords hour was feared of
all his Friends, Servants, and Followers, yet not expected of any: Every man
did apprehend it as a change of his condition, but for that they held it to be
a far off, the opinion of the length of time did moderate the apprehension,
and the less it was foreseen, the more fearful has proved.

Our Christian Doctrine and pure Religion, term those Fates, Destinies,
Phantomes, and Fictions of the Poets, A Disposition of Divine Providence
concerning man's Life and Death. So that neither Comfort nor Blessing, Cross,
nor Curse can come unto us, but by Gods Providence and foresight: not a hair
of our heads can be diminished, nor a cubit cannot be added unto our stature,
without the Providence of our heavenly Father. It is neither Constellation of
Stars, influence of the Celestial bodies, conjunctions of Planets, nor any
such notionall fantasy of an Astrologicall brain, that can work our weal or
woe, our Life or Death: but it is God that sees all, and his Providence that
disposes. Whose disposition being eternal and innumerable, as being in the
Spirit of God, does not impose any necessity, and in that she carries her
effects into things that are humane and created, she is temporal, mutable and
contingent. So as man being considered as temporal, he is under Destiny, but
in his principal part, which is immortal, he is not subject unless he list.
The action of Destiny, upon the matter is necessary, the effect is not. As
the great God, who is the judge of Life and Death, has disposed of the life of
this great Duke, by so fatal and mournful Death, to the end, all that depend
on Princes, should know they be the effects of his great Justice, and that they
put not their trust in Princes: nor in the Psalm. 146. 3.
Son of man, in whom there is no help, or else to show that the World and
all her greatness are but a shadow, dust, and a puff of wind.

Now, seeing we have been every way sufficiently taught, by Gods Word, Reason
and Experience; by the Ancient and Profane Poets, and Philosophers, that there
is no sure rest or residence for us in this World, and that here we have no
continuing City, but live every day and hour in such uncertainty, that the
highest, healthiest, holiest, happiest among men, cannot promise to themselves
to morrow, let us esteem of every present day, as the day of our Death, and
make such a conscience of all our Ways, Words, and Works, as if we were
presently, to give an account of our life. He that thinks always of Dying,
will be circumspect in his doing. The Meditation of Death is a Christian man's
Philosophy, and rightly used may well be termed mentis ditatio, the enriching
of the mind O let us therefore as careful Christians, be continually exercised
in this study; and as cheerful and faithful Professors, be always busied
in performing those righteous, and religious duties, which we would do if we
were Dying: and because that Death in all places wayteth for us, let us expect
it every hour, suspect it every where, and be at all times prepared for it.

Especially at this time, let the dreadful spectacle of Death before our eyes
in this my Monument, be as a shrill Trumpet, sounding aloud that message of
Isaiah to Ezechiah in our ears, that it may sink deep in our hearts. Set thy
Isa. 38 1.
house in order, for thou must Dye, and shall not live. Dispose of thy
temporal affairs, leave not thy Lands entangled, thy substance intested, to
be a cause of variance to thy posterity, make thy Will, do it in time,
whilst thy thoughts are free, thine affections stayed, and thy Reason not
distracted with fear, or senses disturbed with pains, so shall thy Testament
be testatio mentis, a witness of thy mind. Whereas on the contrary, if thou
put over the disposing of thine estate to that troublesome time of sicknesses,
when thine head aketh, hand shakes, thy tongue faultereth, thine heart
faints, and every part is pained, it may justly be feared, that neither thy
words or writing will so express thy meaning, but that thou shall be easily
drawn to make a Will after another mind, rather then thine own.

Death has a thousand Diseases to kill us by, which made the Cabalist Rabbis
observe nine hundred and seven sorts of natural Deaths upon this Verse of
David, Unto God the Lord Psalm. 68. 20.
belong the issues of Death, not counting the infinite number of violent Deaths
by which a man may Dye. And to speak apparently to truth, there is a greater
number of Deadly Diseases and sicknesses in a man then there are Bones, Veins,
Sinews, Muscles, Arteries, Tennons, and all the parts of a Man's body. Cut up
an Anatomy, and consider every particular part of man's body, and you shall
not seek nor find one joint free from the darts of Death. She can kill us in
the Head by an Apoplexy, by a Syncope; in the Eyes by blindness, Ophthalmies,
and Suffusions; in the Ears by deafensse, and runnings; in the Nose by
bleeding, in the Mouth by Cankers; in the Tongue by Swelling and Ulcers; in the
Throat by Angines and Squinances; in the Stomach by rawnesse and coldness; in
the Liver with obstructions; the Spleen with hardness; in the Belly or
Bowels, with the Collicke; in the Kidneys with gravel; in the heart with
beatings or pantings; in the Sides with Pleurisies; in the Hands, in the Feet
and Toes, with the Gowt, Knots, and Crampes. To conclude our whole Body, and
Members are seized on by these ordinary Diseases, and such.

Besides a sudden Death may seize on you: you may Dye in sleeping, or in
sounding, or fainting as we see daily infinite Examples. A man may be
murdered in the field as Abell was: Genesis 4. 8.
a man may fall backward sitting quietly in his 1. Sam. 4. 48.
Chair, and break his neck, as Ely did: or Isa. 37. 37.
Die in the Temple as Senacherib: or at the Altar as Ioab. While Jobs Sons
were feasting, 1. Reg. 2. 34.
the house fell upon them: While the scoffing Boys were mocking of Gods
Prophet, Bears 2. Reg. 2.
came from the Wilderness and devoured them: Number. 16. 31.
When Corah and his company were contending, the Earth opened and swallowed
them. In a word, all our Life is but a Consumption unto Death; sorrows of
mind, and sick nesses of the body, are but the Harbengers of the grave.
Search the Gospel you shall find one blind, another deaf, the third lame:
One Lazar lying at Dives gate, another at the Poole Luke 16. 24.
of Bethesda, a third at the beautiful gate of the Temple: you shall find,
here a Leper crying, there a woman with an Issue of Blood adoring. Here the
house vntiled by the sick of the Palsy: there the Graves haunted by men
possessed of Devils. We cannot (says Saint Augustine) tell what to call our
life; whether a Dying life, or a living Death, when every day our houses of
clay do cramble to corruption.

Set therefore thine house in order now, that thy soul be not wearied, when
thou art at Deaths door, or on thy Deathbed, with secular affairs. Yea, set
thine heart in order also, and forthwith dispose of thy soul to cast up her
reckonings; turn thy self as Ezekiah did to the Wall, that is, from the World
to God. Consider what thou have been, examine thy self what thou art,
premeditate what thou shall be. Think on thy naked Nativity, and blush for
shame; sigh for grief on Deaths approaching tyranny, and tremble for fear, or
rather that thou may be freed from fear, grief, and shame. Weep as
Ezekiah did, bewail thy sins past, keep a narrow watch 2. Reg. 20 3. Psalm.
126.
over thine heart for the time to come. Sow in tears that thou may reap in
joy.

Lastly, (not to leave so good a pattern in any point vnfollowed, which, no
doubt, was practiced by this our Prince) pray too, as Ezekiah did, though thou
can not in the same manner. Lord remember how I have walked before thee in
synceritie and truth; yet to the same effect, for mercy, as David did. Lord,
remember Psalm. 25. 7.
not the sins of my youth. And as Saint Ambrose Amb. in Psalm. 38.
did. Lord, forgive me my faults here where I have sinned, for elsewhere I
cannot be relieved, except I have my pardon here, it is in vain to expect the
restfull comfort of forgiveness hereafter. Now is the acceptable time, 2. Cor.
6. 2.
as Saint Paul speaks, now is the day of salvation. This World is for thy
Repentance, the other for thy recompense. Hic locus luctae, ille coronae. Hoc
cunaeorum tempus est, illud coronarum, as Saint Chrysostom says. This is the
Chrysostom. in Heb. c. 2. Hom, 4,
time and place of combatting, that of crowning, this of working, that of
rewarding, this for thy patience, that for thy comfort. Happy, and thrice
happy are they which are thus religiously exercised, and Christianly affected.

HAPPY then by the judgment of Charity, is My Gracious Lord Duke (as the
judgment of certainty, the Lord of all, alone knows his) who in a
comfortable Christian manner was thus resolved, and in the time of his short
sickness unto his Death, piously devoted. As King Ezekiah being summoned by
sickness, and the Prophets short Sermon to prepare for his Death, turned
presently to the wall, prayed, and wept; so did this Prince, feeling his
frailty, immediately turned to the wall, prayed and wept for his former
sins. But alas! Herein differed that King from this Prince, that God added
unto the days of Ezekiah fifteen years, but he shortened the days of Prince
Lodouick in that same hour. Then he Dyed in his Bed without any further
delay, and slept in the Lord with his Fathers.

O Kings, Princes, and Great men, who all your life long run after the dreams
and sleep of the World, whose thoughts are wholly anchored upon the Earth, and
your hopes have no further extent then the Earth, in picture of this Death,
behold that the vanity of your greatness and ambition, (things so vain and
frail, as when they seem to glister, and twinkle like Diamonds) they vanish
from our sight, and break themselves in pieces like glass. Your spirits being
touched with this Death as with an Adamant, should without ceasing turn
toward the firm and fixed Pole of that truth, That whatsoever is under Heaven
is nothing but vanity, and that the World passes away with his pride and
pomp.

And O ye Gentlemen and Commons, come see this picture of Death, knowing of
wise King Solomon, It is better to go to the house of Eccles. 7. 2.
mourning, then to go to the house of feasting: For that is the end of all men,
and the living will lay it to his heart. Lay it to your heart then if you be
living, and not stupid, senseless and dead in your mind. Gaze not only upon
it with your eyes, as little children do upon their painted Book, not
learning their Lesson, nor to your cares only to hear of Death, nor to your
tongues only to talk of it, but lay it to your hearts, ruminate, remember,
and meditate upon Death day and night. For if ye look upon Death only with
your eyes, hear of it, enquire after it, and take hold of it only with your
hand, and the heart be far from it, then it cannot avail or profit you. The
eye without the heart is a deceiving eye, the care without the heart is
unprofitable, the tongue without the heart is a flattering tongue, the hand
without the heart is a false hand, and God will confound all the rest of the
body without the heart. Son give me thy heart.

Consider the great God, who is the judge of life and death, has disposed of
the life of this Prince by so sudden a Death, to the end Great Britain should
know that this must be the end of all men: and as a man Dies in the favor of
God, so without changing or recalling he remains. Death being to the wicked
the Devils Seriant to arrest them, and carry them without bail, unto a Prison
of utter darkness; which to the godly is the Lords Gentleman Usher, to conduct
them to a Palace of everlasting happiness; yea Death being to the one, as
Satan's Cart to carry them presently to execution in Hell, which to the other is
as Elias 2. Kings 2. 12.
his fiery Chariot to mount them up to Heaven.

Again, as Death is certain, so the form is uncertain, we see round
figures fall otherwise then Cylinders or Triangles, life ends not all after one
manner, the fruits of one tree fall not all at one instant, some are gathered
before they be ripe, others fall of themselves; some are snatched away, some
pulled gently, and the violence of the wind and hail beats them down
indifferently. My Lord Duke as he lived so he Died, meekely, patiently, like
a Lamb; and so soon as he felt his pain of the head increase, and more then
heretofore, he turned his eyes toward heaven, and carried his thoughts whether
his extreme grief did conduct him. Affliction makes men forget the World, when
they must think of Heaven, and it is the liuerie of the servants of God.

He prayed unto God in his Bed, believing assuredly, he who is in all places
where he is called on, God in the Crib, God on the Cross, God in the Grave,
and God every where, Who hears Jeremy in the mire, Daniel. in the Den, who
makes a Palace of a Stable, of a Caluary a Paradise, makes of this Bed an Arc
of propitition, and sent his Angels thither to assist this soul and bring it
unto him. He receives this generous, gracious, gentle, courteous and meek
Soul, which never refused his grace to any one that sought it. That great and
unspeakable mercy of God fortify us in this belief, and the same truth which
recommends mercy unto men; for that God is all mercy, and will rather cease to
be God, then to be merciful, who promises mercy to those which shall be
merciful.

God (it is true) might have suffered this Prince to have Died otherwise then
suddenly, but his mercy had not been so apparent in in any other kind of
Death, this being the sweetest and easiest Death, seeing it takes fear and
apprehension from Death, which is omnium terribilissimum, most troublesome. He
calls these terrible and sudden Death to the absolute power of his bounty,
whereas man has scarce the time to contribute a thought or a sigh. And this
Prince himself would not end his life otherwise then suddenly, thinking it
unworthy of a great courage to languish betwixt a desire of life, and the
fear of Death, and to quit for the interest of his abode, sometimes the use of
a member, half Eyes sight, and all his hearing, and to submit himself to the
discretion of pain and old age.

It is true, a sudden Death, is terrible and fearful to those that are taken
unawares, but is not so to those which attend it always constantly, and who
did watch, sleep, walk, and eat often with those cogitations, made Christian
like discourses, and said so often, that it was not sufficient to know the
graces of God, but they must acknowledge them, might well be taken, but he
could not be surprised by Death. His desire (you see) was not like unto ours;
for we would have wished to have seen him send up his soul quietly to the
place of his beginning after a long continuance of years, and that the
gracious Duchess his Lady had taken her last leave of him; that he had given
Legacies, and tokens to his friends and favorites; finally appointed
recompenses for his old and faithful servants, but God think us not worthy
of those favors and kindness of our Lord and Master.

Wherefore should we rather lament for our selves then for him; and let us say
of him as Rome did of Titus, He is gone for his own good, and for our
afflictions: Death which has raised him to immortal felicities, does plunge
us into a gulf of miseries. We lament justly for our selves, who see our
hopes Dead, and our miseries living, Death has struck but one, and has
slain many. The felicity which he enioyes does not ease the affliction which
does torment us; the contents which he finds in heaven, takes not from us the
feeling of those griefs which his absence has left us upon the earth. If
Death after this blow should have broken his bow, despairing ever to make the
like shot, that would not cure the wound which his arrow has made. But if
there be anything in this world able to mollify our grief, it is, that diverse
nations, and many people have sorrowed for that which we lament. The afflicted
receive some ease when as every man bears a share of their affliction.

Alas! when the Doctor of Physike, and the Groom of his Bedchamber, drew the
Courtaine, and found him cold Dead, without breath or motion, having one hand
lifted toward heaven, and the other as is written of Julius Caesar, when he
was murdered in the Senate, collecta manibus toga honest cadere studuit,
Sueton. in vita C^^s.
spread his gown over himself; so this Comely Lord, desiring to Die decently
in his Bed, (as he carried himself in all his actions of his life) he pulled
up the upper sheet close about his neck, and so quietly gave up the Ghost, not
so much as giving one groan. Then alas! all their rubbing with hot clothes was
in vain, and to no purpose: when Death seizes one, all the Aurum potabile in
the world cannot avail nor will the Bezar stones help against the
heart-beatings, nor the confection of Alchermes against the dissentories, nor
the feet of Elan against the crampes and contractions of the sinews. No more
then Aristotle's arguments, Platoes interrogations, Gorgias his sophismes,
Demosthenes eloquence, Tullies oratorie, S. Thomas his fundaments, Scotus his
subtilties, Durandus his sentences; nor Hectors courage, Achilles his valor,
Samsons strength, Croesus his riches, Caesar's fortune, can prevail against
Death.

What pen or pencill can represent unto you the just outcries of my Lady
Duchess, all the house over? outcries (I confess) so justly and deseruingly,
that they may approve rather their continuance, then condemn their extremity.
How she casts herself upon the ground, teared her fair hair from her head,
beating her breast, blubbering or disfiguring her face, and renting her clothes
from her back, I am not able to express; nor yet could learned
Haelicarnasseus, who painted out the transported Ladies of Rome for their
husbands Death, paint out this our Ladies grief and sorrow.

Or how should I, or any other figure unto you how the Kings Majesty, was
amazed at the first doleful news, My Lord Duke is Dead, and ever since has
missed him. Surely Timanthes himself, that inimitable painter of Mourning, if
he were alive, and would undertake this picture of the Kings grief, he should
fail in his art and skill, otherwise then with a veil before Agamemnons face.
Royalty nor Philosophy cannot free, nor privilege him from the first
motions, and sudden passions of the mind.

Nor yet can I tell you how the Prince his Highness, and the whole Court took
these sorrowful news of my Lord his Death, otherwise then by silence, and by
all men's tears. Discourses are to no end, neither to augment the grief of the
loss, nor to advance the greatness of the glory of this Prince LODOVICK; for
the one is infinite, and the other is seen in his Apogea. But tears show that
he which was lamented of every man was necessary for all. Tears are better
understood then words, it is more easy to weep for this Prince, then to
speak of his Princely virtues.

Frame, has sorrowed for this Duke and Prince, like unto a Mother who being a
Widow and Old has lost her own son, and as a Camp or an Army of men has
lost their Captain and Commander. For he was borne in France, (where his
woeful Mother yet lives) and bred there until the ninth year of his age; and
now Died their Captain of an hundred men at Arms in Scotland, of the French
Kings Ordinances.

Then was he in his ninth year brought into Scotland, which now lament and
grieve for his Death, as it was delighted for twenty years together with his
life there. As also he is universally lamented of every one here in England,
where he lived these twenty last years of his life in all honor and love, and
now is Dead and Buried with great grief and sorrow.

Ireland likewise sorrow for his Death, and hang up their Harpes from the
touching or trembling of their strings to any pleasant sound. So that his
Funeral needed not any hired tears, nor borrowed weepers, called in Latin
Praeficae, and in Hebrew Mekonenoth, as it is written in the ninth chapter of
Jeremy, Every one did afford them with abundance, those which had not their
eyes full of tears, had their hearts void of pity and commiseration. Tears
which constancy and gravity held in, that they might not appear were no less
bitter then those which common grief did cast forth to be seen. If any one
had strength to resist tears, it was wanting to fight with sorrow.

To tell now what the lamentation of London was, it is impossible and
incredible; the people sighed and lamented one to another so: nor can I tell
you how the poor people of the Country, even such as never saw him, were
sorry for his Death, because they heard of his goodness. Nor yet needed he
those Laws of other nations appointed to weep at the Death of their Princes
and Great men. As the Egyptians in Diodorus History, wept threescore and
Diodor. lib. 2c. 2.
twelve days for the Death of their King, and we did now for our Prince
LODOVICK, before his Funeral, and will many more hereafter. So did the
Sparthians or Lacedaemonians mourn for their Kings Death some certain days,
as Herodotus writes. Such was the cruel policy Herodot. lib. 6. Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 17. c. 8.
of great Herodes, to cause the chief Councillors of the Kingdom to be
murdered at his Death, that there might some tears be shed then; liking
belike that which Medea said in the Tragedy, Mors optima est, perire Seneca de
Med.
lachrymosum suis, it is to be wished to be wept for: every man wept and
lamented willingly his Death, and their tears which flowed in so great
abundance, have no other spring then the incredible bounty, goodness, and
gentleness. Never people sorrowed for them that were haughty or difficult,
who have always pride in their forehead, choler in their eyes, servitude is
not less intolerable unto them then Death: People flee from those Princes
which never go out of their chambers or Palaces, but like Lions out of their
Dens or Cages, to fear some, or to hurt others. We should never grieve for
a severe, cruel and inhumane Prince; our tears should but be fained and
forced; but for so good and mild a Prince, so loving to his servants and
followers, so much beloved of all, and so respected of strangers, the sorrow
can neither be expressed nor limited.

Let us, us above all others ( Colleagues, and Fellow-seruants, of one Lord and
Master) weep, weep and lament still for the Death of our Lord: and if any man
ask, or object unto us, why lament we for which we cannot remedy, answer
with wise Solon in Laertius, we lament because our tears avail us not. It
auailes not, to tell us that we lament him, not as Dead but as absent, to
represent unto us, that we have not lost him, but that we expect him: we
find occasions daily which make us remember our loss, and the assurance of
his return cannot moderate the great grief of his Departure.

For my part, I cannot but grieve and lament so long as I live, in remembering
his love, favor, and liberality toward me himself; and how by his means
to the Kings Majesty, and to my Lord of Canterbury his Grace, he has freed
me from the necessity of the world. Even now, my heart pants, my strength
fails Psalm. 38. 10.
me: as for the light of mine eyes, it alsois gone from me, and cannot but
weep and lament, nor can I proceed any further for the present, nor bid you
farewell. Alas!

THE POMPOVS FVNERALS, OF THE GRACIOUS PRINCE, LODOVICK, Duke of Richmond, and
Lenox, etc.
But I would not have you to 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not,
even as others which have no hope. We should hope and know, that we shall
not for ever sleep in the grave, but we shall live with Christ. Many Dan. 12.
2.
that sleep in the Dust, shall awake and rise again, some to everlasting
life, some to shame and perpetual contempt. Marvel not at this (said our
Savior Christ, himself) for the hour shall come, John 5. 28.
in which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and they shall
come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life, but they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.

Of which we may learn there is as great a difference between the Burying of
Christians, and that of Infidels, as there is a distance between the death of
the Just, and that of the Wicked, between the decease of those that are
predestined, and the excess of the reprobates. These die even whiles they
are alive; the others live, even when they are dead: those depart hence with
despair; the others pass with hope: these die bodily to die immortally; the
others die temporally to live eternally: these suffer to augment their pains;
the others rest to rise in glory.

Hence also we may observe the difference of the name, which the Christians
have given ^piphan haeres. 30. Abducunt miserum adolescentem, post occasum
Solis in propinquas tumbas: sepulchra, autem sic appellantur, speluncae
videlicet in petris effosae a^ constructae. Genesis 25. 9. Mark. 5. 2, 14. Luke 7.
12. Ioh. 19. 41.
to their Burying place, from all others. As the Jews and Romans being more
civil then the rest of the world did not Burn their Bodies, but Embalmed
them, and Buried them without the walls of Towns and Cities, in places which
they called Tumbea^, Sepulchra, Speluncas, according to the nature of place,
Dens, Tombs, Sepulchers, and such: and since having received the gift of
faith, and hope of immortality, they name them Coemiteria, Churchyards. This
name of Cemiterie, comes from the Greek word (...), and is interpreted in our
language a Dortor or Sleeping-place, grounded out of Christ's own words in S.
John, where speaking of Lazarus, he says, Our friend John 11. 11.
Lazarus sleeps, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep, though he
adds immediately, verse. 13.
Lazarus is dead. And in Saint Matthew speaking of the daughter of Iairus,
Prince of the Matthew. 9. 24.
Synagogue, the maid is not dead but sleeps, S. Paul also to the Corinthians
uses the same 1. Cor. 11. 30.
term, and many sleep.

All this to show unto you, that this Prince LODOVICK, Duke of Richmond and
Lenox, is not Dead but Asleep, and that we should not awake, or disturb him
with our immoderate cries, cares and weeping; but that Nature having showed her
duty in tears, Reason now should declare her piety in performing our
dutiful Exequies of his Burial. For this duty, has ever been commended and
commanded in all ages, of all nations, as well of Greeks, Romans, and
Barbarians, as of the ancient Jews, and Christians, and that with all Pomp
and Ceremony, therefore not to be neglected of us at this occasion.

To prove this, we will begin at the Heathen, who show themselves
superstitious, in Burying their Dead with great Ceremonies. As amongst them,
even those who were esteemed the most barbarous, uncivil, and inhumane people;
the Panebiens were very respectful in Burying their Dead honorably, placing
them Stob. sermon. de Sepult. 122. Alex. ab Alex. l. 3. c. 2. Herodin Melpom.
Val. Max. l. 5. c. 4.
in the Temples of their Gods. So were the Scythians as appeared by their
resolved answer to Darius, King of the Persians, that they would not stand out
much against him, for their Cities, Towns, Lands, and Possessions, but if ever
he should invade the Sepulchers, and Monuments of their Fathers, then he should
know what the Scythians could do.

Other Nations of them, which seemed more civil in their carriage, were more
curious in there Ceremonies of Burial; as especially the Egyptians above all
others, in their embalming, and with sweet Spices in preserving the Dead
Diodor. Sicul. lib 2. c. 1. Coe'. Rhodig. lib. 17. c. 20.
bodies from corruption, as also in building rich and sumptuous Tombs, which
they esteem of more then their best and honourablest Houses and Palaces; in
mocking the Greeks, and other Nations, for building Houses with great charges
and expenses, wherein they cannot dwell but a short time; and yet they regarded
not the Tombs, and Monuments of Burial, wherein they are to rest along time.
For this cause were Diod. Sic. l. 2. c. 5.
their Embalmers in great reverence, and in no less regard then their
Sacrificators, dwelling with them in the Temples of their Gods. And we read in
Herodotus, it was not lawful for Herod. lib. 2. Plutarch. tract. de Isid. and
O sir.
them, to permit any man to be buried in wool, more then to wear clothes of
wool in their Temples, but all must be made of Linen cloth.

The ancient Greeks and Romans were ever most curious and careful in
celebrating the Solemnity of their Funerals, witness Plato, Aristotle, Plat.
in Phaed and Cratil. Menox. and lib. 4. de l^g. Arist. l. de virtu. and
Problem. sect. 29. q. 9.
Plutarch, Tully, and many other Heathen Authors, Poets, and Philosophers.

Plato the best of the Philosophers prescribed a perfect Rule and government,
in observing the Ceremonies of Burials: so did Aristotle his Disciple in his
Ethics; and Tullius in his Topics; especially Seruius in his Commentaries
Cic. in Top. Seru. in Aen. 6. Plutarch in vitis Thesei, and Themist. above all
in Numa.
upon Virgill, commends these Ceremonies of Funerals, and Plutarch in all his
Works, at all occasions, declares how Honorable Funerals are.

Euripides amongst the Greek Poets, says Eurip. in Hecub. Acl. 2. Sophocl. in
A^ac. and Antig.
that Burial is the commandment, and old Law of the Gods, and to deprive men
of Burial, is to contemn the Gods above and below. And Sophocles says, to
defraud men of their Religious Ceremonies of Funerals, is to violate and
transgress the Laws of the Gods.

Naturally the condition of man requires, that as it is appointed for all men
once to dye; so euery-man wishes and requires that this piety, humanity and
compassion be shown upon him, insuffering their dead bodies to be buried
decently and honestly. And of this same natural inclination proceeds this
great desire, which they show to have of Burying their body, fearing lest
after their death some dishonor or inconvenience should be happen it. Such was
the self-love of that cruel Nero toward his body, when he said surely he
must Die, most Suet. in Nerone.
instantly entreating that his head might not be given to his Enemies. Tacitus
reports of the Tacit. lib. 17.
like of the Emperor Otho, praying that they cut not off his head, after his
death, and expose it to the mockery of his Soldiers. Many years Hom. Iliad.
before that, Homer brings Hector vanquished by Achilles, instantly
requiring, that his body be not made a prey to the Dogs, but that it may be
ransomed, or redeemed, at what price Idem ibidem.
he would: the same motion or the like, Ajax made to Jupiter.

Gods people both in the Old and New Testament ever religiously observed these
Ceremonies and Solemnities of Burial, relying upon their Resurrection, and
that one day they should live again, and that eternally. Yea Gods Word
commands, and commends Burial in express terms and practice. As in
Ecclesiasticus is said, Eccles. 7. 33.
from the Dead restrain it not, that is to say, from the Funeral Solemnity,
according to his estate. And soon after he says, My son power forth Cap.
38. 16.
tears over the dead, and begin to mourn, as if thou had suffered great
harm thy self, and then cover his Body, etc. Gods own holy Spirit Eccles.
6. 3.
pronounces absolutely, it is better to be an untimely fruit then not to be
Buried. For Practice, loc to all the ancient Patriarchs in the Old Testament,
and yet shall find them very diligent in these Ceremonies of Funerals: as
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, David, Tobie, and others. Genesis 23. and 49. and
50. 2. Reg. 2. Tob. 14. John 19. 40. Luke 23. 53. Chrysostom. Hom. 84 in 19.
chap. Joan.


In the New Testament, when Saint John says, our Savior Christ was Buried as
the manner of the Jews is, he signifies sufficiently, that Burial was one of
the Ceremonies of the Law. Jesus was Buried honorably, and that by honorable
men, his own Disciples; first to euince his own innocence, and to convince
the Jews of their iniquity; seeing no criminal condemned Chrysostom. Hom. 4. in
cap. 2. ad Hel^.
person could be Buried, according to their own Laws: secondly it appears
evidently by Joseph and Nicodemus his preparation John 19. 37.
on the day of preparation, that Burial was highly esteemed amongst the Jews;
in regard on that day that they might not provide any other thing: Thirdly,
hence may be collected, that it is lawful for Christians to Bury their Dead
on the Sabbath day, seeing the Jews permitted it on their Sabbath: Fourthly,
that the Burial of Jesus was the end of Jewish Ceremonies in Funerals, and the
beginning of our Christian Exequies; because he would not be Buried by the
superstitious Jews, but by his own Disciples, who were become Christians:
Lastly to show, the Burying-place of Heretics and Schismatics; of
Orthodoxalls, or of Protestants, should not be common, more then you may
observe there was one common place after the Burial of Christ, with the Jews
and Christians. For Christ at his Death, did rent the veil of their two
Religions, as he did of the Temple, Man. 27. 51.
and appointed Funeral Ceremonies for his people, far different from the
Jewish Superstitions in Burial.

In consequence of which Doctrine, Saint Luke marks expressly, that Steven
being stoned, Acts 8. 2.
then certain men fearing God, carried him among them to be buried: by those
of his own profession and Religion, not by Jews, or of his contrary part,
nor yet amongst them. So the Eunuch, who was baptized by Philip, in this Verse.
38. Dionys. de Hi^rar. Ecclesiast. l. 7 Hieron. Epist. 25. ad Paulam.
same Chapter, is said to have been honorably Buried, as Saint Steven was
apparently, in that they made Magnum Planctum, that is to say, a Magnificent
Funeral for him, as Saint Hierome interpretes it.

It is a Christian duty then, to Bury the Dead, and that Honorably and
Magnificently, according to the means, honor, rank, and quality of the
party defunct; howsoever, to Bury him decently, and with an honest conuoy.
Saint Chrysostom renders three Reasons why Chrysostom. Hom 4. in c. 2. ad Hebr.
we should religiously Bury the Dead, and make Funerals. One is to witness
our reciprocal love and charity one toward another* another is to show our
assured hope of Resurrection in others: thirdly, to be a lesson for our own
instruction, that as others Die, so shall we. Lactantius Lactant. lib. 6.
Divine. Institut. cap. 12. Aug. l. 1. de ciuit. Dei cap. 13.
ioynes the fourth, because it is not fit that the Image of God should be
exposed to beasts, or ravenous fowls. Saint Augustine adds the fifth,
showing our bodies are the Tabernacle of the holy Spirit, and it were to o
great an absurdity, or foul fault to preserve carefully the Pictures,
Apparel, Jewels, and Armor of our Predecessors, and neglect their bodies,
and bones, and their essential Spoils of Death. Therefore we accompany the
Dead to the Grave with a holy meditation of Death common to all, but to the
faithful a passage to a better life; comforting our selves, through assurance,
of their happiness that are gone before us, and that we shall follow soon
after them: every man giving thanks unto God for the event of their
victories, according to this saying of Isaiah. The Just are entered into peace,
they rest in their Beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

Hence also is to be observed, that these Isa. 57. 2.
Pompes, Rites, Ceremonies, and honorable Funerals in Burying the Dead, are
called Iusta in Latin; having nothing more frequent, among the ancient
Authors, to signify their actions, then those Phrases of speech, Iusta facere,
Iusta soluere, Iusta peragere; holding these duties for a principal part of
Justice Destributiue. For although the Dead feel nothing in themselves
whatsoever honor or dishonor, right or injury is done unto them, yet the
Dead, (as Pindarus Pind Olymp. Odae 8. antistr. vlt.
writes) have a right, which is due unto them by their Parents, and Friends,
even in their Funerals and Burial.

True, one of the punishments whereby God threatens the wicked, is that they
shall be deprived of Burial: and to Ioachim the King of Ier. 22. 19.
Israel, it was foretold that he should be buried as an Ass, even drawn and
cast forth without the gates of Israel; and to Iesabell that she should be
Buried in the bellies of dogs. And Josephus Joseph. Antiquit. Iudaic. l. 16.
c. 11
in the Antiquities records, that the House of Herodes went to wrack and decay
so soon as he violated David's sumptuous Tomb, or Sepulcher, Acts 3.
which continued twelve hundred years, in honor after it was built. Both the
Civil and Canon Laws, have enacted Penal Laws against Vlpian. l. 1. D. de
Sepulchro violato. Can infames 6. q. 1.
the transgressors in violating the Monuments, and Burying places of the Dead;
which the Ciuilian compare to the crime of Sacrilege, and condemns them by
the Law of Iulia de vi publica, to be marked of infamy, or to be put to
death, or to be sent into perpetual banishment, or condemned to the Mint, or
Galleyes. And the Roman Orator in his second Tullius lib. 2. de Legibus.
Book de Legibus, cites the Constitutions of Solon to this purpose, which
appointed the offenders in this case, to be tied unto a pillar of that Tomb or
Monument, which they had broken, bruised, or spoiled any ways; and there to
remain unto death. In that same Book he tells Idem ibidem.
us, that honorable Burial is the last, and chiefest duty woe can give one
to another.

Interea socios inhumataque corpora terra Virg. A^n. 11.

Mandemus qui solus honos Acheronte sub imo est.
Therefore, let us consider more particularly how piously and pompously this
Princes Funerals Senec. de tranquil. anim. c. 11.
were performed, and these even by the Gracious Princess, FRANCES, Duchess
Dowager of Richmond and Lenox, his Lady and Wife, who after, CONCLAMATVM EST,
like a Niobe, all melted in tears, Her Grace would not forget the last Duty
to her most loving Husband; went to his Bed side, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 17.
Epiphan. and S. Cyprian. de Sepultura Jesus Christi. Virg. Aen. 4. in fine. and
ibi Seruius etiam Donatus. Cic. in Verrem. Quint. Decl. 7. Stat. papin. Epic.
Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 9. de M. Popilio in fine.
Closed his eyes, shut Plutarch. consol. ad vxo^. Tibullus lib. 1. Eleg. 1.
Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 5.
up his mouth, Auson. p^rent. carm. 3. Suet. in August.
kissed him, and I may say (in some sense) Act. 9. Tert. in Apolog. Eusebius.
Trig. Tur^^ensis de Pelagia.
washed him (as the Religious and Charitable Lady Tabitha was washed.) I mean,
she Bathed him again with her tears, caused him to be Tertul. in Apol. c.
13. pr^d^ntius in Hymn.
Bowelled, Embalmed, and then Ioh. 19. Eusebius. l. 7 c. 17. Hieron epist. 49.
Plutarch. probl. ^6. Alex. lib. 3. c. 7.
Wrapped up in the best and finest white linen cloth she had: and all these
piously, Christian-like, according to the custom of the Primitive Church, and
now to our Modern use, of Princes and Great Men.

On the next night at ten of the clock, necessity not permitting to defer
his Burying, he was carried by his own Servants, and accompanied with a great
number of Knights and Gentlemen unto the Abbey Church of Westminster, and there
in King Henry the Seuenths Chapel, (commonly called the Earl of Richmonds
Chapel,) Honorably buried; by the Reverend Bishop of Lincoln, Lord keeper,
etc. who read himself the Burial of the Dead.

Yet Her GRACE like the Goddess Libitina (without offense) amongst the Romans,
appointed presently Designators, three Commissioners, The L. Gorge, S. Th.
Savage. S. Rob. Naper. Plutarch. Romans probl. 13. Liuius lib. 40. and 41. Budeus
ad L. quicunque. Horat. 3. carm. Cocl. Rodig. l. 9. cap. 18. Val. Max. l. 5. c.
2. de L. Sylla. Plut. vbi. sup. Budaeus Annotationibus in Pandect.
men of honor, and worthy great of respect, who diligently prepared for the
Funeral pomps, in the space of two months. In the mean time, they caused six
Rooms of Richmond House to be hung with Blackes, and the L. Herodot. l. 2.
Pierius hierogl. l. 40. Liuius lib. 5. Patercul. lib 11. Hom. Iliad. (...).
Coelius l. 17. c. 19 Isa. 57. 2. Florus lib. 4. 8. Plin. l. 35. c. 3. Tacit.
lib. 3. de funere Germanici, and in sine de Iunia. Seruius in Aen. 5. Ps. 39.
5. Ps. 73. 20.
Effigy of My Lord his Grace, to be made, and set up in the best chamber of
the House, apparelled with his Parliament Robes, lying in a black Velvet Bed,
valanced and fringed, adorned with Scutchions of his Arms, which they
permitted all the people, at all time, that came to see.

An Effigy, it is true, worthy to be seen of all, to teach all still, this
life of ours is but an Image, and Asleep in our Bed: an Image and that neither
(...) (as the Greeks call those that are painted upon Tables or Boords) real
or permanent; but only (...), an apparent or vanishing Image, such is that
appears in a Mirror. For as King David knew well, and said, Kings and Princes
are nothing but an Image asleep; their pomp, honor, and glory is but
vanity. Surely every man in his best estate is altogether vanity, Selah. or,
veruntamen in Imagine pertransit homo. And again, As a dream when one
awaketh! O Lord, when thou raisest us up, thou shall make their image despised.
And the Stoic Philosopher Seneca, Homo imbecillitatis exemplum, temporis
spolium, fortunae lusus, Imago inconstantiae. Where you may see that pride and
pomp of the world, especially of Kings and Princes, is but like a Dream.
David that was a King, and knew this by experience, would teach all Monarchs,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes, that they are but Images or Effigies, and as the
Apostle says, the Figure of the World vanishes. 1. Cor. 7. 31.


Monday, the nineteenth day of April, appointed Herodot. l. 5. Valor. l. 1. c.
1. Solinus l. 17. Rhod. l. 18. c. 23. Strabo de Geograph. lib. 17. Gregor.
Turon. c. 20. and 79. Rupert. l. 7. c. 20. Justinian. in Nouel. 123. c. 32.
for the Funerals; N. Quiris letho datus est: ad Exequias quibus est commodum
ire, iam tempus est: Ollus ex aedibus ecfertur. That great extent of persons
and honors, which proceeded, from the gate of Richmond House, to that of Abbey-
Church, may as well be comprehended by imagination, as by discourse, if we
will figure to our selves one thousand men in Mourning, the Chariot Varro de
langua Latin. lib. 5. festus in verb. Indictiuum, and Scal. in Cast^gat. and
Coniect. Alex. lib. 3. cap. 7. Genesis Dier. Terent in Phorm. act. 5. sc. vlt.
Luc. c. 7. 12. Hieron de Paula. and de fabi^. Virg^aen. 11. and ^bi. 1. de
bello Ciuil^ cap. 13. deserte. Ter^ul de Coron. Mil. Dionys. Hierar. Eccles. c.
7.
of Arms drawn with six Horse, wherein lay the Effigies; the Prince his
Armor carried, the Sword sheathed, the Helm crested with the Mantelet, the
Coat, Armor, Shield, Gan^le^, Spurs, the Banners and Ensigns of Scotland,
England, France (as he had Honors in each of these Countries) and the Horse of
Honor, and seven other led by his Gentlemen and Grooms. Together with a number
of * Trumpeters, sounding a doleful tone at every turn; the Gentlemen of the
Kings Chapel, and of the Quire of Westminster Church; and twenty Chaplains,
of Deanes, Doctors, and others; besides the Doctors of Physic, Apothecaries
and Chirurgians, etc.

After the Effigy, on an open Chariot followed Plut. Prob. 14. Val. Max. li 4.
c. 1 Festus in verb. Pr^texta. Cic. de Legib. 2. Gregor. de Nissen^. Epist. ad
Olymp. Clement. Constable. Apost. l. 6. c. 29. Chrysostom. hom. 70. ad Popul. Antioch.
the chief Mourner, the Duke of Lenox now is, the Defuncts Brother: assisted
with the Duke of Buckingham, the Marquess of Hammilton, Lord Steward of his
Majesty's most Honorable Household; the Lord Chamberlain, and the most part of
the Noblemen at the Court; My Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and some
Bishops: Who all in so good an order, without any of the Marshals-men, or other
Vshers, that it was marvelous to behold; the whole streets being full of
common people, the Windows, Leads, and Tyles full on both sides of the better
sort, to Westminster Church.

Where the Funeral Sermon was preached by My Lord Keeper, taking his Text out
of the Kings thus: AND ZABVD THE SON The Text.
OF NATHAN WAS PRINCIPAL OFFICER, 1. Reg. 4. 5. at the latter end of the Verse.
AND THE KINGS FRIEND. How pertinent or proper it was, judge your selves. Of
which I say truly without any fear of flattery (I hope) by any pious man,
Foelix est cuitalis Praco contigerit, tanti meriti, tanti pectoris, tanti oris,
tant^ virtutis Episcopus, as Augustine Augustine.
spoke of Cyprian: happy is our dead Achilles, who, as in Heaven his so^le
sings praise^ to God, so on Earth that at the interring of his body, his
praise^ should be sounded by such a Reverend Prelate, of suh worth, such
wisdom, such speech, such spirit.

And why should he not have praised him, who was so Praiseworthy; seeing it
is commended, if not commanded in the Bible. Let Eccles. 44. 1.
us now commend the famous men, and our Fathers, of whom We are begotten. This
did the ancient Greeks and Latins, in time of their Plato in Menox. and in
lib. 4. and 7. de Leg. Plutar. in vi^is These^ and Themistocl. Alex. ab Alex.
Genesis dierum. l. 3. c. 7. ex Diodor. Sicolo.
well ruled Commonwealth, as their Histories witness. Not that it was lawful
for all sort of persons, but only for the Nobles, Valiant, and such have
well-deserued of their Country in Wars, or Peace. Such they honored, and
maintained in their old age; as also their children when they were decayed in
their own estate, and in the end commended them highly to the encouragement of
others, and erected Monuments to their praises. Vnde Athenis in Pritaneo
alebantur public, qui been meriti erant de Rep. Isque summus honos habebatur.
This is plain in Plato, Plutarch, and many other Greek Authors.

Amongst the Romans, I read it was Valerius Sueton. in Vitis Imperatorum.
Liuius lib. 3. Cic. in Orat. pro Muzeur. and lib. 2 de orat. Quint. in Gener.
Demonst. Plutarch. in viti. Camilli. and lib. de virtutibu^ mulierum.
Poplicola, who made the first Funeral Oration, at the Obsequies of his
companion Brutus: after him Appius Claudius, Scipion, and diverse since: as
Augustus praised his Nephew. Drusus Germanicus at a public Assembly; and
Tiberius his father and son; and Nero his predecessor Emperor Claudius. Yea
it was practiced in honor of great Ladies, as Julius made an Oration at the
Funerals of his Aunt Iulia, and of his Wife Cornelia; so did Augustus at his
great Aunt, and Caligula at his great Aunt Liuia; and Crassus, at the Exequies
of his Mother Popilia.

Christians have ever been pious in this duty at their Funerals, as Saint
Hierome in his Epistle, Hieron. ad He^^odor.
ad Hel^odorum, which is, De obitu and laudibus Nepotiani, as a Wiseman
commends it, Ante Eccl. 11.
mortem ne lauds quemquam, Praise no man before his death, as if he insinued,
you may praise after their death, but not before, lest the praises be imputed
unto flattery and lying.

Solomon, speaking of a Virtuous woman says, Praise her in the gates, that is,
after she is dead. Prou. 31. v. vlt. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 14. Histor.
Eccles. lib. 9. c. 3. Histor. Tripert. in Nicephor. l. 12. c. 11.
So Gregory of Nice, preached a Funeral Sermon upon Melitius; Nazianzen, upon
Saint Basile and Desarius; and Saint Ambrose, made many Funeral Sermons, for
such he esteemed Praiseworthy, as for the Emperors Theodosius, Valentinian,
Gratian; and for his Brother Satirus and others, etc.

All which Sermons commonly tended, to declare unto the people, how the Dead
lived in honor and reputation: what dignities, offices and charges they bear
in their State, how they attained unto them, and by what degrees, of what
ancient, and Noble Parents, they were borne, what services they had done unto
the King, how they were beloved of his Majesty, how meek, gentle and loving
they were unto all, and of all, in their life time, and so lamented of all, at
their Death and Funerals.

Of which we can have no better pattern, nor proof, then the explication and
application of the Reverend Prelates and Preachers 1. King. 4. 5. vt supra.
Text, taken out of the first Book of the Kings, approved with great applause,
and that most Worthily (in my judgment) of all that heard and understood it,
as even it is Wished to be printed, of all the judicious that heard of it.
Wherein (indeed) Paralleling our Prince Lodouick in every particular with ZABVD
THE SON OF NATHAN, WHO WAS PRINCIPAL OFFICER, AND THE KINGS FRIEND. He
expressed abundantly, his Learning and Love, toward My Lord Duke, in declaring
his Christian Life, and Heroic Deeds, which make me now speak only of his
Death and Funerals.

After whose Sermon, all My Lord's Arms, Armor, Standers, Banners, Shield, and
Ensigns were offered by Noblemen, or by the Knights that carried them, unto My
Lord Duke of Lenox now is, who was his only Brother.

Here now we may mitigate, or temper the bitterness of our affliction, with
the sweetness of some comfort. Open your eyes Brethren of acknowledgement, you
shall see the great mercy of God's Providence, and his special favor and care
toward us: How God is merciful in all his justices, and if of one hand he
beats us down, of the other he lifts us up; he chooses the time to afflict us,
when he has prepared to comfort us; when apparently he depriues us of all
hope, yet casts he us not into despair. The Persians at the Death of their
King, smoothered, or put out all the sacred flames and fire in their Houses:
but let us (who are Christians,) kindle quickly our coals of affection toward
God, in taking away one Lord and Master, to give us another without delay.
Though God has given us check, yet not Mate, he has suffered us to swim in
our tears, and hearts grief, yet he will not have us to drown in them. God
has taken unto himself the Duke of Richmond and Lenox; but lo, he has given
us a Duke of Lenox, changed in nothing but in name, as being Duke by birth, by
succession, by merit, and by all men's Wish, if he were to be elected. For no
doubt, we shall find no change, no alteration, but a Phoenix renewed of
another ashes, or a Pollux that rises after his Brother Castor, to his
Servants, Tenants, and Retainers. Even he will prove himself a trusty
Steward in Gods House, of Church and Commonwealth, unto whom it will be said,
as unto his most faithful Brother: Matthew. 25. 23.
It is well done good Steward and trusty, Thou have been faithful in a
little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter into thy Masters joy.

What remains then for us to do more, seeing our Lord and Master is Dead, and
now we have another alive? Shall we imitate the Romans in these his
Obsequies, in pouring forth Blood and Milk upon his Tomb? Shall we throw
into the fire our best Jewels, and most precious things? and shall we
sacrifice unto him a Captive? or shall we bring some Fencers to fence and kill
upon his Grave? No such Offerings and Heathen Sacrifices are to be performed of
us, nor does the purity and simplicity of our Christian Religion permit any
such superstitious Ceremonies: But we will Offer and Sacrifice our selves
through the violence of our grief, as so many Sacrifices and Victimes to his
Noble Nature; we will offer and shed out our tears, our sighs, and sobs,
which are the blood gushing out of the wounds of our heart. Those are the
Funeral Honors which we will offer to his Memory, and remember and ever
speak of his favors, love, and liberality toward us. Let these be his
Statues, Pillars, Pyramides, Colosses, Obelisques, and Triumphant Arches, which
will be more durable then all the Maruels and Monuments of Asia, of Lidia, of
Caria, of Memphis, of Egypt, of Babylon, of Semiramis, of Croesus; or of all
the Marble, Masonrie, and works of Architecture we can erect to his Name and
Fame. For this is the Tomb and Monument which Prince LODOVICK, purchased and
prepared for himself, whiles he was alive: and in this we shall imitate
Artemesia who swallowed the ashes of her husband Mausoleus, to keep him so
much the better in her memory. Finally, as his Officers brake their Staves
over the Effigy, after all the Offerings were ended, and the Heralds thrice
proclaimed THE DVKE OF RICHMOND AND LENOX IS DEAD, with his glorious Titles of
Elogie sounded by the Trumpetters; so let us over sound out his praises of
Heroical Virtues.

Thus as of old, they cast into the air a thousand times, Io of joy, when any
Roman Captain Trimphed, or went into the Capitol to receive a Laurel Crown,
in sign and token of his Victories, before the Image of Jupiter: So now,
seeing our Prince LODOVICK, Duke of Richmond and Lenox, etc. is ascended up
into Heaven before God, on a Chariot of Triumph, there to receive, not a
Laurel Crown, which may fade and fail, but a Crown of Immortal Glory, we
should all aloud cry-out, with an open mouth,

Teque dum procedis Io Triumph, Horat.

Non semel dicemus, Io Triumph.
As he no doubt, is singing praises, with Angels and Archangels, unto the Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings, HALELVIAH, HALELVIAH.

Amen.
IN POMPAM FERALEM, FAELICIS PRINCIPIS, LODOVICI, Ducis Richmondiae, and
Lenoxiae, etc. CENOTAPHIVM.
SISTE hic etiam Viator, and vide. Vides Purpuram and Coronam, Claritudinis
Pegma, Libitinae Trophaea? Ne mortuum hic quaeras, non querare. Cenotaphium est
Honoris, vacuum Mortalitatis, Gloriae plenum, Memoriae sacrarium, Pietatis
pignus, Amoris Monumentum. Hunc Lectum floridum, Fulora aurea, Culcitram
variegatam, Tapetia conchiliata, Laquearia nitentia, Lilia ornata, Insignia
Virtutis, haec manuum decora, acroteria Pompae feralis, quae in Vita, vt in
Scena minuti homines mirantur, Caelites rident, Ego nihili pendo prae choragio
quo perfruor, tu ne impense and opere nimio mirere Viator. Oculos in sublime
attolle, coelumque tuere, quo me bigae albae duxerunt, PIETAS and BENIGNITAS,
ista homines, illa Deum conciliauit, vtraque stellatam arcem aperuit; vbi
regnabo, dum Rex aetheris moderabitur. Interim Deum precare pro te-ipso, and in
rem tuam abi. Vale.

FINIS.
Gentle Reader, seeing things out of season are ever out of frame, and being
hastened in this, I pray thee to amend what is amiss in letters, words, or
sense.


