Mellin de Saint Gelays au Seigneur des Essars. N. de Herberay traducteur du
present liver d'Amadis de Gaul.
Au grand desir a l'instante request,
De tant d'amys don't tu peux disposer,
Vouldrois tu bien (o amy) t'opposer
Par un reffus de chose treshoneste?
Chascun te pry, and ie t'en admoneste,
Que l' Amadis qu'il to a pleu exposer
Vueilles permettre au monde and exposer:
Car par tes faitz gloire and honneur acqueste.
Estimes tu que Caesar ou Camille,
Doibuent le course de leu^r claire memoire
Au marbre au fer, a cyseau ou enclume?
Toute statue ou medaille est fragile
Au fill des ans, mais la durable gloire
Vient de main docte, and bien disante plume.
Antoine Macault Secretaire and vallet de chamber du Roy, Aux Lecteurs.
Diuins espritz Francoys de hault scauoir comblez,
Qui par viue virtue and merit louable,
En bien escripuant, ceulx qui bien font, ressemblez,
Prenez exemple icy certain and honorable
Que loz immortel vient d'oeuure non paroissable,
Comme est le present liver. Et vous oisifz cessarts
Suyuez ce translateur, qui des branchuz Essars
Du parler Espaignol, en essartant, deffriche,
Nostre Amadis de Gaul: and le rend par ses artz
En son premier Francoys, doulx, orne, propre, and rich.
THE FIRST BOOK OF Amadis of Gaul.
Discoursing the Adventures and Love of many Knights and Ladies, as well of
the Realm of great Brittayne* as sundry other Countries, etc.
CHAP. 1. Of whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, and the Combat
between Perion and two Knights, as also how he fought with a Lion that
devoured a Heart in their presence: with the success following thereon.
Soon after the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, there reigned in little
Britain a king named Garinter, enstructed in the law of verity, and highlye
adorned with many laudable virtues: having a Noble Lady to his Wife, by whom
he had two beautiful Daughters. The eldest (being married with Languines King
of Scotts,) was commonly called the Lady of the Garland: because the King her
Husband, taking great pleasure to behold the golden tresses of her hair,
would have them no otherwise covered, then with a fair circle or chaplet of
Flowers: Languines enjoying by his Queen, Agraies and Mabila, of whom this
present History often makes mention. The other youngest Daughter to this King
Garinter, was named Elisena, very much excelling the eldest in beauty, and
though she had been oftentimes desired in marriage, by sundry Princes and great
Lords: yet as then she had no will thereto, but for her solitarye and holy
life, was commonly called of every one, the lost Virgin in Devotion,
considering that in a person of such estate, endued with such excellent beauty,
and solicited by so many great Princes, this strickt religion was not
convenient. King Garinter being somewhat in years, for recreation took
pleasure in Hunting, when at one time among other it happened, that having
appointed a meeting near one of his Cities called Alyma, a Heart was put
forth, in pursuit whereof him self wandered very far: wherefore seeing he
had lost both his people and game, commending him self to God, he began to
make somewhat the more haste, til having trauersed first one way and then
another, at the very entrance into a Wood, he saw two Knights fighting
against one. Soon had he knowledge of the twain, in yt they were his own
Subjects, of whom he had heard sundry complaints: but slender order was
taken in the cause, by reason of the great alliance they had in the Cuntrye, as
also for that they kept themselves still in this great Forest. Who the third
should be, he meruailed, and for that time he so well liked the valor of the
one Knight, as he feared not what might happen to the other twain: wherefore he
withdrew him self a little further into the Forest, because he might the
better behold the issue of the fight, which sorted to such effect, as by the
strength of the one Knight, both the other were vauquished and slain. The King
beholding what had happened came forth of the Wood, when the Knight seeing one
so near him abo^e, thus demanded. Gentle Sir, what C^^try is this, where
Knights errant are thus assailed by robbers and thieves. Let this be no wonder
to you Sir, answered the King, for this Cuntry yeeldes as other do, both good
and bad. As for them that thus assaulted you, they have done diverse and
villainous outrages, not only in this Wood, which has been their accustomed
receptacle: but like wise in many other places and cheefely against their Lord
and King, who could not execute justice on them, in that they were allied to
the best houses in this Realm. And where may I find the King you speak off?
said the Knight, for I am come to seek him, to bring him news from a great
friend of his. Happen what shall, answered Garinter, I will tell ye so much as
I know: understand then for a truth, that I am the man you ask for. At these
words the Knight took of his Helmet, and throwing down his Sheeld, ran to
embrace him: saying that he was the King Perion of Gaul, who of long time had
been destrous to know him. Greatly were these Kings contented, that their
meeting was in such fortunate manner, and conferring together on many matters,
they took the way through the Wood toward the City, where they thought to
find the Hunters: but suddenly a Heart ran before them, which with some
danger had escaped the toils: wherefore the Princes gallopped after the Dear,
hoping to kill it ere they gave over. But it fell out otherwise, for in the
pursuit, as they came into the thickest of the wood, a chafed Lion ran before
them: which in their sight seayed on the Heart, and having with his strong paws
torn it in pieces, turned again, when running furiouslye against the two
Princes, he watched his advantage as if they had angered him, which the King
Perion perceiving, in laughter said. You shall not be such a glutton, master
Lion, but you shall leave us part of the game. And heerwith presently he
alighted, because his Horse would not come near the beast, so drawing his
Sword, and clasping his sheeld on his arm, not regarding ye cries of King
Garinter, who labored to dissuade him from the attempt, he marched to the
Lion, who for defense of his pray, can eagerly against the King, and so
between them began a new war. But the Lion being quick and nimble, did so
much as he got his enemy under him, yet was the Kings heart so good, that
albeit he was in very great peril of his person, he was not abashed one
iotte: but turned him self in such sort, as he thrust his Sword into the
belly of the beast, which at that instant fell down dead before him. The King
seeing what had happened, was so overcome with meruailing at this deed as he
said within him self: In sooth, it is no shame to renown one of the best
knights in the world. In this mean while, the rest of the train came
thither, who for to find their King, had searched long time up and down the
Forest. Then was their pray and Uenison laid on two horses, and carried to the
City, where the Queen was immediately advertised of King Perions arrival, and
therefore made speedy provision of all things necessary, to welcome and feast
so great a Prince. At their coming they found Dinner ready, and the tables
covered: wherefore (after the welcomes and reuerences done on all sides) the two
Kings sat down, so did the Queen, and fair Elisena her Daughter. Now had
Love secretly ambushed him self, because he had long time assailed this young
Princess, without any power to overcome her: but now he saw her so unprovided,
as at this instant hour he might touch her to the quick, and thence forward
hold a sure conquest of her. The like in King Perion, who thought of nothing
but a freendlye entertainment, yet when he cast his eye on the Lady Elisena,
and she in like sort upon him: by virtue of this pearring regard, her wonted
chaste and holy life, had no longer power to privilege this Princesie, but
she was wonderfully thralled in extreme love to this young King, and he in
self same manner to her, albeit till that power, he had his heart francke and
free, without subjection in any other place. In this sort during dinner time,
they found themselves (for each other) in a strange opinion, till the tables
were with-drawen, when the Queen would depart to her Chamber, wherefore
Elisena arose to follow her: but as she stepped forward, she let fall a King,
which she had put in her bosom when she washed her hands, and so had forgot
it, by reason of this new love, that made her think on other matters Now was
king Perion some what near her, and desirous to let her know how willingly he
would be hers, stooped down as soon as she to take it up, and so right did
their hands meet together, as the King had the mean to close her fingers,
yet feigning to take up her King. Whereupon this amourous Lady began to change
color, and (notwithstanding) by a sweet regard humbly thanked him. Ah
Madame, quoth he, this shall not be the last service I hope to do you, for my
whole life time shall be employed to obey you. Constrained was Elisena (without
answering him) to follow the Queen her mother, so surprised and altered, as
very near she had forgotten her self: so that not able to endure this new
fire of love (which so sudden and vehemently had conquered her wonted chaste
and choice determination:) with the tears in her eyes, and her heart full of
anguishe, she went and discovered the same to a faithful Damsel of hers,
named Darioletta, praying her most instantly to council her, how she might
safely know, if King Perion had not elsewhere placed his love, and whether the
affectionate semblaunce he had showen her, might proceed from force of that
impression, which had so lately sea^ed on her heart. The Damsel mernailing at
this so sudden mutation, and in a person thought so far from any such matter:
taking (nevertheless) compassion on her pitteous tears, thus answered. I see
well Madame, that according to the extreme passion, wherewith the tirant Love
has tormented ye, he has left no place in your judgment, where counsel
or reason may be entertained: and therefore following not what I ought for your
service, but the will I have to obey you, I shall do what you have commanded
me, by the most honest means that my little discretion, and the great desire I
have to please ye, will permit me. So without any more words, Darioletta went
to the Chamber where King Perion was, and at the door she found his Squire,
who brought other garments for his Lord to wear, which the Damsel took of
him. For (quoth she) it is necessary that I perform this service, and you
(gentle Squire) may go if you please about your other affairs. The Squire
thinking it was the custom of the Cuntry, made no denial, but willinglye
suffered her to take the Garments, whereupon she entered the Chamber, where the
found the King laid on his bed: who seeing her enter, and knowing well it was
she, whom he had seen to confer with Elisena most priuatelye and in whom
(above all other) she put cheifest trust, he thought that she would not come in
that sort to him, without bringing him some remedy for his mortal passions,
for which cause, all in trembling, he said. Fair friend, what demand ye? If
it may so like you my Lord, quoth she, I have brought other garments for ye.
Much rather would I, said the King, that you had brought some comfort to my
heart, which at this present is left naked and despoyled of all pleasure. As how
my good Lord? answered the Damsel. Thus quoth he. When first I arrived in
this Country, I was free from all passions, and doubled nothing, but of
adventures that might happen to knights errant: but now (I know not in what
sort) entering this Court, by some one of your Ladies, have I received a
deadly wound, for which if you (fair Damsel) know how to give me any
remedy, your recompense shall be so good, as you shall repute your self
beholding to me. Certes, quoth she, I should imagine my self happy, by doing
service to so high a personage, and so good a Knight as you are, if I could
tell wherein. If you will promise me said the King, as you are a loyal
Damsel, not to discover me but where it is requisite, I shall tell ye. Say
hold^^^ your pleasure, answered Darioletta, for by me (without your liking, it
shall not be known to any. Damsel and my freende, quoth he, I give ye to
understand, that at what time I beheld the excellent beauty of Elisena your
Mistress. I became extreamelye tormented with her love, and in such sort, as
I cannot excuse my self from death if I find not remedy for my grief the
sooner. Darioletta (who knew thoroughly the mind of the Princess) hearing what
the King had said, returned him this answer. My Lord, if you will assure me
by the faith of a King, which before all other things ought to be kept, as a
person most bounden to virtue, and as a loyal Knight, who ought (as is said)
to suffer much, for maintenance of right and equity, that you will take to
Wife my Lady Elisena when time shall serve: right soon will I bring ye to the
place, where not only your heart shall be satisfied but hers likewise, who (it may
be) is in as much or more thought and dollour, then your are, by reason of the
new anguish that touches her through the self same means. But if you do not
(my Lord) what I have said, you shall not there recover her, nor shall I have
other cause then to think, that your words proceeded from no loyal heart,
nor to credit any thing you say hereafter. The King whom love had already
deprived of liberty, to unite him self with Elisena, (to the end that he might
be adorned with the great and gracious fruit, which afterward happened, as
shall be receited unto ye), took his Sword, and setting his right hand on the
Cross thereof, said these words. I swear by this cross, and on this
Sword, wherewith I received the order of Knighthood, to do what you (fair
Damsel) shall command me, at all times, and whenever your mistress
Elisena shall be thereto advised. Be you then frollicke and merrye, answered
Darioletta, for I shall likewise accomplish what I have promised. And at that
instant she returned to the Princess, declaring to her what she had concluded
with King Perion, wherewith the amorous Lady was so pleased, as she had utterly
lost her former countenance, and incesfanty embracing Darioletta, thus
demanded. My dear friend, when will the hour come, that I shall hold
between mine arms, my Lord whom thou have given me? I shall tell ye answered
the Damsel, you know that in the Chamber where King Perion lodges, there is
a door on the Garden side, which your Father has sundry times used for his
recreation, and which at this present is covered with the cloth of Arras, but I
have the keye thereof: wherefore at night when every one is at rest, we may
easily there enter unseen of any, and when needful time of return comes,
my self will call ye. When Elisena heard this devise, she was highly contented
therewith, yet breathing forth a sighe, she said. Alas my faithful friend, how
shall we bring this to pass? seeing my father is determined to lodge with King
Perion: and if he perceive us, we shall be both in very great danger. Refer that
doubt to me, answered Darioletta, and I shall easilye provide for this matter:
whereupon for this time they brake off conference, because the Tables were
covered for Supper. And in like manner as the feasting began in the morning, so
now it continued, till the Tables being voyded, each one prepared him self to
rest. now a little before, Darioletta went to king Perions Squire, and thus
said to him. Gentle Squire and my friend, I pray ye tell me in good faith,
whether you be a Gentleman or no. Why ask ye? answered the Squire. For the
desire I have, said the Damsel, to know one thing of you, which I entreat ye
(by the faith you owe to God and to the King your Master) not to hide from me.
By Saint Mary* quoth he, I will tell you what you please to ask, provided,
that it be not to the damage of my Lord. Heerin, said the Damsel will I
consent with ye, for I would not demand any thing of you that should give him
displeasure, nor were it reasonable that you should acquaint me with any such
matter: but I desire to know, who is the Lady he loves most perfectlye. The
King my Master, quoth the Squire, loves all ingenerall, and I assure ye, that
I know no one, to whom he bears such affection as you speak off.

While they were thus talking, the King Garinter came, who seeing Darioletta
conferring with king Perions Squire, demanded what we she had to do with the
Gentleman? In sooth my Lord quoth she, he tells me that the king his Master
is wont to lie alone, and therefore I think he loves not to have any company.
When Garinter understood that, he went presently to king Perion, saying. My
noble Brother, there are certain affairs suddenly be fallen me, and likewise
I must rise somewhat early in the morning, which has made me think, that (not
to trouble you) the best way is, that I break company from lodging with ye. My
Lord, answered king Perion, do as shall seem best to your liking. This answer
appeared to king Garinter, conformable with that the Damsel had said,
wherefore right soon he commanded his bed to be fetched from king Perions
Chamber. When Darioletta heard thereof she imagmed their affairs would fall out
the better, and therefore returned to Elisena, acquainting her with all that had
passed between the two kings. In good faith quoth she, I now believe, that
seeing God has granted so good a beginning, our enterprise, which at this
present seems a great sin, will hereafter redound to his service: but tell
me what we shall do? for the great joy which I have, has taken from me the
most healthful part of my judgment. Madame, said Darioletta, this night will
we execute what we have determined, seeing the door (whereof you know) is
certainly open. To my self I keep it, answered Elisena, and to you only I
commit the charge, to provide when the hour shall permit: and so they remained
attending for the favorable time.

CHAP. II. How the Princess Elisena and her Damsel Darioletta, went to the
Chamber where King Perion was lodged.
THe time being come, when each one most commonly betake themselves to rest:
Darioletta (who for the contentment of her Mistress, had used extreme
diligence) came and told her. Madame, now is the time to finishe our
enterprise, then let us go if you please. When Elisena heard what she said,
you must think she gave no occasion to be reproved with slothfulnes: but
hastily arose, and without tarying, casting only a mantle about her shoulders,
went forward, and afterward they both entered the Garden. The time was then
calm and gracious, the Moon fair and splendant, giving clear light to the
two Ladies: but surely the one had more cause of content then the other, who
gladlye would have tasted this good hap, or such an other for her self, if she
could any way have compast the mean, and so much she gave in outward
appearance, as Elisena perceived well, that she wanted but the executour to
perform the same: for Darioletta feeling in her spirit, the ease at hand
which she should receive whom she conducted, could not but very pleasantly
jest and dally with her Mistress, breaking many a bitter sigh among, as though
she were to participate in Elisenaes future good fortune, to whom she said.
Alas Madame, how happy is the Prince, by whom this night you shall receive
such pleasure? You say true, answered Elisena, but what? think you not that
Fortune is as favorable to me, as to him? for if I be fair, is not he one of
the most perfect men that has been heard off, either in personage, good grace
or hardines? assure thy self, Darioletta my friend, that I imagine my self so
happy, sa I think it is impossible for me to be more, and therefore let us make
haste I pray thee. These words she uttered with such affection, that she
trembled like the little leaf on the high tree, and as she ended those
speeches, they arrived at the Chamber door where king Perion was lodged: who
(for ye strangenes of this new amorous flame, as also ye hope he had in
Darioletta) had not as yet taken any rest. Nevertheless, being at this
instant wearye with travail, and overcome with sleep: began (even as they
opened the door) to slumber, and dreamed that one entered his Chamber at a
false door, without knowledge who it should be: but he thought that he thrust
his hands into his sides, and rent forth his heart, afterward he saw him throw
it into the River, when the King said. Wherefore commit ye such cruelty? This
is nothing at all, answered he that did this outrage, for with you shall
remain an other heart, which I must take from ye against my will. In great
fear he suddenlye awaked, and making the ^igne of the Cross, commended him
self to God. Now had the Ladies opened the door and entered the Chamber,
wherefore he hearing the noise, suspected some treason, especially by reason of
his fearful dream, and lifting up his head: beheld through the Curtaynes
the door open whereof he knew nothing, and afterward by the light of the
Moon, he saw the shadow of the Ladies that were entered. For this cause, in
fear he started out of bed, took his Sword, and went to the place where he
had seen them: but when Darioletta saw him so affrighted, she spoke to him in
this manner. What shall be done here? Do you my Lord draw arms against us,
that come to you with so slender defense? The king who quickly knew them,
especially Elisena whom he so much desired, threw his Sword to the ground, and
casting a mantle about him which lay near at hand: in great affection he came
to her whom he loved better then him self, kissing, embracing and showing ye
best countenance could be devised, which Darioletta seeing, as one jealous and
envious of such favor, said to Elisena, Now are you somewhat better
contented, for in my judgment, although till this time you defended your self
from many, and he likewise has withstood sundry assaults: notwithstanding at
this present, neither the one or other of you has force or mean, which way
any longer to warrant or defend your selves. As thus she spoke, she looked
where the King had thrown his Sword, which she took up, as a witness of the
oathe and promise he made her, concerning the future marriage of Elisena and him
self: then shutting the door after her, she went into the Garden, and so the
King remained alone with his fair friend, whom (after many amourous
embracinges, infinite kissinges, and execution of delights) he beheld, verily
persuading him self, that all the beautye of the World was in her, reputing
him self much more then happy, that the heavens had allowed him so good an
adventure. See now how it chanced to this Princess, that for so long time, in
the cheifest flower of her youth, being requested by so many mighty Princes and
great Lords, she had withstood all, to remain in the liberty of a Maiden:
now wun in less space then one day, and at such time as her fancy (in her
own thinking) was farthest off from such matters.

Thus Love breaking the strong bands of her holy and chaste life, caused a
sudden alteration of her purpose, making her soon after, of a fair virgen, a
fair woman: serving for example to many other, who assaying to withdraw their
thoughts from worldly things, and despising the great beauty wherewith nature
has endowed them, and tender youth, which makes them ignorant of the
pleasures and delights in their Fathers Courtes' whereof sometime they might
have tasted: yield themselves (for salvation of their souls) into poor and
religious houses, thereto in all obedience offering their free will, vowing
themselves to the subjection of others, hoping to pass their time without any
renown or glory of this world. Certes such Ladies, ought with great
solicitude to stop their ears, close their eyes, and give themselves to
continual devout contemplations and prayers, accepting them as their true and
singular pastimes, as to such they are: and above all, they should exempt them
selves from sight of Parents, neighbors and friends, because that oftentimes
the talk and frequenting of such, procures a change of their holy and chaste
will. And not without cause have I made this little discourse, for it is to the
end that it happen not to them, as it did unto the fair Princess Elisena,
who so long labored in thought to preserve her self: yet notwithstanding in
one only moment, seeing the beauty and good grace of King Perion, changed her
will in such sort, as without the advice and discretion of Darioletta, who
would cover the honor of her Mistress under the mantle of marriage: you may see
she was at the point to fall, into the very lowest part of all dishonor. As it
has happened to many other, of who^ has commonly been heard speech: who not
keeping themselves from what I have said before, have been taken bad enough,
and taken will be, if they admit no better foresight.

Now then are these two lovers in their sollace, Elisena demanding of the
King, if his departure should be shortly or no. Wherefore Madame do you ask?
said King Perion. Because, quoth she, this happy fortune, that with so great
delight has given ease to our affectionate desires; does threaten me already
with extreme anguish and sorrow, which by your absence I shall receive, and
fear it will rather cause my sudden death, then long life. Have no doubt
thereof said the King, for although my body be separated from your presence, my
heart for ever shall remain with ye, which shall give strength to us both, to
you to suffer, and to me by my speedye return. These two contented lovers are
thus devising, when she that had been the cause of their meeting (seeing it was
time to call her mistress, who by this pleasure forget her self in her lovers
arms) entered the Chamber, and speaking somewhat loud said. Madame, I know
that heertofore you thought my company more agreeable then you do at this
present: but it is needful that you arise, and let us go, for the time
calls us. When the King heard her, knowing that perforce it must be so, he
prayed Darioletta to walk into the Garden, and to bring him word in what
corner the wind sat: in mean while he took his amourous conge, with such
reciprocal pleasure, as you that love may easily judge, then sweetly kissing
her, he said. I assure you Madame, that for your sake I will stay longer in
this Cuntry then you imagine, therefore I pray ye be not unmindefull of this
place. So arose. Elisena, and went unto her Chamber with Darioletta, leaving ye
King alone, not a little contended with his new acquaintance: but dreading his
dream, as you have heard, and willing to know what it might signify, he beca^e
desirous to return to his own Country, where as then were good store of
Philosophers, that were well seen in those Sciences: him self likewise in
former times took great pleasure therein, and understood sundry rules thereof.
Nevertheless, he soiourned ten days with King Garinter, after his sporting
with Elisena, who never a night failed to visit her lovely haunte. The ten
days being spent, King Perion (forcing his will and notwithstanding the
tears and entreaties of Elisena which were excessive) resolved to depart, and
therefore took his leave of the Court: but as he would have mounted on
horseback* he perceived that he wanted his good Sword, whereat he became
somewhat offended, because it was one of the best, and fairest in the world,
yet durst he not demand it, fearing least the love of him and Elisena should
thereby be discovered, or King Garinter angry with them that visited his
chamber, In these thoughts, accompanied with infinite regrets, without longer
stay, he took his way toward Gaul: albeit before his departure, Darioletta
came and entreated him, to be mindful of the great grief wherein he left his
Elisena, and of the sollemne promise he had made her. Alas my dear friend,
said the King, I pray ye to assure her on my part, that she shall have no
cause of offense, and that right soon I mean to fee her, in mean while, I
commend her to you as mine own proper heart. Then taking from his finger a King,
semblable to an other that he had, he sent it to the desolate lover, entreating
her earnestly (for his sake) to give it her. This present did no whit lessen
her great grief, but increase it, so that if she had not been comforted by
Darioletta, without doubt she had then finished her days: but so well she
persuaded her to take good hope, that by the allegations she laid before her of
dangerous occurrences, she came somewhat better to her self, and learned
thence forward more smoothely to dissemble her sorrow, till she felt her
self great with Child, by means whereof, she not only lost the taste of her
food, but also the pleasure of rest, and the fair color of her countenance.

Now on the highest step of mishap was her sorrow set, and not without cause,
for in that time was there an inviolable law, yt any woman or maiden, of what
quality or estate soever, offending in such sort, could no way excuse her self
from death. This sharp and cruel custom, endured till the coming of the
virtuous King Arthur, the best Prince that ever reigned in that country: which
he revoked at the time, as he killed Floian in battle before the Gates of
Paris. But many other Kings were between him and Garinter, who maintained
that law, and for this cause the sorrowful Lady could not be absolved by
ignorance thereof: albeit that by the oaths and promises of King Perion on his
Sword, God would remit the offense, yet knew she not how to excuse her fault
to the world, because it was done so secretly as you have heard. See here the
distress wherein King Perion left his Elisena, which gladly she would give him
to understand if possible she could: but it might not be, for she knew the
promptitude of this young King, that took no rest in any place where he came,
nor was his heart satisfied, except in this, with following arms, as also
seeking strange and hazardous adventures, and therefore he was the harder to be
found, Thus dispayring of this succor, she thought there was no remedy for her
life, for which she made not so much moan, as the loss of the sight of her
true friend and only Lord. But at that instant the great and puissa^t maker of
all things, by whose permission this act was appointed to his service,
inspired Darioletta with such counsel, as she only should remedy these
occurrences, in such sort as you shall presently understand.

In the Palace of King Garinter, there was a Chamber vaulte separated from the
rest, near to which was a river, whereto one might easilye descend by a little
Iron door, this Chamber (by the advice of Darioletta) did Elisena request of
her father, as well for her ease, as to continue her accustomed solitarye life,
and would have none other companion the^ Darioletta, who (as you have heard)
knew the occasion of her dollorous greefes. This request she lightly obtained,
the King thinking his daughters intent to be as she feigned, and heeruppon was
the Keye of the Iron door given to Darioletta, to open when it pleased Elisena
to recreate her self on the water. By this mean had she a place proper to her
affairs, and so was in better rest and assurance then before: for well was she
advised, that in this place more commodiously then any other, might she provide
to escape without danger. Wherefore being there one day alone with her
Damsel, they fell in conference, and she required council, what should be
done with the fruit that she travailed withal, What? answered Darioletta:
mary it must suffer to redeem you. Ah poor maidenly mother, said Elisena,
how can I consent to the death of the creature, begotten by the only man of the
world whom most I love? Offend not your self, quoth Darioletta, for if you
should dye, hardly would it be permitted after you to live, In sooth, said
Elisena, although I dye being culpable, it were no reason the little innocent
should suffer. Leave we this talk, answered Darioletta, seeing it were great
follye to hazard the safety of that, which hereafter may be the only cause of
your loss, and your friend likewise: for well you know, that if you be
discovered, you shall dye, and the infant shall not live, and you dying, no
longer can he live yt so dearly loves you So shall you alone cause the death
of al three, where contrariwise, if you escape the peril, the time will come,
when you may have together children enough, which will make you forget the
affection you bare to this first. And as this Damsel was thus inspired, so
would she before hand seek to prevent the inconvenience, in this manner. She
got four little boords, of such largenes as was necessary, to make a Chest
wherein to put the infant, with the clothes and the sword which she kept, then
did she glue the^ together in such sort, as ye water should have no place to
enter. This being done and made fit, she put it under the bed, without
declaring any thing thereof to Elisena, until the time of Childe-birthe
approached, and then Darioletta said. What think ye Madame this little Cofer
is made for? In good faith I know not, quoth she. This shall be to serve us,
said the Damsel, when we have need. Believe me answered Elisena weeping,
but little do I care for any thing that may happen, for I feel my self too
near the loss of my good, and all my joy. Uery soon after, the Princess
felt the anguish of travail, which was to her very strange and troublesome,
oppressing her heart with sundry bitter passions: yet notwithstanding all her
yrk some plundges, poor soul she durst not but be silent, greatly fearing
least she should be heard. Her agonies thus redoubling, the most mighty
(without danger of her person) gave her in deliverance a fair Son, which
the Damsel received, and as she held it, it seemed to her of wonderful
feature, and happy would she have reputed him, had he not been borne to hard
fortune, where-to Darioletta was constrained to send him, for the redemption of
the sorrowful mother, and therefore she deferred it not. But even as before was
concluded, she wrapped the infant in rich clothes, and afterward brought it
with the Cofer to Elisena: which when the good Lady saw, she demanded what
she would do therewith. Madame, quoth she, herein shall your little Son be
put, then will I send it forth on the water, and if it please God, he may
escape and live. Alas my sweet infant, said Elisena how full of danger is thy
destini^? In mean while, Darioletta took incke and parchement, and writ
therein these words, This is Amadis without time, Son to a King: by these
words without time, she meant, that she thought his death to be near at
hand, and the name of Amadis was of great reverence in that Country, because of
a Saint there so called, to whom this little infant was recommended. The
letter being written and sealed, was covered and wrapped in wax, and then
with a little golden Chain fastened about the Childs neck, with the Ring
that King Perion sent Elisena at his departure. Each thing thus appointed,
Darioletta came to the woeful mother, and in her sight put the Child into the
Chest, laying by him the King his Fathers Sword, which he threw on the ground
the first night he came to Elisena, and this the cause wherefore the Damsel
had so well kept it: then after the Mother had kissed her Son as her last
farewell, the Cofer was made fast very arteficiallye, and Darioletta opening the
iron door, commending the babe to the heavenly protection, she set it on the
Water, the course whereof being very speedy, full soon carried the Cofer into
the Sea, which was less then half a mile from the place.

Now began the break of day to appear, and the little infant followed his
fortune, now thrown here, then there, according as the boystrous waves
pleased: but by the will of the highest, who (when he pleases) makes
impossibilities easy, caused it so to fall out, that at the same time as this
was done, a Scottishe Ship sailed on the Sea, wherein was a Gentleman named
Gandales, who from little Britain sailed with his wife into Scotland, she
having been lately delivered of a Son called Gandalin. The morning was both
calm and clear, wherefore Gandales might easilye perceive the Chest floting on
the waves, which he presently sent out for, thinking it to be ^ome matter of
great value: then the Mariners casting forth a Skiffe, made toward the Cofer
and took it up: when they had brought it to Gandales, he got open the cover,
and beholding ye goodly Infant within, as also the rich clothes wherein it was
wrapped, he suspected that it came from no mean place, as he gathered by the
King and the good Sword. So taking it in his arms, he was filled with such
compassion, as he began to curse the mother thereof, who through fear had
forsaken so cruellye such a beautiful creature: and carefully did he cause all
things to be kept which he found in the Cofer, desiring his Wife, that this
infant might be nourished as his own Son. She was heerewith very well
contented, and so the two children were equally fostered together, for never
had young Amadis suckte the teat, but to soon as it was given him by his new
Nursse, he made no refusal thereof, but being very thirsty sucked heartily,
whereat Gandales and his wife were exceeding glad. Now had they the time so
favorable, as shortly they landed in Scotland, near to a City named
Antailia, and soon after they came to their own Country, where little
Gandalin, and the Child found in ye sea were nourished together. And because
Gandales forbad his servants to use any speech of his good hap, requesting the
like of the Mariners, to whom ye ship belonged, and were to sail else where:
the two children were esteemed brethren by such as were ignorant of their
fortune.

CHAP III. How King Perion parting from little Britain, trauayled on his
journey, having his heart filled with grief and melancholy.
KIng Perion being on his way toward Gaul, as already has been recited,
entered into marvelous melancholy, as well for the grief wherein he had left
his Elisena, to whom in his heart he wished well: as also for his doubtful
dream, being in such sort as you have heard. So long rode he in this
heaviness, til he arrived in his country, and soon after he sent for all his
great Lords, as also the Prelates of his Realm, giving them express charge,
to bring with them the most learned Clerks in their Countries, and this he
did, to the end they might expound his Dream. When his vassailes had made
known his will, not only those he sent for, but many other came to the court,
showing the desire they had to see him, and their readiness to obey his
command: for they did so love and reverence him, as oftentimes (being
fearful to loose him) they were for him in very great grief and sorrow,
thinking on the dangerous perilles, that in chivalry (to win honor) he
hazarded him self, so that they would more gladly have had him daily with
them, which could not be, because his heart was discontented, till by arms he
had brought the greatest adventures to end:

The Lords and Princes thus assembled, the King conferred with them on the
estate and affairs of the Realm, but it was with so sad countenance as could
be: for the occasion of his Dream made him so pensive, as his Subjects (being
abashed thereat) were in marvelous doubts, notwithstanding, after he had given
them to understand his will, and appointed all requisite matters in order, he
gave them leave to depart, sending each one home ag^^^^ to his house, only
staying with him three Astrologers ^e^^ted the most skillful in those actions,
and therefore he made choice of them. These men he called into his Chapel,
there causing them sollemnely to swear and promise, that without ^^^e of any
thing, how dangerous soever it were, they should interpret to their
vttermoste, and truly express what he would declare to them, whereupon he
told them his dream, as has been aleady before rehearsed: then one of them
being named Vngan the Piccard, the most expert of them all, thus answered. My
Lord, dreams are vain things, and for such ought to be esteemed:
notwithstanding, seeing it is your pleasure that some account should be made of
yours, give us some time to consider thereon. It likes me well, said the King,
within twelve days look that you make me answer. But to the end they should
not disguise or conceal the truth from him, he caused them to be separated,
so that during the time agreed upon, they might neither see or speak together:
wherefore to their vttermoste they travailed in what they had promised the King,
so that the day being come, when they should render an account of their
labor, he first took Albert of Champaigne aside, and said to him. Thou
know how thou have sworn and promised, to tell me what thou have found by
thy skill. Sir, answered Albert, let then the rest be called into your presence,
for before them will I tell ye. Well have thou advised, said the King: whereupon
they were sent for, afterward Alberte thus began. My opinion is, my Lord, that
the closed Chamber, and him whom you saw enter by the secret door,
signifies this Realm which is close and well guarded: notwithstanding by some
right thereto, some one shall come to take it from you. And like as he thrust
his hands into your sides, renting from thence your heart, and afterward
threw it into the River: even so shall your Towns and Castles both more and
less, be privily stolen from you, and put into his hand from whom you shall
not easilye recover them. And what means the other heart, said the King, which
I dreamed should remain with me, and yet he said, that some after I should
loose it, against the will of him that took the first from me? It seems by
this, answered Albert, that some other shall invade your Country as the first
did, yet constrained more by force of an other that commanded him to do so,
then by any will thereto in him self: thus see ye (my Lord) all that I can tell
ye. Now, said the King to the second named Antalles tell us your advise. Me
thinks Sir, quoth he, that Albert has very well said, and I am of his
opinion, except in this, (for ought I can learn, and as the cause shows me)
yt what he says shall happen, is already effected, and by the person that most
loves ye: notwithstanding I am greatly amazed thereat, seeing there is not as
yet any part of your Realm lost, and if you do loose any thing hereafter, it
must be by such an one as loves ye dearly. When the King heard this, he
nodded his head, for it seemed to him, that he came near the mark: but Vngan
the Piccard, who knew much more then the other, fell into a laughter, which he
was sildome wunt to do, because he was a man very sad and mellancholly, yet
(by chance) the King perceived it, wherefore he said. Master Vngan my friend,
now remains none but you, say boldly what you have gathered. My Lord, quoth
he, peradventure I have seen into things, which is not necessary to be
known to any other then your self, and therefore let these give place a while
if you please. At these words they withdrewe them selves, leaving the King
and Vngan alone, who thus spoke.

If your Majesty saw me ere while to laughe, it was at one word which little
you think on, yet it is true, and will ye know what? It was that which
Antalles said, that what he found by your dream was already happened, and by
the person that bes^e loves ye: Now shall I reu^ale what you keep in
secret, and think that no one knows but your self. You love (my Lord) in
such a place, where you have already accomplished your will, and she whom you
love is surpassing fair, then told he all the gests and fashions of her, as
if she had been there present. But as for the Chamber you found shut, you know
(Sir) full well what if means, and how she whom you love, desirous to deliver
her heart and yours from grief and sadness: came to ye, entering your chamber by
the door that was hid from you. The hands that opened your sides, is the
conjunction of you twain: then the heart taken from ye, shows that she has
by you a Son or a Daughter. Now tell me said the King, what meneth yt
casting thereof into the River? My Lord, quoth he, that nothing concerns you,
therefore never labor for further knowledge thereof. Yet would I, said the
King, feign understand it, and therefore fear not to tell me for any harm that
may happen. Seeing you will needs have it, answered Vngan, I beseech ye Sir
assure me while you live, for any thing that I shall reveal, you will not be
displeased with her who loves you so loyallye. That promise do I faithfully
make thee, said the King. In good sooth Sir, quoth Vngan, that heart that you
saw thrown into the water, is the first infant she shall have by you, who must
of necessity be forsaken. And the other, said the King, that shall remain
with me, what means that? You may, answered Vngan, understand by the one, the
desseigne of the other, which is, that she shall conceive an other child, who
shall be carried away against the will of her, that caused the loss of the
first. Thou have told me strange things, said the King, and would God the
misfortune of my Children were not so true, as what thou have told me
concerning the Lady I love. For things ordained and appointed by the highest,
answered Vngan, none knows how to gainsay or remedy, and therefore men of
wisdom should neither be sad or rejoice at them, because oftentimes the Lord
disposes matters beyond the capacity of men, and far otherwise then they
expect. For this cause my Lord, forgetting all that I have said, and which you
have been so curious to vnderdstand: refer all things to God, desiring him
in these your affairs and all other, to limit the end of them to his honor
and glory, and thus (in mine opinion) you ought to set down your rest. The
King was highly contented with Vngan, and so esteemed of him, that from thence
forward he had him near his person, by means whereof he received many great
favors. Now it happened, that at that instant as the King parted from the
Philosophers, a Damsel presented her self before him, right costlye in
garments and fair of beauty, thus speaking. Understand King Perion, that when
thou recouerest thy loss, the Kingdom of Ireland shall loose her flower. So
giving her Palfray the bridle, and the King not able to stay her, she rode
away: these words made the good Prince more sad and pensive then he was
before.

For this time the Author leaves this purpose, and returns to speak of the
infant, that Gandales caused to be nourished, whom he made be called the
Gentleman of the Sea, Now was he curiously entertained, wherefore in short time
he grew and became so fair, that all which beheld him meruailed thereat, but
one day among other it happened, that Gandales rode to sport him self in the
feeldes, arming him self as became a good Knight: for he had daily accompanied
the King Languines, at such time as he searched after adventures, and albeit
the King discontinued Arms, yet Gandales would oftentimes exercise him self,
and as he rode, he met with a Damsel that thus spoke to him. Ah Gandales, if
many great personages were advertised of what I know certainly, I assure thee
they would cause thee to loose thy head. Wherefore? quoth he. Because, said the
Damsel, thou nourishest their death in thy house. The knight know not the
Woman that thus talked with him, but you must understand, how she was the same
that said to King Perion, that when he recovered his loss, the Kingdom of
Ireland should loose her flower, yet notwithstanding he was far from yt
matter, because he knew not whereof she spoke, and therefore thus replied. For
Gods sake (damsel) I pray ye tell me, on what occasion you use these
speeches. Believe me Gandales, quoth she, I have told thee nothing but truth.
At these words she departed from him, leaving him very sad and pensive: yet
long he did not continue in these thoughts but he saw her return again, in
great haste, thus crying and calling. Ah Gand^l^s, for Gods sake succor me:
then Gandales turning about beheld a Knight follow her with his Sword drawn,
wherefore he gave his horse the spurs to meet him, and placed him self for
defense of the Damsel, then coming to him yt pursued her, he said. Stay thou
bad advised Knight. what moves thee thus trecherously to outrage Ladies? What
now? answered yt other, do thou hope to save her, who by trumpery has made
me loose both body and soul? That meddle not I withal, said Gandales, but I
will defend her to my power, well knewing that Ladies ought not to be
corrected in this manner, albeit they did deserve it, We shall presently see
that answered the Knight: and so gallopped to ye place from whence he came,
which was a little thicket of trees, where stayed a very beautiful Lady, who
when she saw him return, came forth, bringing him a Sheelde and a strong
Lance, which he took and without longer tariaunce, returned to his enemy,
Gandales being a stearne Knight, would not refuse him: whereupon they met
together in such sort as their Lances were broken on their Sheeldes, and they
with their Horses cast to the ground, yet quickly did they recover footing when
began between them a marvelous combat, which woorsse would have been, but
that she which desired succor of Gandales, stepped between them, saying. Stay
Gentlemen fight no more. At these words, the Knight who before pursued her,
went back, then said the Damsel to him. Come now and ask pardon of me.
Most willingly, answered ye Knight, the^ throwing his Sword and Sheeld down,
came and humbled him self on both his knees before her, whereat Gandales was
greatly amazed, afterward the Damosel said to ye knight. Go command the Lady
under the trees, that she get her away immediately, unless tho^ halt take her
head from her shoulders. To this charge the Knight yielded him self obedient,
and to her who^ he loved more then him self (by sudden change from love to
hatred) became and angerly said. Traitorous woman, I know not how I shall
defend my self from killing thee presently. Well perceived the poor Lady,
that her friend was enchaunted, and that contestation would nothing at all
profit her: wherefore incontinent she mounted on her Palfray, and rode away,
making the most grievous sorrow that ever was heard, and there remained she
whom Gandales had defended, speaking to him in this manner. You have (Sir)
done so much for me, as I shall be beholding to you while I live, and now you
may depart at your pleasure: for if the Knight offended me, I have pardoned
him with all my heart. As touching your pardon, answered Gandales, I have nothing
to do therewith: for my self, I will end the Combat, or he shall hold him
self vanquished. It behooves that you acquit him, said the Damsel, seeing
that if you were the best Knight in the world, easily can I make him overcome
ye. Do therein what you can, replied Gandales, but I will not acquit him,
except you first declare to me, wherefore (even now) you said, that I kept the
death of many people in my house. Then will I rather tell ye, quoth she,
because I love you both: he as mine own Soul, and you as my defender, albeit
constraint cannot make me do it: so taking him aside, she said. You shall
swear to me as a loyal Knight, that no other shall know it by you, until
such time as I command it: hereof he made her faithful promise. Know then,
said the Damsel, that he whom you found in the Sea, shall one day be the
flower of chivalry, and shall cause the very strongest to stoop, he shall
enterprise, and with honor finishe what other shall fail off: and such deeds
of arms shall he do, as no one thinks can be begun or ended by the strength
of one man. The proud shall he make humble and gracious, being cruel to the
pitiless, as also benign and amiable to the debonaire: this Knight most
loyally will maintain love, and shall affect in place answerable to his
magnanimity. Moreover, I assure thee Gandales, that he is the Son of a King,
and (without doubt) all this will happen which I have told thee: but if thou
keep it not secret, it may return thee more harm then good, Madame, answered
Gandales, I pray ye tell me where I may meet with you hereafter, to confer
with you on the affairs of this infant. That must you not know by me, said
the Damsel, or any other. Yet tell me your name, quoth Gandales, if so it be
your pleasure. By the faith you bear to the thing you most love in the world,
replied she, you conjure me so, as you shall know it: albeit the thing that
most I love, is he that wishes me least good, and would you know what he is:
it is the Knight against whom ere while you combated: notwithstanding, I will
not leave to entreat him at my pleasure, without he being able to remedy him
self. My name is Vrganda the unknown: and to the end you may remember me an
other time, behold me well at this present. At that instant, she who showed
her self to Gandales fair, young and fresh, as one of eighteen years, became
so old and over spent, as he meruailed how she could sit on her horse, if
then he was stricken into admiration, you may judge. But when she had been a
pretty while in that state, she took out of a little bottell (which she
carried) a certain unguent, wherewith she rubbed her face, and right soon
recovered her former countenance, saying to Gandales. What judge ye now Sir?
think ye to find me hereafter against my will, using all the diligence you
can devise? never therefore put your self to such pain: for when all living
creatures go about it, if I list, they shall loose their labor. In good faith
Madame, answered Gandales, I now make no doubt thereof, yet I beseech ye to be
mindful of the Gentleman, who is forsaken of all but my self. Do not you
trouble your self therewith, said Vrganda, this forsaking will be a
recovering of much more. My love to him is greater then you can imagine, being
she that shortly intendes to receive by him two aids, which no other can give
me. In recompense whereof, I will give him two likewise, wherewith he shall
think him self highly satisfied. Let this suffice ye for this time, because of
necessity I must be gone: aduising ye, that you shall see me again sooner then
you think for. At these words the Damsel departed, and Gandales. who had
not all this while regarded the Knight against whom he fought, seeing him now
bare headed, reputed him one of the goodlyest Gentlemen that ever he had seen:
who after he had taken up his Sheeld, and laced on his helmet, followed the
Damsel, wherefore for this time we will let them go, continuing what happened
to Gandales.

Vrganda being departed, he returned toward his Castle, meeting by the way
with the Lady, whom Vrganda had caused to be rhased from her friend, and this
sorrowful^ woman was hard by a Fountain, where she wept and lamented very
bitterly: when she espied him that came toward her, she easily knew him,
wherefore she thus spoke. Is it possible, Sir Knight, that the wicked creature
whom you succored, has done so much as to let you live? Wicked she is not,
answered Gandales, but wise and virtuous: and if you be otherwise, I will make
ye deny these foolish words. Ah God, said the Lady: how can the villain
deceive every one? How has she deceived you? replied Gandales. Alas, quoth the
Lady, she has taken from me ye fair Knight that should be mine: and so may I
well say, seeing he would be more content to be with me, then with her. This
is mere folly, answered Gandales, for in mine opinion, both you and she do
love without reason. How ever it be, said the Lady, if I can I will be
avenged. You travail in vain, quoth he, thinking to injury her that knows
it, not only before you execute it but when you imagine it. In sooth answered
the Lady, this afternoon ye may be gone when you please: and nevertheless it
often happens, that those which think they know most by presumption, fall
into the greatest dangers. Gandales seeing her so impacient, commending her to
God, followed his way, thinking more of the young Gentleman's affairs, then
what the Lady had spoken to him. Being come to his Castle, and seeing the
little boy come running toward him, he took him up in his arms, and lovingly
embracing him, remembered what Vrganda had said to him, which made the tears
stand in his eyes with joy, saying within him self. Fair Child, I pray God I
may live so long, as to see thee such a one as I hope for. At this time the
young Prince was about three years old, who seeing his Lord weep, (as one
moved with compassion) ^^ wiped his eyes, which made Gandales imagine great
h^manity in him: and yt as the child grew in age and strength, ^^wered he in
will, the better to help him if he had (...). Wherefore thence forward, he was
very careful of him, ^^uising all means for his best education and compaying
continually with his play-fellowe Gandalin, he took very great delight in
Shooting,

He being come to the age of six years, King La^guines and his Queen riding
through the Country, came to Gandales Castle, where they were royallye
feasted: but before they there arrived, Gandales being advertised of their
coming, caused the young Prince and his companions to be hid in a back
Chamber, fearing that in respect of his beautye and good grace, the King would
be desirous to take him away with him, or else that the Children would be
troublesome to the house. But it fortuned, that the Queen being lodged in one
of the highest rooms in the Castle, as she looked forth at a window, which
was on that side where the Children were, she espied the young Prince and his
play-fellowes drawing their bows, and marking him very well, she liked him
above all the other, taking great pleasure to behold his countenance, thinking
he was Son to the Lord of the house: yet being doubtful, and not seeing
any of whom she might ask the question, she thus called to her Ladies. Come
and behold the fairest young creature that ever was seen. At these words
they all came running, and soon after, the child being dry, left his bow by
his companyons, going to drink at a conduit pipe which was hard by: in mean
while, one of them that was bigger then ye Prince, took up his bow to draw
it, but Gandalin would not suffer him, whereupon a great strife fell between
them, and Gandalin being the weakest, cried out: Gentleman of the Sea, come
help me. When the Prince heard him, he left his draught, and ran to him that
misused his brother, taking his vow from him, giving him therewith a great strok
over ye head, saying: In all evil hour (varlet) do thou outrage my brother
The other not content therewith, came to ye Prince, and they fought together:
yet he that began the noise was glad to run thence, and by the way met their
Governor, who said: Whether runnest thou? Master, quoth he, the Gentleman of
the Sea will beat me: then the Governor coming to the Prince, rigourously
threatened him, saying. What? are you already so bold to beat your companions?
you shall be talked withal by and by for it. When ye Prince heard his
threatening, he fell down on his knees, saying. If you will appoint that I
shall be beaten, more gladlye will I take it, then suffer my brother to be
wronged in my presence. With these words the tears trickled down his
cheeks, which moved pity in the Governor, wherefore he thus answered. If
ever you do so again, I will make ye weep in an other sort. The Queen who
had heard and seen all the debate, was greatly abashed wherefore they called
the little boy, the Gentleman of the Sea.

CHAP. IIII. How King Languines carried away with him the Gentleman of the Sea,
and Gandalin the Son of Gandales.
WHile the Queen thus beheld the Gentleman of the Sea, the King entered her
Chamber accompanied with Gandales, of whom she presently demanded if that
fair young Son were his. Ye Madame answered Gandales. And (quoth she) why
suffer you him to be called the Gentleman of the Sea? Because Madame, said he,
that at return of my last voyage into little Brittayne, he was borne upon the
sea Truly quoth she, he resembles you but little: and this was her opinion,
because the Prince was excellent fair, and Gandales somewhat hard favored,
yet a most gentle companion. It chanced during these speeches, that ye King
cast his eye on the little Prince, to whom he seemed no less beautiful then
he did to the Queen, wherefore he commanded Gandales to fetch him: for when I
go hence (quoth he) I will take him with me, and have him brought up with mine
own Son. In sooth my Lord, answered Gandales, he is yet too young to leave
his Mother: but having brought him, presented him to the King, who said, Fair
Child, will ye go with me to the Court? My Lord, answered the Child, I will
go whether you please, if my brother shall go with me. And I, quoth Gandalin,
will not tarry here without him. I perceive my Lord, said Gandales, that if
you take the one, you must needs have the other, for they will not be
separated. I am the better pleased, answered the King: then calling Agraies to
him said. My Son, I will that you love these two Gentlemen, as I do their
Father. When Gandales saw, that the King would have them away in good earnest,
with the tears in his eyes, he thus spoke in his heart. My Child, that so
soon beginnest to prove Fortune, now see I thee in the service of them, who
one day may (happily) serve thee, if it please God to guide and protect thee,
as I shall humbly pray for, and suffer that the words of Vrganda the unknown
spoken to me, may prove true: making me so happy, as to live to see the time,
of those great meruailes promised thee in Arms. The King who noted Gandales,
seeing that his eyes were filled with tears, came to comfort him, saying.
Believe me, I never thought you had been such a fool, as to weep for a
Child. Ah my Lord, answered Gandales, it may be upon greater occasion then you
think for, and if it please ye to know the truth, I will presently tell ye
here before your Queen. So he told the whole discourse, how he found the
Gentleman of the Sea and in what equipage: and he had proceeded with that which
Vrganda foretold him, but that he remembered the oathe he took. Now my Lord
said Gandales, deal for him as you shall please, for (so God help me)
according to his beginning, I think him to be issued of great lineage, When the
King heard this he esteemed much the better of him, that he had so carefully
nourished the child he found, and thus answered. It is great reason (seeing
God has done so much for him, as to preserve him from so great a danger) that
now we be diligent in his education, and endowe him with habilities when time
shall serve. In good faith my Lord, said the Queen, so please you, he shall
be mine during his young years and when he comes to man's estate, I will
deliver him to serve you. Well Madame, quoth the King, I give him you. Now
early on ye next morning the King would set forward, wherefore the Queen, not
having forgot the gift of her Lord, took with her Gandalin and the young
Gentleman of the Sea, whom she commanded to be so carefully attended as her
own Son, for she took such pleasure in beholding him, that daily she would
have him near her own person, because he had such a cheerful spirit, and so
well governed withal, as he was well liked of every one, so that whatsoever he
did, passed with general allowance, and no other pastime had he, but in
shooting and cherishing dogs for the chase.

Now does the Author leave this matter, returning to that which happened to
King Perion, and his new freende Elisena. King Perion (as you have already
heard) being in Gaul, where he understood by his Philosophers the exposition
of his Dream as also what the Damsel had told him: That when he recovered
his lost, the Kingdom of Ireland should lose her flower: he became more
pensive then before, yet could he understand, nothing thereof. As he thus sadlye
spent his days, it chanced that an other Damsel entered his Palace, who
brought him a letter from Elisena whereby she gave him to know, that King
Garinter her father was dead, and she remained alone, and for this cause he
should pity her, in that the King of Scotts would take her Kingdom from
her. For the death of King Garanter was Perion somewhat sorrowful, but yet he
comforted himself, by thinking he should go to see his friend, toward whom
he had not diminished one iotte of his affection, wherefore he quickly
dispatched the Damsel, saying to her. Return and say to your mistress, that
without staying one whole day, I shall be in short time with her. The Damsel
well pleased with this answer, returned, and after the King had set his
affairs in order, he parted in good equipage to see his Elisena, and iournied
so speedily, as he arrived in little Brittayne: where he heard news, that King
Languines had already gotten all the chief of the Country, except those
Cities which Garinter gave to Elisena, who now abode (as he understood) at a
place named Arcate, whether he addressed him self. If he were there well
received, I leave to your judgments, and she likewise of him whom she loved
so much. After the welcomming and feasting of one an other, the King told her
that he would now marry her, and for that cause she advertised her kindred and
Subjects: which she did with all diligence could be devised, as also with so
great contentation as her heart might desire, for heerin only consisted the
sum of her affections. Which being heard by the King of Scotts, and how to
accomplish this, King Perion was already arrived with his Sister: he sent
immediatlye for all the noble men of his Realm, to bear him company in doing
honor and welcome to the King his brother. At his coming, he was graciously
received by King Perion, and after by embrac^uis they hadsaluted each other,
and the nuptialles likewise thorowlye ended: the Kings determined to return
home into their own Countries.

King Perion trauayling toward Gaul with his Queen Elisena, and somewhat
weary with tediousness of the way, he would refresh him self along by a River
side: and while the tents were erecting, he rode softlye alone by the water
bancke, imagining how he might know the truth, whether Elisena had a Child,
according as his Philosopher told him in expounding his Dream. But so long
continued he in this thought, that riding on without any regard, he came to
an Hermitage which was near at hand: wherefore finding him self at a place of
devotion, he alighted, tying his Horse to a tree, that he might go in to say
his prayers. And entering the Church, he found there a very ancient religious
man, who coming to meet him, said, Knight, is it true, that King Perion is
married to our Kings daughter? Yea verily, answered the King, Praised be God,
said the good Hermit, for I know certainlye, that she loves him with all
her heart. How can you tell that? replied the King. Even from her own mouth,
said the good old man. The King then hoping he should hear of him the thing
which he most desired to know, said. I pray ye Father tell me, what you have
understood of her and me, for I am King Perion. Truly Sir, answered the wise
man, herein should I greatly fault, and justly might she repute me an
heretic, if I should manifest what she has told me under confession: suffice
your self with that I have declared, namely, the true and sincere love she
bears you. But seeing I have met ye in a place so convenient, I will that ye
know, what a Damsel (in mine opinion very wise,) said to me at the time you
came first into this Country: yet spoke she to me so darkelye, as I never
knew well how to comprehend her words, for she said. That from little
Britain should come two great Dragons, that should hold their government in
Gaul, and their hearts in great Britain, and from thence they should go to
devour the beasts of other Countries: but against some they should be brave
and cruel, and against other some humble and gracious, as though they had
neither nails or heart. At these words I became very pensive, nor could I
ever since learn the signification hereof. Nor did the King at this instant
understand them, but was in no less marvel then the Hermit:
notwithstanding, no long time after, he found this prophecy to be true. Now
the King having commended the holy man to God, returned to his Tents, where
he saluted his Queen, yet would he not tell her (as then) any thing of that
wherewith his mind was troubled: but dissembled the same till they were in
bed, and after their accustomed embracinges, the King by an apt mean
recounted to her, what his Astrologers had said on his dream, earnestlye
desiring her to tell him, whether she had any Child by him or no. When the
good Lady heard this, she was surprised with shame in such sort, as willingly
she could have wished her self dead: and therefore altogether denied the truth,
so that at this time the King might not know what he desired. On the morrow
they departed thence and arrived in Gaul, where this noble Queen was
generally received with great joy. And because that (as it has been
heretofore rehearsed) the King bare her singular affection, he did for her
sake stay more in his Realm, then he was wunt to do: so that not long after,
the Queen brought him a Son, who was named Galaor, and next a daughter called
Melicia,.

But the little Galaor being two years and a half old, it chanced that one
day the King his Father, soiourning not far from the Sea side, in one of his
Cities named Orangill, standing at a window toward the Garden, where was the^
the Queen with her Son and Ladies sporting: there entered at a posterne door
such a horrible Giant, as no man that ever saw him but was exceedingly
affraide, bearing on his neck a huge and mighty Mace. When the company of
women espied him, some fled among the trees, and other (not to see him) fell on
the ground: but the Giant made no reckoning of them, only he came to little
Galaor, whom he took in his arms, and in a laughter said. By my faith, the
Damsel said true. So without doing any thing else, taking away the Child,
returned the same way he came: and entering a Brigandine that there stayed for
him, departed under sail. In mean while the sorrowful Queen, who saw her
son carried away. (forgetting through motherly love the fear of the Giant)
followed him very near, hoping to recover her little Galaor: but when she saw
him enter the Brigandine, God knows in what anguishe she was, for her Son in
crying said: Ah help me Mother. Alas she could not, and more strange then
death she took it, to see him carried away, whom she loved as her own life: and
in this extreme dollour, she remembered her other Son thrown into the Sea,
wherefore the woeful mother fell down in a swoune. King Perion her husband, who
saw all this in the place where he stood, from whence he could not quickly
come to aid the Queen or her Son: at last came to y^ Queen, finding her in
that case, and did so much as he recovered her again. Then began she to make
the most grievous move in the World, regreting this new loss, by whom she
before hoped to understand of her first: and dispayring ever to hear any
news of comfort, moved great compassion in all that beheld her. All this
while the King labored to persuade her, whereby at last she reobtained the
reason yt before was absent, whereupon the King said. Madame, we must thank
God for all, and cheefely in this case, for now I euidentlye see has happened,
the effect of my Dream whereof sometime I told ye: thus is little Galaor the
last heart, that must be taken from us against our will. Henceforth therefore
fear not to declare, what is become of the first, for considering the estate
you then were in, you ought not in reason to be blamed At these words the
mournful Mother, forgetting none of the fault committed, told him the
misfortune of her first borne Son, entreating him to pardon her, seeing she
did it through fear of death, according as was the law of the Country. In
good faith Madame, answered the King, well may ye assure your self, that while
I live I will not be offended with ye, on your behalf therefore I pray ye, to
take their desteny so discreetly as you may: for I trust in God, that seeing it
has pleased him at our beginning, to affoorde us so little joy and comfort by
our children, in time to come he will recompense us with better success, and
it may be yet one day, that we shall hear good tidinges of them.

Now leaving this, ye must note, that the Giant who bare away the young Prince,
was of the Countreye of Leon^^. Lord of an Isle named Gandalan, wherein he had
two strong places. He was not a bloodye man as many other were, but of gentle
and peaceable conversation, except when he was offended for in his fury he
would do great cruelties. At one instant was the little barque so carried by
the Wind, as he arrived in his Country, which he had caused ^o be peopled
with Christians, and there he kept a Hermit of most holy life, to whom he
went saying. Father take this Child, and nourish him for me, teaching him all
that is convenient in a Knight, for I assure ye, he is the Son of a King and
a Queen. Ah, said the Hermit, why have ye done such a cruel deed? I will
tell ye, answered the Giant. Being minded to go combat with the Giant Albadan,
who most vnhappilye killed my Father, as you know, and at this present
forcibly holds from me the Rock of Galteres, which by right appertains to
me: being thus embarked to execute mine intent, there came a Damsel to me,
who said. Thou abusest thy self, for what thou go about, must be done by
the Son to King Perion of Gaul, who is much more strong and hardy then thou
art. I demanded by her faith, whether she told me true or no. That shall thou
see, quoth she: At what time the two branches of one tree shall be joined, which
at this instant are severed: then did she tell me, where I should find him of
whom she spoke, and this is he I give you in guard, even as you love me. By
these means remained little Galaor in the holy man's charge, and there he staide
so long, till he was of years to receive the order of Knighthood, as hereafter
shall be recited to you.

At this time reigned in great Britain, a King named Falangris, who dying
without Children, left one of his brethren his heir: no less prudent in all
affairs, the^ prompt at arms and Knightly chivalry, being called Lisuart,
who married (not long before) with Brisana, daughter to the King of Denmark,
the fairest Lady that then was to be found in all the North parts. And albeit
she had been requested in marriage by great Princes of the country,
notwithstanding for fear of some, the father durst not consent to the other:
for which he would provide by choosing one him self, and so married her to the
young Prince Lisuart, who for love served him, nor was he ignorant of the
virtues harboring in his gentle heart. Now after the death of Falangris, the
Princes of great Brittayne knowing the right of Lisuart, sent for him to
succeed in the Realm: for he being in a strange Country, where by his
hautye deeds and chivalry, he was married in so good a place, therefore they
dispatched their Ambassadors to him, entreating him to accept the Realm and
Subjects of great Britain, and to come to inuest him self therein.

CHAP V. How King Lisuart sailing by Sea, landed in Scotland, where he was
greatly honored, and well entertained.
PRince Lisuart understanding his subjects desire for his short return,
provided his equipage by Sea, being aided and assisted by the King of Denmark
his Father in Law, and afterward set sail toward great Britain. And because
he coasted along Scotland, he took landing there, whereof Languines being
advertised, came and received him very royally. Now was this new King of great
Britain accompanied with the Queen his wife, and a fair Princess their
daughter, aged (as is thought) about ten years, named Oriana, one of the
fairest creatures that ever was seen: and therefore (during the time of her
abode in Denmark,) she was commonly called The only, because her paragon was
not to be found in beauty. This young Lady Oriana, being not used to the
travail on the Sea, found her self somewhat weary, and her Father fearing a
woorsse mishap, entreated the King of Scotland she might stay with him till he
sent for her. Right gladly did King Languines and his Queen accept this charge,
wherefore King Lisuart, (without longer stay in Scotland) went to Sea, where
weighing Anckers and hoising sails, in short time landed in his own Country,
where being arrived, before he could abide in quiet, asin such occasions it
often falls out: certain Rebels were found, whom in time he ouer-maistred,
which was the cause he could not so speedilye send for his daughter that he
left in Scotland.

In this place the Author leaves the new King peaceably ruling in great
Britain, and returns to the Gentleman of the Sea, who by this time has
attained the age of twelve years: albeit in stature he seemed past fifteen,
and and for his good grace (both of the Queen and the other Ladies) was loved
and esteemed more then any other. Now according as has been already declared,
the young Princess Oriana Daughter to King Lisuart, was left with the Queen
of Scotts to refreshe her self, till the King her Father should send for her,
and to her did the Queen use all the gracious courtesies could be devised,
saying to her withal: Fair Madame, henceforth (so please you) shall the
Gentleman of the Sea serve you, and be yours. Which the Princess Oriana
willingly accepted, wherefore the young Prince made such an impression of this
kindness in his spirit, as during life he meant to serve nor love any other,
and therefore foreeuer bequeathed to her his heart: but so well it came to pass,
that this love was mutual and equal between them both. Notwithstanding, the
Prince for a while having no knowledge thereof, thought him self unworthy so
great good: reputing it a very bold enterprise to think thereon, which was the
cause he durst not speak, but show his good will in outward semblaunce. The
young Princess who was of the same mind, and also in like pain, forbear to
talk more with him then an other, thereby to avoid all suspicion: but the eyes
of the two lovers doing their deuoire and office, entercoursed the thing which
most they esteemed, and thus covertly they lived, without acquainting each
other with this amorous affection. Soon after, this young unknown prince,
seeing that to attain the good grace of the Lady he loved, it was necessary he
should take Arms, and receive the order of knighthood, he said to himself.
If once I were a knight, I would do such exploytes as should deserve the
favor of my Lady, or dye in the attempt. And in this desire, one day finding
King Languines at leisure for his request, and coming to him in the garden
where he walked, he fell on his knee, using these speeches. My Lord, might it
stand with your pleasure, I gladly would receive my knighthood. When the King
heard him, seeing his young years, he was greatly abashed, and thus answered.
How now Gentleman of the Sea? Do you think your self already strong enoughe
for such a weighty charge? in sooth it is an easy thing to receive honor: but
to maintain it as behooves (it may be) is more hard then you esteem, so that
oftentimes a a right good heart is troubled therewith. For if through fear or
cowardice he forsake what he ought to do, more better is death to him, then a
shameful life: therefore by mine advise, I would have you yet a while to
forbear. The prince not contented with this answer, replied. I will not
forgo honor, my Lord, through any such fear as it pleases you to allege,
for if I had not the desire to do all that appertains to chivalry, I would
not have been so bold to make this request: but seeing by your gracious
favor I have been hitherto nourished, most humbly I beseech ye to grant me
this peticion, that I may receive no occasion of loosing your service, to seek
else where for obtaining my suit. The king highly esteeming the courage of ye
youth, and doubting least he would depart indeed, answered. Assure your self
Gentleman, that I will do it when I see it necessary for ye, in mean while
provide your Arms and what else belongs: Yet tell me (fair Sir) to whom (if I
refused) would you go for your order. To King Perion, said ye Prince, who is
reputed a good and hardy Knight, for he has married the Sister to your Queen,
who makes me believe that he will not deny me: when I shall let him understand,
how she has nourished me, and that I am her servant. It is true, quoth the
King, but for this present have a little patience, and when time serves, you
shall be honorably Knighted: in mean while he gave charge, that all his
needful accoustrements for the cause should be provided.

Now did the King advertise Gandales heerof, who was so contented therewith, as
he soon dispatched a Damsel toward the young Prince: by whom he sent the
Sword, the King, and the letter covered with ware, which he found in the Chest
he took out of the Sea. Such speed made the Damsel, as she came to the
prince, at what time he was sporting with Oriana and the other Ladies, while
the Queen slepte. At that instant was he in such a sollemne thought of Oriana,
as not daring to lift up his eyes to behold her, said within him self. Ah
God, why have thou endued this Lady with such excellent beauty, that unhappy I
should suffer so extreme passions by loving her? Ah mine eyes, too high did ye
look when ye beheld her, of whom you are not worthy: but if the woorst
happen, death shall satisfy this ^imeritie, whereto my heart (for her) is
humbled. In this thought he was like to fall down, so had he forgotten and
ouergone him self: when a Page came to him, saying. Gentleman, there is a
strange Damsel attending without, who has brought ye certain presents, and
would speak with ye. When she (who loved him) heard this message, her heart
began to tremble in such sort, as being not able to endure this new ^ame, she
called to the Prince, saying. I pray ye stay here, and let the Damsel come
in, that we may have the sight of what she has brought: which he did, and the
Damsel being entered, thus spoke to him. My Lord, your good friend Gandales
saluteth you, as the man whom he only loves, and has sent ye this King, this
ware, and this Sword, which he desires ye (for his sake) to keep while you
live. The Prince having received the presents, said the King and wa^ aside, to
behold the Sword, which being without a sheath, was wrapped in a fine linen
cloth, whereat he greatly meruayled: and while he was musing thereon, Oriana
took the ware, thinking it to be some other thing, and said. Believe me
Gentleman, for my part I would have this ware. You may have it if you please
Madame, quoth he, but me thinks this fair King were better for ye. I will have
nothing but this ware, said Oriana, and so took it. During these discourses,
the King came, who said to the Prince: What think ye of that Sword? My Lord,
quoth he, I find it a very fair one, but I marvel wherefore it has no
scabbard. It is said the King, very near fifteen years since it had one: and
having so said, he laid it aside, proceeding thus. You would be a Knight, and
know not whether you ought be one or no: therefore it is necessary, yt you
understand what you are, and I to tell you so much as I know. Heerupon he
declared, how he was found in a Chest on the Sea, with the Sword and the King
as you have already heard. I believe my Lord, quoth the Prince, that for your
pleasure you use this invention, because the Damsel when she entered said:
that my good friend Gandales sent me these presents, but I think she failed in
her words, and would have said my Father Gandales. Notwithstanding (my Lord)
if it be so as you have rehearsed, I am not displeased thereat: except in not
knowing of whence I am, nor they me, yet do I think my self a Gentleman, for
my heart persuades me of no less. Now therefore it is more necessary that I be
Knighted, then before, to the end I may labor to become such a one as may
acquire honor and reputation, seeing I have no parents by whom I may be named,
not knowing what I am. When the King heard him speak so vertuouslye, he
esteemed much better of him then before, thinking him self, that he could not
but be a man of calling and hardy.

As thus they were devising, a Gentleman came to the King, and said. My Lord,
King Perion your brother is come to the Court. The King very glad thereof,
departed to receive his Brother, and embracing him, thus spoke. I see my good
Brother, you meant to take me unprovided, for little did I think of your so
sudden arrival in this Country. Noble brother, answered King Perion, I come to
request ye aid of my friends, because I have more need of them at this time
then ever I had: for Abies King of Ireland threatens me with strong war, and
is with great puissaunce entered my Kingdom, so that he and Dagauel his Cousin,
have laid very severe siedge to me. And which is woorst of all, Fortune has
so hardly dealt with me, that certain whom I trusted have forsaken me: and the
greatest part of my other friends are overthrown in the skirmishes we have had
together, so that now I come to request your succor in this extreme need.
Truly Brother, answered Languines, you may be sure thereof, and your
mis^fortune greeueth me not a little: but I will provide therefore so well as I
can. Agraies who was newly Knighted, being hot and ready to Arms, having
heard the request of his Uncle, and the grant the King his Father had made
him of assistaunce: came and ^^ll on his knee before him, saying. I beseech ye
Father let me obtain one boon at your hands The King who loved him as him
self, answered. Demand what thou will, for it shall not be denied thee. I
desire your sufferance, quoth Agraies, that I may go to Gaul to aid the
Queen mine Aunte. In good faith, said the King, well content am I, and in good
equipage shall thou go and stronglye accompanied. When the Gentleman of the
Sea heard this determination, he was more earnest to compass his enterprise
then before: and seeing King. Perion was present, he could not glut his eyes
with beholding him, only for the good report he had heard of him: for he
thought not the^ of any affinity or parentage, but would rather be Knighted by
his hand then any other, in respect of his high and hautie deeds of Arms. And
to attain his purpose, he thought best to entreat the Queen, hoping that if
she would do so much for him, as to move the King her brother therein, she
should not be gainsaid: and for he saw her so sad that he durst not speak to
her, he boldly went to Oriana, and setting his knee to the ground, said. I
pray ye Madame tell me what causes the Queen to be so pensive? Oriana
beholding the man before her whom she loved in her very soul, albeit neither
he or any other knew it: was surprised with such vehemencye of love, as she
could hardly tell how to dissemble it, yet thus she answered. Gentleman of the
Sea and my friend, I will take pain to know, then shall I tell ye with all my
heart, seeing it is the first request that ever ye made to me. Madame, quoth
he, I know in my self so small deserving toward you, that I account myself
unworthy to request any thing of you: but I should think I were happy if I had
the mean to obey you, or that it would please you to command me. What? said
she, have you so base a mind, and such small estimation of your self? Madame,
answered he, in what sort soever it be, I have no forces at all, but such as
have left me in great desire to serve you: for my heart is altogether yours, and
can receive nothing but from you. Mine? quoth Oriana, and since when? Since the
time it pleased you Madame, replied the Prince, And when was it, quoth she,
that it pleased me? At that time, answered the Prince, when the King your
Father left you in this Country, if you remember, and when ye Queen presented
me to you, saying: I give you this Gentleman to serve you, and at that time you
accepted me as yours, when you answered, that you were well contented. Then was
I given to you, and yours only I repute my self, so that I have no authority
over my self. Certes, said Oriana, you took her words to better end, then
at that time she meante them: which I take in good part, and am content it
shall be so. No sooner had she thus said, but the Prince was over come with such
joy, as he had no power to answer. Oriana perceiving it, made no show thereof,
but said she would go to the Queen, to do what he had desired: and returned
soon after, telling him, that her greef was for the Queen of Gaul her sister,
because the King of Ireland so oppressed her country. So please you Madame,
answered the Prince, if I were Knighted, I gladly would go succor her, with
your leave. And without my leave, quoth Oriana, will ye not go? Not for death,
said he, for without your graious favor, my conquered heart can have no force
or virtue in any peril. At these words Oriana smiled, saying. Seeing the^ you
are mine, I grant you to be my Knight, and you shall aid ye Queens Sister.
Most humbly did the Prince give her thanks, telling her, how the King thought
it not good to give him the order of Knighthood, but had denied him: yet, quoth
he, is King Perion here as you know, at whose hands (so pleased you to
entreat it) I would more willinglye receive it, then of any other. Nor will I
let for that, said she, and the better to compass your desire: I will cause
the Princess Mabila to bear me company, for whose sake he will the sooner
grant it. So presently she went to her, and told what she and the Gentleman
of the Sea had concluded, to attain his Knighthood, and how feign he would
have it at King Perions hand, for which cause she entreated her assistaunce in
ye suit. Mabila who loved the Prince vary well, thus answered. I assure ye
(Sister) there shall be no want in me, for so well does the Gentleman deserve,
as would make one do much more then this for him, wherefore let him be ready
this night in the Queens Chapel: then when time shall serve, we will go with
our women to accompany him, and I will send for the King mine Uncle (which
shall be somewhat before the break of day) that he may come see me, and he being
come to us, you and I will move him in the matter, which I hope he will grant
us considering he is a very gracious and affable Prince. This is very well
appointed, answered Oriana: wherefore they sent for the Prince and told him all
the platform they had laid: who humbly thanking them, would provide all
things ready for him self, and therefore departed. Then went he to find
Gandalin, making him acquainted with the whole, saying. I pray ye brother,
convey mine Armor so closely as you can into the Queens Chapel, because I
hope this might to receive mine order: and for I must right soon depart
hence, I would know if you have any will to bear me company. Believe me,
quoth Gandalin, never with my will shall I depart from ye. Of these words was
the Prince so glad, that the tears flood in his eyes with joy. Well* said he,
provide all things ready as I told ye: wherein Gandalin fa^led not, for ere
supper he took such order, as all was done unseen of any, and the Prince got
him secretlye into the Chapel, where he armed him self except the head and
hands. So staying there for the Ladies and King Perion, he fell on his knees
before the Altar, desiring God to be his aid: not only in conquering such as
he should deal withal in Arms, but also in obtaining her, who caused him to
endure so many mortal passions. The night being come, and the Queen
withdrawn; the Princesses Oriana and Mabila with their women, came to the
Chapel where the Gentleman of the Sea attended, and Mabila having sent for
King Perion, he was no sooner entered but she thus began. My Lord, seeing you
have taken so much pains for me as to come hither, I pray you grant Madame
Oriana, daughter to King Lisuart, a small request she will make to ye. I would
be loathe, said the King, to deny her, as well for her Fathers honor as her own
sake. Oriana arose to thank him, whom when he beheld so fair, he thought all
the world could not match her in beauty: thus speaking to her. Madame, does
it please ye to command me any thing? Not command my Lord, quoth she, but
entreat ye to give my Gentleman the order of Knighthood: this said she,
pointing to him as he kneeled before the Altar. When the King saw him, he
wondered at his goodly stature and said to him. My friend, would you receive
the order of Knighthood? Yea my good Lord, answered the Prince, may it please
you to give it me. In Gods name be it done, said the King, who give you grace
so well to proceed therein, as he has bestowed seemly perfection on you. Then
putting on his right spur, and dubbing him with the Sword, thus spoke. Now
have ye the order appertaining to a Knight, but I would opportunity had served
me, to have given it you with greater honor? not withstanding, according to
mine opinion of you, I hope you will prove such, as your renown shall supply
what wants here in perfourmaunce. Afterward King Perion took leave of the
Ladies, who highly thanked him, and then set on his way toward Gaul,
commending the new Knight to the heavenly protection: this was the first act,
that might bear testimony of these Lovers sweet desires. If it seem to the
reader, that their purpose was not according to affection, but simple in
respect of their vehement passions: I answer, that they ought to excuse their
age, likewise it often comes to pass, that they which think them selves most
expert in those pleasing and amourous amoris, have been by this God so
strongly bound, and lively attainted: as not only he* d^priued them of speech,
but of judgment also, and it is necessary for such persons to use greater
words, then these two who as yet had not learned them. But this new Knight
being thoroughly furnished, and ready to his journey by his Ladies consent:
would in thanking ye company, take a more secret conge of Oriana. And she who
for this sudden parting, felt new passions in her heart, yet nevertheless
dissembling the^: took him by the hand, and walking aside, thus spoke*
Gentleman of the Sea, you will be gone then, but first I pray ye tell me,
whether you be the Son of Gandales or no: for according to the good opinion I
have of you, I think ye to be issued of better place. Then rehearsed he all
that King Languines had told him, wherein she conceived very great pleasure:
which done, they committed each other to God. So departed the Prince from this
company, and right soon found Gandalin, who attended for him at the Kings
lodging door, with the rest of his Arms and his Horse. whereon he mounted,
and left the City unseen of any, because as yet it was not day, so rode they
on till they came into a Forest.

Now is the greatest part of the day spent, before they would refreshe them
selves in any place: but hunger constrained them to feed on such viandes, as
Gandalin had brought with him from the City. During this time, they heard in
the wood on their right hand the voice of some one, which seemed to them very
doleful, wherefore the prince rode presently that way: where he found a Knight
dead, and hard by him an other in little better case, for he was so wounded,
that he had no hope to live. As for the party that so cried, it was a woman
who lay upon the Knight, pressing him so sore, as made his heart to fail him:
and which was woorst of all, the villainous woman to cause his death the sooner,
cruelly thrust her hands into his wounds. But when the wounded Knight espied
the Prince, so well as he could he craved succor, saying. Ah gentle Sir, for
Gods sake suffer me not to be thus murdered by this ribaude. Greatly was the
Prince abashed at this wicked dealing, and therefore very roughly thus spoke.
Woman withdraw your self, for you do the thing not beseeming you or your like.
She as one ashamed, retired, and ye Knightful of anguish fell in a swoune, which
made the Prince very desirous to know what he was: but fearing that he had
already yielded his breath, quickly alighted, and used such good means as
revived him again, when he began to cry. Ah I am dead, good friends bring me
to some place where I may have council for my soul. Take courage, answered
the Prince, for you shall have what you demand: but I pray ye tell me, what
fortone brought ye hither, or where is he that has thus hardly entreated ye?
It is, said the Knight, through this wicked woman, who (albeit I was rich and
puissant, yea far much more then she) I made choice, for the good love I bare
her, and espoused her as my wife: nevertheless she discourteous creature,
forgetting the good and honor I had done her, has sundry times abandoned her
honest regard, namelye this night past with this Knight here dead, whom I
having never before seen, by cha^^ice yesterday he came to me: and this last
night thus villanouslye abused me, where taking him with the deed, we had a
combat together, wherein (as you see) he lost his life. But when this strumpet
saw. I had slain him, fearing I would do as much to her: she fell at my
feet and desired pardon, whereto I easily condiscended, provided, that she
offended no more. Heerupon, I entreated her to bind up my wounds, but she
perceiving how grievously I was hurt, and brought into very weak estate through
overmuch loss of my blood, to revenge the adulterous Uillaines death, she
assaied to kill me outright: and to make me languish the more in dying, cruelly
she thrust her hands into my wounds, so that well I perceive I cannot long
live. Therefore I beseech ye good Sin, help me to an Hermitage which is near
at hand, where I shall find some religious man, to comfort me in the agony of
my Soul. Such compassion took the Prince on him, as he and Gandalin taking
him in their arms, carried him on a horse to the Hermitage: in mean while the
wretched woman stole away privily, and a little before, she fearing that her
Husband would be revenged on her, sent for help to three of her brethren, who
dwelled not far from that place, giving them to understand which way they
should come. In her wandering they met with her, and she had no sooner espied
them, but she thus cried out. Ah help me good brethren, for heerbefore is a
thief, who has slain this Knight which lies here, and has beside so
wounded my Husband: as there is no hope of life left in him: let him not
therefore escape ye, nor he that is in his company, because the one is as deep
in the evil as the other. Such like speeches used this Harlot, that by the
death of the Prince and Gandalin, her treason might be covered: therefore that
her Husband should not dye alone with her will, she showed them the Gentleman
of the Sea, even as he returned from the Hermitage where he left the wounded
Knight. Heeer-upon the three brethren (too light of belief) gallopped toward
him, crying: Traitor thou art but dead. You lie villains, answered the
Prince, for right well shall I defend my self from such traitors as you are.
Bestirre thy self then, said the brethren, for thou have offended us all
three, and we all will be revenged on thee if we may. By good hap the Prince
had his Sheeld and Lance ready, and his Helmet very well laced, wherefore
without any further answer he sharply charged them, and meeting with the
first, pierced through both his Sheeld and arm: and withal threw his Horse
and him so fiercely against the ground, as his right shoulder was broken in the
fall: in like manner was one of his horse legs, so that neither the one or
other could rise. At this encounter he brake his Lance, wherefore he suddenly
drew his Sword, and addressing him self to the other twain, gave one of them
such a forcible stroke, as s^icing through his Armounr, entered the flesh to
the very bone on his shoulder likewise, so that therewith he fell from his
Saddle. Being thus dispatched of two he came to the third, and saluted him with
such a sound blow on the Helmet, as the poor Gentleman was constrained to
embrace the neck of his Horse, thereby to sheeld himself from falling, finding
him self as greatly amazed as ye other were. Heer-upon the woman that brought
the^ thither fled away, which ye Prince perceiving, cried to Gandalin that he
should stay her: in mean while the first Knight having recovered him self,
used these speeches to the Prince. We know not Sir, whether this fight has
been for right or wrong, For right it could not be, answered the Prince,
unless you think I have done wrong, in succouring the husband of this
traitorous woman, whom cruelly she has caused to dye. When the three Knights
heard that, they were very much abashed, and then thought they had been abused
by their Sister, wherefore they thus replied. Insooth my Lord, so please ye to
assure us, we will show on what occasion we assailed you. You shall have good
assurance so to do, said the Prince, yet will I not acquit ye from the
Combat. Then he that first spoke, rehearsed all the words of their Sister,
according as has been already declared. In good sooth, quoth the Prince, never
was villainie disguised in such sort, for she has done far otherwise: as
you may understand by her Husband him self, who being near his death, I
conuaied to an Hermitage hard at hand. Seeing it has so fallen out, said the
three Brethren, dispose of us as they that remain at your mercy. And mercy
shall ye have, answered the Prince, if first ye will loyally swear to me, that
you will carry this woman and her husband to the Court of King Languines, and
there before him recite all that has happened: saying withal, how you were
thereto constrained by a young Knight that sent ye thither, and who this day
departed from his Court, desiring him to censure on this misdeed as he shall
think good. All this they promised and swore to perform: wherefore commending
the^ to God, he road away, leaving them together.

CHAP VI. How Vrganda the unknown, brought a Lance to the Gentleman of the
Sea.
THis quarrel thus ended with the three Knights, the Gentleman of the Sea
took the way which before he had left: but they had not ridde^ long, till they
saw two Damoselles come toward them by two sundry ways, who addressed
themselves to meet together, which when they had done, they entered into
communication. One of them bare a Lance in her hand, and when they were come
to the Prince, she with the Lance auaunced her self to him saying. My Lord,
take this Lance which I give ye, because I can assure ye, that within three
days it will stand ye in so good steed, as therewith you shall deliver from
death, the house from whence ye are descended. The Prince amazed at these
words, thus answered. How can it be Lady, that a house should live or dye? It
shall be, quoth she, even so as I have said, and this present I was desirous to
bring ye, as a beginning of recompense, for two favors I hope to receive by
you, the first whereof shall be: When one of your best friends, shall by you
have one of the greatest honors that ever he can receive, whereby he shall fall
into the deepest danger, that any Knight has done these ten years space.
Believe me Lady, answered the Prince, such honor (if God please) I will not do
my friend. Full well I know, quoth the Damsel, that so it shall come to
pass: then putting on her Palfray, departed: this Damsel you may note, was
Vrganda the unknown. When the other Damsel (who heard the words) saw her
forsake her company, she determined for certain days to stay with the
Prince, to see what he should do, wherefore she said. My Lord, although I am a
stranger, if you think it convenient, I would gladly for a while abide with
y^, deferring a journey that I have to my mistress. The Prince well perceived
she was a stranger, which made him to demand of whence she was: whereto she
replied, that she was of Denmark. And that him self could not gainsay,
because her language gave assurance thereof, for having heard his Lady Oriana
at her first coming into Scotland, it made him the better remember that
Country speech, whereupon he said. If you please (fair Damsel) to go with
me, I will defend ye to my power: but I pray ye tell me, if you know the other
Lady that even now gave me this Lance? Truly Sir, quoth she, never did I see
her, till now I met her on the way, and then she said to me: that the Lance
she carried, she would give to the best Knight in the world, desiring me
(withal) to let you understand after her departure, that she bare you great
affection, and how she was named Vrganda the unknown. Ah God, quoth he, how
unfortunate am I in not knowing her, if I forbear now presently to follow her,
you must think Lady the cause is, that I cannot find her against her will: and
thus devising they rode on, until the dark evening ouer-tooke them.

At this time it so chanced that they met with a Squire, who demanded where
they intended to find lodging travailing so late. Where we can, answered the
Prince. In good faith, said the Squire, if you mean to have lodging, you must
leave the way which now you take, for you can not long time come to any that
way: but if you will follow me, I will conduct ye to a Castle belonging to my
Father, who shall do you all the honor and good entertainment may be devised.
The Damsel thinking this council good, desired the Prince to accept thereof,
which he did, therefore the Squire rode before them as their guide, leading them
directly forth of the way, because he had never seen the combats of Knights
errant: and hoping to conduct them the day following to a Castle where such
pastime was used, but that night he brought them to their lodging, feasting and
entertaining them very sumptuously: yet could ye Prince take no rest all ye
night, for thinking on ye Lady that brought him the Lance. On the morrow very
early they would be gone, and taking leave of their host, the Squire said he
would bring them again into their way, acquainting the Prince as he rode with
the custom of the Castle, which being very near at hand he showed them: the
Castle standing very strong and pleasantly, for before it ran a huge swift
River, and no passage thereto, but over a long drawe-bridge, having at the end a
fair Tower for defense thereof. When the Prince beheld it, he thought he must
needs pass thither by ye bridge, yet he asked the Squire if there were any
other way. No my Lord, quoth he, for this is the usual passage. March on
then, said the Prince, wherewith the Squire, the Damsel and their company set
forward, but the Gentleman of the Sea remaining behind, entered into such a
thought of his Lady Oriana, as he had well near forgotten him self: but at
length he heard the noise of fire Halberders, armed with Corslettes and
Helmettes, who at the entrance of the bridge had arrested the Damsel, and
there would force her to take an oathe, that she should never bear love to her
friend, if he would not promise her to aid King Abies of Ireland against King
Perion: which she refusing, cried to the Prince for his assistaunce. This
clamor made him forget his musing, when addressing him self to the
Palliardes, he said. Traiterous villaynes, who commanded you to lay hands on
this Lady being in my charge? In speaking these words, he came to the
cheifest of the six, from whom right soon he caught his hatchet, and gave him
such a stroke therewith, as he fell to the ground. All the other together
presentlye set upon him, but one of them he sliced to the very teethe, and
soon after an other bare him company with the loss of his arm. When the
three that were left saw their companions so handled, they took them selves to
flight, and the Prince followed them so near, as one of them left his leg
behind him, the other twain he let go, returning where he left the Damsel,
to whom he said. Now boldly go on, and like evil fortune may they have,
that encourage any villain, to lay forcible hand on Lady or Damsel. She
being assured by these words, went on with the Prince and his Squires: but
ere they had gone any thing far, they heard a great noise and tumult within
the Castle. Me thinks Sir, said the Damsel, I hear a meruaylous murmuring
within this Fortress, therefore I would advise ye to take the rest of your
Armor. Go on quoth the Prince, and fear not, for where Ladies are evil
entreated (who ought every where to go in safety) there hardly abides any man
of valewe. In sooth, said she, if you do not what I have desired, I will not
pass any further: and so much she persuaded him, that at length he laced on
his Helmet: afterward he went into the Castle, at the entrance whereof, he met
a Squire weeping, who said. Ah God, why will they murder (without cause) the
best Knight in the world? alas, they would enforce him to promise, what is
impossible for him to accomplish. These words of the Squire, could not stay
the Prince, for he saw King Perion (who had so lately Knighted him) very hardly
used by two Knights, who with the help of ten armed Halberders had round beset
him, saying. Swear, if not, thou dyest. Greatly did it grieve the Prince, to
see such outrage offered to King Perion, wherefore he thus called to them.
Traiterous villains, what mooues ye to misuse the best Knight in the world? by
heaven you shall all dye for him. At these words, one of the Knights left the
King, and taking five Halberders with him, came to the Prince, saying. It
likewise behooves you to swear, if not, you can escape no better then an
other. What? quoth he, shall I then swear against my will? by Gods leave it
shall not be so. Then they of the Castle cried to the Porter, that he should
shut the gate, wherefore the Prince now saw he must stand upon his defense:
wher-upon he ran fiercelye against the Knight, charging him in such sort, as
he fell down dead over the crupper of his horse, for in the fall he brake his
neck. Which the prince beholding, not tarying any longer with the Halberders,
came to the other Knight that combated with King Perion, piercing his Lance
quite through his body, so that he accompanied the first in fortune. King (...)
seeing him self thus succored, so cheered up his heart, as he did much better
then before against his enemies, causing them by sharp strokes of his Sword
to retire: in mean while the Gentleman of the Sea, (being on Horsse-backe)
ran among them and scattered them, tumbling one down here, and another
there, so that at length by the aid of the King, they were all slain, except
certain that fled away on the top of the walls. But the prince alighted and
followed them, whereat they were so affrighted, as they cast themselves down
headlong from the walls: only two got them into a Chamber, where they thought
to remain in safety, notwithstanding he pursued them so near, as he buckled
pel mel with them. But within the Chamber on a bed lay an ancient Knight, whose
unwieldy age had taken from him the use of his legs: to them that came in he
used these speeches. Cowardly villains, from whom run ye so shamefully? From a
Knight, answered one of them, who has plaide the Devil in your Castle: for
he has slain your two Nephews and all our companions. As thus he spoke, the
prince caught him by the head, saying. Tell me (villain) where is the Lord of
this place, or else thou die. The poor man seeing him self in such peril,
showed him ye old Knight lying on the bed: but when the prince saw him so
old and decrepite, he blamed him in this manner. Thou wretched old man, has
death already seized on thy bones, and yet do thou cause such a wicked
custom to be maintained here? Well does thine age excuse thee from bearing
Arms, yet shall I give thee the desert belonging to such villainie. With these
words he made offer to smite off his head: Wherefore the affrighted old man
cried: Alas my Lord, for Gods sake mercy. None at all, quoth the prince, thou
art dead if thou swearest not to me, yt while thou live, such like treason
shall be no more maintained in this place: whereto ye old Knight right gladly
took his oathe. Now tell me, said the prince, wherefore have thou heertofore
kept this custom here? For the love of King Abies of Ireland, answered the
Knight, who is mine Nephewe, and because I can not aid him with my person in
his war, I was desirous to succor him with such Knights errant as passed
this way. False villain, answered the prince, what have Knights errant to do
with thy desire? so spurning the bed with his foot, threw it down and the
old Knight under it: where commending him to all the Deuilles, he left him,
and coming down into the Court, took a Horse which was one of the slain
Knights, and bringing it to ye King, said. Mount your self my Lord, for it
little likes me to stay any longer here, where such bad people have their
habitation. The King presentlye went to horseback, and so they rode together
out of the Castle: but the prince fearing least the King should know him,
would by no means take off his Helmet, notwithstanding as they rode along, the
King thus spoke to him. I pray ye sir Knight tell me of whence you are, that
have succored me when I was so near my death: warranting me also hereafter
from the enemies of this place, and showing your self a good friend to Ladies
and Knights errant. As for me, I am the same man against whom they kept this
strait passage, importing the cruel oathe for which you combatted. My Lord,
answered the prince, I am a Knight desirous to do you any service. Believe me,
quoth ye King, that have I already well perceived, for hardly should I have
found so good a friend to help me: yet will I not give over till I know ye.
Alas my Lord, said he, that will little profit ye. Notwithstanding, quoth the
King, I pray ye take off your Helmet: which he would not do, but put down his
Beuer a little. When the King saw that his entreaty would not prevail, he
desired the Damsel to obtain so much for him: whereto the condiscending,
took the prince by the hand, saying. I beseech ye Sir, grant the King what he
has requested. He seeing her importunate, took off his Helmet, when presently
the King knew him, that it was the same man he had Knighted at the Ladies
motion, wherefore embracing him, he said. Right glad am I to know so dear a
friend, My Lord, quoth the prince, I knew you so soon as I came to the
Castle, to be the man that gave me mine order of Knighthood, wherewith (so
please if God) I mean to serve you while your war continues in Gaul: and
willingly I would not be known by any one till your troubles be finished. You
have already, said the King, done so much for me, as I rest bounden to you
while I live, allowing you to dispose of me and mine: and if (as you say) you
come into Gaul, you shall augment with advantage the honor due to you, then
justly may I term the hour happy, that it was my fortune to make so good a
Knight. Such like words used King Perion, little thinking how near they were
allied together, and thus they rode devising, till at length they came to a
double way, when he demanded of the King, which of those ways pleased him to
take. This on the left hand, answered the King, because it guides directly to
my Country. God have you then in his keeping, said the Prince, for I must
needs ride this other way. I pray ye, quoth the King, remember your coming
into Gaul as you promised me, for the hope I have in you has abridged part
of my sorrow, and gives me assurance withal, that by your means I shall
recover my loss. So took they leave of each other, the King toward Gaul, and
the Prince in company with the Damsel and Gandalin: but because she had now
seen what she desired, namely the proof of the Lance which Vrganda gave him,
she would travail no further out of her way, but turning to the Prince said. I
have hitherto (my Lord) with right good will kept ye company, because ye Lady
that gave ye the Lance, said she brought it to the best Knight in the world,
and surely I have seen so much, as I stand in no doubt of her speeches:
wherefore I shall now shape my course to find her I am sent to, as before I
told ye. I pray ye Lady, quoth he, tell me what she is. It is, said she, the
Princess Oriana, Daughter to King Lisuart of great Britain. When he heard
her named whom he loved so deerly his heart began to tremble in such sort, as he
had fallen beside his horse, but that Gandalin stayed him, yet fetching a
great sigh, said: Ah God, my heart fails me. The Damsel thinking some sudde^
sickness was cause thereof, would have had him unarmed: but he told her it was
needelesse, for he was oftentimes want to feel such passions. The Squire (who
all this while had been their guide) took leave of the Prince, asking the
Damsel if her way lay toward the Court of King Languines: which she
affirming, he said he would accompanye her thither, because he had business of
some importance there. So having courteouslye saluted each other, they returned
the same way they came, and the Prince rode on with Gandalin to seek
adventures.

Here leaves the Author, to tell ye what happened to Galaor, whom the Giant
carried away, and gave in keeping to the aged Hermit, as already you have
heard. By this time had Galaor attained the age of sixteen years,
meruaylouslye increasing in stature and comely perfection: having no other
exercise, then reading on a Book which the old man lent him, discoursing the
deeds of Arms of sundry ancient Knights. Heerin he took so great pleasure,
as on this occasion, as also by a natural instinct: he was desirous to be
Knighted, nevertheless, he knew not whether by right such honor appertained to
him. Uerye earnestlye he questioned thereon with the Hermit, but the holy man
who knew right well, that so soon as he received the order, he should combat
against the giant Albadan: his eyes being filled with tears, he thus answered.
My Son, much better were it for you to labor in the safety of your soul,
then to adventure on the order of Knighthood, which is to be maintained with
wunderous travail. Father, quoth Galaor, very hardlye shall I follow the
calling, which I take against my will: but in that whereof my heart has made
choice, if God grant me good success, will I advance his service, for
ther-out may I not be during life. The good Hermit, who then well perceived
his grounded resolution, replied. Certes my Son, seeing you are determined to
follow Arms, I can well assure ye, that through fault of high lineage, you
need not despair of good hap, in respect you are Son to a King and Queen:
but keep that to your self, and let not the Giant know how I told ye so
much. When Galaor heard this, he was exceedingly contented, saying to the
Hermit. In sooth Father, the care I have had all my life time to be a Knight,
has been very great: but now I thank God and you, I am rid thereof, for by
that you have told me, I can not miss of it. The Hermit noting his earnest
affection, doubted least soon after he would be gone: wherefore he gave the Giant
to know his Scholars for wardnes, as also how his constitution did now very
well serve him, being wonderful desirous of his knighthood, and therefore he
should now deal in the cause as best him self pleased. No sooner was the
Giant enfourmed heerof, but presently he got him to horseback, and rode to the
Hermit, with whom he found Galaor, of more large stature then his years
expressed, very comely and beautiful in every part, whereupon he thus spoke to
him. I understand Son, that you would be a Knight to follow Arms, truly you
shall, prepare your self to go with me when time serves, and your desire
shall be honorably satisfied. Father, answered Galaor, here in consists the
sum of mine affection: so not long after, the Giant departed from the Hermit,
taking Galaor with him, who falling on his knee before the reverend old man,
desired that as he had fatherlye nourished him, so still he would remember him
in his devout orisons. The holy man with the tears trickling down his
cheeks, kissed and blessed him, the^ mounted Galaor on horseback and followed
the Giant, who brought him home to his Castle: where for certain time he
practiced to combat at Arms, as also bravely to manage horses, having all
things convenient for the same, and two masters very expert therein. When he
had continued a year at these exercises, the Giant seeing him woorthye to
receive honor, and strong enough to endure chivalry: disposed thereon as you
shall read hereafter.

Now again does the Author leave him, and discourses of that which chanced
to the Gentleman of the Sea, who after he departed from King Perion and the
Damsel, rode two days together, without any adventure: and on the third
about midday, he arrived at a very goodlye Fortress, that appertained to a
Gentleman named Galpan. This Galpan was then the most valiant Knight in all
that Country, and therefore was greatly feared of all his Neighbors, yet did
he there maintain an abominable and wicked custom: forgetting God who was
chiefly to be honored, bequeathed his endeavors to the service of the Devil.
For he constrained all Ladies and Damoselles that passed by his Castle to
enter in, where villamously he took his pleasure of them: and not contented
therewith, enforced them to swear, that while they lived they should bear
affection to none but him, if any denied, he caused them cruellye be put to
death. Likewise he compelled such Knights as travailed that way, to combat
one alone, against his two Brethren, but if they were vanguished, he would
force the conqueror to deal with him self, he being the most hardy Knight in
all those parts. If it happened that he brought them into any debilitie, he
would take from them all they had, turning them away on foot, after he had
made them swear, to name them selves while they lived, the vanquished by
Galpan, otherwise, he would deprive them of life. But God displeased with the
cruelty, which so long time he had used to the hurt of many good people, would
now alter this great inconvenience, and that Galpan with his accomplices should
receive guerdon to their deserts, making them an example to all other, as you
shall hear presently recited.

CHAP. VII. How the Gentleman of the Sea, combated with the guarders of Galpans
Castle, and afterward with his Brethren, and in the end with Galpan him self.
BY this time the Gentleman of the Sea is come near ye Castle, where he saw a
Lady coming toward him greatly afflicted, having no other company then a
Squire and a Page. This sorrowful woman breathed forth many grievous sighs,
showing a violent kind of war, between her hands and the golden tresses of
her hair, which she discheueled and rent very pitifully. Heerat was the
Prince not a little amazed, and willing to know what moved her to these
extremes, he came to her with these speeches. Fair Gentlewoman, I pray ye
tell me the cause of your sorrow. Ah my Lord, quoth she, death would be now
right welcome to me, being the only friend to bear me company: for such is
my misfortune, as tears are more convenient for me, then remembrance of the
cause. In sooth Lady, said the Prince, if in any respect I can do ye good,
you shall find me ready with all my heart. Being sent Sir, quoth the
Damsel, by my Mistresses commandment, to a young Knight, a man of some
account in these parts, and passing along this way: four cruel villains
set upon me, and (whether I would or no) brought me into this Castle, where a
traitorous Knight dishonourably forced me, compelling me afterward to swear,
that I should never love any friend but him. This complainte moved the Prince
to great admiration, and thus he answered* Follow me Lady, for your iniurye
shall be revenged if God give me leave, Heer-upon the Damsel immediately went
with him, and by the way he desired her to tell him, what the man was to whom
she was sent. If you revenge my wrong quoth she, I will tell ye: but I can
assure ye he is such a one, as will be right sorye when he hears of my
misusage. Great reason, said the Prince, has he so to do: and as thus they
communed together, they came to the place where she showed him the four
Gardants, to whom he presently said. Disloyal varlettes, wherefore have ye so
abused this Lady as she travailed on her iourny? Because (quoth they) we stood
in no fear of you: but if you get ye not gone the sooner, your entertainment
shall be woorsse then hers was. Without any more talking he drew his Sword, and
coming to one that heaued his Hatchet against him, quite cut away the right
arm from his body: then turning to another, cleft him over the face to the
very ears. When the rest saw their companions thus maimed, they fled away so
fast as they could, running through a by way along a River side: but the
Prince making no show of pursuing the^, wiped his Sword and put it up again,
then coming to the Damsel, bad her go forward. My Lord, quoth she, hard by
is a gate, where I found two armed Knights attending. Well, said he, and I
shall find them when I come thither. So rode they on, and as the Prince entered
the base Court, he saw the Dungeon door open, and an armed Knight on
Horseback come forth, after whom they within let down a Port cullis, and
shut the door again: then the Knight of the Castle auauncing him self, very
boldly thus spoke to the Prince. Poor wretch, too soon art thou come hither
to receive shame and dishonor. Dishonor? quoth the Prince, tush these are but
words, leave what shall happen to the prescience of God, who only is skillful
therein: and tell me if thou be the villain that did force this Lady? No,
answered the Knight, but if it were I, what then? I mean, quoth the Prince, to
revenge her wrong if I can. Go to, said the Knight, I shall see then what
kind of revenge you use. So giving the Spurs to his Horse, ran as fiercely
as he could against the Prince, yet he failed in the attainte: but the Prince
meeting him with full carrire, gave him such a greeting with his Lance through
the Sheeld, as the armor being unable to resist it, let pass ye iron through
both his shoulders, whereby he fell down dead in the place. Having withdrawn
his Lance, prepared him self for an other that came to succor the first,
who pearcing quite through the Princes Sheeld, left the head of his Lance in
his Armor, which was of sufficient proof: but in the encounter he met his
enemy to directly, as he rent the Helmet from his head, casting him so
violently of his Saddle, as he was able to sit no more on horse back. The
Knight seeing him self thus unarmed, cried for some other to come help him,
wher-upon three Halberders issued forth, to whom he said: Look well my
friends that this man escape us not. At these words, they ran all three
violentlye on the Prince, and buckled so near him, as they slew his horse
between his legs, whereby he was constrained to fight on foot: and so
offended was he thereat, that having recovered him self, he smote his Lance
through the Knights head, which made him presently yield the ghost. And now he
bestirres him self against the other three, who cowardly stealing behind him,
wounded him on the Shoulder, whereby he lost a great quantity of his blood: but
full well he recompensed the villain that did it, letting forth the dearest
blood he had in his body, by cleaving him with his Sword as it had been an
Axe. The other two terrified heere-with, ran up into a long Gallerie, crying:
Come my Lord, come quickly, for we are all vanquished. In mean while, the
Prince seeing his own Horse was slain, mounted on that belonged to the
Knight he slew last: soon after he saw another Knight stand looking forth at
a door, who perceiving the Prince had espied him, said. What has moved thee
to come in here and kill my people? Nothing else, answered the Prince, then the
desire I have to revenge this Lady, who has been here wronged most
dishonourably. As thus he spoke, the damsel came to him, and knowing the Lord
of the Castle that forced her, she said. Ah gentle Knight, see that this
monster escape you not, for by him have I lost my former honor. Libidinous
Ruffian, quoth the Prince, dearly shall thou pay for thy disloyal dealing:
Go arm thee, else will I slay thee naked as thou art, for to thee or such
like Uillaines ought be used no favor: but the Damsel more and more still
cried. Kill, kill the Traitor, that hereafter he live not to abuse any more,
otherwise will their shame be laid to your charge. Lewd woman, answered the
Knight, in an evil hour came he hither by thy counsel, and in thy company.
And thou ye threatnest me so bravely, attend my coming, and fly not away, for
by no other means can thou warrant thy self. So he departed, and soon
after came armed into the Court, where he mounted on a lusty white Courser:
then coming to the Prince, he began to menace him, saying. Well may thou
curse the time that ever thou saw this Damsel, for it will cost thee the
price of thy head. Each one, said the prince, must keep his head so well as he
may, and he that cannot, let him loose it. Without longer stay they coutched
their Lances, which at their encounter ran into their Sheeldes and armor,
wounding somewhat deep into their flesh* and so forcibly did their bodies
meet together, as they were both laid along on the ground, when quicklye
recovering themselves, with their Swoords drawn they prepare to the combat.
Fierce and cruel strokes were given on either side, to the great admiration of
such as beheld them, for many pieces of their Sheelds and armor was scattered
round about them: and which is more, their Helmets were so torn and battered,
as oftentimes their bare heads bore off ye blows, so that the ground was
coulloured with their blood: but Galpan had received a wound through the sight
of his Helmet, which made the blood trickle into his eyes, and he to wipe them
retired back a little. What Galpan? said the Prince, desire thou to breathe?
do thou not remember that thou fightest for my head? if thou defendest not
thine own well, thou art like to loose it. Be pacient a while, answered
Galpan, and let us breathe a little, for we have time enough to make an end. It
is no reasonable motion, said the Prince, seeing I fight not with thee for
courtesy, but to revenge the dishonor thou have done to this Lady* With these
words he have him such a stroke on the head, as made him fall to the ground on
his knees, yet quickly he arose and took heart a fresh: but the Prince would
not let him range about as he desired, for he was so out of breath, that he
could hardlye lift up his Sword, wherefore he did nothing but croutch under
his Sheeld, yet was it so sliced away in pieces, as very little was left to
defend him self withal. Galpan seeing he had no other remedy, began to fly
before the Sword of his enemy, and at length (as his last refuge) thought to
save him self in a little Tower which his Gardants used to stand in: but the
Prince following him hard at the heels, got him by the helmet and pulled it off,
and giving a full stroke at him, therewith smote his head from the shoulders,
afterward he came to the Damsel, saying. Fair Lady, now may ye choose an
other friend if you please, for he to whom you promised, has discharged ye of
the bargain. Thanks be to God and you sir, quoth she: and as they returned
from ye Tower, they heard the door shut too, wherefore he mounted on Galpans
Horse, which was esteemed one of the goodlyest in the World, and said to the
Damsel. I pray ye Lady, now let us be gone hence. My Lord, quoth she, if it
like you. I will carry this head to him whom I am sent, and present it to him on
your behalf. Do not so, said the Prince, for the carriage will be too
troublesome, but take the Helmet if you will. The Damsel liking well of his
advise, commanded her Squire to carye it with him: and so they rode from the
Castle, the servants whereof were all gone, and had left the gates wide open.
But the Prince not forgetting the Damoselles promise, that she would tell him
the Knights name she was sent unto: therefore earnestlye he entreated her to
satisfy him therein. Good reason, quoth she: his name is Agraies, Son to the
King of Scotland. Praised be God, said the Prince, who made me able to do so
much, as so good a Knight shall be no more wronged by traitorous Galpan: for
you are (in mine opinion) well avenged, and woorthelye may you call Agraies a
good Knight, in respect he is one of the best I know, and if for him you have
received dishonor, it now returns to your commendation. Go then and say to
him, that a Knight of his, humbly saluteth him, whom he shall find at the
wars en Gaul when he comes thither. Gentle Sir, quoth she, seeing you love
him so well, I pray ye grant me one request. That will I, quoth the Prince. Let
me then, said she, understand your name. Lady, quoth he, at this time forbear
the knowledge thereof, and command what else you please, you shall not be
denied. No other thing will I desire, answered the Damsel. Believe me, said
the Prince, it is little courtesy to request the thing, which willinglye I
would not reveal to any one. Yet must I needs know it, quoth the Damsel, or
else you do not perform your promise. When he perceived she would not be
dissuaded, somewhat moved with anger he replied. Such as know me, call me the
Gentleman of the Sea. So setting spurs to his horse, he gallopped away from
the damsel, who was not a little glad that she knew his name: but when he was
gone from her, he remembered the wound on his shoulder, which still bled very
freshlye, so that he might easily be tracte by his blood, and on his white
Horse it had dropped in many places. At evening he came somewhat near a
fortress, where he beheld a Knight unarmed coming toward him, and after he
had well viewed him, he said. My Lord, I pray ye tell me where have you been
so wounded? In sooth, quoth the Prince, at a Castle not very far hence. And
how, said the Knight, came you by that goodly white Horse? I took it,
answered the prince, in requital of mine own, that was there slain by
traiterous Uillaines. But would Galpan, quoth the Knight, suffer ye so to do?
Yea mary Sir, replied the Prince, he is now become more pacient, for he has
endured the loss of his head. When the knight heard of Galpans death, he
presently alighted from his Horse, and ran to kiss the Princes feet: but he
would not suffer him, yet could he not hold him from embracing his Sheelde,
saying. Ah gentle Knight, how highlye am I indebted to you? you are to this
place the most welcome man in the world, for by your means have I thoroughly
recovered mine honor. Leave we this talk, said ye Prince, and say where I
may quicklye find some remedy for my wounds. In my house, answered the
Knight, abides a Niece of mine, who shall heal your hurtes better then any
other. So riding on, they arrived at the Castle, where being dismounted, they
walked into the great Hall, the Knight reporting by the way, how Galpan had
kept him from bearing Arms one whole year and a half, compelling him to
change his name, and swear to call him self while he lived, the conquered by
Galpan: but now, quoth he, seeing he is dead, mine honor is restored me again,
Afterward he caused the prince to be unarmed, and laid in a sumptuous bed,
where his wounds were dilligentlye attended by the Lady, who assured him in
short time to make him well again: if he would be advised by her council,
which he promised faithfullye to do.

CHAP VIII. How the third day after the Gentleman of the Sea departed from
King Languines, the three Knights, came to the Court, bringing with them the
wounded Knight in a Litter, and his disloyal wife.
ON the third day after the Prince left ye Court of King Languines, where he
received the order of Knighthood, the three Knights came thither, with their
wounded brother and his trothlesse wife, of whom the discourse has been
already recited. At their arrival they presented him before the King, letting
him understand the cause of their coming, and delivering their prisoner on the
new Knights behalf, to deal with her as he should think convenient.
Greatly did the King marvel at the woman's disloyalty, not imagining such
wickedness could have harbored in her: notwithstanding, he thanked the Knight
that had sent them to his Court, yet could he not guess who it was, for he
nor any body else knew that the Gentleman of the Sea was Knighted* but the
Princess Oriana, and the Ladies which accompanied her in the Chapel. Full
soon was he advertised of his absence from the Court, but he thought he was
gone to visit his father Gandales: then the King turning to the Knight in the
Litter, said. Me thinks that a woman so unfaithful as your wife has been,
deserves not to live. My Lord, quoth the Knight, do therein as it shall like
your majesty: as for me, I will never consent that ye thing I most love
should dye. This said, the knights took their leave of the King, carrying back
again with them their Brother in the Litter: leaving their Sister to receive
Justice by the Kings appointment, who after their departure called for her and
said. Woman, thy malice has been too great in respect of thy Husbands
kindenes, but thou shall be made an example to all other, that they hereafter
offend not in the like: and so he commanded her to be burned alive. The
execution being done, the King was in greater pensiuenes then before, because
he knew not who the new Knight should be, that parted so suddenly from his
Court: but the Squire standing by, which lodged the Gentleman of the Sea, and
afterward conducted him to the Castle, where he delivered King Perion from
death, began to imagine that it was his guest, wherefore he said to the King. It
may be (my Lord) a young Knight, with whom the Damsel of Denmark and my
self were certain days, and then we left him when we came hither. Know
thou his name? quoth the King. No my Lord, said the Squire, but he is both young
and very beautiful: beside, I saw him do such rare chivalry in so little
time, as in mine opinion if he live, he will prove one of the best Knights in
the world. Then discoursed he at large every action, as also how he delivered
King Perion in the time of great danger. When the King had noted well his tale,
his desire to know him increased now more and more. My Lord, quoth the Squire,
the Damsel that came hither with me, happilye can tell ye more tidinges of
him, for it was my chance to meet them together. Of what Damsel speak
thou? said the King. Of her, answered the Squire, that lately came from great
Brittayne to Madame Oriana. Presently was she sent for, and he demanded what
the Knight was of whom there went such report. Whereupon she declared so much
as she knew, cheeflye the occasion wherefore she rode with him, and in what
manner the Lance was given him by Vrganda, as to the only Knight in the world:
But in sooth, quoth she, I know not his name, for never could I learn it of
him. Ah God, said the King, who may it be? Now was Oriana void of all
doubting, for she well knew it was her Gentleman of the Sea, but she was so
grieved with the news, which the Damsel of Denmark had brought her, as well
she knew not whom she might complain to: for the King her Father sent her
word, how she should prepare her self in readiness to come to him, so soon as
his Ambassadors should be sent for her into Scotland. But much more willingly
could she afford to stay in that Country, then there whether she should now
go against her mind, not only in respect of her gentle usage there, but
because she imagined by being far thence, she should be further from him
that had the prime of her affection: beside, she might there hardlye afterward
hear any news of him, but continuing in Scotland she could easilye compass
it. In these melancholy thoughts was the amourous Princess, and the King (on
the other side) in daily musing, what he might be that sent the four Knights,
with the wicked woman whom the fire had consumed. But five or six days after
these matters were thus passed, as the King was conferring with his Son
Agraies, (who now stood upon departing toward Gaul to succor the King his
Uncle) there entered a Damsel, who falling on her knee before all the
assembly, framed her speeches to Agraies in this manner. May it please ye my
Lord, that in the presence of his highness and this assemblye, I deliver a
message of importance to ye? then taking the Helmet from her Squire, she thus
proceeded. This Helmet thus broken and battered as ye see, I present ye in
place of Galpans head, as a token to you from a new Knight, to whom (in my
judgment) it better belongs to bear Arms then any other: and the cause why
he sendes it to you, is, for that Galpan villainously abused a damsel, that
came to you on urgent affairs. What? quoth the King, is Galpan overcome by the
hand of one man? believe me Damsel you tell us meruailes. Worthy Lord,
answered she, he only of whom I speak has done him to death, after he had
slain all the other that resisted him in Galpans Castle: and he thinking to
revenge their foil him self, combatted hand to hand with ye Knight, but such
was his bad success, as there with dishonor he lost his head, which I would
gladly have brought to this Court, yet doubting the corrupt savor thereof, and
being otherwise advised by him that sent me to my Lord Agraies, as testimony of
his victory this Helmet may suffice. Undoubtedly, said the King to all there
present, it is the same Knight of whose name we are ignorant: how say you Lady,
cannot you resolve us? My Lord, quoth she, I obtained it by exceeding
importunity, for otherwise he would never have told me. Say then good maiden,
replied the king, to rid us of all other doubts. He names him self, said
the Damsel, the Gentleman of the Sea. When the king heard this, he was
greatly abashed, and so were all the other likewise, afterward he thus spoke.
By my faith, I am assuredlye persuaded, that whosoever Knighted him, need not
to be ashamed thereof, seeing so long time he requested it of me, and I deferred
it for occasions which I needed not have done, seeing Chiualrye is in him
already so well accomplished. Then Agraies taking occasion to speak,
demanded of the Damsel, where he might meet with his gentle friend. My
Lord, quoth she, he humblye commends him self to your good grace, giving you
to understand by me, that you shall find him at the wars in Gaul if you
come thither. Good news fair Damsel, said Agraies have you brought me, now
am I more desirous to be gone then before I was: and if I may find him there,
with my good will shall I never leave his company. You have reason so to do,
answered the Damsel, for he loves you as becomes a Gentleman. Great was
the joy for these good news of the Gentleman of the Sea, and if any one
received displeasure, you must think it was Oriana above all the rest, yet was
it handled so couertlye, as the watchfullest eye could not discern it. Now in
mean while the king enquired by diverse means, how and by whom the Prince was
knighted, when at length he was advertised, yt the Ladies attending on the
Queen, could tell better the^ any body else, which with much a do he obtained
of them. Then may the Gentleman of the Sea, quoth he, vaunte, that he has
found more courtesy in you then in me: but the cause why I prolonged the time
of his honor, was that he seemed too young for so great a charge. In this time
Agraies courteouslye welcomed the Dammosell, who beside the Helmet, delivered
him Letters from a Lady that deerelye loved him, of whom the Historye
hereafter makes mention. But now for this present occasion, the Reader must
imagine, that Agraies (without longer tarying in Scotland) is departed with his
Army, travailing toward Gaul to his Uncle King Perion.

CHAP. IX. How King Lisuart sent for his Daughter the Princess Oriana, for
that long before he had left her in the Court of King Languines: who sent her
accompanied with the Princess Mabila his only Daughter, as also a noble train
of Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen.
ABout ten days after Agraies was departed the King his Fathers Court with
his troop, three Ships of great Britain took port in Scotland: wherein as
chief was Galdar of Rascuit, accompanied with an hundred Knights of King
Lisuartes, as also many Ladies and Gentlewomen that came for Oriana. Being
arrived at the Court of King Languines, they were very graciouslye
entertained, especially Galdar, for he was esteemed a wise and hardy Knight.
After he had given his Majesty to understand his ambassadge, which was hearty
thanks from King Lisuart his Master, for the gentle entreataunce of ye
Princess his Daughter: he requested now to have her home, and Mabila his
Daughter with her, to whom he would do all the honor could be devised. Right
thankfullye did King Languines accept this offer, and was content that his
daughter should go with Oriana, thence-forward to be educated in the Court of
King Lisuart. Certain days soiourned Galdar and his train in Scotland, during
which time they were most honorably feasted, and in this while the King
prepared other Ships to accompany the voyage. When Oriana saw that matters
fell out in this sort, she knew well it was impossible longer to dissemble or
tarry: wherefore as she placed all her little trifles in order, she found among
her Iewelles the ware, which she had taken from the Gentleman of the Sea. This
gave her such a remembrance of him, as ye tears entered her eyes, and (through
vehement love) often wringed her hands, so that the ware which she held in
them, suddenlye brake, and she espied the Letter enclosed therein, which so soon
as she unfolded, she found therwritte^ these words. This is Amadis without
time, Son to a King. At these news she conceived such joy, as quickly she
left her former countenance, and not without cause: for she was now assured,
that he who before was esteemed (at the most) but the Son of a simple
Gentleman, or it might be of less, because he was unknown both of name and
parents: the man whom she so faithfully loved, was Son to a King, and named
Amadis, therefore without longer deferring, she called the Damsel of Denmark
to her, one whom she intirelye trusted, and thus spoke. By good freende, I will
declare one thing to ye, which no other then mine own heart and you shall
know: therefore regard it as the secret of such a Princess as I am, and of
the best Knight in the world beside. On my faith Madame, answered the Damsel,
seeing it pleases you to honor me so much, more willinglye shall I dye then
fail therein: and well may you be assured, that what-soeuer you disclose to me,
shall be altogether kept secret, and executed to my power. Then so it is dear
friend, said Oriana, that you must needs go seek the Gentleman of the Sea,
whom you shall find at the wars in Gaul, and if you chance to come
thither before him, there must ye of necessity stay for him: but so soon as
you see him, give him this letter, saying he shall find his name therein,
written on the day that he was cast into the Sea, whereby I know him to be the
son of a King, which ought inspire him with higher courage and hardines, to
increase the fame he has already so well begun. You shall likewise tell him,
how the King my Father sent for me, and therefore I am gone toward great
Britain: which I was desirous to acquainte him withal, that when he
returns from the war where he is, he should immediately come to the place of
my abode, limitting all things in such sort, as he may live in my Fathers
Court, until he receive other commandment of me. Such was the speedye
dispatche of ye Damsel, as without longer stay she iournyed toward Gaul, and
executed her enterprise, whereof hereafter you shall understand more. But not
to discontinewe the purposed voyage of Oriana, after that Languines had
provided all things necessary for the same, Oriana, Mabila and their company
were embarked: then taking leave of the King and Queen at the Sea side, they
set sail, having the wind so prosperous, as in few days they landed in great
Britain, where they were all right woorthily welcomed.

Heere-of does the Author at this time make no more mention, because he
means to tell ye what happened to the Gentleman of the Sea, having left him
at the Knights Castle that was vanquished by Galpan, in the Damoselles charge
who attended his wounds, which in fifteen days were almost thoroughly healed.
Notwithstanding, despising rest, determined to set on his way, so that on a
Sunday morning, taking leave of his host and his gentle Surgeon: he mounted
on Horsse-back, accompanied only with Gandalin who never would forsake him, and
not far from the Castle they entered a great Forest. It was now about the
month of April, when the Birds tune their notes most pleasantly, and that
all Trees, Herbs and Flowers declare the coming of the Spring time: this
delightsome change made him remember her, who above all other flowred in
excellent beautye, and for whom (abandoning his liberty) Love had taken him
captive, so that in these thoughts he thus (somewhat loud) parled with him
self. Ah poor Gentleman of the Sea, without parents or lands that thou can
avouch, how durst thou lift thy heart so high, as to love her who is beyond all
other in beauty, bou^ty and birthe? Ah wretch as thou art, oughtst thou not to
consider by the greatness of these three things, wherein she is most perfect: ye
best Knight in ye world may not be so hardy as once to think of loving here
And thou poor unknown, art wrapped in a labirinthe of folly, loouing and
dying, not daring to tell it or make show thereof. In this complaint was the
Gentleman of the Sea so carried away, as forgetting all other matters, he rode
cross the Forest a long space with his Helmet closed: till at length lifting
up his head, he beheld a Knight well mounted in the wood by him, who long had
kept him company to hear his sad discourse. When the Knight saw the Prince had
descryed him, and for that cause held his peace, he approached nearer him, with
these words. Believe me Knight, it seems you more love your friend then she
does you when in commending her you dispraise your self: and for ought I
understand by your speeches, you are no such man as ought to pretend love,
therefore it is necessary I should know who she is, to the end I may supplye
your defect and serve her. Sir Knight, answered the Prince, you have some
reason for these speeches, yet hap what shall, you can know no more the^ you
do: and I can assure ye, yt by loving her you can get no advantage. So do
not I believe said the knight, for a man ought to conceive glory in travail,
or any danger in the service of so fair a Lady, seeing that in the end, he
cannot but gain his long hoped-for recompense: wherefore he yt looueth in so
high a place as you do, should not be agreeued at any thing that happens.
When the Prince heard him speak so sensiblye, imagining he used these words
to comfort him: he was of better cheer, and came more near him to continue
this talk, but the knight said. Keep ye back, for either by freendship or
force, you must tell me what I have demanded. Now trust me, answered the
Prince, it shall not be so. Go to then, quoth the knight, see what will happen
thereon, and defend your self. With right good will, said the Prince. So began
they lace their Helmets, taking likewise their Sheelds and Lances: but as they
severed themselves for the Ioust, a Damsel came that spoke in this manner.
Knights, I pray ye forbear a while, and tell me one thing before the combat
if you can: for such is my haste, as I have no leisure to tarrye the end of
your fight. At these words they stayed them selves, demanding of her what
she desired. I would very feign quoth she, hear some news of a knight,
called the Gentleman of the Sea. And what would you with him? said ye Prince. I
have brought him tidings, answered the Damsel, from Agraies Son to the King
of Scotland. Attend a little, replied the prince, and I will tell ye so much as
I know of him. All this time was the knight of the Forest ready for the
Ioust, and much offended at her that came to stay them, wherefore he called to
the Prince to guard him-self, giving him such an attainte in the encounter, as
his Lance flew in pieces: but the Prince met him so full, as both Horse and
Man were thrown to the ground, when the Horse (being more nimble then his
master) seeing him self at liberty, ran about the feelde, yet the Prince
found the means to take him again, and bringing him to the dismounted knight,
said. Here Sir, take your Horse, and hence-foorth desire not to know any
thing against a man's will. The knight would not refuse his gentleness, for he
found himself so shaken with his fall, as he could hardlye follow to catch
him again: and in mean while he assaied to remount on his horse, the Prince
left him, coming to the Damsel that stayed for him, demanding if she knew
the man she enquired after. No truly, quoth she, I did never see him: but
Agraies told me, that he would p^esently make him self known, so soon as I
should say that I came from him. He did not deceive ye therein, answered the
Prince, therefore you must understand I my self am the man: and with these
words he unlaced his Helmet, when the Damsel saw his face, she said. In
truth now do I verily believe it, for your beauty I have heard very much
commended Then tell me, quoth the Prince, where have you left Agraies? Hard by
a River not far hence, said she, where he staieth with his troop, attending
a fit wind for passage into Gaul: and is very desirous before he go any
further, to know if you will bear him company. With all my heart, replied the
Prince, ride then before and conduct me the way. So rode he on with the
damsel, and in some short time after, they came near the place where Agraies
and his Army were encamped: but yet before they arrived there, they heard
behind them on cry: Stay Knight, for thou must tell me what I demanded. The
Prince turning back, beheld the Knight whom he so lately dismounted, and an
other that bare him company, wherefore he stayed to take his Arms. Now were
they so near the Prince Agraies Camp, and he as they all might see the
tourney, having a far off noted the Princes coming, meruailing what he was
that so gallantly managed his Horse: and to say soothe, he was (in his time)
a Knight of the comlyest grace that ever was seen, and where he strove to hide
him self, he was soonest discovered, by reason of his bravery in
horsseman-ship. The two Knights ran together in full course against him,
breaking their Lances in pieces on his Sheelde: but the Prince meeting him
that had the foil in the Forest, threw him again from his saddle so roughly,
as in the fall he brake his arm, the greef whereof made him lie still as if he
had been dead. When he perceived he was so well rid of one, he drew his
Sword, and came to the other, giving him such a stroke on his Helmet, as the
Sword entering in, he pulde it back with such force, that the laces brake,
whereby he brought it quite from his head upon his sword: then he lifted up his
arm to have smitten him, but the Knight quickly clapped his Sheelde before. In
mean while the Prince got his Sword into his left hand, which he could do
very hardlye and with his right hand took hold on his enemies Sheeld,
renting it violently from about his neck, and afterward gave him such a blow
on the head, as in great amazemente he fell to the ground. Thus did he leave
him there with his companion, and rode with the Damsel to the Tents of
Agraies: who having seen the conclusion of this quarrel, meruailed what he
was that had so soon overcome two knights, therefore when he came toward him,
he went forth to meet him, and so soon as they knew each other, you need make
no doubt of their kind salutations. Soon after the Prince alighted, and by
Agraies was conducted into his Tent to be unarmed, but first he gave
commandment, that the Knights dismounted in the feeld should be brought
thither, where they were no sooner arrived, but Agraies thus spoke to them.
Believe me my friends, you attempted great folly to meddle with this knight.
You say true my Lord, answered he whose arm was broken, yet once to day I saw
him in such plight, as I little thought of any such resistance. Afterward he
declared all ye happened in the Forest, and the communication they had
together: yet he omitted the Princes complaints, because he stood in fear to
displease him. During the repetition of these matters, the patience of the one
and boldenes of the other, was entercoursed among them, and all that day they
soiourned there, but on the morrow morning they mounted on horsse-back, shaping
their course to Palingues, a right good City on the frontiers, and the
vtmoste part of Scotland, where they found Shipping, and embarked themselves
toward Gaul. The wind serving according to their desire, in few days they
landed in the haven of Galfrin, and marching thence in seemly order, without
any hinderaunce they came to the Castle of Baldain, where King Perion was
besieged, having already lost great number of his people. When he was
advertised of this succor, you must imagine him comforted thereby, and their
welcome to be good and gracious: cheefely by the Queen Elisena, who having
knowledge of their arri^all, sent to entreat her Nephew Agraies to come visit
her: which he did, being accompanied with the King and the Gentleman of the
Sea, and two other knights of good account. But you must note, that king
Perion knew not the Prince at the first sight, yet at the length he called him
to remembrance, that it was the same man whom he had Knighted, and after-ward
saved his life at the Castle, wherefore thus he spoke. By dear friend, on my
faith I had forgotten ye, you are most welcome to this place, for your presence
gives me assurance, that I need fear this war no further, having the only
Knight of the world so near me. Dread Lord, answered the Prince, God give me
grace to serve you accordingly, for persuade your self, that while these
troubles endure, I will make no spare of my person. As thus they devised, they
entered the Queens Chamber, when the King taking the Prince by the hand,
presented him to her saying. Madame, this is the good knight of whom
here-tofore I told ye, he defended me from the greatest danger that ever I
was in: and therefore I pray ye let no spare of courtesy be made to him here,
but give him the best entertainment the time will affoorde. The Queen
auaunced her self to embrace him, but he fell on his knee with these words.
I am servant (Madame) to the Queen your sister, and from her I come to serve
you, with like obedience as to her own person. Right graciously did the good
Lady give him thanks, yet little thought she that he was her son, for she
imagined the Sea had devoured him: yet was the Princes presence at that very
instant so pleasing to her, as her eyes could not be satisfied with beholding
him, and (through a secret moving of nature) she wished more good to him the^
any in the troop. At this time likewise was her remembrance solicited, with
the former loss of her two Children, whose years she thought would have
equalled the Princes, if God had preserved the^, and these occasions urged the
tears into her eyes. Thus wept she for him that nature touched her withal,
and yet unknown was in her presence, but when the Prince beheld her so
sorrowful, he reputed it to the reason of the war begun, wherefore he said.
Madame, I hope with the aid of God, your King, and the fresh supply we have
brought: in short time to recover your joy, and for mine own part, trust me
I will make no spare. Heaven prosper ye, answered the Queen, with happy
success, and for you are the Queen my sisters knight, I will that ye provide
no other lodging, but abide here with us, and all things shall be appointed
for ye to your own contentment. Such was their conference together, until
Agraies would go refreshe him self, wherefore taking leave for ye night, he
went to his lodging where it was provided: and gladly would the Prince have
followed him, but the Queen with-helde him by such importunity, as he was
constrained now to remain in his unknown mothers custody.

Right soon was the news of this fresh succor, brought to King Abies of
Ireland and Daganel his Cousin, who made very small account thereof, because (in
those times) was king Abies accounted for one of the best knights that ever
was heard of, and in respect of his hot desire to the fight, determined
(seeing new aid was come to his enemy) very quickly to bid him battle, and
for this cause he said before all his people there present. If King Perion were
so gentle a companion as to come see us, I had rather he would do it to day
then to morrow. Assure your self, answered Daganel, he is nothing so hasty as
I think: for he fears you too much, albeit he makes little show thereof.
Know you, said Gallin Duke of Normandy, by what means we may thereto
constrain him? First let us make an ambushe of the greater part of our Army,
which shall remain with the King in this Forest of Baldain, the^ you Lord
Daganel and my self will go with the rest, to present our selves at break of
day before the City: and I am certain that being discryed by our enemies,
who imagining our strength is altogether, will take heart, and not fail to come
running forth upon us. When we see them approach, we will dissemble a timorous
fear, and take our flight toward the Forest, where shall abide the King with
his company: then our enemies pursuing assured victory in their own conceit,
will seek advantage by our shameful retire, and so be taken themselves in the
snare. Uerie well have you advised, answered King Abies, do you your self
worthy Duke give order, that all things be done as you have appointed. Now
might ye there behold armed men on horssebacke, the Soldiers mustering, the
Drommes thundering and the Trompets cheerfully sounding, as in one instant
matters were so well ordered, that the Kings commandment failed in nothing:
whereupon the next morning at the break of day, Daganel and the Duke of
Normandye, showed themselves with their Squadron before the Town. Little did
King Perion at that time think of any such enterprise, but altogether
refreshed his succor, and honored the Prince by whom he had found such
friendship. And to make some show of his affection toward him, in the morning
he came with his Queen to the Princes Chamber, where they found him washing
his hands, and perceiving his eyes red, swollen, and blubbered with tears,
they easily gathered he had taken no good rest that night: and very true it
was, for continually he thought of her, whose love had deprived him of
liberty, and likewise compared therewithal, the slender means he had to
attain so high, which made him enter into such profound grief, as he expected
no other remedy then death. The Queen desirous to know the cause of his
sadness, took Gandalin aside, thus speaking to him. My friend, your Masters
countenance bewrays some inward displeasure, has any one here offended him
in ought? No Madame, answered Gandalin, he has by your Majesty received great
honor: but he is wont to be tormented in sleep as you see. During these
discourses, the Sentinel came to advertise the King, how he had discoucred the
ambushe, and the enemies were very near the City, wherefore presently he
commanded to dorayne the Army. Now was each one ready to horssebacke,
especially the King and the Prince, who went directly to the City gate, where
they found Agraies chiding, because they would not let him go forth,
thinking he should tarry too long from the fight: for he was one of the
hardyest Knights, and the best to give assistance in need that could be found,
so that if good advise had been as ready with him, as he was possessed of
unconquerable courage, his like might not have been found in the world. At the
Kings coming the gates were suddenly opened, and then went forth the men of
Gaul in order, who seeing their enemies to be so great a number, albeit the
whole Army was not there: the greater part of them was minded to go no
further, reputing it overmuch boldness to assail such an unequal strength,
and therefore arose among them a murmuring contestation. Which Agraies
perceiving, without further trifling, gave the spurs to his horse, crying
aloud, Beshrowe him that taryeth any longer: seeing them he is to deal
withal, shall we not venture? So saying, he gallopped toward his enemies, in
like manner did the Gentleman of the Sea and the rest of their train, who
without any order of marching, ran among them, and were immediately mingled
together. He whom the Prince first met withal, was the Duke of Normandye,
whom he charged so courageously, as breaking his Lance on him, ouerthrewe
both man and horse to the earth, and with this rough fall his leg was
broken. So passed on the Prince setting hand to Sword, and as a chased Lion
entered the preasse, showing such deeds of Arms, as none durst withstand him:
for he ouerthrewe all that encountered him, killing some outright, chyming and
dismembring others, so that every one was glad to give him way. When Daganel
saw his men in such disorder by the means of one Knight, he got the most of
them together so well as he could, and round about beset the Prince to beat him
down: which they had done, but that Agraies perceiving it, came with his
troop to reskue him. At their arrival you might behold Lances broken,
Knights tumbling down, helmets rent, and Sheelds scattered on the ground,
making a great conflicte and disorder among the Irish-men, for King Perion
likewise came fresh upon them with his band. Daganel (on the contrary side) did
the best he could to retire back, but the Gentleman of the Sea was among the
thickest, showing such chivalry, as he found before him not any resistance,
each one was so abashed at his behavior: and Agraies above the rest, showed
that his arm was not benommed, for the more to harten and cheer up his men,
he cried aloud to them: follow my friends, follow the best Knight that ever
bare Arms. When Daganel saw his side to have the worst, and what great damage
he received by the Prince, he determined to kill his horse, and so to make him
fall among the crowde: but he was deceived, for the Prince coming to him, let
fall so mighty a stroke on his Helmet, as rent it clean from off his head,
and so remained Daganel unarmed. Which when King Perion espied, he reached him
such a salutation with his Sword, as cleft his head through the very brains:
whereupon his men seeing him slain, they that had the best horses fled away
for life, and stayed not till they saved themselves where King Abies was
ambushed. But King Perion still pursuing victory, discovered the rere-guard
that came from the Forest, marching in very great haste toward him, showing by
their countenance a revenge of their loss, wherefore joining together, they
cried: Set on them men of Ireland, see that none of them escap^^^s, but let us
enter pel mel in the field. When the Gauls found themselves thus surprised,
never were people more astonished, for they imagined the ambush had not been
so great: and which most of all affrighted them, was, that they must now deal
with fresh and lusty me^, themselves being sore wearyed, and their horses so
ouer-laboured, as they could hardly endure their burden. Beside, they knew
King Abies was there in person, being (as you heard before) accounted one of
the best Knights in the world: and for this cause the most part of the Gauls
began to tremble But the Gentleman of the Sea foreseeing the disorder was like
to ensue, came and persuaded them, rather to dye then loose one ^ote of their
honor and reputation, saying: My friends and companyons, be of good cheer,
each one make known his virtue, and remember the esteem the Gauls have
gotten by Arms. We are to deal with people astonned and half overcome, let
us not make change with them, taking their fear, and delivering our victory:
for if they but only behold your resolved countenances, I am certain they are
not able to endure ye, let us the^ enter among them, for God is our defender.
At these words the most dishartened took courage, concluding to stay and fight
manly with their enemies, who soon after in great fury set upon them. Now did
King Abies make known his magnanimity, and hardly could Prince Agraies men
endure the assault, nor the squadron that King Perion brought: for King Abies
maimed some, other he overthrew, and while his Lance held, he dismounted every
Knight that met with him. Afterward he laid hand to Sword, wherewith he carried
himself so valiantly, as the hardyest were amazed thereat, for he made way
where ever he came: so that King Perions men, not able longer to hold out,
began to retire so fast as they could toward the City. When the Gentleman of
the Sea saw that fortune was so contrary to the^, in great despite he entered
the throng, and fought so fiercely, as the most part of the Irish-men were glad
to stay, while the Gauls without disorder retired toward the Castle, then
turning his horse, he followed them. To defend this brunt, there was also King
Perion, and the Prince Agraies, who delivered testimony to their enemies (by
the keen edge of their Swords) how well they knew to govern themselves in
such extremities: notwithstanding, the Irish-men seeing they had the better,
still pursued them with eager courage, driving them confusedly into the City,
hoping that now would be the end of their war. Such was the retire of the
Gauls, still more and more pressed by their enemies, as doubtless the Irish
had entered the City after them, but that they were hindered by King Perion,
Agraies, and the Prince, who wholly did repulse the throng, till their people
by them were gotten in. But now was tidings brought to King Abies, that his
Cousin Daganel and Gallin Duke of Normandye were slain, whereat he wexed very
displeasant: and seeing King Perion with his people were enclosed in the
City, he resolved to take leisure for his revenge, wherein he was deceived,
for soon after he was very strongly repulsed, which made him almost mad with
anger. And as he thus raged up and down, one of his Knights showed him the
Prince, saying: My Lord, he whom you see mounted on the white Horse, is the
man that slew Prince Daganel and the Duke of Normandye, with many other the
best in your Army. When King Abies heard that, he rode to the Prince with these
words: Knight, thou have slain the man whom most I loved in the world: but if
thou will combat, I hope to be reue^ged so well, as I shall have cause to be
quit with thee. Your men, answered ye Prince, are too little travailed to
meddle with ours, notwithstanding, if thou will (as a Knight) revenge him thou
louedst, and declare the great hardines for which thou art renowned: choose of
thy men such as thou shall like, and I (if it please the King) will do as much
of mine, for being equal in number, thou shall gain more honor then with so
great an Army, which thou have brought into this country without just
occasion. Believe me, quoth the King, thou talkest well, go to, choose thou thy
self the number of men, how many or few thou think good. Seeing you leave
it in my choice, replied the Prince, I will make an other offer, which (it may
be) you will account more convenient. You are mine enemy for that which I have
done, and I yours for the wrong you have done to this Realm, so for our
several cause of anger, it is not reasonable any other then our selves should
suffer: let then the battle be between you and me only, and presently (if
you will) without longer dallying, yet shall you assure me from your men, as I
will do you from mine, so y^ none shall move, whether the one or the other be
vanquished. Right well, said King Abies, do I allow of thy offer: whereupon he
chose ten Knights on his part to guard the feeld. And as the Prince labored to
gain the like of the King, with his consent, he found King Perion and Agraies
somewhat loath to grant the Combat: as well for the consequence that might
ensue, as also because the Prince was much wearyed and sore wounded beside,
wherefore they entreated him to defer the matter till the day following. But
the desirous affection he had to be conqueror, as also to make a final
conclusion of the war, that he might return under her obeysaunce, from whom
he came to serve King Perion: would not suffer him to make any longer delay, of
the glory and honor which he saw so near at hand. For this cause he used so
many persuasions to the King, as in the end he was granted the Combat, and
on his side likewise were ten Knights appointed, for his guard and safety in
the feeld.

CHAP. X. How the Gentleman of the Sea fought the Combat with King Abies, on
difference of the war he made in Gaul.
YOu have heard in what manner the Combat was accorded between King Abies and
the Gentleman of the Sea, and now already is the greatest part of ye day
spent: wherefore it was agreed by the Lords on either side, (very much against
the wills of the two Combatants) that all should be deferred till the morrow
morning: as well that they might refresh themselves, and repair their battered
Armor, as also for regarding such wounds, as they had received in the passed
encounters. Hereupon the two Kings withdrewe themselves, the one to his Camp,
and the other to his Castle. But such is the brute spread through the City,
what worthy exploits the Gentleman of the Sea had done: as he could not pass
by them, but thus they spoke with general voice. Ah famous Knight, God give
thee grace to proceed as thou have begun: impossible is it to find a
Gentleman, so accomplished with beauty and chivalry as he is, for our eyes
are judges of the one, and our enemies full well have felt the other. But you
must note, that in the morning when they went to the feeld, the King had given
the Queen in charge, that so soon as the Prince returned from the war, she
should send one of her Ladies to him, requesting him not to be unarmed in any
other place then in her Chamber: wherefore as he went near the Kings lodging,
the Lady came unto him, saying. Sir Knight, the Queen desires you not to be
els-where unarmed, but in her Chamber, where she stays your coming. In
sooth, said the King, you must needs grant this request, and I desire it may
be so. The Prince condiscending, went where the Queen stayed with her Ladies,
and no sooner was he entered, but presently the Ladies help to unarm him: yet
the Queen her self took the greatest pain of all, and as she had off his
coat of Mayle, she perceived he was sore wounded, which she showing to the
King, he said. I marvel Gentleman, seeing you are so hurt, that you took no
longer time for your Combat. It had been needless, answered the Prince, for
I have no wound (I thank God) that can keep me from the Combat, Right soon
were the Chirurgions commanded to look thereon, and they found it greater in
show then danger. In the mean while supper was prepared, during which time,
they had much talk of the accidents that day past: until the hour of rest
came, when each one departed till the next morning. Which being come, after
they had served God, the King sent a rich and goodly Armor to the Prince, of
better proof and strength then that he had on the day before: wherewith he
armed himself, and having taken leave of every one, mounted on horsseback in
company of the King, Who bare his Helmet, the Prince Agraies his Sheeld
(wherein was portrayed two azured Lions in a golden feeld, rampant the one
against the other, as if they both intended murder,) and an other Prince
carried his Lance. In this equipage he set forward to the feeld, where the
King of Ireland attended his coming, well armed, and mounted on a goodly black
Courser: but because King Abies had in former time fought hand to hand with a
Giant, and vanquished him with the loss of his head, therefore he brought to
the Combat the like figure in his Sheeld, describing the whole order as the
deed was done. On either side resorted thither a number of people, placing
themselves for most convenient sight of the Combat. And now were the Champions
entered the lysts, each one courageously resolving against his enemy, wherefore
without longer tarying, lacing down the sight of their Helmets, and commending
themselves to God: they gave the spurs to their horses, meeting together so
furiously, both with lance, body and horse, as their staves flew in shiuers,
yet piercing their Armor, and both were laid along in the feeld. But heat of
heart and desire of conquest, made them recover footing quickly, and plucking
forth the spields of their lances wherewith they were wounded: set hand to
Sword, beginning such a strange and cruel fight, as each one was amazed to see
them endure so much. For this fight was not equally matched, in respect the
Prince was but young, well proportioned, and of reasonable height: but King
Abies was so great, as he never found any Knight y^ exceeded him a handful
every way, being (withal, so strongly made, that he was rather to be accounted
a Giant then a man: yet was he highly loved and reverenced of his subjects, for
the virtue and prowess which remained in him, albeit he was too much audacious
and proud. Now were these Champions so animated against each other, as well for
honor, as the consequence of the Combat, that without any stay for breathing
they laid on such load, as their strokes resounded the fight of twenty men
together. And well they witnessed no great good will between them, for there
might ye see the earth tainted with their blood, the pieces of their Sheelds,
the plate of their Armor scattered abroad, and their Helmets so bruised: that
by reason their Arms being so squandered, they were unable to hold out their
strokes, for every blow caused the blood to gushe out abundantly, yet were
they of such invincible courage, as they seemed to feel none of this
annoyance. Hereupon they maintained such bravery the one against the other,
as it could not be judged who had the better or worsse: notwithstanding, about
the hour of three, the Sun gave an exceeding warm and violent heat, whereby
they found themselves so chafed in their Armor, as they began to wax somewhat
feeble: especially King Abies, in so much as he was constrained to retire back,
thus speaking to the Prince. I see thee very near falling, and my self am
likewise out of breath, if thou think it good, let us rest awhile, for
afterward we may more easily finish our enterprise. And thus much I tell thee,
(although I have no cause or desire to favor thee) that I hold better opinion
of thee, then any Knight that ever I combatted withal: moreover, it
displeases me that I had any occasion to see thee, and much more that I am so
long in conquering thee, whereby I might take vengeance for his death whom
most I loved in the world, and as thou did sie y him in open battle, so
likewise will I overcome thee in sight of both our Camps. King Abies, replied
the Prince, I now perceive it displeases thee that thou can do me no more
harm, entering so like a Tirant as thou did to ruinate this country. And as
it often happens, that he which delights in evil, can never brook any
other savor: so hope I to reward thee so well for thy pains, as thou shall
confess thou have wronged these people. Beside, thus much I advise thee before
hand, that I shall give thee as little leisure or respite, as thou have given
the^ who have tasted thy cruelty: therefore stick close to thy tackling, and
defend thy self against the Knight whom thou reputest failing. The King then
taking his Sword, and what was left of his Sheeld, thus answered. Well may
thou curse the boldness that made thee enter these Ly^tes, for hence thou shall
not escape without loss of thy head. Do what thou can, said the Prince, for
thou shall rest no more, till thou or thine honor be dead. Heerewith more
cruelly then before they began again their combat, as if they had but even
then entered the feeld, and albeit King Abies was so expert, by reason of his
long exercise in Arms, that he knew right well how to defend and offend:
nevertheless the lightness, hardines, and promptitude of the Prince, made him
in the end forget all his industry, for he was so closely followed at an
inche, as he lost altogether the rest of his Sheeld, by which means the Prince
could endomage him far better then before: whereof he failed not, and in so
many places withal, that the blood streamed down his Armor in marvelous
abundance, causing him by little and little to loose his strength, and being
in this agony, staggering from one side to another, he could not devise what to
do, to escape the pursuing sword of his enemy. Seeing himself now deuoyd of
all hope, he concluded either soon to dye or have the victory, and taking his
Sword in both hands, he ran with all his might against the Prince, and pierced
it so far into his Sheeld, as he was not able to pull it forth again. Which
when the Prince beheld, he gave him such a furious stroke on the left leg, that
being quite cut from the rest, the King was enforced to fall down: and right
soon did the Prince set foot upon him, tearing violently his Helmet from his
head saying. Thou art dead King Abies, if thou do not yield thy self
vanquished. Believe me I am dead, answered the King, not vanquished alone, but
of both the one and other, my ouer-weening has been the only cause.
Notwithstanding, since it is so come to pass, I pray thee let assurance be
given to my Soldiers* that without injury they may carry me into my
Country, and dying like a Christian, I may pay my debt both to God and men.
Feign would I have council for my ouer-burdened soul, then afterward shall I
render to King Perion what I usurped from him. And as for thee who have
vanquished me, I despise not to dye by the valiaunce of so gentle a Knight as
thou art: but with all my heart pardon thee my death, wishing thou may
continue honorable, and yet hereafter to remember me. When the Prince saw him
in such debilitie, he was exceeding sorrowful for his death, although he knew
assuredly, that if he had won the glory of the combat, he would have dealt
much worsse with him. During these speeches, the Knights appointed on each side
came to them, wherefore King Abies commanded his Captains, to render King
Perion what he had conquered in Gaul: which was accomplished, and by these
means the Irish-men had assurance to carry home their King, who dyed soon
after order was given for their affairs. These matters thus ended, King
Perion, Agraies, and all the Lords of Gaul came to ye Prince, accompanying him
with great joy from the feeld into the City, even with such triumphant glory
as to Conquerours is accustomed: who by their prowess not only overcome their
enemies, but restore the country that is wel-neere ruynated.

Now must ye understand, that a little before the beginning of the Combat, the
Damsel of Denmark who came from fair Oriana to the Prince, was arrived at
King Perions Court: and before she would make her self known, she desired to
behold the issue of the fight. Afterward, having seen him she searched was so
honorably returned, she showed herself, and taking him aside, said. Sir
Knight, may it please ye to hear a word in secret, of such matter as does
very near concern ye? Even what you will, answered the Prince: with which
words he took her by the hand, and keeping her from the throng, she thus
spoke. The Princess Oriana who is only yours, has sent me to you and this
Letter withal, wherein you shall find your name written. When he heard her
named, by the remembrance of whom only he lived, he was so perplexed, that
without understanding what else the Damsel said: having taken the Letter, he
let it fall, being ready himself to bear it company, which the Damsel
seeing, she took up the Letter and came to him again. Every one that beheld
him in these passions, meruayled what news she brought to procure this
alteration: but she pulled him by the arm so roughly, as made him forget his
former trance, thus speaking. What now my Lord? take you the message in so ill
part, that commes from the only Lady in the world, and who above all other
loves you? for whose sake likewise I have taken so great pain to find you?
Ah Lady, quoth he, on my faith I knew not what ye said to me, for even as you
began to speak, I felt the pain to renew in me, which heretofore you have
seen me endure. It is true, said the Damsel, but now it is needless for ye
to conceal your self any longer from me, for I know more of your affairs
and my Ladies, then you imagine, because her self has bewrayed them to me.
And if you bear her affection, you need not be ashamed thereof, in that she
loves you beyond all other: in respect whereof, she tells you by me, that
she must go to the King her Father, requesting after your departure from this
war, you would come see her in great Brittayne, appointing all things in such
order, as at your arrival you may remain there in the Court, until more
amply you understand her mind. Beside she gave me charge to tell ye, how she
certainly knows you are Son to a King, wherewith she is no less pleased
then she thinks you will be: and seeing (being ignorant of your lineage) you
have proved so good a Knight, now understanding your nobility, you should
labor to increase your fame if you can. And then again she gave him the
Letter, saying. Take here the Letter wherein your name is written, and which
you had hanging about your neck, at such time as you were found in the Sea. The
Prince took the Letter, and when he looked on it, remembering to what good
purpose his Lady had taken it from him, fetching a vehement sigh, somewhat
softly he thus spoke. Ah happy Letter, most divinely wast thou found, in
respect thou have been kept by her who has my heart in her custody, and for
whom I have so often assayed to dye, yet cannot. For thinking on her
perfection, I seek to augment it by strength and commendation, but of so
slender value is my puissance found: that striving thereby to gain her favor,
the least pain I feel surpasses a thousand deaths, which nevertheless are
now recompensed by this present benefit. O highest God, when shall I see the
time, wherein I may give her to understand, how great my devotion is to obey
her by some agreeable service? Having finished these words, he opened the
Letter, and saw his name written therein, which was Amadis: then thus spoke the
Damsel again to him. I was charged Sir, so soon as I had done my message,
to return with all speed to her that sent me to you, whereby she might
understand some news of you, therefore bethink your self if you will
command me any thing. You shall not depart (so please you) in such haste
answered the Prince, but stay with me two or three days: during which time,
for what occasion so ever it be, you shall not forsake me, and then will I
conduct ye whether you please. In obeying you, replied the Damsel, I trust I
do service to my Lady Oriana. Their talk thus breaking off, he returned to the
King and Agraies, who stayed for him at the entrance of the City, where the
people were wonderfully assembled in the streets. Then came the Queen with
her Ladies and Gentlewomen to unarm him, and the Chirurgions to visit his
wounds, which when they had regarded, albeit they were many and yrksome to
behold, yet were they to be healed without any great danger of his person. For
this night the King desired that he and Agraies would sup with him, but the
Prince making excuse by his wounds, went to his Chamber, willing to have no
other company then the Damsel: to whom he did all the honor could be
devised, hoping through her to find remedy for part of his griefs. This
Damsel soiourned with him certain time, and in respect of the good news she
brought him, no wound could hinder him from visiting the great Hall, there
walking and conferring with every one: but most with her whom he caused to
stay, attending his disposition till he might bear Arms. And between them
happened a strange occasion, which was cause of his longer aboade in Gaul
then he expected: so that the Damsel returned to Oriana without him, as you
hereafter shall understand.

CHAP. XI. How the Gentleman of the Sea was known by King Perion his Father,
and by the Queen Elisena his Mother.
IN the beginning of this History it has been recited, how King Perion gave
his Queen Elisena, being then in little Brittayne, a King like another that
commonly he wore, and these two Kings were of such an uniform, as there was no
difference to be discerned between them. Likewise you have understood, how
when the young Prince was put upon the water, this King was fastened about his
neck, which Gardal^^, kept* till time he sent it by the Damsel (a little
before he was Knighted) with the Sword and the ware. Now had the King sundry
times demanded of the Queen for the King, who made him diverse doubtful
answers, and in the end said she had lost it. But it came to pass, that as the
Prince walked with Orianaes Damsel, which commonly he was wont to do, young
Melicia daughter to King Perion, passed by him weeping, when the Prince stayed
her, saying. Fair friend, why weep ye? Ah my Lord, quoth the Princess, I
have even now lost a King, which the King my Father gave me to keep while he
slept. Weep not so fair Uirgin, answered the Prince, you shall have another
of me to give him: so taking his own King from his finger, he gave it her.
When she beheld it, thinking it was the same she had lost, she said. A my Lord,
you have found it, wherewith I am not a little glad, for I have all this while
sought it. What now? quoth the Prince, this is not your King. In mine opinion
it is, answered Melicia, or the only thing of the world that most resembles it.
So much the better, said the Prince, for more easily will it be judged the same
you lost. Heerewith went Melicia to the Kings chamber, and finding him awake,
he asked her for his King, then gave she him the same she had of ye Prince,
which the King put on his finger, thinking it was his own. But soon after as
he walked through the Gallarie, he espied in a corner lying the other King,
which he gave his daughter before to keep, and taking it up, he compared them
together: whereupon he remembered, that one of these two was the same he
sometime gave the Queen, so he asked of Melicia where she had the King. The
young Princess affrayd of beating, durst not lie, but thus answered. My Lord
and Father, your King I lost, and as I searched for it, I met with the
Gentleman of the Sea: who because he saw me weep, gave me one of his, which I
delivered you in stead of your own, and if that be not it, I know not where
it is. When the King heard this, he presently conceived suspicion between his
Queen and the Prince, imagining in respect of his beauty, how she was fallen
into some dishonest liking of him, and therefore had given that token.
Hereupon he went to the chamber where she was, and shutting the door, sat
down by her, not speaking one word a good space, but silently fixed his eyes
on the ground: then breathing forth a passionate sigh, he said. I will not
marvel any longer Madame, why you would never make me any certain answer,
when I demanded for the King I gave ye in little Brittayne: you have lost it
in such a place, where you would be loath I should know of it, but hardly can
you conceal affection, when it proceeds to such effects. The Gentleman of
the Sea inconsiderately gave it to Melicia, little thinking that it came at the
first from me: and thereby do I know what he suspecteth not, and your self
would I should not understand. When the Queen (who already by his countenance
saw he was troubled) heard what he had said, she now determined not to
dissemble with him in any thing, but summarily made a true discourse of her
childbirth. And (not without tears) she recounted to him, how standing in
fear of the King her Father, as also the severe law used in his Kingdom, she
was constrained to comunt her Son to the mercy of the Sea, and in his cradle
coffin put with him, both the King, Sword, and what else has been already
declared. Confounded was the King with marvel when he heard the whole truth,
and presently imagined that the Prince might be his first Son, whom God had
so miraculously preserved, wherefore he said to the Queen. According to your
circumstances revealed, it may be, that he who is unknown to us, is our Son,
and the rather I conjecture so by the name he bears of the Sea. Ah God, said
the Queen, may it fall out so happily? I beseech ye my Lord, send presently
for him, and we will desire him to tell us of whence he is. Let us go then,
quoth the King, to seek him. So went they to his chamber, where they found him
sleeping, wherefore (without making any noise) he approaching near the bed,
espied his Sword, which he took, and after he had well viewed it, knew it to
be the same he esteemed so much, and wherewith he had finished many famous
adventures, whereupon he said to the Queen. On my faith, this is the Sword I
left in the chamber of the King your Father, the first night we were acquainted
together, and now do I the better believe what you have said unto me. Ah God,
said the Queen, let us suffer him sleep no longer, for my heart cannot endure
this weighty burden: heerewith she took him by the hand and awaked him,
saying. My Lord, sleep no more at this time, for other occasions calls you.
Easily was the Prince raised from sleep, but when he beheld the Queen
weeping, as one amazed thereat, he said. Madame, from what occasion proceed
these tears? is there any thing I may do ye service in, to remedy them? Noble
friend, quoth the Queen, you only may quallifie my griefs by your words, in
telling us whose Son you are. So God help me Madame, answered the Prince, I
know not, for by strange adventure was I found in the Sea. The good Lady was
then so overcome with joy, as not only speech, but vital sense was taken from
her, and she fell down in a swoune: which the Prince perceiving, quickly ran
to recover her, saying. What ayle ye Madame? further could he not imagine on
the cause of this alteration. Ah my Son, quoth she, now know I better then
thy self who thou art. The King likewise was so carried away with joy and
admiration, as he stood not able to speak a word: now was it hard to judge,
which of these three felt greatest contentation, but the mother throwing her
arms about the Princes neck, said. Now may I boldly dare to kiss thee in
safety, having been so long deprived of thy sight and knowledge: highly am I
beholding to the divine bounty, who has favored the offense I committed
through fear, which was, in delivering thee to the courtesy of the waters,
and see here thy Kingly Father that begot thee. With these words the Prince
fell at their feet, extreme joy reducing the tears into his eyes, and all
together praised God for this good adventure: especially the Prince, because he
had been preserved in so great danger, and now at length to find such honor
and good hap, as to meet with his Parents, being all this while unknown to
them. As thus they devised on the fortunes passed, the Queen demanded of him
if he had no other name, then that which now he called himself by? Yes Madame,
quoth he, but it is not fully three days past since I knew thereof, for as I
came from the Combat against King Abies, a Damsel brought me a Letter which
I have, and (as she says) was fastened about my neck, being wrapped in ware,
when I was found in the Sea, wherein I find that my name is Amadis: and
heere-withall he showed the Letter to the Queen, which she full well knew so
soon as she saw it. Believe me, said the Queen, this truly is the Letter
that Darioletta wrote, when she made the separation between you and me: thus
though I was ere while in great grief and sorrow, yet now (praised be God) I
feel as much joy and pleasure. Now seeing assuredly your name is Amadis, it is
needless you should bear any other contrary title: so thence forward he was
called no more the Gentleman of the Sea, but Amadis, and sometime Amadis of
Gaul. It was not long before the brute hereof was spread through the City,
that the good and famous Knight was Son to King Perion and the Queen
Elisena: wherefore if every one reioysed, you must think the Prince Agraies
was not sorry, for they were found to be Cousin germans. Among the rest, the
Damsel of Denmark had knowledge heer-of, wherefore considering what comfort
this would be to the Princess Oriana, she labored so much as she could to
return toward her: knowing she would give her friendly countenance, bringing
her so good news, what gracious fortune had happened to him whom above all
other she loved. For this cause she entreated Amadis, to dispatch her return
to her Mistress: In that I well perceive, quoth she, you cannot so speedily
depart hence as you would, nor were it reasonable, but you should give some
contentation to them, who for the love of you have shead so many tears. These
words caused the tears to tricle down his cheeks, yet smothering his grief
so well as he could, he made this answer to the Damsel. Lady, I will pray
that the heavens may safely conduct ye, yet let me entreat your friendly
remembrance, commanding the uttermost of my endeavors, for without your gentle
care my life cannot endure: withal, I find my self so indebted to my
gracious mistress, as I dare not request any thing at her hand.
Neuer-the-lesse you may say to her, that right soon shall I come to show my
obedience, and in like armor will I be clad, as when you saw me Combat with
the King of Ireland: because both she and you may the more easily know me, if
I can not compass the mean to spoke with you, and in this manner departed the
Damsel of Denmark. On the other side, Agraies seeing his Cousin Amadis was to
remain longer in Gaul, determined to take his leave, and calling him aside,
said. Fair Cousin, for this time I must be enforced to leave ye, albeit your
company is more pleasing to me then any other: but my passionate heart will
allow me no quiet, until I be with her, who both far and near has power
to command me. It is Madame Oliuia, daughter to the King Vanain of Norway, who
sent for me (by the Damsel that brought me the Helmet of Galpan, which you
sent me in revenge of the dishonor she received by him) that I should come to
her with all convenient speed: and therefore I neither may or dare fail,
which is the only cause of my parting with you. Now must you note heerewithall,
that at the time as Don Galuanes, brother to the King of Scotland, was in the
Realm of Norway with Agraies his Cousin: this young Prince became so enamoured
of the Lady Oliuia, as he concluded never to love any other then her, and this
made him the more earnest to depart by her commandment. And to tell ye what
this Galuanes was, he had the name of Galuanes without land, because all the
portion his father left him, was only a poor Castle: for the rest he had
spent in following Arms and entertaining Gentlemen, whereupon he had the
Surname of without land. Such as you have heard were the speeches Agraies had
with Amadis, of whom he requested to know, where he should find him at his
return from Norway. Cousin, quoth Amadis, I hope at my departure hence, to
visit the Court of King Lisuart, where I have heard chivalry to be worthily
maintained, with greater liberty and honor, then in the Kingdom of any
Emperor or King. But seeing it likes you to take another way, I desire when
you shall see the King your Father, and the Queen, to remember my bounden
duty to them both: assuring them on my behalf, that they may command me in
their service, even as your self, or any other, as well in respect of our
alliance together, as also for the gracious entertainment I had in my youth,
being by them most carefully educated and esteemed. This done, Agraies took
his leave, being honorably conducted through the City by the King and all the
Lords of his Court: but so soon as the King entered the feelds, he saw a
Damsel coming toward him, who boldly laying hold on the rain of his horse
bridle, thus spoke. Remember thy self King Perion, what a Damsel sometime
said unto thee: That when thou did recover thy loss, the Kingdom of Ireland
should loose her flower. Think now I pray thee whether she said true or no,
thou have recovered thy Son whom thou reputedst lost, and even by the death
of valiant King Abies, who was the flower of Ireland, and such a one as that
country shall never have his like: until time the good brother of the Lady
must come, who shall by force of Arms cause to be brought thither the tribute
of other Countries, and he must dye by the hand of him, that shall accomplish
for her the only thing of the world which most he loves. And so it happened by
Marlot of Ireland, brother to the Queen of that country, whom Tristan of
Leonnoys killed, on the quarrel of tribute demanded of King Mark of
Cornwall his Uncle: which Tristan afterward dyed for the love he bare to
Queen Yseul, being the only thing of the world that he most loved. Now must
thou be mindful hereof, said the Damsel to the King, for Vrganda my
mistress so commands thee. When Amadis heard her speak of Vrganda, he
took occasion thus to answer. Damsel and my friend, I pray you say to her
who sent you hither, that the Knight to whom she gave the Lance, commends
himself to her good grace: being now assured in the matter whereof then she
spoke, how with that Lance I should deliver the house from whence I first
descended: and even so it fell out, for I delivered my Father unknown to me,
being then at the very point of death. So without any other reply, the Damsel
turning bridle, rode back the same way she came, and the King into the City,
with Amadis his Son so lately recovered: for which cause, he assembled all
the Princes and Lords of his Realm, meaning to keep a more magnificent Court
then ever he had done before, to the end that every one might behold Amadis, in
regard of whose honor and happy coming, there were Knightly Tourneys daily
used, beside great store of other pastimes and delights.

During these pleasures, Amadis was advertised in what manner the Giant had
carried away his brother Galaor, wherefore he determined (happen what might) to
go seek him, and if possible he could to recover him, either by force of
Arms or otherwise. Notwithstanding, his heart being daily moved to go see
her that hourly expected his presence, one day he entreated the King his
Father: seeing now he had peace with his enemies, that with his leave he might
go seek adventures in great Brittayne, because he was loathe to remain idle.
But little pleasing was this request to the King, and much less to the Queen,
yet by importunity he obtained permission for his voyage: nor could they all
have power to withhold him, by reason of the love he bare to Oriana, which made
him obedient to none but her. Hereupon, being clad in such Armor as he
promised the Damsel of Denmark, he set forward on his journey, embarquing
himself at the nearest Port of the Sea, where by good hap he found passage
ready. Not long was his cut into great Brittayne, landing at Bristow, a most
noble and ancient City of that country, where he heard that King Lisuart
soiourned at Windsore, royally accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen: for all
the Kings and Princes his neighbors, did highly favor and show him obeisance,
which made Amadis shape his course directly to the Court. Not long had he
ridden on the way, but he met with a Damsel, who demanded of him, if that
were her ready way to Bristow? Yea marie is it, answered the Prince. I pray ye
then tell me, quoth she, if I may find any Shipping there, for my speedy
passage over into Gaul? What affairs calls you thither? said Amadis. In
sooth, replied the Damsel, I go thither to find a Knight named Amadis,
whom King Perion not long since has known to be his Son. Greatly did
Amadis marvel heereat, for he thought these news had not been so far
spread abroad, wherefore he demanded how she heard thereof? I know it, quoth
she, from her, to whom the most secret things of all are manifest: for she
knew Amadis before he knew himself, or that his father heard of Amadis, and
if you would understand what she is, her name (by common report) is Vrganda the
unknown. She has at this time especial affairs with him, and by no other
can she recover that, which she now stands in fear in loose. Believe me
Damsel, answered Amadis, seeing she who may command every one, does now
please to employ Amadis, I assure ye, it is needless for you to travail any
further: for I am the man you are sent to seek, and therefore let us go
whether you think convenient. What? said the Damsel, are you Amadis? Yea
verily am I, answered the Prince. Come then and follow me, quoth she, and I
will conduct ye where my Mistress is, who attends your arrival in good
devotion. Heere-with Amadis rode after the Damsel, and thus are they gone
together in company.

CHAP. XII. How the Giant bringing Galaor to King Lisuart, that he might dub
him Knight: met with his brother Amadis, by whose hand he would be Knighted,
and no other.
THe Giant, of whom sundry times we have spoken heretofore, causing young
Galaor to be enstructed in managing Horses, and all other exercises beseeming
a Knight: found him so capable of every thing, as in less space then a year
he was grown meruaylous perfect, so that now nothing remained but to know of
him, by whom he most willingly would receive his order of Knighthood.
Notwithstanding, before the Giant moved this matter to him, one day among
other, Galaor came to him in this manner. Father, quoth he, you have daily
promised me that I should be Knighted, I desire you would be so good as your
word: for there is too much time spent since I ought to have had it. In sooth
my Son, answered the Giant, you have reason for your words: yet tell me by
whom you would receive your order? King Lisuart, quoth Galaor, is reputed a
gentle Prince, and a right good Knight, wherefore if it so like you, I shall be
contented to have it at his hand. Well have you advised, said the Giant: so
presently preparing all things in order, they set forward on their journey.
About five days after their departure, by good hap they came near a very
fair and strong Castle, named Bradoid, seated on the top of a Mountain,
environed about with fennes or marshes, as also with a salt water, that ran
before it wondrous swiftly, so that without a Barque it was impossible to get
thither. And because the marish was very long, there was to pass over it a
fair long causey, being so broad, as two Chariots might well meet together
on it: and at the entrance of the causey was a draw bridge, where-under the
water ran with such a violent fall, as no one was able by any means to pass
it. Here must ye note, that equally facing this bridge, there grew two goodly
high Elm trees, where*under the Giant and Galaor beheld two Damsels and a
Squire, with a Knight mounted on a black Courser, this Knight was armed,
bearing figured in his Sheeld two Lions rampant: and because the bridge was
drawn up, he could pass no further, but called with a loud voice to them
within, that some should come to give him entrance, which Galaor perceiving,
said to the Giant. My Lord, if it please you, I would gladly see what this
Knight will do here. Soon after they espied at the further end of the causey
by the Castle side, two other armed Knights, accompanied with ten Halberders,
who came and demanded of the Knight, what he would? Marie enter in, answered
the Knight. It may not be, said one of the two Knights, except you mean to
combat first. I will not stick for that, answered he that would enter, cause
you the bridge to be let down, and come to the combat: which presently they
did. But one of the twain (more hasty then his companion) auaunced himself
first, and placing his Lance, ran with a swift carrire against the Knight, who
received him so bravely, as he sent both horse and man to the ground. The
friend to the dismounted Knight thinking to revenge his injury, gave forth to
meet him, and failing in the attaint with their Lances, so furiously
encountered with their bodies, as the Knight of the Castle fell into the water
where he was drowned, and the conqueror rode on, which the Halberders seeing,
presently drew up the bridge again after him. When the Damsels saw he was
thus* closed in, they cried aloud to him that he should return, and as he was
about so to do: he espied three other Knights well armed coming toward him,
who very audaciously thus spoke. Unhappy was the hour to thee when thou did
pass this bridge, for thou shall dye in this water, where he is drowned that
was of greater reputation then thou art. Heerewith they all three together ran
against him, and met him so firmly, as his Horse was like to have fallen over
backward, yet having broken their Lances on him, he was at this encounter
wounded in two places: nevertheless, one of them he met in such order, as his
Armor being unable to resist the point of the Lance, pierced through with
such violence, that the trunchion still remained in his body. This done,
courageously he drew his sword, addressing himself to the other twain, and
they in like manner against him, where-upon began a dangerous combat between
them: but he with the Lions in his Sheeld doubting his death, labored so much
as he could to overcome his enemies, giving one of them such a stroke on the
right arm, as (being cut from his body) it fell sword and all to the ground:
wherefore feeling himself thus wounded, he gallopped with all speed to the
Castle, crying. Help my friends, help your Lord who is in danger of killing.
When the Knight of the Lions heard, that he with whom he must yet deal, was
the Lord of the Castle, he delivered him such a rigorous blow on the Helmet,
as made him loose his stirrops and ready to fall, had he not got hold about
the neck of his Horse: in this staggering the Knight of the Lions rent his
Helmet from his head, and he perceiving himself unarmed, thought to escape by
flight as the other did, but his enemy got between him and the Castle,
saying. Thou art dead, if thou yield not thy self my prisoner. Alas, answered
the amazed Knight, I am dead in deed if you please: but as you are a Gentleman
take pity on me, for I do yield my self your vanquished. Suddenly the Knight
of the Lions looking about, espied other Knights and armed men on foot, that
came in great haste from the Castle to succor their Lord: wherefore he
stepped to his conquered prisoner, and holding his sword against his throat,
said. Command thy men to return, else shall thou presently dye. Then he who
saw his life in such peril, cried to them, and made a sign with his hand,
that if they loved him they should return: where upon, they beholding their
Lords life at his enemies swords point, obeyed his command with all possible
speed. Yet is not this enough, said the conqueror, cause now the bridge to be
let down: which he did, and they came both forth on the causey where the
Ladies tarried: but when the Knight of the Castle beheld them, and that one of
them was Vrganda the unknown: Ah my Lord, quoth he, if you keep me not from
this Lady, I am but dead. Nay believe me, answered the Knight, that will not I
do, but rather am to deal with thee as she shall command me: then stepping to
Vrganda, he said. Madame, see here the Lord of the Castle, what is your
pleasure I shall do with him? Smite off his head, answered Vrganda, if he will
not deliver you my friend whom he keeps in prison. Heere-with he lift up his
sword to fear him, when the Knight falling on his knee, cried: Ah my Lord,
kill me not, I will obey what so ever she commands. Dispatch it quickly
then, said the Knight of the Lions. So called the Lord to one of the Halberders
within, saying: Go to my brother, and tell him if ever he intend to see me
alive, let him quickly cause the imprisoned Knight to come hither, and the
Damsel that brought him with her. Right soon was the messenger gone on this
errand, returning immediately with the Damsel and the Knight, to whom the
Knight of the Lions thus spoke. Thank this Lady who has done so much for ye,
and truly great cause you have to love her, in that she has taken wonderful
pains to deliver you from this thraldom. I do love her, answered the restored
Knight, and so will continue better then I have done heretofore. But before he
could finish these words, Vrganda ran and embraced him, the like did he to her:
afterward the conqueror demanded, what should be done with her that brought
him thither. It is necessary that she dye, replied Vrganda, to let her know
the price of so heinous an offense. Presently was the poor Damsel so
strangely enchaunted, as she ran skipping over the marrish quag-mires, and
turning back again, would have thrown her self into the water, had not the
Knight of ye Lions entreated Vrganda, to pardon her trespass for this time.
Provided, said Vrganda, that she return no more to offend me, otherwise she
shall pay for all together. When the Lord of the Castle saw the Damsel was
remitted, at his request who overcame him, he thus spoke. My Lord, I have
performed what has been commanded, therefore I pray ye give me leave to
depart from her that never loved me. In sooth, answered Vrganda, for honor of
him by whom you make your suit, I am content, and you may return. He being
gone, the Knight of the Lions (who yet meruailed, by what occasion the Damsel
was driven into the fury) asked what moved her so to do? Ah my Lord, quoth
she, me thought one came round about me, and would have burned me with a
lighted torch, therefore to save my self, I sought to leap into the water. At
these words the Knight fell into a laughter, saying. Your folly has been
ouer-great, fair Damsel, to work her ill who knows how to revenge it.

Galaor stood and had seen all these things, where-upon he thus spoke to ye
Giant. Believe me father, I very much desire that this worthy man should give
me my order, for if King Lisuart be renowned, it is for his possessions, but
this Knight deserves it by his strength and valor. I am well content, answered
the Giant, go and request it of him, if he deny you, the fault is his own. So
Galaor went forward, accompanied with four Squires and two Damsels, when
coming to the Knight of the Lions, he found him yet under the trees. At his
arrival he was courteously received by the Knight, who reputed him one of the
most comely Gentlemen that ever he had seen, afterward Gal^^^ thus began.
Gentle Sir, I am come to entreat a favor at your hand. Truly, answered the
Knight, if your request be reasonable, it will the sooner be granted. My suit
Sir, quoth Galaor, is for nothing else, but that it might please you to give me
the order of Knighthood, and in so doing, you shall save me a great deal of
travail to King Li^^^^^* to whom I am going for the same cause. My friend,
replied ye Knight, you shall do your self over much wrong, to leave so good an
occasion by the best King in the world, for so poor a Knight errant as I am.
My Lord, quoth Galaor* the great state of the King can put no such strength
unto me, as I have seen performed by you in the late Combats: therefore (so
please it you) accomplish in me my earnest desire. I can be much better
content, answered the Knight, to grant any other thing you will demand: for
such authority appertains not to me, nor to you likewise is it so honorable.
As thus they stood on these terms, Vrganda ^vnlooked for^ came to them,
wherewith ye Knight of the Lions was very glad: and she having as yet not heard
any of their talk, thus spoke to her champion. What is your opinion of this
Gentleman? Me thinks, quoth he, a brauer person was never seen: but he
requires such a thing of me, as is neither in him or me convenient. What is
it? said Vrganda. That I, quoth he, should give him the order of Knighthood,
and yet is he now in travail, with determination to request the same of the
famous King Lisuart. Certainly, answered Vrganda, to make him stay, will be a
greater cause of evil to him then good, and I will council him not to desist
from his former motion: for you ought not to deny it him, seeing I can assure
ye, that honor will be better employed by him, then any other in all the Isles
of the Sea, except one. Seeing it is so, replied the Knight, in the name of God
let it be done: go we then to some Church to perform the vigill. It shall be
needless, quoth Galaor, to stand about such matters now, in that I come not
unprovided of them already. It suffiseth then, answered the Knight: so put he
on his right spur, and embracing him, said. You are now a Knight, wherefore
take the honor of the sword by whom you shall think it more convenient. Do
you then give it me, said Galaor, if you please, for by no other will I receive
it with my will. Then he called a Squire that held a sword ready, but Vrganda
stepped before, saying. No, no, you shall have a better: take that which
hangs on yonder tree, and you shall find it far more fair and good.
Heerewith they looked up on the tree, yet saw it not, wherefore they all began
to smile, and she doing the like, said to them. In sooth it is almost ten
years since it first was hanged there, yet no passenger by ever saw it: look
better about the tree, for sure you cannot but easily behold it. Now did they
all perceive it tied to a branch of the tree, even as though it had but even
then been hanged there: and by it was a scabberd covered with gold, showing,
most fine and curious workmanship on it. The Knight of the Lions took it
down, and afterward girded it about Galaor, saying. So fair a sword beseems
a Knight so formal, and think she hated ye not, who of so long time has kept
it for you. Most cheerfully did Galaor give her thanks, and the Knight
likewise, thus speaking to them. I beseech ye to hold me excused, for I am
constrained presently to depart from ye, and were it not I must go where I am
attended, no company in the world would I desire more then yours: therefore I
desire ye Sir, to tell me where I may find ye at my return. In the Court of
King Lisuart, answered the Knight, where I shall be very glad to see you: and
because it is no long time since I was Knighted, I am the more desirous of some
abode there to attain honor, as you cannot choose but do the like if you come
thither. Certes, said Galaor, to that place will I shortly follow ye: and
Madame, quoth he to Vrganda, you have so strictly bound me to your service, as
may it please you to account me your Knight, I am ready wheresoever you shall
command me. So departed he from them, returning to the Giant who stayed for
him by the river side, where he had hid himself least he should be seen.

But now you must here observe, that as Galaor thus devised with Vrganda and
the Knight, one of the Damsels that was in Galaors company, had conference
with her that attended on Vrganda, of whom at large she understood, how the
Knight of the Lions was Amadis, Son to King Perion of Gaul: whose coming
thither Vrganda had caused, to deliver by force of arms her friend that there
was kept prisoner, for by enchantment she could not compass it, by reason the
Lady of ye Castle was too cunning in that art, and there had first enchaunted
him in despite of her, fearing no way to loose him again but by Knightly
chivalry. On this occasion the custom there was appointed, which Amadis
ended, and restored (as you have heard) the man for whom they came thither:
and he by the Damsel, Niece to the Lady of the Castle, that in enchaunted
fury would have leapt into ye river, was conducted to this place.

So soon as Galaor had left Vrganda, she demanded of Amadis, if he knew the
man to whom he gave the order of Knighthood. No truly Madame, quoth he. In
footh, answered Vrganda, it is great reason you should know what he is: for he
bears so brave a mind, ye if you both should meet without further knowledge,
there might happen between ye great inconvenience. Therefore I give ye to
understand, how he is your own brother both by father and mother, and the very
same whom the Giant carried away, being then but two years old and a half:
now he is of so goodly stature as you have seen, for whose sake and yours
likewise, I have a long time kept the Sword, wherewith (I assure ye) he shall do
more in exploits of Arms, then ever any Knight did in great Brittayne. Amadis
conceived heereat such inward joy, as ye tears trickled down his cheeks,
wherefore he said to Vrganda. I beseech ye Madame, tell me where I may find
him. It is not necessary, quoth she, that as yet you should seek him. Why?
said Amadis, is he then constrained to accomplish some predestinate matter,
before I may find him? Yea verily, answered Vrganda, and it is not so easy to
know as you may imagine. Long time thus continued their conference, till
Vrganda would depart alone with her friend: so she commended Amadis to God, who
presently took his way toward Windsore, where at this time King Lisuart
soiourned.

Our History at this time pauseth of him, continuing what happened to Galaor
the new Knight, w^^ being arrived where the Giant stayed for him, thus spoke.
Father, I am now thanks be to God and him you sent me to, a confirmed Knight.
My Son, quoth the Giant, I am not a little glad thereof: and seeing it is so
well effected, will ye grant me one request? What? said Galaor, am I to deny
you any thing, except you would withold me from seeking honor? My Son,
answered the Giant, I rather desire thy happy proceeding therein, and that
which I would have appertains thereto. Demand then what you will, said
Galaor, for I grant it. Fair Son, quoth the Giant, heretofore you have
heard me complain of the Giant Albadan, who by treason slew my father, and yet
forcibly detaineth from me the Rock of Galteres, which justly does belong to
me. I pray ye to take revenge on my behalf, for no other then you may do it:
remember how well I have nourished and used you, as also my true and unfeigned
love, which is such, as I will yield my person even to the death for safety of
yours. This matter, said Galaor, you need not request, but command me to do
it: as for my self, I desire ye to rest content, till with Albadan I have
tried this difference, seeing it concerns you so near. Beside, hereof you
may be persuaded, that if I escape with life, I shall continue evermore in
readiness, to accomplish any thing else for your honor and profit: in which
deuoire, the whole circuit of my time is bound, as witness of the duty I owe
to you, therefore without any longer trifling, let us set forward to him with
whom I must try my fortune. So took they the way to the Rock of Galteres, but
before they had trauayled far, Vrganda ouertooke them, and being acquainted
with each other, she said to Galaor. Know ye (gentle Sir) who has this day
made you Knight? That do I Madame, answered Galaor, even the best Knight that
ever I heard of. It is very true, quoth she, yet is he of greater esteem then
you think, but I would have you to know his name: then called she Gandalaz the
Giant, saying. Gandalaz, do not thou know that this Knight whom thou have
nourished, is Son to King Perion and his Queen Elisena, and how by such like
words I bad thee take him, since which time thou have been his foster father?
It is very true, answered the Giant. Now then Galaor my friend, said Vrganda,
the man that made thee Knight is thy brother, and elder then thou by two
years: wherefore when thou see him, give him honor, and labor to resemble
him in hardines and kindship. May it be possible? replied Galaor, that King
Perion is my father, and Queen Elisena my mother, and I the brother to so good
a Knight? Doubt not thereof, quoth she, for it is so. Praised be God, said
Galaor, now may I assure ye that I am in greater care then before: nor will I
make any spare of my life, seeing it is necessary I should resemble him you
talk of. Thus returned Vrganda the same way she came, and the Giant with
Galaor rode on as they purposed, the Prince demanding of the Giant, what the
Lady was that had communed with them? It is, quoth he, Vrganda the unknown, as
she names her self, because she often trans-formeth and makes her self
unknown. As thus they devised together, they came to a river side where they
would refresh themselves, and by reason the heat of the day was very vehement,
they caused a Tent to be erected: where long they had not sitten, but they
beheld two Damsels coming toward them by two several ways, and met together
directly before the pauillion. So soon as they espied the Giant, they would
have fled, but Galaor came to assure them, and courteously caused them to
return, demanding afterward whether they travailed. I go, quoth one of them,
by the commandment of my mistress, to see a strange fight, which one only
Knight has enterprised in combat, against the strong Giant at the Rock of
Galteres, to the end I may bring her true tidings thereof. When the other
Damsel heard her say so, she thus replied. I am amazed at your speeches, is
there any Knight in the world dare venture on such folly? Certes, said the
first, it is most true. Believe me, answered the other, although my occasions
be elsewhere, I am content to stay and go with you, to see a matter so
incredible. Hereupon they would have taken leave of Galaor, but he said to
them. Make no haste fair Damsels, but tarry if you please, and we will bear
ye company: whereto they condiscended, as well for the good grace they noted in
this new Knight, as also in respect of his amiable countenance, which made them
take great pleasure in beholding him: then Galaor walking with the Giant aside,
said, Father, I could wish that you would go no further with us, but let me
go with these Damsels to accomplish what I have promised: this he spoke,
because he would not be known what he was, or that his enterprise should be
suspected by them, whereto the Giant (unwillingly) did accord. So rode Galaor
with the Damsels, and three Squires the Giant left him to bear his Armor,
making such speed in their journey, that they arrived within two miles of the
Rock of Galteres, where they lodged in the little cottage of an Hermit, to
whom Galaor imparted some of his secret thoughts: but when he revealed that he
came for the combat, the good Hermit (abashed thereat) discoursed with him in
this manner. My Son, who has advised thee to this boldness, seeing there is
not in all this country ten such Knights, as dare assail the Giant, so
fearful and monstrous is he to behold: and you being but young, to hazard
your self in this danger, adventure the loss both of body and soul,
because such as wilfully seek their own death, are very homicides of
themselves. Father, answered Galaor, God work his will with me, for by no
means may I let pass mine enterprise. Greatly was the good man moved to
compassion, so that the tears bedewed his milke-white beard, being able to
make no other answer, but thus: If not my Son, I desire God to assist ye,
seeing you will give no better credit to me. Good Father, quoth Galaor, be
mindful of me in your devout prayers: and thus till next morning they spent
the night.

Galaor having armed himself, went to the Rock which was not far from the
Hermitage, for there might be easily discerned the fortress and great towers,
which delivered good mark of a most strong Castle. When one of ye Damsels saw
they approached so near, she demanded of Galaor, if he knew the Knight that
should perform the Combat? I think, quoth he, I have seen him sometime: but
tell me I pray ye, from what place are you come to behold this pastime, and
what is the Lady that sent you? None must know so much, said the Damsel, but
the Knight himself which deals in the Combat. Thus continued their talk,
till they arrived at the Castle of Albadan, the gate whereof they found fast
shut, but Galaor stepping thereto, called the Porter: at which noise, two men
showed themselves over the porche, demanding of him what he would have. Go,
quoth Galaor, and say to Albadan, that here is a Knight, who is sent from
Gandalaz to defye him: and if he come not forth the sooner, he will show
himself of less valor then reputation. You have reason, said one of them in
mockage, but he will quickly bring a remedy for your choler, if you do not
help it your self by running away. So departed the watchmen to inform the
Giant of these news, and when the Damsels understood, that Galaor himself
must execute the enterprise, being terrified with amazement, they said. Ah my
Lord, you attempt a matter of overmuch folly, would God you might speed so
well, as with honor to accomplish an enterprise of such consequence: As for me,
quoth one of the^, I dare tarry no longer with ye, for I shall dye at the sight
of the Monster with whom you have to deal. Damsels, said he, seeing you may
not be assured here, depart I pray ye to the Hermitage where we lodged this
last night, and if I dye not in fight, I will not be long from ye. Believe me,
replied the other Damsel, what-soeuer happen I will not go, for I determine
to see the end. The boldness of the one made them both tarry, yet did they
sunder themselves by the Forest side, because the Giant should not see them,
and hoping the better to escape away if the Knight sped not well.

CHAP. XIII. How Galaor vanquished the Giant at the Rock of Galteres.
Soon was the Giant advertised of these news, wherefore not long after he
came forth of the Castle, mounted on a horse proportionable to such a huge
body: for it seemed an Elephant, and he on his back made ample resemblance of
a huge Colossus, or like a mountain moving, rather then a man. Armed he was
in plates of iron so long, as from his throat they covered all the saddle on
the horse, having on his head a bright shining helmet, and in his hand a
mighty iron Mace, being the weapon wherewith he commonly used to fight.
Wonderfully affrayde were the Squires and the Ladies that beheld him, and
Galaor was not so assured, but he stood somewhat abashed: notwithstanding, he
resolved so courageously, as the nearer he approached, the less account he made
of his huge enemies Mace. When the Giant saw him come marching so bravely
toward him, he said. I marvel demie man, how thou dare with such boldness
tarry thy death: he that sent thee hither might either borrow thy courage, or
thou his corpulence, but he intended I should break my fast, before the hour
of dinner came. Galaor somewhat discontented with these despisings, thus
answered. Think thou huge beast that thy barking can advantage thee, or
hinder me? my confidence is in him who abated the pride of the great
Philistine, and can likewise deliver thee more base and vile then the dust.
Exceeding angry was the Giant at these words, wherefore without any more talk
he lifted up his Mace to strike, seeming in his marching as though a Tower had
been carried about, but Galaor being prompt and nimble, stooped his Lance, and
with a rough carrire of his horse, attainted him on the stomach so bravely, as
he caused the mighty Poliphemus forgo one of his stirrops, his Lance
therewith shiuering in pieces in the air. At this encounter the Giant thought
to have strooken him down with his Mace, but he was too roughly and suddenly
stayed, whereby his blow was given in vain: for the Mace which was heavy,
and comparable to a huge beam in bigness, being delivered with full force of
both his arms: fell down so weightily, as the Giant himself was not able to
hold it, whereby it lighted on the head of his own horse so peazantly, as
being feld therewith, dyed presently under him, the Giant tarying a good while
before he could recover himself again. Yet the horse being of courage, did
often strive to get up, but Galaor thrusting his Sword into his belly, caused
him at length to lie there still enough: but in the end, the Giant did the like
to Galaors horse, and he seeing in what great danger now he was, by his wunted
dexterity quickly got footing* Then approaching his enemy, drew the Sword
Vrganda had given him, wherewith (watching when the Giant lifted his Mace) he
gave such a stroke at it where he held his hands, as breaking the stock in
pieces, he left but little length for the Giant to hold it by: yet he made
shift to buffet Galaor therewith in such sort, as he was constrained to set one
hand to the ground to sustain himself. But all this did no jot astonnish
him, for coming to the Giant, (who yet kept play with the remainder of his
mace, which by wary escapes the Prince still prevented) he gave a stroke at
him with so full force, as: clean cut away the left arm from his shoulder,
and the sword passing further with like strength, met the Giants leg so
directly, that it wounded him through ye flesh, with a wide gaping wound to the
very bone. Feeling great pain by both these maimes, he cried out aloud: Ah
unhappy wretch that I am, to be thus overcome by the strength of one man. Being
in extreme rage, he sought to fasten hold on the body of Galaor, but the sore
wound on his leg would let him stand no longer, co^straining him to fall on his
knees to the ground: and as the Prince approached to him, he thought with his
other arm to pull him down, but Galaor perceiving his intent, struck at him
again and smote off his hand. Now was the Giant dispoiled of all force, being
so wounded and ouer-trauailed withal, that he was no longer able to endure: by
which means Galaor more easily parted his head from his shoulders, which he
delivered his Squires to ^ary with him. When the Damsels beheld this famous
conquest, they left their ambush, and came to regard this marvel, saying to
Galaor. In sooth worthy Knight, great good nurture has been bestowed on you
by your educatour: for as we have heere-tofore heard, he has the profit and
vengeance, and you the honor exceeding all.

As they were about to return, they saw ten Knights come forth of the Castle
chained together, who cried to him. Come my Lord, come take this place, seeing
you have done him dead that so miserably detained us prisoners. What think you?
said Galaor to the Damsels, may we soiourne here this afternoon? Truly,
quoth they, we think nothing to the contrary. So went they into the Castle,
where Galaor discharged ye prisoners: and soon after, viands for dinner was
brought him and his company by the servants. When they had refreshed
the^-selues, and at their pleasure visited the fortress, the subjects
inhabiting the Rock came all to him, and would have done him honor as to their
Lord: but he by no means would accept thereof, for he told the^ that what he
had done, was on the behalf of Gandalaz, to whom that place by right
appertained. And I, quoth he, as bound to him by duty, came hither to prepare
his lodging: therefore I pray ye that he may be well received of you all, and
obey him as your true and natural Lord, for well am I assured, that he will
entreat you with love and gentleness. These requests were presently answered by
one for them all, who said. Hither shall he be most heartily welcome, because we
hope, that he to whom we shall be ^assailes and subjects, will cherish and
favor us: in stead whereof, ye other used us as villains and slaves, and you
(being ye conqueror) we hold for our only deliverer. All things thus debated
and accorded, Galaor departed thence with his company, returning to the
Hermitage, where the Hermit atte^ded for happy news: but he was not a little
glad to see Galaor come with such success, wherefore he thus spoke. My Son,
daily are you bound to praise the divine bounty, whose love has given you
grace to execute this notable vengeance. On the morrow, after he had received
the good man's benediction, he set forward on his way, and one of the Damsels
entreated him, that he would suffer her to travail in his company, whereto
right willingly he gave consent. And I, quoth the other, must take another way,
in that I had not come thus far, but only to behold the issue of the co^bat,
which I have seen with such content, as I must needs make commendable report
thereof to other, and so shall I not fail to do in ye Court of King Lisuart,
whether now I go to find a brother of mine gone thither before me. Fair
Damsel, answered Galaor, if you meet a young Knight, who bears in his Sheeld
a couple of Lions, I pray ye say to him, that the Gentleman, to whom not long
since he gave the order of Knighthood, does humbly salute him, adding this
withal, how he endeavors to honor the order, and when they both shall meet,
he will acquaint him such matter between them, as yet perhaps he knows not.
So took the Damsel her leave of Galaor, who afterward thus began to commune
with the other. You know Lady, that I have finished the combat with ye Giant,
and you said to me before I began it, how the Knight himself should know what
she is y^ sent you thither. Uery true, answered the Damsel, but if you would be
resolved therein, follow me, and within five days I will show you her. That
shall not let me, said Galaor: thus rode they on together so long, till at
length they came to a forked way, and Galaor who rid mu^ing before, thought she
had followed him: but she arrested behind a little, and when she hoped to
ouer-take him again, it was her hap to take the wrong way. This chanced at the
entrance of the forest of Braganda, which seuereth the countries of Claire and
Gresca, where long he had not erred, but he heard a voice thus calling to him:
Ah good Knight, help me. Galaor turning his head to see what was the cause: I
think, quoth one of his Squires, it should be the Damsel that departed from
us. What? said Galaor, has she left us? Yea truly, answered the Squyre, she
took the way leading on the left hand. Believe me, quoth he, I had very little
care of her: and hastily without taking his helmet, having only his Sheeld and
Lance, he galloped so fast as he could to the place where he heard the voice,
and hard at hand he espied five men on foot, armed with Corslets and Halberds,
and a Dwarffe on horsseback, who cruelly laid on the Damsel with a staff.
When Galaor approached near them, he came to the Dwarffe, saying. Thou
villainous and deformed creature, soon shall I send thy soul to the Devil:
and running fiercely against him with his Lance, threw him against the ground
meruailously amazed. Then came the other eagerly upon him, compassing him on
every side: but to the first he gave such a greeting with his Lance, as he lay
sprawling along on the earth. An other of them buckled close to him, laying
load on his Sheeld with his Halberd, but at length he pierced his Lance quite
through his body. When the other three saw this massacre, they ran away so fast
as they could overthwart the Forest, and Galaor not able to overtake them,
returned back again to the Dwarffe, who being gotten on horsseback, fled away
after the other, crying. Accurssed Knight, in hapless hour have thou thus
misused my men, for thou shall dye an evil death. Galaor seeing the Dwarffe
labored so hard to save himself, would follow him no further, but went to see
if his Lance were unbroken, which he had left in the body of the dead man:
and finding it sound as it was before, gave it to his Squire, saying to the
Damsel. Ride now before me, and I will guard ye better then I have done.

So took they the way again they had left, that brought them to a River named
Braz, which could not be passed at the f^rd: now rode the Damsel somewhat
far before Galaor, finding the passage so ready, as she went over before he
came. In mean while he stayed the return of the boat, he espied the Dwarffe
come after him crying: Uillainous traitor thou art dead, if thou deliver not
the Damsel thou tookest from me. Little account did Galaor make of his words,
but looking back, he saw three Knights come after the Dwarffe well mounted, one
of the three thus speaking to the rest. It were great dishonor for us, to set
all three together upon one man: and as for my self, I think scorn to be
assisted by any. Having so said, with a full course he ran against the Prince,
who likewise was ready to entertain him, and they encountered in such sort, as
the Knight pierced Galaors Armor, making him feel ye naked point of his
Lance: but Galaor bad him so bravely welcome, casting him from his saddle with
such might, as he lay on the ground not able to stir, whereat the other
twain were so abashed, that they ran both together against the Prince, the one
failing, and the other breaking his Lance: which Galaor determining to
revenge, struck his Lance into the sight of the last Knights Helmet, as he
made it fall from his head, and he (having lost his stirrops) ready to lie
along. Mean while, the second who had not broken, returned against Galaor, and
sped in meeting. Now albeit the encounter was with great vigor, yet escaped
the Armor on either side. Having thus gallantly shiuered their staves, they
drew forth their Swords, beginning a fierce and cruel combat: and while the
fight endured, the Dwarffe without ceassing cried to his men: Look well that
he escape not, but kill him least he get away. Then Galaor coming near him
who had lost his Helmet, reached him such a stroke on the head, as he tumbled
down dead before him. And when the third saw his companyon slain, being
afraid of himself, he turned his back and away: but Galaor pursued him so
near, that he gave him a blow between the neck and the shoulders, which
brought off a great many plates of his Armor. Now did the run-awayes fear
more and more increase, when he felt his enemy so near at hand, wherefore the
better to save himself, he cast his Sheeld back over his shoulders, and fled
away faster then he did before: which Galaor perceiving, would follow him no
longer, but hastily returned, thinking to take the Dwarffe and bind his legs
to a tree, from which the Dwarffe kept himself well enough, for he had gotten
more ground in running away then ye other. Here, upon he came to the first
that he dismounted, who having somewhat recovered himself, Galaor thus spoke
to him. In sooth your misfortune grieueth me more then your fellows does, for
like a good Knight you came alone to me, albeit I know not on what occasion, in
respect I never offended ye as I remember. It is very true, answered the
Knight, notwithstanding you must not^ what the Dwarffe said to us: how you had
beaten him, slain his men, and taken a Lady perforce from him that was in his
company. Believe me quoth Galaor, (showing him the Damsel on the other side
of the River,) he falsely lied, and were it that I had brought her away
perforce, she would not tarry for me so willingly as she does: but she unhappily
straying in this Forest, the Dwarffe met with her, offering to lead her away
against her will, and because she would not obey him, he gave her many cruel
strokes with a staff. Ah traitor that he is, answered the Knight, for this
villainy shall I reward him if ever we meet again. And because Galaor found
the Knight in so good sort, he help to take his horse that had escaped:
desiring him to punish the Dwarffe for his treason. This done, he entered the
boat and past the water, afterward he and the Damsel rode on their way, she
showing him soon after a Castle near at hand, which stood very bravely on
the top of a Mountain, saying. Here will be the best lodging we shall find
this night: and alighting from their horses, they were entertained there with
marvelous courtesy, it being the dwelling of the Damsels mother. Soon after
was the Prince unarmed, and then the Damsel came to him in this manner. To
the end (my Lord) I may keep promise with ye, if you please to stay here till
I return, which credit me shall be very speedily: I will bring ye news of her
whom you desire to see. I am content, answered Galaor, provided that you make
no tariance, because I have affairs of importance elsewhere. Let it suffice,
replied the Damsel, you shall see me again sooner then you imagine. And so
she departed, using such diligence, as Galaor was not displeased with her stay.
At her return, they mounted on horsseback, and rode together cross the
Forest, which when they left, the night ouertooke them: whereupon the Damsel
forsaking the outright way, turned aside, and by time the greater part of the
night was spent, they arrived at a very fair City named Grandares, where
coming to a Castle gate, the Damsel said. Now let us alight, and follow me,
for here will I show you her I promised: but leave not your weapons and
Armor, because one can scant tell what may happen. The Damsel went before,
and Galaor followed her till they came near the wall. Get up here, said the
Damsel, and I will go on the other side to attend you. With much adoo he
ascended the wall, by reason of his weighty Armor, as also being troubled with
his Sheeld and Helmet. When the Damsel saw he was amounted, she entered the
Palace to guide him as she had begun: in mean while Galaor was descended, and
sat hard by a posterne that entered a Garden, where he tarried so long, till the
Damsel came and opened the door with one of her companyons, but ere he
entered, they thus spoke. Although you have attained thus far, yet before you
pass any further, you must needs tell us whose Son you are. Let that alone
answered Galaor, for I have such a Father, as till the time of better hap, I am
content not to name him. Nevertheless, quoth one of the^, it is very necessary
we should know, for it shall not be any way to your hinderance. I am, answered
Galaor, Son to King Perion of Gaul and the Queen Elisena, and it is not
sire days past since I could not tell ye so much. Stay then, said the
Damsel: so they caused him to be unarmed, casting a mantle about his
shoulders, and afterward went on, the first Damsel going before, and the
other coming behind him. In this manner they entered the Palace, passing
through a chamber, where many Ladies and Gentlewomen were in bed: and if any
one demanded who went by so late, the Damsels his guides made answer for
him. Thus not perceived by any, they came to another chamber, wherein when
Galaor entered, he saw sitting on a gorgious bed a most beautiful Lady, with an
Iuory comb kembing her fair locks: but when she espied. Galaor, she presently
cast on her head a chaplet of flowers, and came to receive him whom the
Damsels had brought, saying. My friend, you are right heartily welcome, being
the best Knight in the world that I know. And you Madame, quoth he, are most
happily found, being the fairest Lady that ever I saw. Then the Damsel that
had guided him thither, thus spoke. My Lord, see here my mistress, now am I
discharged of the promise I made ye, and if you would have me say any more: she
is named Aldena, daughter to King Serolys, and because the wife to the Duke of
Bristoya, is Sister to her mother, she nourishes her here as her own
daughter. And you Madame, quoth she to the young Princess, have here present
(as I can assure ye) the Son to King Perion of Gaul: wherefore you being
both the children of Kings, excelling in beauty and natures perfections, if you
love together no one dare blame ye. Heerewith she went presently forth of the
chamber, and making fast the door after her, left the two lovers alone: by
which means they spent this night so amorously, as they that have tasted like
fortune may conceive, and therefore need I make no further talk thereof.

But the hour being come when Galaor should depart, he was warily advised
thereof by the Damsels, who brought him to the place where ouer-night he had
left his armor: and after he was invested therein as he ought to be, he went
along the Garden again where-through he came in. And as never any good
chances, without some mishap attending thereon, so now came it to pass: for
there found he the Dwarffe ambushed, that had so misused him before, as you
have heard, who no sooner espied him, but he cried out. Believe me Sir Royster,
unwise wast thou to enter here, for thou dyest, and the traytresse that did
conduct thee. Come forth Knights, come forth, here is a man that secretly
came from out the Dukes chamber. It was no time then for Galaor to sleep, but
lightly getting up the wall, cast himself on the other side, where finding his
horse ready, he presently mounted: notwithstanding, the Dwarffe and the rest
well acquainted with the secret issues of the Castle, with all speed pursued
him, and perceiving how this villainous Dwarffe was cause of all this trouble,
stayed, saying to himself. Either I will dye, or be revenged on this
ridiculous creature if I catch him. Then came the other and set upon him, but
so bravely did he defend himself, as none of them durst be bold to tarry near
him: for he being moved to exceeding impacience, thrust himself in the
midst among them, laying about with courage, as well they found who they
dealt withal. Galaor seeing the Dwarffe still kept aloof, determined to dye
but he would lay hold on him, and entering among the thickest of them, before
his Lance brake he slew two outright: then drawing his Sword, made them so
soundly acquainted with the sharp edge thereof, as he that thought himself
hardyest, was glad to give him way, for no one meddled with him but was laid
along. At length they compassed him in such sort, as they found means to kill
his horse, which made him fall to the ground in very great danger, for now
they verily intended to murder him, and the Dwarffe persuading himself that he
could not escape, came near to show some part of his manhood: but when he
saw Galaor had in spite of them recovered his feet, and happy was he which
kept furthest from him, he turned his horse to escape away, yet by chance
Galaor got hold on the reins of his bridle, giving him such a blow on the
stomach with the hilts of his Sword, that he fell to the ground so loutishly,
as the blood gushed forth at all the conduits of his head. Then lightly
mounted he on the Dwarffes horse, and the Beast seeming to storm at this
change, from an evil favored Dwarffe to one of ye best Knights in the world,
made proof whether his rider could sit fast or no, running violently with him
a good distance from his enemies. And turning to make an end of his work, as
by chance he lifted his eyes to the Castle, he saw in one of the windows the
Lady whom he had chosen as his friend, she shaking a white hand-kercher to him,
meaning he should be gone with all possible speed, which he did, because he
perceived more enemies at hand. With nimble pace he hyed him away, not tarying
til he recovered the Forest, where to refresh himself awhile, he gave his
Helmet to his Squire.

Now shall ye understand, how when the Dukes Knights saw him make such haste
away, some were of the opinion to follow him, the rest said it was in vain,
seeing he had gotten into the wood, and thus debating, they went no further,
but stood as men confounded, with meruailing how one man could be able to
vanquish so many. Mean while the Dwarffe was come to himself again, but he
felt his body so sore and bruised, as very hardly could he stand on his feet,
yet still he cried to them in this manner. My friends, carry me to my Lord the
Duke, for I will let him know what he must needs revenge. Through these
importunate acclamatious, he was brought by them before the Duke, to whom he
declared, how he met the Damsel in the Forest, and because he would have
accompanied her home, she cried out till a Knight came to aid her, who killed
his men, and beat him likewise very cruelly. Afterward, how he followed him
again with three Knights to have her from him, and they in like manner were
discomfited. Lastly, that she brought the same Knight to his honors Castle,
and suffered him to be with her in the Dukes own chamber. The Duke being highly
offended heereat, demanded if he knew the Damsel he thus complained on. Yea
my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, if I see her again. Hereupon all the Ladies and
Gentlewomen were sent for, and so soon as the Dwarffe beheld her, he said.
This is she (my Lord) by whom your Palace is dishonored. Ah Traitor,
answered the Damsel, thou lie falsely, for had not the Knight come to reskue
me in the Forest, thou would have abused me: and villainously did beat
me, because I would not consent to thee. Very much incensed with anger was the
Duke against the Damsel, and said to her. By mine honor (false woman) I will
make thee to reueal the truth. Afterward he sent her to close prison, yet
notwithstanding all the pain she endured, she would not discover any thing
touching her Ladies secrets, albeit she was there very long tormented: to the
no little grief and sorrow of Aldena that dearly loved her, and knew not by
any other how to understand of her Galaor. But the Author thinking he has
kept ye too long from Amadis, returns to him: intending when place and matter
shall serve, to finish that which afterward happened to Galaor.

CHAP. XIIII. How after Amadis departed from Vrganda the unknown he arrived at
a Castle, where it chanced to him as you shall read in this discourse.
GReat joy had Amadis at his departure from Vrganda, as well for understanding
that the man whom he had Knighted was his own Brother, as also because he
approached near the place where his Oriana soiourned, hoping ere long to have a
sight of her. And so long travailed he through a Forest where into he had
entered, as he was surprised with dark night, before he could find any house
for lodging, yet notwithstanding the obscurity of the night, he espied in the
wood a great fire: wherefore he rode thitherward, and by the way chanced on a
fair Fortress, as he gathered by the lights he beheld through the glass
windows, and coming near thereto, he heard the voices of men and women
singing, tunable to sweet Music that consorted with them. When he came to
the gate, he knocked and called for some to open it: but the hermony of the
Music, and other noise in the Castle, made such hinderance, as he was not
heard. Notwithstanding, he still more loud knocked and called, till certain
came and peeped forth at small creuises in the gate, and seeing him, one of
them demanded what he would have there so late. Sir, answered Amadis, I am a
strange Knight that seeks for lodging. Strange? quoth he within the Castle,
it appears so by thy language, but more by thy manner of walking so late: our
countrymen desire the day time, and thou shunnest it, fearing to be seen, or
least thou should have occasion to combat, and at such an hour as this is,
none travail the way except they be Devils. Believe me, answered Amadis,
little courtesy do you know or show, that use these words, seeing without
further knowledge what I am, you not only rebuke but condemn me: and I think
if you are possessed either with sense or manhood, you have sometime been in
like distress as I am, and having found it in your self, never reprove it in
an other. Thou may make trial thereof if thou will, quoth he in the Castle:
but get thee walking, for here shall thou set no foot this night. Now trust
me, said Amadis, I think thou would have no man of valewe in thy company:
yet before we part, I am desirous to know what thou art. That will I tell
thee, quoth the other, on this condition, that when so ever we meet, thou
shall combat with me. I will not stick for that, answered Amadis. Know then,
said he within, how I am Dardan, who commands thee not to stray so far this
night, but that I may find thee to morrow morning. Thou vauntest of thy self
very much, quoth Amadis, but if thou will cause Torches be brought hither to
give us light, and come forth presently without longer stay: we shall soon
see who ought to have ye worsse lodging this night. What? said Dardan, to
combat with an Owl, the enemy of the day, must I bring Torches, and this night
take Arms? unwise is he, that so late to gain such simple honor, will either
put on Spur or Cuyrate: and with these words he went from the gate.

Here may the Reader by himself discourse awhile, what fruit ouer-braining
commonly brings with it, and contrariwise, what perfection (among all other
virtues) is in modesty. No well grounded courage, or gallant disposed body,
can duly put in exercise the benefit of the one or other, if moderation and
temperance be not their guides therein. And albeit valiance and hardines is a
great gift of God: yet are they so pernicious in such as have them, (who are
transported with passions, or the glory of ambition,) as they be even no better
then cowardice and presumption. Eloquence, and the faculty of well speaking,
is a rich and precious gift of nature, augmented and increased by long use and
study, to give light and decking to the fair conceptions of the spirit: but
it is there a more hurtful pestilence in a common wealth, then when a well
spoken Orator will misuse his art and sweetness of language? Have not some bin
known to persuade simple people, to enterprise things which afterward have
brought their ruin and subuertion? I leave the confidence of the wise, and the
opinitiue in their own beauty, the one procuring to many the loss of their
souls, and the other to infinite number the destruction of honor: so hurtful
in all things is too much usurpation of ouer-weening, and immoderate estimation
of our selves. I will not here compare the wisdom of Ulysses, with the
arrogancy of furious Ajax, or the violence of Turnus, with the temperance of
Aeneas: nor make other remonstrances by the success of great matters,
happening to mighty personages both Greeks and Latins. It shall content me,
to set for example this only accident of indiscreet Dardan, to the end that
young Gentlemen, who take delight to read this History: seeing on ^he one
side the pacient magnanimity of Amadis, and on the other the furious
brutalitie of Dardan, may propose the virtues to be imitated, and the vices to
be detested and punished.

Amadis then somewhat displeased with the outrageous speeches of Dardan,
departed, not so much caring for his lodging, as how to be revenged: and
concluded, sometime in walking about, and other while in resting by a bushe, to
pass the incommoditie of this night in the Forest, thus to beguile the time
till day rising. As there he traced up and down, he heard the speech of some
body near him, and looking about, espied two Damsels on horsseback
accompanied with a Squire: after they had saluted him, and he them, they
demanded from whence he came so late armed, wherewith Amadis thoroughly
reported, all that had happened to him at the Castle. Know you, said the
Damsels, the name of the Knight? That do I, quoth he, for he told me his name
is Dardan. Uery true, said they, he is called Dardan the proud, the most
audacious Knight in this country. I believe it well, answered Amadis. Sir
Knight, quoth they, seeing you are so unprovided of lodging, if you will take
patience to remain this night in our Tents, which are pitched here hard at
hand, you shall be welcome. He glad of this courtesy, rode with them, and
being there alighted, Amadis caused his Squire to unarm him. When the Damsels
saw him so fair, and of such honest conversation, they were well pleased with
his company: and so they supped together merrily, afterward they gave him a
pallad to rest upon. Nevertheless, before they parted, they demanded of him
whether he travailed. To the Court of King Lisuart, answered Amadis. And so do
we, replied the Damsels, to see what shall happen to a Lady, one of the best
and most noble in the Country, who has committed her welfare to the trial of
a Combat, and it must be within few days following be performed before King
Lisuart: but yet we know not who will be the man, for he against whom the
cause must be defended, is one of the best Knights in all great Brittayne. What
is, said Amadis, the Knight so much esteemed, especially among so many good? It
is the same Dardan, answered the Damsels, from whom so lately you came. And on
what cause, said Amadis, arises the Combat? I pray ye (fair Ladies) if you
know, let me understand it. Sir, quoth one of them, this Dardan loves a
Knights daughter of the Country, who at his second nuptials married her. I am
to speak of: now has this Damsel the beloved of Dardan, conceived such
hatred against her fair mother, that she has said to her friend, how she will
never love him, except he bring her to King Lisuarts Court, and there openly
maintain, that all the poor Ladies goods appertains to her, and if any one
gainsay it, he to justify the same in combat. These news were highly
pleasing to Amadis, for by these means he intended to compass occasion, to be
revenged of the wrong he did him: and that in the presence of Oriana, who
should there perceive what her Knight was, which made him enter into such
thoughts, as the Damsels well noting it, one of them thus spoke. I pray ye
Sir, for courtesy, acquaint us with the reason of your sudden musing, if it
may without offense be known. Fair Ladies, answered Amadis, if you will
promise me as loyal Gentlewomen, to keep it secret and reveal it to no one,
willingly shall I tell ye: all which they sollemnely swear to perform. I
intend (quoth he) to combat for the Dame you spoke of, and mind not to fail:
but I would have it concealed from any but your selves. When they heard what he
said, they were much abashed, notwithstanding they made great esteem of him:
seeing what they had uttered in praise of Dardan, could not affray him, but he
would hazard the combat, and therefore she that already had broken the matter,
thus replied Gentle Sir, your intent proceeds from a high resolved mind, and
we will pray for your prosperous success. So gave they each other the good
night, and went to rest till the morning, when they dislodged together. Then
entreated the Damsels, that seeing he went to the same place they did, and in
the Forest kept men of evil hauiour: therefore he would not forsake their
company, whereof he made them promise.

Along they ride with sundry discoursings, where among other talk, they
desired, in respect they met so happily together, that he would be content to
let them know his name. My name, quoth he, is Amadis, but I pray ye keep it
only to your selves. Proceeding on by vaste and unfrequented places, one day,
when furthest they were from doubt, they beheld before them under a tree, two
armed Knights prepared for the Ioust: who seeing them coming, stepped into the
midst of the way, the one saying to his companyon. Which of these two
Damsels would thou have, and the other I mean to take my self? I will,
said the other, have the first. And I her companyon, answered the other: so
without more words they came to lay hands on them. Amadis, who misliked such
dealing, without the Damsels consent, addressed himself to the Knights:
demanding what manner of behavior this was, to Ladies coming from honest
place? Such, quoth they, as beseems women of their age. What? answered
Amadis, would you then force them? Who shall let us, quoth they, if we please?
Marie that will I replied Amadis: then lacing his Helmet, he took his Sheeld
and Lance, saying. Let the Damsels alone you shameless men, and defend your
selves. Without any more talk they gave ye spurs to their horses, meeting
together with such puissance, as the Knight brake his Lance, and Amadis gave
him such an attaint, that he carried him from his horse to the ground, with his
head under, and his heels upward breaking the laces of his helmet in the fall,
so that his head remained without shelter. When the other saw his companyon
down, he would revenge him, and coutching his Lance against Amadis, met him
so full, as piercing his Armor, wounded him a little, and his Staff was
shiuered all in pieces: but the Prince failing with his Lance, encountered him
so fiercely with his body and horse, as he lay tombling hard by his fellow,
then coming to the Damsels, he said. I pray ye hereafter come no more behind,
but for your better surety keep ye before. Awhile he tarried to see if they
would rise again, but perceiving they made no show thereof, he forbear to
charge them any further, and so rode on with his company. Soon after they
came to a fair plain, whereby a pleasant River had his course, and there they
caused their Tents to be erected: as well to regard the hurt of Amadis, as also
to refresh themselves. But as they sat at meat, the two dismounted Knights
came riding thither, saying to Amadis. Sir Knight, you have wun the Ladies at
the Lance, now must ye defend them by the Sword, otherwise we will carry them
hence in despite of you. But you shall not, quoth he, if I can let it: so
drawing his Sword against him that first made offer, in short time he brought
him into such distress, as without the succor of his companyon, he was unable
to hold out any longer: which Amadis perceiving, said. Ah Knight, the Ladies
make slender account of you, that you must come both upon one man. Yet
notwithstanding he would not forbear, but as the pattern of unconquerable
valor, gave him likewise work enough to do, so that all their wrong turned to
his honor: for he gave the last such strokes on the helmet, as the Sword
glauncing on his shoulders, cut in twain the cuyrates of his Armor and sliced
his flesh to the very bone, which made him let fall his Sword, and run away
half dead. Then turning to the other, he cut off his hand under his S^eeld,
the pain whereof was so yrkesome to him, as he cried: Ah I am slain. Thus
speaking, he threw his sword to the ground, and the Sheeld from about his neck.
All this avails not, said Amadis, for I will not leave thee, except first
thou swear, never to offend Lady against her will. Alas, quoth he, I promise
faithfully, and will perform it. Heerewith Gandalin came, who gave him his
Sword and Sheeld again, permitting him to go for help whether he would: and
Amadis returned to the Tent, where the Damsels rejoicing for his safe return,
said. In sooth Sir, we had been dishonored without your aid, which is much
better then we expected, and such, as not only assures your revenge for
Dardans injury, but the Ladies also, it fortune permit, you do undertake her
quarrel. Then was be unarmed, and after his wound was dressed, he sat down to
meat again.

At their departure thence, they lodged at a good Ladies Castle, where they
were most courteously entertained, and on the morrow travailed all day, without
any adventure worthy rehearsal, arriving very near Windsore where King
Lisuart lay, when Amadis thus spoke to the Damsels. Fair friends, I would not
be known to any one, therefore till such time as the Knight come to the
Combat, I intend to withhold my self from the place: and when the hour is,
let your Squire bring me tidings thereof hither. Sir, quoth the Damsels, as
yet there wants two days of the assignation, therefore if you please we will
tarry with you: and our Squire shall go into the Town, to bring us word when
the Knight is arrived. I am well content, said he: whereupon they pitched their
Tent between a little wood and a river, and Amadis presently put off his
Armor. Now did the Damsels change their opinion, and thought it better for
them to go into the Town, to see how things were in preparation, saying they
might return when they pleased. Amadis not misliking thereof, willed them to
do so, in mean while (being unarmed) he mounted on horsseback, intending to
stray abroad a little for his pleasure, and Gandalin guided him thorough the
wood. Riding along, as they were on the side of a little Mountain, he might
easily behold the Town, and when they were at the highest, they alighted from
their horses: when Amadis sitting down under a Tree, cast his eye toward that
part where he judged the Princess Oriana should be, then regarding the walls,
the Towers, and the whole Castle, breathing forth a vehement sigh, he said.
An happy Towers, within you is the only flower of the world: and thou fair
Town, how fortunate art thou in containing that, which all the hearts and
praises of men can not comprehend? High in divine grace were he, who for
maintenance of this quarrel should spend his life: but much happy he, that
without other combat then his small desert, should reach a bliss so
incomparable. Then resting his head on his arm, he entered into a deep
conceit, which provoked him to sudden silence, and in this melancholy the
tears trilled down his cheeks: in mean while Gandalin who knew his
complexion, standing where he was unseen of any, espied a goodly troop of
Lords and Ladies coming toward them, whereof he made haste to advertise the
Prince, but he was so perplexed, as he could not answer, wherefore Gandalin
took him by the arm, saying. My Lord, see you not what a great train makes
toward us? At these words he came to himself, beginning to sigh, and lifting
his eyes to heaven, said. Gandalin, if in this love I were master of my
strength, as I am in diverse other actions: neither should thou have need to
advertise me, nor my self be without council so much as I am. But I feel my
self so oppressed, as all the enemies in the world can not bring me to such
extremity, as this ouer-ruling passion does: therefore I pray thee talk to
me, of the felicity a man shall enjoy in death, for other may I not taste, and
practice no means of my life, seeing the contrary does surmount it. What my
Lord? answered Gandalin, esteem you the victory over your self so difficult,
after so many conquests of stout and bold Strangers? Why do you not think,
that peradventure she loves you as well, for whom you endure such assaults,
and happily by as great reason as you love her? your personage, prowess,
beawtie, and nobility of lineage, can they deserve less, then the good grace
of the most rare and excellent Lady in the world? let these humors (my Lord)
repel your desperations. Further he would have proceeded, but Amadis brake him
off in anger, saying. Wretch dare thou blaspheme so much, as to say, that he
who has merited no condition in the world, may be equalled with so perfect a
thing as is my Lady? enter no more into such terms, if thou will not have me
thine enemy, and so lose my conversation. Well, well, said Gandalin, I pray ye
wipe your eyes, least those that come hitherward perceive you have wept. What?
answered Amadis, commes there any body? Yea marie, quoth Gandalin, and now
they be at hand: heerewith he showed him ye Knights and the Ladies, who were
hard by them by time Amadis was mounted. Then as though he had stayed for their
company, he saluted them, and riding among the train, he beheld a Lady (very
comely and beawtifull) who wept very grievously, whereupon he left the rest
and rode with her saying. Madame, God comfort ye and give you joy. In sooth,
answered the Lady, and thereof have I need, in that as now it is very far
from me, which except heaven favor me with better grace, I am utterly out of
hope ever to see again. And so high a Majesty, said Amadis, can provide
therefore when he pleases: notwithstanding, if you were so contented, I gladly
would know the cause of your sadness. Believe me my friend, quoth she, all that
ever I enjoy in this world, consists in the trial of a Combat. By these
words he knew this to be the Lady of whom the Damsels had told him before,
wherefore he enquired further, if as yet she had found a Knight on her behalf?
No truly, said the Lady, and (which greeueth me most of all) to morrow must my
delay be exterminate. What will ye then do? answered Amadis. What would you
that I should do? quoth she, but lament and loose all, unless by hap I find
one in the Kings Court, who moved thereto by charitable compassion, will
courteously defend the right of a desolate widow. Such fortune, said Amadis,
shall I pray may befall ye, for I should not be a little glad thereof, as well
for your own sake, as also because I never thought well of your adversary. I
thank ye gentle Sir, quoth she, to God I commit the revenge of my wrong. So
passed on the Lady, and Amadis turning bridle, rode back to the Pauillion,
where he found the Damsels, who were already returned from the Town: and
presently they told him, how Dardan was come into the feeld, with full
resolution to do his deuoire. And trust me, said Amadis, it was my hap to meet
the distressed Lady, even the same whom the case concerns: heerewith he
declared all the talk they had together. But now is the hour of quiet come,
and each one went to rest till the point of day, when the Damsels being risen,
came to tell Amadis, how they would go before to the Town, and send him word
when Dardan was ready. Not so, quoth Amadis, I will not be far behind ye,
but let one ride before, to advertise me when Dardan shows himself in the
feeld. After he was armed, they went all to horsseback, and being come to the
issue of the Forest, he said to the Damsels. Now may you go if you please,
for I will not depart this place til I hear some news from you. Away they
went, when Amadis alighting, took off his helmet to refresh himself.

No sooner did the Sun appear in the East, but the King came to the place
appointed for the Combat, which was without the Town hard by the walls, where
Dardan not long after showed himself, in such manner and equipage, as an
ambitious man uses to gain goods and honor, also like an amourous Champion to
maintain the quarrel of his beloved: who to countenance him with the greater
favor, was queintly led by the raynes of his palfray, then presenting himself
before the King on his knees, he said. My Lord, according to the ordenance by
you appointed, this Lady and I humbly beseech ye, that the goods may be
delivered her as is no more then reason: for if any Knight oppose himself
against her, here am I ready for the Combat. The King then called for the
other Ladies defendant, but she poor soul appeared alone. Why Lady? quoth the
King, are you unprovided of a Champion, that you come without any one to
sustain your right? So help me God, answered she weeping, I am (my Lord)
forsaken of all, except you grant me mercy. Great compassion had the King on
her, for he knew her to be very virtuous: but he could not together order
reason and the law. In mean while, Dardan who thought no resistance would
come, sat down in the midst of ye feeld, attending the third hour, which
was the time according to the custom, when the King should pronounce sentence
to the conqueror: but one of the Damsels seeing now the noedfull time, made
haste to let Amadis understand, what want of his presence was in the feeld. For
this cause he immediately mounted on horsseback, and being armed as appertained,
commanded the Damsel and his Squire to go some other way, for he would not
be seen by any from whence he came: assuring them, that if he were victor, he
would return again to the Tent. So departed Amadis alone, riding on a brave
white Courser, as he promised the Damsel of Denmark in Gaul, and arrived at
the place where Dardan held the world in wunder of him. The King and his Nobles
seeing him come from the Forest, stood somewhat in doubt of him, for he
carried such a gallant and Knightly countenance, as promised a far off, that
his enemy should find him of hautie disposition: which made the King (above
all other) desirous to know him, and thinking she for whose cause he came knew
his name, he called and demanded of her the question. Dread Lord, answered the
Lady, I never saw the man before, nor do I know what he is. By this time was
Amadis entered the feeld, when doing reverence to the King and the Ladies,
without longer stay he came to Dardan: demanding if he were the man, that
would maintain the quarrel of her, for whom the poor Lady was put to such
trouble, because, quoth he, I am come in her defense, and also to keep promise
with thee. What did thou promise me? replied Dardan. That I would see thee in
the day time, said Amadis, and wottest thou when? it was at such a time, as
thou being whitled with Wine, or glory, or else the trust thou had in thy
strong Castle, spakest so outragiously to me standing without, wearied both
with travail and hunger. And therefore do I make the less account of thee,
answered Dardan: but cause her to come hither, for whom thou will do such a
doubtie deed, to know if she will accept thee as her Champion, and afterward
do the uttermost thou can. When the King saw they talked so long together,
he would have heard what they said: but the good widow came, and to her Dardan
thus spoke. Dame, this Knight would maintain thy right, will thou submit all
to what he can do? With all my heart, quoth she, seeing it pleases him to stand
so much my friend, and God speed him no otherwise then my cause is just. When
the two Knights were at the very point to combat, the King perceived that
Amadis Sheeld was bruised in two places, both with strokes of the Sword, and
point of the Lance, wherefore he said to such as stood near him, that if the
Knight demanded an other Sheeld, he would gladly give him one: but Amadis was
so hot in desire to revenge himself and the Lady, that he listened to nothing
but the Combat. Thus the Ladies accord being received, the two Champions took
their carrire against each other so roughly, as their Lances pierced their
Armor and flewe in pieces, without any other harm as yet: but when their
bodies met, Dardan was sent to the ground, yet it happened so well for him, as
holding fast the reins of his horse, he recovered himself more nimbly, and
mounted again, as one both valiant and bravely disposed, boldly setting hand
to his Sword. When Amadis saw him so quickly up again, and in such readiness
for his own defense: he approached to him, when began such a battle between
them, as every one present meruailed thereat. On all sides were placed the
inhabitants of the Town, and many other that came far off, as well on
mighty Scaffolds in the feeld, as also on the towers and walls of the
Castle: but above the rest, the Queen was there present with her Ladies, most
desirous to behold who should bear away the honor of this cruel combat, for
they seemed two so gallant companyons, as it was hard at first sight to judge
the better. Such were the rigorous strokes delivered on either side, that
sparks of fire flewe forth of their Helmets and Armor, their Sheelds cut in
pieces, and their blood coullering the ground, which moved exceeding
compassion in the regardants, who seemed copartners in their danger, according
as each one favored the welfare of his friend: but the two champions gave no
respect thereto, because their desire was to make known both to the Ladies and
themselves, the man deserving highest account. When King Lisuart saw them
endure so long, he said aloud: that he never beheld a more singular combat,
pursued with greater courage and manhood: wherefore he determined not to
depart, until he had seen the final issue thereof, permitting the^ to
proceed as themselves pleased. And to the end, quoth he, that the conqueror
may be dignified with more then accustomed honor, I will cause his deserts to
be lively carved in Marble at ye entrance of my Palace, to provoke the like
perfection in all other, that are desirous to follow Arms. In such manner as
you have heard continued the two Knights a long time, the standers by being not
able to discern who had ye better: for without taking breath or rest their
fury continued, as though their strength had more and more increased. But
Amadis, who by chance turning his head to the place where ye Ladies stood;
espied his fair Mistress lovely Oriana, whereby he felt his virtue augme^ted
in such sort, yt he was as fresh and lusty, as if but then he entered the feeld,
imagining he was become more then a man. Now followed he the fight with such
cruel extremes, as in short time he dissolved ye doubt who should be
superior: for Dardan (notwithstanding all his defense) was constrained to
draw back, seeking how to escape the wreakefull strokes of his enemy, which
without ceassing wounded his body in many places: his horse likewise no longer
able to endure, stumbled so often, til at length he set both his knees to the
ground, which made Dardan think it better to fight on foot, wherefore he said
to Amadis. Knight, our horses are weary and fail us, by reason whereof we
cannot do as we would: and if we were on foot, me thinks in short time ye doubt
would be discided. These words did Dardan speak so loud, as the King and his
Lords easily heard them: whereat Amadis seemed ashamed, thus answering. Although
it be vnhonorable in a Knight, to forsake his horse so long as he can keep
him: yet since thou think to combat better on foot then on horsseback, we
will alight, and defend thy self well, for thou shall have need. Heerewith
they dismounted, assailing each other so courageously, as if but now they began
the combat, showing more sharp cruelty then before they had done: yet Amadis
evermore kept ye advantage, commonly delivering two strokes for one, which made
Dardan do nothing but defend his enemies blows, who compelled him to turn and
reqoile as himself pleased, so yt each one accounted him very near vanquished,
blaming him because he kept not still on horseback. But as he turned here and
there, flying the slicing Sword of Amadis, he was driven under ye Ladies
Scaffold, which made the^ cry: Dardan can hold out no longer, he is overcome if
he enter ye combat again. Yet for all this Amadis would not leave him, but
pressed him still with such pursuit, as he brought him hard by the Queens
Scaffold, when she and all ye Ladies said. Without question, Dardan is but
dead. At this clamor, Amadis understood the voice of the Damsel of Denmark,
and lifting up his head, espied her standing by the Princess Oriana: by means
whereof, he became so far beside himself, as he set the point of his Sword
to the ground, forgetting not only the danger wherein he was, but also stood
amazed at ye sight of his Mistress. Which when Dardan beheld, he took heart
afreshe, and charged his enemy so bravely, that if he had longer continued, he
would have gone away conqueror: but the Damsel of Denmark noting this
change, spoke out aloud. In an unhappy hour did the Knight behold any Lady in
this company, whereby he has lost what he wun of Dardan: it is no time now for
his heart to faint. These words confounded Amadis with shame, that gladly could
he have given entertainment to death, fearing least his Lady would suspect
cowardice in him. For this cause, lifting up his Sword, he gave Dardan such a
stroke on the Helmet, as made him set both his hands to the ground: then
falling upon him, he rent the Helmet from off his head, and trampled in such
sort on him with his feet, as he fell down like one deprived of his senses.
Afterward taking him by the locks of his hair, he beat him on the face with
the pommell of his Sword, saying: Thou dyest Dardan, if thou confess not the
Lady free. When Dardan saw himself in such estate: he replied: Ah gentle
Knight, for Gods sake mercy, kill me not, I acquit her. Now approached the
King and the other Lords to hear what he said, and while they stood
conferring with him, Amadis as yet ashamed of his fault committed, drew back
through the throng: and seeing he had gotten behind them all, so covertly as
he could he ran toward the Forest, leaving them all musing at Dardan, who
filled the empty air with his complaints. In mean while his beautiful
friend came to him, who in sted of giving comfort for the foil he sustained
through her, began to detest and despise him, saying. Dardan, hereafter seek
thee some other friend then me, for while I live, will I neither love thee, or
any other, then the good Knight who valiantly overcame thee. How now Lady?
quoth he, is this the reward of my honor and life adventured for you? you then
are not the friend to Dardan, but to fortune, who is no sooner contrary to me,
but presently you are mine enemy. Have I then escaped death by the mercy of
my foe, to endure wursse then death by the cruelty of my friend? Heaven
suffers me to live, and yet you repine at my unfortunate life: now shall I
make known to all women by your example, that ingratitude is no less hurtful
to such as exercise it, then to any one offended therewith. Heere-upon he took
his Sword, and before it could be imagined what he meant to do, he smote her
head quite from her shoulders: then as a man transported with madness, staring
every where ro^^d about him, declared by his angry countenance, that high and
not vulgar, was the enterprise he embraced in such an extremity. The King
sent his Archers to convey him thence, but ere they came to him, he struck
himself so violently to ye heart, as the blood spouted in the Archers faces,
and then he cried out, saying. Now friend art thou revenged by my vengeance,
and thine enemy satisfied with the despised life thou leftst me. So falling
down, delivered the last sign of his death, where-at each one was confounded
with marvel, as well for the novelty of the case, as pitying the very
latest words he breathed: but when they remembered his passed life, wholly
addicted to ouer-weening folly, they reputed this unfortunate end happened to
him, not so much by accident, as the divine ordenance, which made them sorrow
no more, but converted their thoughts to commend the conqueror.

CHAP. XV. How King Lisuart caused a Sepulcher to be made for Dardan and his
friend, with an Epitaph in remembrance of their death: and the honor he did to
Amadis, after he was found and known.
AFter the unfortunate end of these ill advised lovers, the King in memory of
this strange accident, commanded that in the feeld where they lay dead, should
be erected a sumptuous Sepulcher of black Marble stone, fashioned like a
Roman Obelisque, and thereon was engraven in the Brittayne language an
Epitaph, declaring the whole matter as it happened. And when he had knowledge
of the conqueror (as hereafter the manner how is declared,) his name was
placed thereon, and four great Lions at the four corners of the Sepulcher,
importing the devise which Amadis bare in his Sheeld.

But now the rumor being appeased, and they returned to the Palace, he called
for the Stranger that wun the honor of the day: but after long inquiry, no one
could certainly tell what was become of him, albeit certain coming from the
wood, reported how they saw a Knight return from the feeld thither-ward, being
alone and making great haste. He that is worthy, said the King, to bear him
company, may imagine himself happy enough: for seeing he has showed himself
so brave a Combatant, it is impossible but he should be a wise and virtuous
Knight. And for no less each one reputed him, who understood the injuries of
Dardan used to him, and saw how he requited them with gentleness and courtesy:
albeit I make no doubt but he knew right well, that if Dardan had got ye better,
he would not have pardoned him. Such as you have heard were the words of King
Lisuart, but Oriana, who day by day expected the arrival of Amadis, seeing the
incomparable valor of him that fought against Dardan, began to suspect that it
was he: for (quoth she to the Damsel of Denmark) I am sure he would not send
me a fabulous message, and this is the just time he assured you of his coming.
In good sooth Madame, answered the Damsel, you say very true, and which makes
me conceive the better hope, is that he promised me to ride on a white Courser,
with the like Arms he had when he Combated against King Abies: and I remember
how the Knight who overcame Dardan, had the like horse. But did you, (quoth
Oriana) take no regard of his Arms? Yes marie did I, replied the Damsel,
albeit the cruel strokes received thereon, made me hardly perceive what devise
was there figured: yet me thought the ground was a golden feeld, and the like I
told ye he bare in Gaul, with two azured Lions rampant portrayed therein,
which being battered all in pieces, he presently made him such an other,
assuring me to wear no other when he came into this country, and therefore I
will doubt no further but it is he. Sweet friend, said Oriana, if it be he,
either he will shortly come, or send into the Town, therefore you must be
watchful and diligent to hear thereof. Madame, quoth the Damsel, refere
these matters to my charge. This conference caused Oriana to remain very
pensive, and breathing forth many bitter sighs, she said. Ah gracious
heavens, what favor have you done me if this be Amadis? now shall I compass
the means (better then ever I could) to speak with him.

So attended the Princess for tidings from her friend, who returned as he
promised to the Damsels Tent, yet was it somewhat late ere he came thither,
finding them ready to sit down to supper. After he had unarmed himself,
they told him the misfortune of Dardan and his friend, as also the whole
circumstance of their deaths: heereat he was very much abashed: then falling
to their cheer, they beguiled the time with sundry pleasant devises, yet
Amadis could think of nothing else, but how he might make his arrival known
to Oriana, wherefore they were no sooner risen from the table, but he took
Gandalin aside, and thus began. My friend, thou must of necessity go to the
Court, and labor secretly to find the Damsel of Denmark: to whom thou
shall report that I am here, attending to hear from her what I shall do.
Gandalin with all possible speed departed, and the better to execute his
enterprise, he went on foot, when being come to the Palace, not long had he
stayed till he saw her he looked for, who was as busy as he in the selfsame
cause: yet at the first she knew him not, but quickly remembered she had seen
him in Gaul with Amadis, and embracing him, demanded where his master was.
Why Lady? quoth Gandalin, did not you see him to day? it was he that vanquished
proud Dardan, and has withdrawn himself to the Forest to hear from his
Mistress, desiring you by me, to let him understand what he must do. Right
welcome, said the Damsel, is he into this country, being the man desired
above all other: but my Lady must needs see thee, therefore follow me. If any
one ask who thou art, say thou bring letters to Oriana from the Queen of
Scots, and likewise thou art come to look for Amadis, who is arrived here as
thou have heard: by these means, thou may hereafter come to her without
suspicion. Thus was Gandalin conducted into the Queens chamber, where the
Princess Oriana was, to whom, the Damsel of Denmark came, and speaking
somewhat loud, said. Madame, here is a Squire sent to you from the Queen of
Scots. Oriana weening she had said true, arose to welcome him: but when she
knew Gandalin, the vermillion couller arose in her cheeks, and was so overcome
with joy, as she knew not well what countenance to use, yet Gandalin (as well
advised) set his knee to the ground, saying. Madame, the Queen my mistress
heartily saluteth you, as the Lady whom she loves and esteems above all
other of her kindred, desiring to hear some news from you, for here she
greetes you with all that she does know. Then gave he her a Letter which he had
feigned, having nothing written therein, but the superscription on the out
side: whereupon she went aside with Gandalin to one of the windows, making
show to hear the rest of his charge, but she demanded where he had left his
Master? Madame, answered Gandalin, he withdrew himself into the Forest, so
soon as he had conquered Dardan. Good friend, said Oriana, tell me by the
faith thou bear to him, how he fares? Even so fair Princess, quoth
Gandalin, as the man that is altogether yours, he loves only ye remembrance of
you, and yet suffers such anguish in his soul as never Knight endured: by
the only fear he sustaineth least he should not be yours, mistrusting his own
deserts for so high a service. His greatest hope is in your princely kindness,
and knowing him so long, as also what he is, that you will not forget him.
Wherefore I beseech ye Madame, take compassion on him, appoint a meeting
together, then resolve him, make me a happy messenger, and discharge your
self of your deuoir: for hitherto has he endured such sorrow, as no man is
able to suffer the like. Often have I seen him (thinking on you) so far
beyond himself, as he has fallen down dead (in a manner) before me, so that
I have imagined (noting the abundance of his tears) his poor heart to be
distilled into water through the conduits of his eyes. If he should dye, you
offered him great wrong: for he is yours, and easily can ye not find another
so worthy of you. Nor need you doubt, but if you grant the hour of
lengthening his life, he will surpass in chivalry the best Knight that ever
bare Arms: wherein if he be happy by his virtue, yet has he mishap to
counterpoise the same, only through the passions he endures for you. If now
you will not deigne to afford him remedy, much better had it been for him,
that fortune had let him perish in the Sea, to the mercy whereof in his cradle
coffin he was committed: then after his preservation by such strange means, to
suffer him dye by a worsse shipwreck then the other. But if his dismal stars
will not divert this danger, happy might he have accounted himself, if he
had never come to the knowledge of his parents, whose grief likewise he
greatly increases, to see him so consume and dye before his day, being unable
to divine or understand the cause thereof. Gandalin all this while accompanied
his words with such tears, and often among breathed forth so many mournful
sighs, as would have enforced the very rocks to rueth: but perceiving Oriana
was touched to the quick, he began again in this manner. Ah gentle Madame,
consent not to the death of such a servant of yours, and so good a master of
mine: for beside the common loss which will be great, in you alone shall
consist the fault, moreover, you shall maculate that perfect beauty, with the
high condemned stain of cruelty and ingratitude. Here did he knit up his
persuasion, attending an answer from the Princess, but she was not able to
deliver one word, so vehemently was her heart surprised and overcome: and
holding down her head, let fall wonderful streams of tears adowne her
dainty cheeks, which enforced her to turn on the other side, least she
should be descried, then when as Gandalin would have begun again, she stayed
him with a piercing sigh, saying. Ah my friend, I pray thee say no more,
unless thou be willing to see me dye here presently. Now stood she silent a
pretty while, often wringing and strayning her fingers with grief, then
setting apart all dissimulation, she softly thus spoke. The assurance thou
give me of thy masters love, is highly pleasing and agreeable to me: but the
passion thou say he endures, tormenteth me to the very death, so that I
feel both his pain and mine own. Ah God, let not me be the occasion of
death, to a man so high and precious of desert as he is, rather let me work
mine own death, for if he dye, I may not live one hour. Thou art come to tell
me his painful travail, and now thou may go to let him understand mine,
which if thou knew so well as thou do thy masters: in stead of blaming
me with cruelty, thou would rather judge me unfortunate, and if I use any
cruelty, it is against my self, whom I have deprived of rest pleasure, and
well-neere life it self. The less succor can I give to mine own distress,
because as it often happens to our sex, when thinking to draw near such as
we desire, we are furthest off, and seeking for a harbor of contentment,
glaunce into a place of torment and vexation: so falls it out with me by thy
master, whom fortune has ever kept me furthest from, but God knows my good
will has always been with him, and gladly would I provide for his griefs and
mine own, if I were able to compass the means. Do then Madame what you may,
answered Gandalin, if you love him as I am sure he does you, and begin at this
instant to let him know, how he shall behave himself in this Country. Oriana
then showed him a Garden, which was under the window where they talked,
saying. Return to thy Master, and tell him, that this night he must secretly
come to the place thou see, and remember this withal, how the Chamber under
where we stand, is the same that Mabila and I lodge in, and there is a cross
barred window near the ground, where-through we may easily discern each
other, and talk together: for his Cousin is acquaynted with mine affairs, nor
is it necessary they should be concealed from her. Then taking a costly Ring
off her finger, she thus proceeded. Deliver him this token from me, as the only
Jewel I most esteem, and ere thou go, thou shall see the Princess Mabila,
who is so wise and discret, as she will easily understand thee: yet thou must
say somewhat loud to her, that thou have brought her tidings from her Mother.
Hereupon Oriana called her to talk with the Squire, whom the Queen of Scots
her Mother had sent to her: but when she saw it was Gandalin, she then
suspected how matters went: wherefore she went to the Queen, leaving them in
deep talk together. In mean while the Queen demanded of her daughter, if
the Gentleman were to return shortly or no: For, quoth she. I would send a
token to the Queen of Scots by him. Madame, answered Oriana, the chief cause
of his coming into this country, was to seek for the good Knight Amadis,
Son to the King of Gaul, of whom you have heard such famous report. And
where is he? said the Queen. The Squire says, quoth Oriana, it is more then
ten months since he heard that he was here, and now he meruaileth to miss of
him in this Court. Now trust me, answered the Queen, right glad would I be to
see so good a Knight in the Kings company, for it would be a great comfort to
him many ways, having to deal with so many countries: wherefore I assure ye,
if he do come hither, he shall find here such honorable entertainment, as he
shall have no cause to depart in haste. Of his prowess Madame, replied Oriana,
I know little, but what common brute has blazed abroad: but hereof I am
certain, how he was one of the most brave young Gentlemen that ever Isawe,
when in the King of Scots Court he served Mabila and me. All this while Mabila
continued with Gandalin, enquiring if his Master were as yet arrived. Yea,
Madame answered Gandalin, the same was he that vanquished Dardan, and express
charge he gave me, to salute you on his behalf. The name of heaven be for ever
praised, quoth she, having preserved our kinseman from such exceeding danger,
and now sent him hither so honorably. Ah Madame, said Gandalin, he were happy
indeed, if the force of love made him not in wursse case then dead: for Gods
sake therefore do you assist him, being thus fully persuaded, that if he find
no ease to cure his afflictions, you shall loose the best Knight in the world,
and the vpholder of your fathers fame. He may be well assured, answered Mabila,
how he can not with greater desire employ me, then I have to do him pleasure,
and will him not to fail in what the Princess has commanded him: as for thy
self, being judged to come from the Queen my mother, thou may come and
speak to us at all times as need shall require.

Gandalin took his leave for that time, returning toward Amadis, who attended
the answer of life or death, and into such debilitie was he brought by these
extremes, as he had scant force enough to support himself: for the short
sight he had of his Lady at the combat, increased such a desire in him to see
at more liberty, as every hour seemed to him longer then a year. When he
saw that Gandalin was returned, in hope of happy news, he came and embraced
him, not daring to demand any thing of him, fearing least matter should not
fall out to his contentation: but Gandalin with a cheerful countenance, told
him that he brought no bad tidings, and rushing into the matter at the first,
said. My Lord, God make ye as constant, as you have cause to be content, for if
you have that virtue, you are the most happy and accomplished Knight in the
world. Overwhelmed with joy, Amadis caught him in his arms, demanding what he
had done, seen, and heard? I have seen and heard, answered Gandalin, the
felicities of Paradise, and know that they are provided for you, if you hinder
it not your self. Ah Gandalin, quoth Amadis, jest not with me, but tell me the
very truth. Then Gandalin declared word by word how every thing happened,
first of the counterfeit Letter, and next the appointed meeting at the window:
and (by the way) reported some part of his own speeches, moving a change of
countenance in Oriana, then her answer, even to the conclusion before
rehearsed: likewise how he talked with Mabila, and how willing she was to
assist him with her uttermost ability. Amadis was so fed with content by
these reports, that he made him rehearse one thing ten times, and I cannot tell
which of them was most affectionate, either Gandalin in reporting, or Amadis in
hearing, for both the one and other seemed in^atiable, in the end Amadis thus
spoke. My faithful companion, I thought my self altogether indebted to thy
Father, who saved me from the danger of drowning in the Sea, but I confess
that duty belongs more necessarily to thee: because by thy diligence and
discretion, thou have given me a better life then he preserved. But tell me
now, did thou take good mark of the place to which she commanded me? Assure
your self thereof, quoth Gandalin, for she her self showed it me. Ah God,
said Amadis, how shall I deserve the great good she does for me? away from me
now all cause of sorrow and complaining. Yet this is not all my Lord, quoth
Gandalin, see here a token she has sent ye, as a testimony of her honorable
love to you: so he gave him the King which came from Oriana, and after he had
long beheld it, kissing it a thousand times, put it on his finger, saying.
Fair King, that have been so happy, as to be carried and accounted dear by
the most accomplished creature in the world, albeit thou be now in a place of
much inferior honor: yet have thou not changed thy Mistress, for both thou
and I are hers, and she does compass my heart with greater force, then thou
can possibly bind in my finger. Let us leave this talk, answered Gandalin,
and return to the Damsels, who tarry for us in the Tent: but you must
dissemble cunningly, for if they see you altered from your wunted
mellanchollie, it may be some hinderance to your determination. So they brake
off communication, and went into the Pauillion, where Amadis, (nothwithstanding
Gandalins council) could not but show himself pleasantly disposed, whereat
the Damsels were very glad, because such behavior, better beseems him then
his former pensiuenes.

When the hour of rest was come, each one went to his accustomed lodging, and
soon after Amadis seeing the time commodious for his enterprise, arose and
found Gandalin, who had already prepared for their journey: wherefore being
armed, they mounted on horsseback, taking the most convenient way for their
purpose to the Town. When they came to the Garden, which Oriana had before
showed Gandalin, they alighted, and tied their horsies at a tuft of trees near
adjoining, afterward they went through a hole which a watercourse had made in
the garden wall and approached the window where Oriana lay: fair and softly
did Amadis knock thereon with his finger, she not yet sleeping, who expected
his coming, and when she heard the loving signal of her friend, she awaked
Mabila, saying. Sweet Sister, I think your Cousin knocks at the window. My
Cousin? answered Mabila, it may be so, but you have greater interest in him then
I, or all other of his lineage together. Mabila presently arose, and lighted a
wax taper which she had hid for the nonce, when Oriana likewise was got out of
bed, they came together and opened the casement, where they found* Amadis no
more attending then he was attended. If they were then well pleased, it were
folly to enquire, for all the contentinents in the world, might not be compared
with the joy of seeing each other. And without question, they had two inducing
reasons heereto, for beside the nourishment they received together in their
younger years, and their first amity, continued by the remembrance and good
opinion they had of each other: their beauty and perfectons were so
correspondent, as if they had never seen one another till that very instant,
yet had they cause enough to love together. Oriana had on such brave attire
beseeming the night, as set the heart of her lover on fire, for under a fine and
dainty white frontlet, appeared the rarest golden tresses of hair that ever
nature made, and about her shoulders she had a mantle of figured cloth of gold,
imbroidered all over with rich and costly flowrets, as it might beseem the
greatest Majesty in the world. And for her self, a thing more fair was
impossible to be found, the inward conceit of her present comfort, decked her
face with such a heavenly beauty, as it seemed that nature in pride of her
art, made this piece to excel all other in perfection. I will leave you then
to consider on the judgment of Amadis, who (when the was nothing so glorious
in fairenes) thought her worthy the love of the best Knight in the world: now
if he stood mute, blame him not, having the only jewel of his heart before
him, and therefore she to break off this silence, first spoke in this manner.
My Lord, if I have given you the liberty (contrary to my duty and custom) to
see me in this place at an hour so unfitting, you must commit the offense to
the security, which our former nutturing together loyally promised, and
likewise to the good opinion of your great virtues since that time encreassed:
which has conquered no less favor in me, then honor and renown in all other
places. Amadis to avoid further silence, thought it better to let his speeches
pass at adventure, the^ (by holding his peace) to be reputed unworthy this
happiness, or not so fervently touched with love as she was, to exclude all
which doubts, he thus replied. Madame, I account my self not so much favored
by fortune in any thing else, as honored at my first entrance into your
service, even the very highest tipe of grace she could afford me: nor do I
feel my self so beholding to my virtues, as I rest double bound to them that
report so well of me. But when both these benefits shall be excluded, yet is my
love and service to you so affectionate, as they can deserve no less then this
secret gentleness: and when you shall allow me more ample courtesy, it may
command a stricter bond of duty, but not of affection, for that is already
so substantially grounded, that the uttermost good you can do me, is neither
able to augment it, or the sharpest unkindness diminish it. I know not whether
it be seemly for a man, to confess the extremities he has infinite times
endured by this passion, the very least grief I received, has been the
loss of rest, and banishment of sleep from mine eyes: and yet to afflict me
with greater torment, my spirit has seen in a dream what it incessantly
desired. How many times has it happened to me, in thinking on you to be so
confounded, that such as have seen me, reputed me not only deprived of common
sense, but even of very life it self? What woman, what child well beaten,
has ever powered forth so many tears, as I poor Knight have done? yea my
very chiefest enterprises have I sprinkled withal for your sake: not as
feeling my self a happy subject in love, but rather too little merit in my
self, and much less hope. This favor proceeding from you in deigning to
hear me, is greater then ever I durst hope forand so far^ does it surmount my
passions, as I cannot express the least part of my joy: my tongue likewise
seems as unprofitable and ignorant of his office, having been so long from
serving me to you. But above all, this impuissance in speech, shall on my
behalf testify to you, what all the words in the world cannot deliver with
sufficient truth: for as all other beauty in comparison of yours is nothing,
so before mine affection, all the other habilities of my soul vanish away, and
become of no reckoning. Will you then (good Madame) with your courtesy supply
my insufficeincie, and (with pity) give me both life and my self: and
conserve that which else cannot be, unless it be yours only? These words
uttered Amadis with such interruption of sighs and tears, as witnessed he had
no intent of feigning, but rather knew how to suffer then speak: wherewith
Oriana moved to compassion, thus answered. I make no doubt (dear friend) but
you love me, in respect of the pains you have taken for me, as also by what
you have now told me: and though I should have no sign thereof by speech or
ought else, yet am I content to believe, because my heart has no other desire,
but herein conceiueth greatest contentment. And yet the torment I see you in
with impacience, troubles my quiet, for you being assured by sufficient
proves, and especially this, that I love ye: me thinks you should have no
further cause of so severe affliction, but rather ought to temper your pains,
in that (through the union of our spirits) I feel no less then you do your
self. If you will not appease them for your own sake, I pray ye let it be
done for mine, the rather, that we may the oftener meet (if you please)
publicly: when such sadness will but discover, what we most willingly would
keep unknown, whereby may arise too great inconvenience, and be a mean to
hinder the thing we cheifest desire. Sweet Lady answered Amadis, I have such
felicity in seeing and hearing you, as wanting strength enough to underprop
the burden of so especial contentation: I am feign to fall down under it,
experimenting no less the pain of not accustomed pleasure, then the other
beside of continual pensiuenes, which makes me wonder that I cannot dye here
in this solace. If then I have offended you by this transportation, pardon it
in your own self, who brought me to this happy misfortune, and likewise gave
me this hurtful medicine: suffer me then yet longer to use it, that in the
assurance of your grace, I may by little and little learn to support it, and
attain the knowledge of living content: excusing my apprentishood in this
felicity, being yet scant skillful enough how to use it. Love is sickness,
and be it favorable or contrary, it cannot be without passion, woorking the
like effect in other, which you reprove in me. Well have you said my friend,
answered Oriana, how you are as yet but an Apprentise: and so you show very well
by your words, proouing that love cannot be without passion. I hope to see
the time, when you (attayning greater and more perfect knowledge therein, then
yet you have) shall be in higher tranquillity of mind, which (it may be) you
think cannot be had in this world. Nor shall it not happen to you by
admiration of that which now you most love, and is likewise of far more less
account: but by the fruition of the thing wherein felicity consists, the
knowledge whereof unites and lifts the spirits so high as heaven. And albeit
I am yet so young in years and discretion, as I cannot be exempt from the ill
you complain on: yet am I not unprovided of desire to hasten the time, when we
shall live together merrye and contented. Ah Madame, said Amadis, the hope of
that happy day, shall make me pass this mournful life in patience,
supporting for your honor my inward pains so covertly as I can, and bearing
the outward with what courage possible I may: but I beseech ye do me the
favor, as to tell me when it will be. Well perceived Oriana, that he had not
thoroughly understood her meaning, wherefore in smiling she said. It is already
begun, but the dazeling of your eyes will not let you see it. Heerwith Amadis
became very pensive, holding his eyes steadfastly fixed on her, and she to
change his sadness, took him by the hand through the window: which Amadis
kissed a thousand times, without any word passing between them, and Mabila
noting it, she came to them saying: Gentles you forget your selves. Amadis
lifting up his head, courteously saluted her, she doing the like to him, and
after sundry speeches of welcome, as also how long they desired to see him:
Mabila demanded, what length of time he intended to stay in the Court. So
long as it shall please Madame Oriana, answered Amadis. It must be then
continually, quoth Oriana, and you shall grant it if the King request it,
sweet Madame, answered Amadis, if it please his Majesty so much to honor me,
I will obey both him and you: yet will I dissemble strangenes a while. All the
better, replied Mabila, and in the mean time I pray ye visit us often. Longer
they would have continued in talk, but Gandalin gave them warning how the day
appeared, wherefore he said to Amadis. My Lord, me thinks you are importunate,
but then you must needs accuse the day. Amadis gave no ear to him, for he
proceeded on still with his devise: but Oriana perceiving Gandalin said true,
thus spoke to Amadis. Now go my Lord if you please, for it is time, and forget
not your promise. Then taking her by the hand, and kissing it, he went to
horsseback, returning to the wood where he left the Damsels, who had by
entreaty earnestly persuaded him, to go deliver their Cousin that the King
held captive, until such time she presented her Champion, as you have heard:
wherefore after they had rested till morning, they returned to the Town, in
the greatest favor and expectation of the world.

CHAP. XVI. How Amadis made himself known to King Lisuart, as also the
Princes and Lords of his Court, of whom he was honorably received and feasted.
Early the next morning, Amadis armed himself, and mounting on horsseback,
rode presently to the Town accompanied with the two Damsels: where being
arrived, they brought him to their Cozins lodging, when the good Lady knowing
her worthy Champion, falling on her knees before him, said. My Lord, all the
goods I have you gave me, for of you I hold them and no other, dispose
therefore of them as you please: but Amadis brake her off in this manner. Come
Lady, let us go before the King, to the end he may acquit you, and I return
where urgent affairs call me: so taking off his Helmet, he rode on to the
Palace with the three Ladies. The people knowing him to be the man that
ouer-came Dardan, made such thronging in the streets to see him, as the King
was given to understand thereof: and he rejoicing at his coming, honored him
so much, as he came to meet and receive him on the way, thus speaking to him.
Worthy Knight, hither are you so welcome as may be devised, because we have
been very desirous to see you. Amadis noting this gracious entertainment,
setting his knee to the ground, thus answered. The God of heaven give your
Majesty a long and happy life: then the King taking him by the hand, caused
him to arise, saying. Right glad am I to have knowledge of you, being a Knight
of so excellent deserving: these words enforced Amadis to blush, yet he replied
in this manner. My Lord, to desire the Ladies discharge whom you caused to be
detained, I am bold to come before your Highness: and seeing she has answered
the Law according to your appointment, hereafter I hope she may enjoy her
liberty, yet till this present she knew not who maintained her quarrel
against Dardan. While the King and Amadis thus conferred together, a number of
people gathered about them, some commending his beauty, other his gallant
youth, and all in general his famous Chivalry: in that he being so young, had
the power to vanquish Dardan, who was redoubted and feared through all great
Brittayne. By this time sundry speeches past between him and the King,
where-among he dissembled his speedy departure, to provoke a desire in him to
stay him, and thus spoke Amadis. Dread Lord, seeing the Lady is free, I desire
leave for my return again: but if in ought I may do your Majesty any
service, I am the man ready to be commanded, and you the Prince whom most I
desire to honor. Good friend, quoth the King, your departure must not be so
soon, except you delight to displease me. God forbid, answered Amadis, in
respect my endeavor is altogether to obey you. Do you think, said the King, it
is any obedience, if I may not entreat a longer stay? In sooth my Lord, quoth
Amadis, you may and shall command, for in greater matters then this I will not
offend ye. Go then and unarm you, replied the King, and speaking these
words, him self took him by the hand, conducting him to a sumptuous Chamber,
where he left him to take some refection, with Arban King of Norgalles, and the
Duke of Gloucester, whom he commanded to keep him company: for King Lisuart
was a Prince, that especially favored and honored strange Knights. Having
left Amadis thus woorthely accompanied, he went to the Queen, and told her in
what manner he had stayed the good Knight who overcame Dardan. But do ye my
Lord, quoth she, know his name? No verily, answered the King, for in respect of
the promise I made him, I durst not demand that question of him. It may be,
said the Queen, he is the Son to King Perion of Gaul. I would it might
fall out so well* answered the King. Do you know, quoth the Queen, who may
put us out of this doubt? even the Squire that talked with Mabtla, who came to
search him in your Court, and said, how he was advertised of his arrival in
this Country long before. Immediately the King caused Gandalin to be called,
and without declaring any thing to him, thus spoke: Follow me, for I must show
a Knight to thee, that I may be resolved if thou know him or no. Gandalin
attended on the King, entering the Chamber where Amadis was, and Gandalin
viewing him very earnestly, feigned to have seen him long time since, then
setting his knee to the ground, said. Ah my Lord, great travail have I
endured to find you, since I departed from the Scottish Court. Gandalin my
good friend? right heartily art thou welcome to me, what news do thou bring?
None but good my Lord, answered Gandalin, all your noble friends are in
perfect health, commending themselves to your excellency, but hence-foorth
Sir you must conceal your self no longer: then turning to the King he thus
proceeded. Mighty King, he that has been so long time unknown, is this brave
Prince the famous Amadis, Son to the invincible King Perion of Gaul: and
then came his Father to understand so much, when he slew in combat the
puissant King Abies of Ireland, by means whereof he recovered his Realm which
was well near lost. By these devises was Amadis discovered, and better
welcomed then before: for til then he was not known but through his famous
deeds, the renown whereof was every where blazed abroad, and now was he so
well honored for his virtue as his noblenes required. So spent they the whole
day in honorable feasting, until such time as each one withdrew him self, when
King Lisuart commanded the King of Norgalles, that he should lodge in Amadis
Chamber: afterward when they were alone, to sound his mind, and understand by
all means possible, if he would consent to remain in his service. Thus leaving
them together, he returned to the Queen, and to her thus spoke. Madame, hardly
shall I cause Amadis to stay as mine, nor can I tell which way to compass it,
albeit I never had greater desire to any Gentleman of long time, for the high
account is held of him, would cause me to be much more feared and redoubted.
My Lord, quoth the Queen, grant him any thing he shall demand, and do your
self present him what you imagine will best please him. He requesteth nothing
of me, replied the King, for if he did, I would consent thereto more willingly
the^ he could desire. Me thinks it were good, said the Queen, to entreat him
first by some other of our Court, and if they cannot prevail, will him to
come see me, your Daughter and our Cousin Mabila: they likewise shall solicit
the matter, for they knew him when he served them as a Squire. Then shall we
let him understand, how all the Knights here are yours, and none but thinks
him self honored thereby: him will we desire to be one of the company, that you
may enjoy his service when need shall require. This will be a good mean,
answered the King to procure his stay, and if he will not be won by you, we
may well judge him of less civility then Chivalry. Now because it wexed
somewhat late, the King bad his Queen good night, and went to his Chamber. On
the other side, the King of Norgalles persuaded his new come guest, that he
would abide in the Court of King Lisuart: but Amadis could so cunningly
dissemble, that he altogether disguised the chief point of his desire, and
might not by all these intreties be wun. When he perceived he labored in
vain, on the morrow morning he brought him to the King, of whom Amadis made
offer to take his leave: but the King answered him in this manner. My good
friend, you should have done me pleasure not to depart so soon, yet can I
not constrain ye to tarry against your will, but my Queen would gladly see
you before your departure. Nor will I go my Lord, answered Amadis, before I
have done my duty to her: whereupon, taking him by the hand, he brought him
into her chamber, and thus spoke to her. See here Madame King Perions son of
Gaul, who is come to salute you before his departure. In sooth my Lord,
answered the Queen, he does me great honor, and he is very heartily welcome
hither. Then Amadis stepping to her, fell on his knee to kiss her hand, but
she caused him to rise and sit down by her: when the King perceiving they
would enter into further talk, withdrew himself to discourse with his
Knights, while they conferred together. In mean while the Queen ^^urteously
entertained Amadis, but the other Ladies and Gentlewomen, who had heard such
fame of his beauty and excellent perfections, began to eye him very
diligently, meruailing that nature had so enriched him, with the only thing
they most desired. Now knew Amadis by their countenances what judgment they
held of him, yet durst he net turn his head aside, fearing least seeing his
Oriana, (by some sudden mutation) he might reveal what carefully he coueted to
hide. And as he continued in this perplexity, the Princess Mabila came and
did him reverence, whereupon the Queen (the better to compass her intent)
called her Daughter, who dissembled as if she scant knew him, and thus she
spoke to her. Fair Daughter, remember you not the Son to King Perion of
Gaul, who served you well while he was your Squire, and yet may do (if it
please him) now he is a Knight? in sooth, you must all assist me in desiring
him to grant me one request. And know ye what it is? quoth she to Amadis, the
King earnestly entreats you to remain in his Court, and yet as I understand,
you have no will to afford him so small a favor. We shall see anon, if Ladies
hold greater privilege in Knights, then men do, therefore we all join
together in one suit, that you would be Knight to my Daughter and my self, and
likewise to them whom you see in this fair company. And if you will do so
much for us, you shall deliver us from seeking support in any other, who
happily cannot be to agreeable so us: for well we know if you be our Knight, we
shall surpass all them that attend on the King. The Ladies were before
advertised what they should do in this case, wherefore they flocked about him
altogether, and with signs of earnest supplication, confirmed the Queens
request: especially Oriana, who gave him a sign that he should consent, but he
very wisely dissembled it, although he had no other desire in the world:
wherefore the Queen seeing him so slow in answering, as if she would have
pressed him thereto, said. Well Sir Amadis, what? shall we be denied? Madame,
replied Amadis, what is he that dare do otherwise, then grant your will and
these Ladies present, seeing you are the most honorable Queen of the world,
and they likewise deserve the highest point of service? therefore Madame, by
your commandment and the Princess Oriana, as also these other Ladies who are
loath to be denied, I am content to tarry with you: yet under this condition,
that I will do nothing but for you only, and if I accomplish any service for
the King, it shall be yours and none of his. Then as our Champion, answered the
Queen, all we accept you: and these glad tidings she soon sent to the King,
who was so highly pleased therewith, that he commanded the King of Norga^les
to go^ and bear him company, and himself for joy went presently to him, when
taking him in his arms, he said. Gentle Knight, right glad am I of your
consent to the Queen, and for my part be you well assured, that my desire is
to entreat ye according to your deserts. Amadis on his knee humbly thanked
him, albeit he only stayed by the commandment of Oriana, and no such other
matter as he feigned to the Queen.

For this time the Author leaves Amadis, returning where he left the Prince
Galaor, who being departed from the Duke of Brystoyaes Castle, where the
villainous Dwarffe unhappily discovered him: all that day he wandered in the
Forest of Arinida, not meeting any one to direct him a more ready way, yet
toward evening, he saw a Squire come toward him, mounted on a right good
Courser. Now had Galaor received a certain wound, by one of the three Knights
that assailed him as you have heard, which by reason of dallying with his new
friend the night past, began to fester and ranckle very much, and feeling
himself not half current, he said to the Squire. My friend, know thou
where I may find cure for a small wound I have? What if I do? answered the
Squire, yet will I not company any such coward as thou art, because it were to
my shame and discredit if I should. Enough of that, said Galaor, tell me where
I may find help for my wound? Rather, quoth the Squire, would I seek one to
give thee another. Show me the way, answered Galaor, and I will adventure what
thou fear me withal. I may choose, said the Squire, except I list. Day thou
shall do it, quoth Galaor, by freendship or force. By force? replied the
Squire, think thou I will do any thing for so bad and false a Knight as thou
art? When Galaor heard him speak so imperiously, he drew his Sword, making show
as if he would smite off his head, saying. Uillaine thou shall conduct me, else
will I send thy soul to all the Devils. The Squire being affrayd, thus
answered. Seeing thou enforcest me, I will bring thee to a place where thy
folly shall be chastised, and my outrage revenged. Heerewith he rode before,
leaving the right way, Galaor following some distance behind im, and by tune
they had ridden the length of a mile, they came to a Fortress seated in a
pleasant valley, bravely environed about with trees: the Squire then pointing
him to the place, said. Now may thou let me go, for here I hope will be
revenged the injury thou have done me. Go thy way to all the Devils, replied
Galaor, for I have enough of thy company. Scant will thou like my conducting,
said the Squire, before thou departest from this Castle: wherewith he turned
bridle and away, but Galaor followed the path that guided to the Castle, which
in his judgment was but newly edified, and being come to the Gate, he saw
within a Knight armed mounted on horsseback, attended on by five Halberders,
provided to forbid entrance into the Castle: who coming to him, demanded if
he were the man that abused their Squire. I know not, answered Galaor, whether
he be your Squire or no, but hither am I come by the conduct of a varlet, the
most audacious Roge that ever I knew. It may be so, replied the Knight of the
Castle: but what would you have in this place? Sir, quoth Galaor, I am fore
wounded, and seek for one to give me help. Enter then, said the Knight.
Galaor rode in, but presently the Knight and his Soldiers very fiercely
assailed him, yet the first that came before him, thinking to strike at his
head with his Halberd, was followed so near: as Galaor snatched his weapon out
of his hand, giving the Knight such a wound therewith, that he fell down dead.
Then entering among the other, he gave them so many rough and sharp charges, as
in the end three of them were slain outright, the other two fled so fast as
they could into the Castle: and Galaor would have pursued them, but that his
Squire cried to him: My Lord take your Arms, for within me thinks I hear a
great rumor of people, my self(...) take this hatche^ to assist ye if you
stand in need: and although I am unworthy the order of ^hwalr^e, yet will and
defend my Lord to my uttermost ability: so threw he down the hatchet,
taking up a Halberd and a Sheeld belonging to one of them that were slain.
Assure thy self, answered Galaor, so soon as I find him that gave me
Knighthood, thou shall for thy forwardnes likewise have ^^i^e. So passing
further, they saw two other armed Knights come forth, and ten Soldiers with
them, who were brought out at the gate by the other that fled away. Now was the
Squire that conducted Galaor to this Castle, standing showing him self at one
of the Casements, and he cried alowde to this fresh supply: Kill him, kill him,
but save his horse to do me service. Galaor looking up, presently knew him,
at whose words his heart was so enraged, that he fiercely ran to meet the
new assaylants: in which encounter their Lances brake, especially Galaor on
him who gave the first charge, as he made him sure enough from ever bearing
arms afterward. Then setting hand to Sword auaunced himself to the other,
delivering him so sound a greeting, that he tumbled from his Horse with his
heels upward: and turning to the Halberders on foot, he saw his Squire had
dispatched two of them, wherefore to harten him the more, he thus cried to him.
My friend thou have begun very well, not one of the rest shall escape us,
because such villains are unworthy to live. When the Squire that was in the
window saw this bloody con(...) (...) ran up a Ladder into a high Tower,
crying ^ut so loud as he could in this manner. My Lord, arm your self unless
you mean to be slain. By chance Ga(...) understood him, wher-upon he stepped
aside to behold (...) should ensue, when presently he saw a Knight came (...),
and one bringing a Horse for him ready to (...) but (...) stepping between,
laid hand on the b^i^le, giving these speeches to ye Knight. An other time Sir,
(...) to ^^ount your self sooner, for I have occasion to use (...) Horse, and
mean to keep him till you can get him (...). Greatly astonished was the Knight
when he heard him, because all this while he had not seen him, wherefore he
returned this answer. Are you he that have slain my two Nephews, and the
other here in the Castle? I know not who you ask for, replied Galaor, but
this I can assure ye, how I found here the most disloyal and bad minded
people, that ever I dealt withal. I tell thee, said the knight, they whom thou
have slain were better then thou art, and dearly shall thou pay for thy
boldenes. Heer-upon they began a fierce and cruel combat on foot, for the
Knight of the Castle was a man of great valor, and such as had seen this
dangerous fight, would have meruailed that they could endure half so many
blows. Yet in the end, the Knight found him self too weak for Galaor,
wherefore he thought to save him self by flight: but he was followed so near,
as having entered a Porche, he was constrained to leap out at a window, and
falling on a great heap of stones, with weight of his armor brake his neck.
When Galaor saw his desperate end, he returned back curssing the Castle and
the wicked inhabitants, and passing by a chamber, he heard a very doleful
voice crying: Ah my Lord, leave me not to suffer any more. Galaor stepping
nearer, said. Open the door then. Ah Sir, I cannot, answered the voice, for I
am tied with a strong chain. By these words, Galaor knew well it was some
prisoner, wherefore he ran against the door with his foot so strongly, that he
made it fly from off the hindges, and entering, beheld a fair Damsel tied
by the neck with a great chain, who thus spoke to Galaor. Alas my Lord, what
is become of the master of this Castle and his company? They be all dead,
quoth he, for coming hither to seek cure for a wound I received in fight,
they caused me to enter, and afterward set upon me: but by the help of God I
have so well defended my self, as they shall never d^^ (...) to any living
body, Heaven be praised, answered the Damsel, for your happy success, and
leave ^^e not in this misery, for being delivered, right soon shall I make
whole and sound your wounds. Presently did Galaor break the chain, and the
Damsel took out of a Cofer two little bottles, with other precious things
belonging to the Lord of the Castle, and so came down together into the
Court: where Galaor perceived how the first Knight he iousted withal was not
yet dead, but travailing to his end, wherefore to let him languish no longer, he
so trampled on his breast with his horse feet, as quickly his soul forsook
the body, afterward they rode away devising on many matters.

This Damsel was wife, well governed and of good grace, whereby she could so
queintly answer and entreat Galaor, that he became highly enamoured of her:
and being able to endure no longer this kindled fire of affection, thought
good to make some proof if she would love him, wher-upon he thus began. You
know (fair Damsel and my friend) that I have delivered you from prison, but
in giving you liberty, I am become my self captive, and brought into great
danger unless you help me. You may be well assured my Lord, quoth she, that
the matter were very difficulte, wherein I would not obey you, standing so
deeply bounden to you as I do: for otherwise I might be reckoned among the
most ungrateful women of the world, considering the misery you so lately
delivered me from* and therefore do I remain at your disposition. In these
familiar conferences they proceeded so far, as the execution of this hot
love soon after followed, tasting together the benefit of such content, as
other may do the like that have so good fortune: and thus merrily they pass
this night, in the Pauillion of certain Hunters they met withal in this
Forest, So Galaor receined by this Damsel, ease of his new wound love had
made, and cure of the other he got in sight.

For certain days they remained in this wood, during (...) the Damsel told
him, how she was daughter to (...) the Fleming, not long since County of Claire
by the gift of King Lisuart, and a Lady whom he had often entreated as his
friend. But one day, quoth she, being with my Mother in a Monastery not far
hence, the Lord of this Castle (whom you have slain) demanded me in
marriage, and because my parents misliked thereof, by reason of his ungracious
behavior: he watched a day when I was sporting among other Damoselles, from
whom he forcibly carried me away, furiouslye thrusting me into the prison where
ye found me, saying. Be well assured Damosel, that seeing thou have disdained
to match with me in marriage, and made so little account of my great renown:
while thou live thou shall not depart hence, till thy Mother and the rest of
thy kindred come entreat me to take thee as my wife. Perceiving how severely he
was bent against me, I set down my rest on pacient hope, thinking it better
for a time to endure that captivity, then by making him my Husband suffer a
woorsse. Great reason had ye therein, answered Galaor, but tell me now I pray
ye, at parting hence what shall become of you? for I am constrained to make
little stay, and must travail very far, being too much trouble for you to
follow me. I desire ye, quoth she, conduct me to the Monastery from whence I
was taken, for my Mother is there, who will be right joyful to see me at
liberty. With all my heart, replied Galaor: so mounting on horsse-back, about
Sun setting they arrived at the Monastery, where they were received with great
joy, especially when the Damsel had declared his worthy deeds of chivalry
for her: and albeit he determined a speedy departure, yet at the request of ye
fair Sisters, he tarried there longer then before he intended. Here pauseth
the Author on this matter, to tell ye what happened to the Prince Agraies,
since his return from the wars in Gaul.

CHAP. XVII. What were the adventures of the Prince Agraies, since his return
from Gaul, where he left Am^^^^.
AGraies returned from his enterprise in Gaul, after Ama^^^ had vanquished
King Agraies of Ireland, and was known to his Father and mother as you have
heard: addressed his journey toward Norway, where he hoped to find his Lady
Oliuia. Riding one day along somewhat near the Sea side, on a sudden he had a
Heart in chase, which when he had some pretty while pursued, he gained at
length the top of a mountain, from whence he might easily discearne the raging
bellows of the Sea. Suddenly arose an exceeding great tempest, which with
mighty winds so troubled the water, and the thunder ratled with such violence,
as if heaven and the nether region would have met together. At length he
espied a Ship tossed in the tempest, utterly destitute of any safety, and
(which was woorsse) subject to the mercy of a dark comfortless night ensuing:
wherewith he being moved to pity, commanded his Squires (as asignall) to make
certain blazes of fire, that they in the Ship might choose their best landing
place, without perishing in the dark, him self minding to stay to see the
end: which happened so well, by the help of God and diligence of the Mariners,
as the Ship took safe harbor near where Agraies was, when they landed
certain Ladies, who were greatly frighted with ye merciless tempest thinking
they could not have escaped so long. Agraies being one of the most courteous
Princes in the wolrde, see^^^ them so well landed and free from danger* sent
one of ^is S^^es, to will them come and refresh themselves in ^is Pauillion:
which gentleness they refused not, and because he was loathe to be troublesome to
them, knowing they had now need of nothing more then rest, he concluded this
night not to see them, keeping him self close in his chamber. The Ladies
being separated to their own contentement, the Mariners made great fires on
the shore to dry their garments, and afterward fell to sleeping that they
wakened not till next morning. Agraies desirous to see strange women, yet more
to serve and honor them, then remove his affection from where it was settled:
privily pried in to behold their countenances, they being round set about a
fire, reciting to each other pleasantly their passed danger. As thus he
listened their discourses, among the rest he knew the Princess Oliuia, toward
whom he was travailing by virtue of her message: and you must imagine him so
entirely addicted to her service, as also she in affection to him, that they
might well be termed happy in their love. No sooner had Agraies espied her,
but he was so overcome ther-with, as being no longer able to dissemble, having
before his eyes her so late peril of ship-wracke, he breathed forth a
vehement sigh, saying: Ah divine comfort, help me. When the Ladies heard this
cry, especially Oliuia, thinking some one of their company was not well,
commanded her women to open the door: which presently they did, when Agraies
told one of them who he was, that she might secretly imparte he same to her
Mistress, the news whereof were so welcome to her, as immediately she
commanded him to enter. Then were embracinges and kisses freely entercoursed,
with all other gracious favors so kind lovers could devise, even ye very
point wherein love most triumphs: so that the fair Princess lost the name of
a maiden, with like contentme^t as other who have assaied, and can more then
imagine what I mean. So pleasing was this happy meeting, as they soiourned
there sir days together, beguiling the time with riciprocall courtesies, yet
so secretly, as none in the company (except her (...) Damoselles) perceived.

Mean while the Sea became nauigable, the weather fair, and the waters calm:
which made the Princess determine to go aboard her Ship, that she might pass
into great Britain* whether the King her Father had sent her, to be nourished
by the Queen Brisana. Which being understood by Agraies, after he had
acquainted her with the cause of his journey, he gave her assurance: that very
shortly he would come to her, as well to show her his faithful service, as also
to seek his Cousin Amadis in King Lisuartes Court, according as he made him
promise, wherewith she was not a little contented, desiring him earnestly not to
tarry long from her. Thus courteously taking leave of each other, the Princess
Oliuia departed under sail, and in few days after they landed in great
Britain, when coming to Windsore where King Lisuart kept his court: both by
him, the Queen, Oriana, and all the other Ladies, was the Princess and her
train graciously welcomed, as well to honor the King her Father, as also in
respect of her excellent beauty.

Now remained Agraies on the Sea shore, giving many a long look after the Ship
which carried away the jewel of his heart, and having lost the sight of it, he
took his way to Briantes a right good town in Scotland, where the King his
Father soiourned, and his Uncle Galuanes without land, in whose company he
intended shortly to visit King Lisuartes Court. For there, quoth he to
Galuanes, shall we find more good Knights, then in any other Court of King
christian, there likewise may we gain honor and renown better then in
Scotland: where we have none to try our selves against, unless some few that
slenderlye follow arms. This Galuanes was of gentle heart and a good Knight,
desirous among other to reach the top of honor, yet of simple ability as you
have heard before: now the enterprise of these twain thus concluded, after
they had obtained license of the King, they went on board with their Horse and
Armor, each one likewise a Squire attending on him, Having wind at will, in
short time they landed at Bristowe, where they made no long aboade, but riding
through a Forest, they met a Damsel who demanded of them, if that way would
conduct her to the Rock of Galteres. No, quoth they, but tell us Damsel why
you travail thither? To see if I can find the good Knight, said she, who
knows how to remedy a grief I endure at this present. You abuse your self
Damsel, answered Agraies, for at the Rock you demand, you shall find no
other Knight then the great Giant Albadan, to whom if you bring any cause of
sorrow, he will quickly double it on your own head. If you knew so much as I
do, quoth the Damsel, you would not imagine me to be abused; because the
Knight I ask for has vanquished the Giant, and killed him in battle hand to
hand. Believe me Uirgin, replied Galuanes, you tell us matter of great
marvel, in respect never any Knight dealt alone with a Giant, unless it was
King Abies of Ireland, who combated with one, him self being armed, and the
Giant naked, which was the cause of his death, and yet this attempt of the
King, is thought the greatest stratageme that ever was heard of: then sound not
your speeches to any likelihood, for this Giant surpasses all other in
strength and cruelty. Gentleman, answered the Damsel, the Knight I speak of
has done no less then I told ye: wherewith she rehearsed the whole manner
thereof, they reputing it strange and almost incredible, which caused Agraies to
ask her, if she knew ye Knights name. His name (quoth she) is Galaor, Son
to King Perion of Gaul. Ah Lady, said Agraies, you declare the only news of
the world to content me withal, naming my Cousin, who more commonly was reputed
dead then living: keer-upon he reported to Galuanes, what he had heard
concerning Galaor, how he was taken away by the Giant, and till this instant he
never heard of him. By my faith, answered Galuanes, the life of him and his
brother is miraculous, and their beginning of chivalry so famous, as I think
their like is not to be found through the world, but Damsel, what would you
have with that Knight? My Lord, quoth she, I seek his aid on the behalf of a
Damsel, who is imprisoned by the accusation of a Dwarffe, the most villainous
creature that ever was borne: heereto she added the whole discourse of Galaor
and the Dwarffe, as has been already declared to you, yet she concealed ye
lovely pranck of Aldena. And because Sir, said she, the Damsel will not
confirm what the Dwarffe has avouched, the Duke of Bristoya has sworn, that
within ten days she shall be burned alive: which is an occasion of great
grief to the other Ladies, doubting least she through fear of death will
accuse some of them, and tell withal to what end Galaor came into the Dukes
Castle: more-ouer, of the ten days, four are already expired. Seeing it
falls out so, answered Agraies, you need travail no further, for we will
perform what Galaor should do, if not in strength, yet in good will, and
therefore be you our guide to the place. The Damsel turned her haqueney, and
led them with such speed to the Dukes Castle, that they arrived there the
day before the execution should be. Now was the Duke set down to dinner, when
the two Knights entering the great hall, humbly saluted him, and when he saw
them, he requested they would sit down to dinner with him: but they answered*
that he should presetly know the cause of their coming, wher-upon Galuanes
thus began. My Lord, you detain a Damsel prisoner, by the false and
disloyal accusation of a traitorous Dwarffe, we desire that she may be
delivered, seeing she has no way mis-doone: and if it be needful to prove her
innocencye by battle, let come two other Knights to maintain the quarrel
for we are ready as her defenders. Well have you said, replied the Duke: and
calling for the Dwarffe, thus spoke to him. What answerest thou to these
Knights challenge, who say that falsely thou have caused me to imprison the
Damsel, and will prove it against thee in open battle? it behooves thee to
find some defense for thy self, For that I am not to seek my Lord, quoth the
Dwarffe, I have such on my behalf, who shall make known the truth of what I
have said. Heer-with he called a frollick Knight his Nephewe, so like him in
pitch and proportion, as one would have thought he had no other Father, to him
he said. I pray ye Nephewe maintain my quarrel against these two Knights.
Scarce had he thus sp^ken, but his Nephewe returned this answer to Galuanes
and his companion. Well Gentlemen, what will you say against this loyal
Dwarffe, who was so injured by the Knight the the false Damsel brought
hither? it may be one of you is the man I speak off: but whether it be or no,
I will prove in combat he dealt villainously, and the Damsel ought to dye,
because she brought him into my Lord the Dukes chamber. Agraies who found him
self most touched in his own conceit, stepped forth with this answer. In
sooth, neither of us is the man, albeit we desire to imitate his virtues, but
we auouche he has done no wrong, and if the Duke please, this difference
shall be soon discided: for on his behalf will I maintain, that the Damsel
ought to be delivered, and the Dwarffe in her stead burned as a traitorous
villain. I justify the contrary, replied the Dwarffes champion: then calling
for his Armor, full soon was he mounted on a gentle courser, and turning to
Agraies who presented him ye combat, thus spoke. Would God Knight thou were the
man by whom this quarrel began, too high a price should I set on thy (...). We
shall quickly see, quoth Agraies, what thou ca^^ d^^ but (...) a^ assured if he
were present, he would make no account of two such braggers as thou art, how
just or unjust the cause were on his side: by greater reason then do I leave
thee to judge, how notably he would handle thee in this, consisting on truth
and equity. While these menaces thus passed on either side, the Duke stirred
not from the table till dinner was done, when seeing the Knights prepare^ to
execute their speeches, he conducted them with a brave company of Gentlemen, to
the place appointed to end such controversies, where all accustomed ceremonies
being observed, the Duke thus spoke to Agraies. Perform the uttermost of
your ability, yet shall not the Damsel be delivered: for to the Dwarffe
has not been offered injury alone, but to such beside as are of higher
reckoning then your self. My Lord, quoth Agraies, you caused her to be
apprehended only by his false accusation, and he has deceived your judgment
with a lie: wherefore if my fortune make me conqueror, you ought by good reason
to deliver her. I have told ye what I mean to do, said the Duke, and
other-wise it shall not be. Agraies tarying for no more words, turned his
horse, running a brave carrire against the Dwarffes Knight, and in the
encounter brake their s^aues gallantly, meeting likewise so furiouslye with
their bodies, as they were both laid along on the ground: yet quickly they
recovered themselves, and unsheathing their weapons, delivered fierce and
cruel strokes to each other, their Swoordes being very sharp, the Knights
valiant and hautilye disposed, by means whereof their Armor, healmes and
sheeldes, were in short time made of slender resistaunce: yet Galuanes well
saw, how his Nephewe had still the better on his enemy, if then he had before
esteemed him a good Knight, far greater reason had he now so to do:
notwithstanding, he was so hot and vigorous, as often times he seemed out of
breath, which made every one imagine (regarding his violence) that he could not
long endure. But in him it proved far other-wise, for the longer the combat
endured, his courage and strength the more increased, by reason whereof he
became the conqueror, as shall hereafter be declared. The Nephewe to the
Dwarffe found him self so hardly handled, as he drew back a little, thus
speaking to Agraies. Me thinks Sir Knight we have made proof enough, of what
we are able to perform in these affairs, wherefore I am of the opinion, that
he whose quarrel I undertake, and the other for whom you entered fight: are not
faulty in any thing wherewith they are charged, otherwise our combat could not
thus long have endured, but victory would fall to one of us. Well have thou
said, answered Agraies, that ye Knight for whom I venture is just and loyal,
but the Dwarffe is a villain and a traitor: nor will I suffer thee to rest,
till with thine own mouth thou confess as much, defend thy self therefore
better then thou have done. These angrye words did somewhat eleuate the
Dwarffes Knights courage, but he had lost so much blood, that he was no longer
able to hold out, by means whereof Agraies took his pleasure on him, because
the other did nothing but defend his strokes: which when the Duke beheld, by
reason he favored him, he was highly displeased, and to shun the sight of his
death, departed toward his Castle, swearing thence forward to work revenge
for him on all Knights errant, by doing them all the shame he could possibly
devise. He being in this fury spoke so loud, as Galuanes ouer-heard him,
wherefore he thus answered. Duke thou do enterprise a great war, especially
against such as are known to more worthy Lords then thou art, seeking thus to
smother up the blame of others. As thus he contended with the Duke, the
Dwarffes champion fell at Agraies feet, who immediately snatching off his
Helmet, caught him by the head, giving him many blows with the hiltes of his
Sword on the face, saying. Confess the disloyalty of the Dwarffe, otherwise
thy life is at an end. Ah gentle knight, quoth he, give me my life, for I
truly confess, that he who you fight for is virtuous and loyal, and promise
withal to gain the Damoselles release from imprisonment: but for Gods sake I
desire ye, let me not reprove the Dwarffe mine Uncle with treason. These
words were by all the assistantes easily understood, which moving Agraies to
pity, he thus answered. For the Dwarffe I will do nothing, but for you
being a good Knight, I grant the favor of your discharge: provided that you
labor to your uttermost for the Damoselles release from prison, according as
you have faithfully promised.

All this while the Duke heard none of these words, because he was gone
somewhat further off: but Galuanes laid hold on his horsse-bridle, saying. By
God (Duke) you shall not depart hence, until you have seen the extremity of
your Champion: for he is either dead or vanquished, what answer then make ye
concerning the Damoselles right, and the treacherous iniurye offered her by the
Dwarffe? What? said the Duke, think thou I will break mine oathe, or do
any otherwise then I have determined? I know not, quoth Galuanes, what
conclusion you have appointed. Mary this, replied the Duke, that she shall be to
morrow morning burned, if she tell not what moved her, to cause the Knight come
hither whom she conducted. Why? quoth Galuanes, will ye not the^ deliver her?
No, said the Duke, and if thou provide not for thy speedy departure out of my
country, thou shall well know that thou have displeased me. Is it true?
answered Galuanes, do ye threaten me contrary to all equity, and will not
discharge the Damsel so honorably justified? By heaven henceforth I defy
thee, as well on mine own behalf, as all other knights errant whatsoever. Very
well, quoth the Duke, the like do I to th^e, and all such as thou resemblest.
So went the Duke into his Castle, and Galuanes returned in an exceeding chafe
to Agraies, but rejoicing at his Nephews glorious victory, he somewhat
qualified his angry choler: yet did he tell him all the Dukes menaces, and
what deffaunce had past on either side, wherewith Agraies was very much moved,
cheefely for the wrong he threatened to the Damsel, wher-upon he thus replied.
In sooth my Lord and Uncle, it is against all reason, that such a palliard as
the Duke, possessed of so great a Signorie, should carry so vile and bad a
mind. Having thus spoken, he called for his horse, which being brought him
he mounted thereon, speaking thus to the vanquished Knight. My friend remember
your promise, and accomplish it so soon as you can, that the Damsel may be
released from her imprisonment. In good faith, quoth he, I will perform my
uttermost ability therein. So rode away Agraies and Galuanes toward the
Forest of Arinida, where when they entered, Galuanes thus began. You know
Nephewe, that I have defied the Duke, in respect of the injury he offered us:
but if I might give advise, I would think it good for us, to ambush our selves
a while in this wood, where we may easilye take him or some of his. I promise
ye, said Agraies, I like well your council: wherefore without passing any
further, they made choice of a little thicket, where they alighted, sending
their Squires to the town to provide them victualles.

On the other side, the Duke (as you have heard) being with-drawen to his
Castle, grew into such displeasure against the Damsel, as he thought
presently to send her to the fire: wher-upon he called for her, and willed her
now to have mind on her soul, because the next morning she should be burned,
if quickly she declared not the truth of the Knight: but all these threatenings
could not draw one word from her. Now because the vanquished Knight had
promised Agraies, to labor for her deliverance to the Duke, so soon as he
returned from the feelde, he came and fell on his knees before the Duke:
beseeching him most instantly to grant, what he had promised on the Ladies
behalf. But the Duke by all means excused the matter, saying he had sollemnely
vowed she should dye, if she revealed not the thing he was so desirous to know.
Therefore, quoth he, I will rather consent to the ruin of my whole estate, then
in one iotte to the breach of my oathe. In this manner was the Knight denied,
and the next morning very earelye he sent for the Damsel, to whom he spoke
thus as follows. Thou lewd and disobedient woman, now make choice of the
fire, or resolve me in the matter I have demanded, for one of them thou must
do. My Lord, qu^th she, you may appoint what you think good: but if I dye in
this manner, it will be against all law and reason. Presently he committed her
to two Sergeants at arms, accompanied with ten Knights well provided for
their defense: and for the more suretye that she should not be reskewed, him
self mounted in person on a goodly great horse, then leaving the town, along
they ride through the feeldes by the Forest side, and being come to the place
prepared for execution, he commanded forth^with she should be thrown into the
fire, saying: Let the stubborn strumpet dye in her obstinacy. But Agraies and
Galuanes being ready armed to adventure their fortune, discerned when the
troop came from the town toward the Forest, wherefore without longer tarying,
(having give^ express charge to one of their Squires, to have especial care
of the Damoselles safety) s^yly left their ambushe, beholding ye poor maiden
ready for the fire, when she perceiving her present danger, cried to the Duke,
that she would tell what he desired, only to delay the time of her death. The
Duke believing she intended as she said, came to her, when suddenly he espied
Agraies and Galuanes gallopping toward him, calling so loud that he might
easily hear the^: Duke, now shall thou be forced to deliver the Damsel. At
these words were all the Dukes Knights greatly astonished, yet prepared they
for their own defense, wher-upon began between them a fierce and cruel
fight. Now though Agraies and Galuanes were alone against so many, yet did they
so bravely behave themselves, as at the first onset they quailed the greater
part of them, before they could devise which way to turn themselves: whereat
the Duke was so amazed, that fearing his own death was near at hand, he
withdrew him self behind his men, yet Galuanes perceived it, wherefore he
cried to him. Traiterous Duke, this day thou beginnest to feel the war thou
did enterprise against Knights errant: then rushing through the preasse, he
minded to charge the Duke, but he retired aside, willing his Knights to kill
their enemies horses, which they on soote might easilye compass. In brief
these two champions showed such chivalry on their footmen, as they were
vanquished and driven to flight, the most of the^ so cruelly wounded, that they
were scant able to keep them selves on horse back in their escaping away: and
ye Duke who was better mounted then any of them, made such haste, as he brought
the first news heerof to the town, being eagerly pursued a while by
Galuanes, but when he saw it was in vain, he returned to the Forest, where
he found his Nephewe and the Squires with the Damsel.

Such was the reskewe of the poor maiden, and shameful foil of the Duke, who
being arrived at the town, caused with all speed a great number to arm
themselves, returning to the Forest to revenge their late injury, thinking to
find the Knights there as yet, but they were dislodged: wherefore failing of
their purpose, they dispersed them selves in several troops, by five and five
in a company to seek them, the Duke likewise being one in the search,
having four of the best Knights he could make choice off. And as they rode
along in a valley, he espied the Knights conducting the Damsel, wherefore he
said to his men. Behold (my friends) the traitors we are to deal withal,
let us set on the^ before they get leisure to escape: for if they gain but a
sight of us, they will run away faster then ever we did. But Galuanes espied
them ere they came near, and showed them to his Nephewe Agraies, who he
thought was ouer-weried with the last assault, which made him say. We already
have felt what these villains can do, but now must we warily defend our
selves, that we be no more followed in this sort. I know ye Duke to be he
comes foremost, if good hap befall us, I hope he shall have his payment first of
al: be now (good Nephew) mindful of your wunted courage, having passed
through greater dangers then this can be. Why Uncle? quoth Agraies, in time of
perrill do you think I will forget my self? especially being in your company?
dream of no such matter I pray ye, but let us serve these as we did their
companions. By time he had thus spoken, the Duke gave the spurs to his
horse, and coming near them, said. I am sorrye villaynes you should dye so
honorably, but afterward I mean to hang ye by the heels on the tops of
these trees. Galuanes and Agraies buckled close with them, showing how much
they despised such shameful burial: on the other side, the Duke and his
Knights stuck to it closely, especially him self, to whom Agraies came, and
angerly reached him such a blow with his sword beneath ye sight of his Helmet,
as quite cut away ye nosthrilles from his face. The Duke imagining him self
wounded to the death, turned his back and fled, Agraies following him, but
seeing he could not overtake him, he commended him to all the Deuilles,
returning to succor Galuanes, whom ye other four had very sore labored* yet
did he hold out so courageously, as none of the^ durst come near him: for one
was tumbled headlong from his horse, not showing any motion of life was left
in him. Agraies being now come from pursuing the Duke, buckled so closely with
the first he met, as he fell down deprived of life: so that there remained but
two, who found themselves too weak to uphold the honor of the vanquished, and
therefore trusted to the speed of their Horses, following the first runaway
toward the Forest, by which means they escaped the fury of Agraies and
Galuanes, they suffering them to enjoy that benefit, and returned where the
Damsel attended for them, of whom they demanded, if any town or place of
lodging were near. Gentlemen, quoth she, I know the dwelling of a Knight hard
by, named Oliuas, who is mortal enemy to the Duke, by reason he slew a Cousin
of his, which makes me think he will the better welcome us. Be you our guide
thither, said Galuanes, and so she was, they being very kindly entertained
there, especially when he knew what had happened. On the morrow they took their
leave of Oliuas, but calling them aside, he thus spoke. Gentlemen, the Duke
trecherously killed a Cousin german of mine, who was a good Knight, wherefore I
am determined to accuse and combat with him before King Lisuart. Now since I
understand you are Knights errant, and such as know how, or else your selves
can redress the wrongs offered to the unable, yea, by them who (without care
of God or their honor) durst proceed so far: I desire you to give me your
counsel and supporte. In sooth, answered Galuanes, you are deepelye bound to
prosecute the murder, being committed in such shameful manner, and we will
assist ye in your quarrel on so just a cause: if the duke will bring any
Knights to maintain his wrong, we will be for you; for so little account makes
he of us, that he has openly given us defiaunce. Most heartily I thank ye,
replied the Knight, and for this cause I will go with ye if you please. Content
quoth they. Heer-upon Oliuas armed himself, and so they rode together to
Windesore, where they had good hope to find King Lisuart.

CHAP. XVIII. How Amadis tarying with his good will in the Court of King
Lisuart, heard tidinges of his brother Galaor.
BY the discourse past you have understood, how Amadis (after he had in open
feelde foiled and overcome the audacious proud Dardan,) was stayed in King
Lisuarts Court by the Ladies request, expressly to be the Queens Knight: his
entertainment by the King, favor and manifold other courtesies, you have
likewise heard. It now came so to pass, that as he was one day devising among
the Ladies, a Damsel entered the Queens chamber, who falling on her knees
before the Queen, said. Madame, is not a Knight here that bears azured
Lions in his arms? The Queen perceiving she meant Amadis, answered. Damsel,
what would you with him? Madame, quoth she, I have brought him tidings of a new
Knight, who has begun in deeds of Arms so rarely as ever did any. You speak
very much, answered the Queen: but you perhaps being acquainted with none but
him, think therefore he is beyond all other. It may be so, replied the
Damsel, yet when you understand what he has accomplished, I think your
self will agree to my saying. I pray ye then, quoth the Queen, tell us what
he is. When I see the good Knight, answered the Damsel, he who caryeth such
estimation from all other: I will tell him in your presence, and other news
which I am charged to acquaint him withal. The Queen was now more desirous to
know him then before, wherefore showing her Amadis, she said. See here
(Damsel) the man you ask for. Madame, quoth she, in respect you speak it, I
believe it, for a Queen of such state as you are, is free from beguiling: then
coming to Amadis, she thus proceeded. My Lord, the young Gentleman whom not
long since you Knighted before the Castle of Bradoid, when you vanquished the
two Knights on the bridge, and the other on the cawsey, where you took the
Master thereof prisoner, and delivered by force of arms the friend to
Vrganda: most humbly saluteth you by me, being the man whom he reputeth as his
Lord, and gives you to know, how he endeavors to reach the height of honor,
which he will attain, or dye in the attempt: likewise when he shall perform
somewhat worthy the name of Chivalry, he will acquaint you with more then
yet you know, until which time he shrowdes it in silence. Amadis soon
remembered ^he spoke of his brother, wherefore with joy the tears dewed his
cheeks, and the Ladies well noting this alteration, meruailed thereat,
especially Oriana: who (as you have heard heretofore) was grounded in such
affection toward him, as she was well near deprived of power to dissemble it.
In mean while, the Queen desirous to hear what deeds of prowess the new
Knight had performed, said to the Damsel, I pray ye continue your message,
and tell us the brave beginning of chivalry you spoke of. Madame, quoth she,
the first place where he made proof of himself, was at the Rock of Galteres,
where he combatted with the great and terrible Giant Albadan, whom (in open
feeld hand to hand) he overcame and slew: heereto she added the manner of the
fight, assuring her that she had seen the same. Greatly were all the hearers
abashed at these news, but above all the rest the Queen: who demanded of the
Damsel, if she knew whether he travailed from thence. Madame, quoth she, I
parted from him soon after, leaving him in the company of a Damsel, who came
from her Mistress to seek him, because she was desirous to know him, at
which time he went with her, and since I never saw him. What think you
heere-of Sir Amadis? said the Queen, do not you know of whence he is? Yes
truly Madame, answered Amadis, although I can say but little herein: I think
he be mine own brother, for so Vrganda not long since assured me. Doubtless,
quoth the Queen, the fortune of you both is admirable, and I marvel how you
could come to the knowledge of your Parents, or they of you? yet would I be
glad to see that Knight in the Kings service. While these speeches endured,
Oriana who sat far from the Queen, and heard none of these news, was in
such grief to see Amadis shead tears, as being unable to conceal the same,
she said to Mabila. I pray ye (fair friend) call your Cousin Amadis,, that we
may know what has happened to cause him mourn. Mabila made a sign to Amadis
to come, and when he was with them, Oriana showing her self somewhat grieved,
thus began. Sir Amadis, it may full well be said, that by some Lady you are now
moved to pity, I pray ye tell us what she is, and from whence this Damsel
brought you these tidings. Amadis quickly perceived his Mistresses disease,
wherefore he declared all that the Damsel told the Queen: which appeased
the iealouzie of this hot lover, and made her show more amiable countenance,
thus speaking to Amadis. Alas my Lord, I must entreat ye to pardon the fault,
raised only by fond suspicion against you. I promise ye Madame, quoth he, there
is no cause of pardon, nor did my heart ever think amiss against you: but
could you like thereof, that I should go seek him the Damsel departed from,
and bring him hither with me to serve you? for this I am assured, if I bring
him not, it will be very hard to get him hither. Believe me, answered Oriana, I
could gladly with so good a Knight in this company, and therefore I think you
shall do well to go seek him: yet before you depart, acquaint ye Queen
heerewith, that she may imagine, how by her commandment only, you enterprise
this journey. Humbly did Amadis regratiate his Mistress, and according to her
council he went to the Queen, to whom he began in this manner. It were good
in mine opinion. Madame, that the King had this Knight likewise to attend on
his service. Certes, quoth she, I would it might be so if it were possible. If
you will grant me leave, said Amadis, to go find him, I have no doubt of
bringing him hither: otherwise I know you shall hardly see him, till he have
made himself known in many other places. You do very much for the King,
quoth she, if he do come, nevertheless, I refer it to your own discretion.

Thus Amadis obtained license to depart, which he did very early the next
morning, having no other company then Gandalin, and spending most part of the
day riding through a Forest, he saw a Lady come toward him, accompanied with
two Damsels and four Squires: who weeping very grievously, conducted a Knight
in a Litter, whereat Amadis being abashed, demanded what moved them to be so
sorrowful, and what he was they had in the Litter. He is, quoth the Lady, the
only cause of my care and pensiuenes, my Lord and husband, who is wounded in
such sort as I fear his death. Amadis auaunced himself to behold the man, and
lifting up the couerture of the Litter, saw a Knight lie there of goodly
personage: but of his face he could make no judgment, by reason it was cruelly
cut and mangled, whereupon he called to him, saying. My friend, who has thus
wronged thee? yet did the Knight make no answer, which made him go to the
Lady again and ask her the question. Gentle Sir, quoth she, a Knight that
keeps a bridge not far hence, did it, who as we passed by said to my Lord,
how he must swear whether he were of King Lisuarts Court or no: which made my
husband demand why he would know. Because, said the Knight, no friend of his
shall pass here, but I will kill him. What is the occasion of your hatred?
replied my husband. I wish so much ill, quoth the Knight, to that ungracious
King, as I would gladly have him in my power, to take vengeance on him at mine
own pleasure: and in despite of him, hence-foorth shall I sley all such as
are belonging to him, because he keeps a Knight that killed the valiant
Dardan, for whose sake I mean to deal in such sort, as the King and his
wel-willers shall receive by me infinite displeasures and dishonors. When my
Husband heard him, as one agreeued at his villainous speeches, he answered.
Know thou that I am one of his Court, and his vowed servant, who neither for
thee or any other will deny him. Highly displeased was the Knight of the bridge
with this answer, and without any more words charged my husband, so that
between them grew a cruel combat: but in the end, my Lord was brought into
this hard extremity, and far more wursse in the Knights opinion, for he
reputed him to be slain outright, commanding us within three days, to carry
him before King Lisuart to despite him withal. Lady, quoth Amadis, I pray ye
lend me one of your Squires, who can show me the Knight when I come where he
is: for seeing your husband has been so wronged for my sake, it behooves me
more then any other to revenge the same. What? said the Lady, are you he for
whose cause he so hates the King? Yea verily, answered Amadis, and if my hap
prove so good, he shall never here* after abuse any other. Ah gentle Knight,
quoth she, I will pray for your prosperous success. Afterward she gave him one
of her Squires, and committing him to God, rode on with her husband, and Amadis
never stayed till he came to the bridge, where he saw the Knight playing at
the Tables with an other: but quickly leaving his pastime, being ready armed,
he mounted on horsseback, calling to Amadis in this manner. Holla, holla Sir,
I forbid ye to pass any further till you have sworn. What shall I swear?
answered Amadis. Whether thou be of King Lisuarts Court or no, said the Knight:
for if thou belong to him, here must thou leave thy head behind thee. It is a
question, quoth Amadis, if thou can do so much: but I assure thee I belong
to the Queen his wife, ever since not long ago. Since when? replied the
Knight. Since a disinherited Lady, said Amadis, came thither for her right. But
thou art not he, quoth the Knight, that foughtest the Combat for her? I am the
man, answered Amadis, who wun her her peace. By my head, said the Knight, now
shall thou loose thine if I can, for thou did kill the only honor of my
lineage. I killed him not, replied Amadis, but made him discharge her of his
outrageous demand, and afterward he became a murderer of himself. All this
can not profit thee, quoth the Knight, for by thee and no other he dyed: now
for his sake shall thou likewise loose thy life. Hereupon they gave the
spurs to their horses, and breaking their Lances bravely, met so furiously
with their bodies, as the Knight of the bridge was thrown to the ground,
whereof he was not a little ashamed: but by reason the helmet of Amadis was
unlaced in the running, while he amended it, the Knight had leisure to mount
himself again, and to give his enemy two or three strokes with the sword,
before he had time to draw forth his. All which afterward he very well
requited, for striking full at his head, he brake away the skirts of his
helmet, and redoubling his blow, met so directly with his neck, as his head
hung down behind his shoulders, his soul passing to the Author of his pride
and cruelty. When his gardants of the bridge saw him thus slain, they
trusted to their heels, yet Amadis would not follow the^, but returned to the
Squire that co^ducted him thither: willing him to make haste to his Lady, and
let her understand how he had revenged her husbands injury: which he
immediately did, not sparing the worthy attaints at Sword and Lance, which he
had seen Amadis bestow on the Knight of the bridge.

Amadis having there no more to do, issuing forth of the Forest, entered on a
large and goodly plain, bravely beautified with Uiolets, sweet herbs, and
all other devises of natures tapistrie, which presently provoked the
remembrance of his Oriana: riding on in diverse amorous thoughts, he saw come
toward him an evil favored Dwarffe on a simple Palfray, whom he called to
know from whence he came. My Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, I come from the house of
the County of Claire. Have thou not seen a young Knight, said Amadis, named
Galaor? No truly, answered the Dwarffe, but I know where (within three days)
I can show you the best Knight that ever bare Arms in these parts. When Amadis
heard this, thinking he had meant his brother, he said. I pray thee my friend
conduct me to the place where I may see him. With all my heart, replied the
Dwarffe, on condition you will grant me one request, and go with me whether I
shall guide ye. The great desire he had to find his brother, made him soon
consent. Come with me then, quoth the Dwarffe, and I will bring ye where you
shall behold ye good Knight. So rode they on till dark night ouertooke them,
which the Dwarffe perceiving, he said to Amadis, My Lord, hard by is a Castle
where we may lodge this night, for there is a Lady who will freendly welcome
us. Thither they rode, and had kind entertainment, when supper being ended,
Amadis was brought to lodge in a sumptuous bed: but he could take no rest, his
thoughts so hammered on the perfections of his Mistress. And taking leave the
next morning of their freendly Hostess, continued on their journey till about
midday, when they saw two Knights fighting against one, then Amadis
approaching to the^, said. Gentlemen, may it please ye to pause awhile, and tell
me on what occasion your quarrel arises? At these words they ceased, and one
of the two thus replied. It is because this Knight maintains, that he alone
is as able as we two together, to bring a hautie enterprise to end. In sooth,
said Amadis, your difference is very slender, for the bounty of the one
diminishes no jot of the other. The Knights perceiving he spoke the truth,
ended their strife, demanding of Amadis, if he knew the Knight in King
Lisuarts Court, who combatted for the iniuried widow, whereby the good Knight
Dardan was slain. Why ask ye? quoth Amadis. Because, said the Knights, we
would gladly meet with him. I know not, answered Amadis, whether your meaning
be good or bad, yet is it not long since I saw him in the Court of King
Lisuart. Having so said, he rode on his way, when the three Knights having
conferred a little together, they began to gallop after him: and he no sooner
heard them, but turned again, then doubting they intended some harm to him,
he clasped on his Helmet and his Sheeld, yet had he no Lance, nor they
likewise. Alas my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, what will ye do? consider you not
they be three, and you alone? What matters that? answered Amadis, if they
assail me without reason why, by good right I must assay for mine own
defense. On these speeches, they came to him in this manner. Sir Knight, we
would demand one thing of you, which we desire ye not to deny, otherwise you
may not so easily escape us. The sooner shall I grant it, quoth Amadis, if it
be reasonable. Tell us then as you are a loyal Gentleman, where you imagine we
may find him that slew Dardan. He who could do no less then speak the truth,
thus replied. I am he, albeit I would have you think, that I do not so soon
fulfill your request, in respect of adding any praise to my self. When the
Knights heard him, they cried altogether: Ah traitor, thou dyest, and drawing
their Swords, set violently upon him. Amadis offended to see himself thus
assailed, by them whom ere-while he had so freendly pacified: resisted them
with such resolute courage, as at the first stroke he smote one of their arms
from the body, the grief whereof made him likewise fall beside his horse: the
second also felt his Sword so peazantly, that he cleft his head to the very
teeth, and sent him to keep his fellow company. When the third beheld their
bad success, he put ye spurs to his horse and got him away, but Amadis
being not so well mounted, let him escape, returning to Gandalin and the
Dwarffe, who thus spoke. Credit me my Lord, henceforth will I trust better to
your words then I did, let us now therefore make haste hence if you please. So
riding along, at length the Dwarffe showed him in a pleasant valley two high
Pine trees, near which was a Knight mounted on a lusty Courser, and two other
whom not long before he had vanquished, they running to catch their horses
there strayed about the feeld. And looking again, he espied an other Knight
lay leaning on his helmet, having his Sheeld by him, and twenty Lances reared
against the Pines, with two spare horses likewise ready furnished. My Lord,
quoth the Dwarffe, do you see the Gentleman that leans on his helmet? What
then? said Amadis. He is, replied the Dwarffe, the good Knight I promised to
show you, Know thou his name? quoth Amadis. He names himself, answered the
Dwarffe, Angriote destrauaus, and is the best Knight that I have heard report
of. Tell me then, said Amadis, why he keeps there so many Lances? I can
therein, answered the Dwarffe, full well resolve ye, listen then awhile. He
loves a Lady of this country, who hates him above all other: nevertheless,
he has prevailed so much by fight, as her Parents were constrained to give him
her. After he had gotten her into his power, he thought himself the happyest
man in the world: but she told him, he should wade into no such fond opinion,
because he took a young Lady against her will. And albeit, quoth she, perforce
you have enjoyed me, yet while I live never shall I love ye, if you do not
perform one thing for me. What Lady? answered Angriote, it is within compass
of my puissance? That is it, said she. Command then sweet Madame, replied
Angriote, for I will accomplish it even to the death. The Lady whose evil will
was toward him exceeding great, thinking to appoint him a place most convenient
for his death, or else to get him there so many enemies, as her Parents might
enjoy better assistance to take her from him: entreated him and his brother to
guard this vale of Pines, against all Knights errant that should pass this
way, causing them by force of arms to take an oath, how they should afterward
travail to King Lisuarts Court, there to confess her more beautiful then the
Ladies they loved. And if it so fell out, that the brother to Angriote (whom
you see on horsseback) were vanquished, and could endure the combat no
further: then Angriote should keep this passage alone, during the space of one
whole year. For this cause they depart not hence all ye day time, and at night
return to a Castle on the Mountain you see at hand: having already
maintained their enterprise three months, in all which time Angriote never set
hand to sword against any Knight, because his brother has still been
conqueror. Trust me, said Amadis, I believe thou say true, and so I heard
in the Court of King Lisuart, where not long since a Knight arrived, who
confessed Angriotes Lady to be more fair then his friend, and me thought he
called her name Grouenesa. Uery true, quoth the Dwarffe: but now seeing you are
resolved, remember your promise to me, and bear me company as you said you
would. With right good will, answered Amadis, which is the way? Even over this
vale, replied the Dwarffe, but because of this hinderance, as yet I think we
shall very hardly pass. Care not thou for that, said Amadis: so giving his
horse the spurs, he rode on, and soon after he met a Squire, who thus spoke
to him. Go no further Gentleman, if you will not grant the Knights Lady under
the Pine, to be more beautiful then your Mistress. Never will I yield to such
a slander, replied Amadis, without force or extreme constraint. Return then,
said the Squire, otherwise you must combat with the^ twain you see before. If
they assail me, quoth Amadis, I must defend my self so well as I can: so
using no more words, he rode on forward.

CHAP. XIX. How Amadis combatted against Angriote and his brother, who guarded
the passage of the valley, against such as would not confess, that their
Ladies were inferior in beauty to Angriotes choice.
WHen Angriotes brother saw him coming, he took up his weapons and met him,
saying. Believe me Knight you have committed great folly, in not granting what
our Squire gave you warning off, you must therefore enter combat with me. As for
the combat, answered Amadis, I like it much better, then to confess the
greatest lie in the world. I know well, said the Knight, you must do it with
disadvantage in an other place. And trust me, quoth Amadis, I think not so.
Stand on your own defense then, replied the Knight: wherewith they gave the
carrire against each other, meeting together so furiouslye, as the Knight was
vnhorssed: yet held he fast the reins of his bridle, till they brake in his
hand, which caused him to fall on his neck to the ground, where he lay without
remembrance of him self or any other. Heerupon Amadis alighted, and pulling
the helmet from his head, perceived that he was in a swoune, wherefore he
buffetted him in such sort, as he came to him self again. Thou art but dead,
said Amadis, if thou yield not thy self my prisoner. When the Knight saw the
naked Sword over his head, fearing his death, he yielded. Then Amadis mounted
again, perceiving Angriote already on horsse-back, ready to revenge his
brothers injury: and a Squire came to the Prince, bringing him a Lance, which
he presented him with-all from Angriote. Soon after they encountered so
gallantly, as their Lances flewe in pieces without any further harm, and
ending their carrire, Amadis quickly drew his Sword, turning to Angriote, who
thus spoke. Make not such haste (Knight) to combat with the sword, because
thou shall have time enough for that annon, (this he said, in respect he
reputed him self the best at the sword that might be found:) But I pray thee,
quoth he, let us ioust till our Lances fail, or one of us be sent to ye
earth. Knight, answered Amadis, I have weightye business else where, and may not
trifle time with tarying here. What? said Angriote, think th^^ to escape me
so lightly? I promise thee it is the least part of my thought: yet I pray thee
let us tire one course more. Amadis was content, and taking such Lances as
each of them liked, finished the ioust with such violence, as Angriote was cast
down and his horse upon him. Amadis leaping from his saddle, saw that a small
trunchion of a Lance had a little entered his body, yet scorning any shame
should be discerned on his side, fighting for the honor and beauty of his
Goddess Oriana: snatched forth the trunchion, and marched with his sword
drawn against Agriote, who seeing him come, said. I see sir Knight thou art
very young, and me thinks before it be woorsse with thee, thou were better to
confess my Lady fairer then thine. Then should I lie very fowlly, answered
Amadis, and (by my will) I shall not dissent so far from the truth. These
speeches enkindled choler on either side, which made them charge each other
with such vigor, as not only they that beheld them, but even themselves were
driven into doubts, thinking it impossible to endure so extremely. And to say
sooth the cause was hard, for Amadis undertook the honor of his Lady, for
which he could rather choose a thousand deaths, then she should loose one iotte
of her excellence: and this opinion still whetted on his courage, that Angriote
was compelled to diverse simple shifts, to avoid the fierce assaults of his
valiant enemy, who had wounded him in twenty several places, and he
perceiving his death at hand, stepped aside thus speaking to Amadis. Believe me
sir Knight, there is more valor in thee then I imagined. Yield thy self, said
Amadis, so shall thou do wisely, seeing thou art already brought into such
danger, for with the finishing of our combat, thy life will likewise end:
which can be no pleasure at all to me, in that I esteem of thee better then
thou weenest. These words he used, as well for the brave chivalry he noted
in Angriote, as also ye great honesty he showed to the Lady in his possession:
wher-upon Angriote returned this answer. It is reason I should yield my self
to the best Knight in the world, and the like all other to do that bear
Arms: believe me then gentle Knight, I not so much sorrow for my foil, as the
wreakfull chance threatened to me, by loosing this day the only thing in the
world I most love. That shall you not, quoth Amadis, if I can help it, beside,
the Lady should show her self very ungrateful, if she acknowledge not your
honorable pains in her defense, and it cannot be, but she will requite ye
with the good you have deserved. As for me, I promise ye to imploye my
uttermost ability, in causing her consent thereto, so soon as I shall return
from a search I have now in hand. My Lord, said Angriote, in what place may I
heer-after find you? In the Court of King Lisuart, answered Amadis, where (by
Gods help) I mean shortly to be. So took he leave of Angriote, who gladly
would have had him to his Castle, but he might not be hindered of his journey.

Thus does Amadis follow the Dwarffe, who guided him five days together
without any adventure, showing him at length a marvelous strong and pleasant
Castle, saying: Sir, within yonder hold you must perform the promise you
made me. And I will do it for thee, answered Amadis, if it consist in my
power. I am in good hope thereof, quoth the Dwarffe, in respect I have seen
some proof of your Fortune: but know ye Sir how the place is named? No verily,
said Amadis, for till now I was never in this country. It is called Valderin,
replied the Dwarffe: and thus devising, they came near the Castle, when the
Dwarffe willed him to take his Arms. Why? said Amadis, shall we have any such
need? Yea, mary, quoth the Dwarffe, for they suffer none to come forth that
enter so lightly. Amadis buckled on his helmet, riding in before, the Dwarffe
and Gandalin following after, then looking on every side they could see no
creature. This place said Amadis is not inhabited, where is ye request thou
saidt I should do for thee? Credit me Sir, said the Dwarffe, I have sometime
seen here a most brave Knight, and the strongest in chivalry that ever I
saw, who in that Porche killed two Knights, one of them being my master, him
he put to death very cruellye, without regard of favor or mercy. In revenge
whereof, I would desire that traitors head, which I have long failed in
obtaining, because all such as I brought hither, have lost their lives or
remain here in captivity. Thou do the part of a loyal servant, answered
Amadis: yet ought thou to bring no Knight hither, before thou tell him
against whom he shall fight. My Lord, quoth ye Dwarffe, the man is known well
enough, and reputed for one of the best Knights in the world: therefore when I
have named him, I could not meet with any so hardy as to revenge my cause.
Belike then thou know his name, said Amadis. Yea my Lord, replied the
Dwarffe, he calls himself Arcalaus the enchaunter. Amadis hereupon went
further in, looking round about if he might see any body: but all was in vain,
wherefore to rest his horse, he stayed there till evening, saying to the
Dwarffe. What will thou I shall do now it is so late? Alas my Lord, quoth he,
the night being so near at hand, me thinks it were good we departed hence. Nay
trust me, answered Amadis, I will not boudge hence till the Knight come, or
some other that can tell me tidings of him. But I dare not tarry, said the
Dwarffe, least Arcalaus chance to know me, and imagine I practice the means
of his death. Yet shall thou bear me company, replied Amadis, as I will not
excuse my self from the promise I have made thee. As thus they communed,
Amadis espied a court somewhat more backward, whereinto he entered and found no
body: but he saw a dark place underneath, and certain steps leading into the
earth. Gandalin got hold on the Dwarffe, who would have run away, and Amadis
took great pleasure to behold his trembling, speaking thus merrily to him.
Fear not tall fellow, but let us go down these stairs to see who is
beneath. My Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, for Gods sake spare me, nothing in the
world can make me go into such a fearful place. If thou go hence, said
Amadis, how will thou enjoy the thing I promised thee, or know that I do my
endeavor therein? Ah Sir, quoth he, I acquit you, and hold my self fully
satisfied. But so do not I, answered Amadis, because hereafter thou shall not
say I brake my promise. On my faith Sir, said the Dwarffe, I freely discharge
ye, and if you please to let me go, I will tarry for ye in the way as we came
hither. Get thee gone then, replied Amadis, for here will I abide till to
morrow morning attending the Knight.

In this manner the poor Dwarffe escaped thence, and Amadis went down the
stairs, coming into a plain place so dark, that he could not imagine where
he was: yet he proceeded on, and by groping on a wall felt a bar of iron,
whereat hung a Key which he took, opening therewith a Chain that locked a
porte-cullis, then heard be a lamentable voice thus complaining. Ah God, how
long shall we remain in this misery? sweet death why stayest thou from
succouring us, who call to thee as our last refuge? Soon after the voice
ceased, which made him hold on his way, and enter a vault having his sword
and sheeld ready: then passing further, he came into a great palace, at the
entrance whereof hung a Lamp burning, and sire men laid a long a sleep, with
their sheeldes and hatchets lying by them, the best of which he took him
self. They not awaking he went on by them, and soon after heard another
grievous lamentation in this manner. Ah God full of pity and mercy, send
death if it please thee to deliver us from this hell. Now was Amadis in woorsse
case then before, for one of the sire Soldiers suddenly awaking, said to his
fellow: Arise, take these rods and make that curssed creature sing another
kind of song, who has thus disturbed us in our sleep. Mary and I shall,
answered the other: so he arose and took the rods, but as he went, he
chanced to see Amadis before him, where at he was somewhat affraide, yet to be
better assured, he demanded, who is there? I, quoth Amadis. What art thou?
said the other. I am, quoth he, a strange Knight. Who brought thee hither,
said the soldier, without any license? No body answered Amadis, but my self
alone. The wursse for thee, replied the Soldier, now must thou be enclosed
among these unfortunate people, who cry as thou hear. Then stepping back,
he shut the door against Amadis, and waking his companions, said. My friends,
I have found a strange Knight, who to his harm has entered on his good will.
Let me talk with him, answered the Iaylor and if I lodge him not woorsse then
the rest, then blame me. So taking his hatchet and sheeld he came to Amadis
with these words. Caitife, if thou will not dye, throw down thy weapons,
least with my hatchet I slice thy flesh, and make carbonadoes of it. Uery
angrye was Amadis, to be thus threatened, wherefore he returned this answer.
Slender is thy reason in thinking to fear me with thy words, but the
deuilles shall affright thee a great deal more: for I will make the^ a present
with thy soul, which so long has given power to thy wicked body in doing
evil. Presently they smot at each other with their hatchets, the Iaylor
delivering his stroke on ye helmet of Amadis, so that it entered very far
therein, and Amadis cutting through the Iaylors sheeld, enforced him to throw
both it and his hatchet down to stand to the only defense of his Sword: which
endured not long likewise, wherefore he minded to grapple Amadis about the
body, because he was a man of marvelous strength, yet could he not do so
much as he meant, in respect Amadis was a Knight both stiff and sturdie.
Nevertheless, the Iaylor griped him very cruellye, till the Prince gave him
such a blow on the face, as brake his iaw bones, which compelling him to fall
down amazed, Amadis had the mean to accomplish his promise, seperating with
his sword the body from the soul.

The other Soldiers that beheld this fight, not thinking the Iaylor was dead
in deed, cried to Amadis: how on peril of his life he should not kill him,
least they likewise should send him after. I know not, answered Amadis, what
may become of me, but I am certain he is safe enough for doing any more
harm: heerewith he drew his sword, and taking up his hatchet again, marched
toward them that came against him, who charged him very sharp and roughly: yet
the first he encountered with, followed the Iaylor, so did the second, and the
fourth being smitten on his knees to the ground, had dyed, but he appealed for
mercy, the other twain bearing him company in the same suit. Cast down your
weapons, said Amadis, and show me them that complained so woefully: which they
did, guiding him the way to the captives, when Amadis hearing another voice
somewhat near him, demanded what he was. My Lord, replied the Soldiers, it
is a Lady in extreme anguish. Open the door, quoth Amadis, that I may see her.
Then one of them ran where the Iaylor lay dead, and taking two keys from his
girdle, opened the dungeon where the Lady was enclosed: but the imagining the
Iaylor entered, cried. Alas man, take pity on me, and oppress me with no more
torments. Ah King, quoth she, breathing forth a bitter sigh: hard was my lot
to be loved of thee, seeing I buy my affection so dearly. Her grievous mones
moved such compassion in Amadis, as the fears trickled down his cheeks,
returning her this answer. Lady, I am not the Iaylor that locked you here,
but the man who means to deliver you hence if I can, a strange Knight, seeking
my fortunes every where. Alas my Lord, said she, what is become of the Iaylor
and his companions? He and some of them, answered Amadis, are sent to Hell to
look their copes-mates: then one of the Soldiers having brought a light, the
Prince saw how the Lady was tied by the neck with a great chain, which had so
worn and dispoiled her garments, as the naked flesh appeared in many places,
and when she beheld that Amadis pitied her, she thus spoke. Although (my Lord)
I am at this present sequestered from all my liuelood, yet time has been, when
I was the wealthy daughter to a King, and for a King you find me in this
misery. Lady, quoth Amadis, it behooves you to embrace patience, these are
but the mutabilities of fortune, which no one is able to prevent or escape: and
if the man for whom you have thus suffered, be of any account, or loves you,
I am sure he will convert right soon this poor estate into rich abundance,
and remunerate your long sorrows with joy and gladness. So he caused the chain
to be taken from her neck, commanding garments to be brought to put about her:
wherefore he that brought the lights, ran for a scarlet mantle, which Arcalaus
not long before gave the Iaylor, and cast it about the Ladies shoulders. This
being done, Amadis took her by the hand, conducting her forth of the dark
prison, saying she should never return thither again, but he would loose his
life before: and passing by where the Iaylor and the other lay slain, the Lady
began thus to complain. Ah cruel hands, how many wounds and torments have you
given me, and diverse other in this Castle without desert? although your bodies
at this instant cannot receive condign vengeance, your damned souls may
evermore abide in sufferance. Madame, said Amadis, while I go to deliver the
rest of the prisoners, I leave ye in my Squires custody: so passing on to the
Port-cullis, he met the Soldier that brought the lights, saying. Sir,
Arcalaus demands where the Knight is which entered here, whether he be dead
or taken. He who carried the torche before the Prince, was so afraid at these
words, that he let it fall, which Amadis made him take up again, thus speaking
to him. Uillaine, fear thou being in my guard? go on. Then ascending the
stairs, they came into the open court, where they saw the greater part of the
night was spent, the Moon shining clear, and the weather fair: but the Lady
feeling the air, and beholding the heavens, was so repleat with joy, that she
fell on her knees before Amadis, saying. Ah gentle Knight, the Almighty
protect thee, and requite the good I have received by thee, delivering me from
comfortless darkness. Amadis looking round about for Gandalin, and finding
him not, feared he had lost him, wherefore he said: If the best Squire in the
world be dead, I shall take such revenge for his death may I but meet his
murderer, as never was the like heard before. Being thus overcome with grief,
he heard one cry, wherefore he ran which way he thought best, and found the
Dwarffe (that parted from him the night before) hanging by one leg on high at a
great piece of wood, having a fire underneath him full of filthy stinking
savors: and near him he espied Gandalin tied to a tree, toward whom he was
going to unbind him, but he saw the Dwarffe had greatest need of help,
wherefore he cut the cords in twain that held him up, catching him in his
arms to set him on his feet, afterward he unloosed Gandalin, saying. In sooth
my friend, whosoever entreated thee thus, made little reckoning of thy good
deserts. Now because he would deliver the other prisoners, he met the Lady
coming forth of the Castle, as he returned back again, but going on, he
found the gates fast shut against him: whereupon he stayed till day light in a
corner of the Court, sitting down by the Lady, accompanied with two of the
Soldiers, the Dwarffe and Gandalin. And as they communed together, Gandalin
showed the Prince a place wher-into he saw a horse led, which Amadis being
desirous to see, came to the door and found it shut: but he ran so strongly
against it with his foot, that he made it fly open, finding the horse there
ready sadled and bridled, whereon he mounted, attending the day and sight of
Arcalaus, who he knew was already arrived at the Castle, by matters he heard
of Gandalin and the Dwarf. In mean while he conferred with the Lady,
demanding what the King was she loved so dearly, and for whom she had
sustained such injury. Worthy Lord, quoth she, Arcalaus getting intelligence,
of the Princes affection toward me whom I love so loyally, this deuillish
enchaunter being his mortal enemy: thought he could be no better revenged on
him, then by depriving me of his presence, imagining the grief hereof would
be greater to him then any other. Being thus persuaded, he stole me away, at
what time I was with many great personages, who were not able to give me any
succor, by reason of the traitors villainous sorceries: for they could not
devise what was become of me, because a wonderful dark clowd environed me,
which hindered them from following me to this place, since when, I never saw
light till now you brought me forth. The disloyal wretch said by the way as
he brought me, that he would be revenged on my love and my self by these
means: I poor soul enduring the torments, and my Love the grief of my
absence, yet ignorant where. Madame, said Amadis, I pray ye name the man you
speak of. It is King Arban of Norgalles, answered the Lady, whom it may be
you know. I know him right well, replied Amadis, for he is one whom I dearly
love, and now do I less pity your sufferings then before: because they have
bin for one of the best men in the world, who will so well recompense them, as
by rendering you incomparable joy, your love and honor shall both be satisfied.

While thus they communed together, fair day appeered, when Amadis saw a
Knight leaning in a window, who thus demanded. Art thou he that did kill my
Iaylor and my servants? Art thou he? answered Amadis, that so trecherously
puts Knights to death, abusing likewise both Ladies and Gentlewomen? by
heaven thou art one of the vilest villains that ever I heard off. As yet thou
know not, said Arcalaus, the uttermost of my power, but soon shall thou
have experience thereof, to rid thee of such boldenes in asking me what I can
do, whether it be wrong or right. Heer-with he went from ye window, and not
long after came down into the court, being well armed, and mounted on a
lusty bay courser. Now you must note that this Arcalaus, was one of the
mightyest Knights in the world, yet no Giant, wherefore when Amadis beheld him
of such stature, he doubted not of his great force and strength. Arcalaus
perceiving he eyed him so much, demanded what moved him so to do? I imagine,
answered Amadis, that according to thy large proportion, thou should be a man
of exquisite chivalry: but thy perverse and inhumaine actions are a foul
blemish thereto. Now trust me, said Arcalaus, I think my self highly beholding
to Fortune, who has brought thee hither to make me such a smoothe sermon: but
all this will not help thee, therefore defend thy self. So charging their
Lances, they brake so bravely on their sheeldes, as the shiuers flew up into
the air, and with such violence met their horses and bodies, that they were
both laid along on the ground. Quickly they arose, and with their swoordes
began a bloody combat, wherein desire of victory, and hautie resolution of
unconquerable courage, made them continue a long time, till Arcalaus retyring
aside, thus spoke to Amadis. Knight, thou art in danger of death, and because I
know not who thou art, tell me, that when I have slain thee, I may yet commend
thy boldenes in entering here. My death, answered Amadis, is in ye hand of God
whom I reverence, and thine in the power of the Devil, who is weary of helping
thee: and bequeatheth thy body to so innumerable mischeefs, as a present
perishing of soul and all together. But seeing thou would so gladlye know my
name, I am commonly called Amadis of Gaul, Knight to the Queen Brisana: let
us now then chat no longer but fall to the combat, for on my part I promise
no more resting. Arcalaus auauncing his sheeld, came with foming fury against
Amadis. who knew full well how to welcome him: and such eager stroks past on
either side, as their sheeldes were scattered in pieces about them, and
likewise very many plates of their armor. Now was it about the third hour,
when Arcalaus having sustained great loss of his blood, was forced to seud up
and down before his enemy, and seeing the imminent death before his eyes, fled
to that part of the Castle where he came out: yet Amadis by close pursuit
still continued his fear, whereupon he stepped into a chamber, at the door whereof
stood a Lady be holding the combat, and he was no sooner entered the room, but
he caught up another sword, turning his face to Amadis, saying. Enter this
chamber to make an end of our combat. The open Court, answered Amadis, is more
spacious and convenient. I will not come forth, quoth Arcalaus, for thy
pleasure. What? said Amadis, think thou so silly to escape? so placing his
sheeld before, he entered the chamber: but as he lifted up his sword to strike,
he was deprived of strength and the use of his members, so that he fell to the
ground as he had been dead. Yea mary, said Arcalaus, this is the way to make
thee dye as I desired, sleep then till I wake thee. Now say you Lady? quoth he
to her that stood by, am I not (in your opinion) well revenged on him? Indeed,
said she, he is now altogether at your commandment. Presently he unarmed
him, Amadis not feeling any thing was done to him: afterward Arcalaus put on
him self the Princes Armor, thus speaking to the Lady. Madame, look (on
perrill of your life) that no one remove him hence, until his soul have
forsaken his body: then he intended to journey to the court, where each one
seeing him in the Armor of Amadis, might think he had slain him.

But now the sorrowful Lady so lately delivered from prison, made such moan as
would have melted a heart of Adamant, and what Gandalins countenance was, you
may easily judge: when Arcalaus saw the Lady lament, he said. Dame, seek some
other to deliver you from prison, for I have dispatched your hardy champion.
These words made Gandalin in such despair, as he fell down like one
senseless, and Arcalaus called the Lady to him in this manner. Come hither
mistress, and you shall see him dead that durst so boldly combat with me.
When he had showed him to her, he demanded if he were not now quiet enough.
The comfortless Lady seeing him in such estate, wanted no tears to express
the abundance of her grief, and withal: Ah God, quoth she, how irksome will
the report of his death be to many? then Arcalaus calling his wife, said. So
soon as this wretch is dead, imprison this Lady where she was before, for I
will go to the Court of Ling Lisuart, and there declare how I combated with
Amadis, by covenant, that the conqueror should cut off the head of the
vanquished, and within fifteen days following, to publishe his victory openly
in great Britain. By these means none shall quarrel with me about his
death, and I shall obtain the greatest glory in the world, having overcome
him that conquered every one. Then went he where he left Gandalin and the
Dwarffe, commanding them to be locked up in a prison: but Gandalin who wished
death, thinking his master was dead indeed, would not go with him, desiring
some one to kill him: and to enforce Arcalaus do him so much favor, reviled
him with names of traitor and villain, having slain the most loyal Knight
in the world, Arcalaus made no account of his words, but because he would
not go willingly, he dregged him by the ears, and thrust him into the
dungion, saying. If I presently kill thee, thou should endure no more pain,
but here shall thou suffer wursse then death. So mounted Arcalaus on the
horse of Amadis, and accompanied with three Squires, rode toward the Court of
King Lisuart.

CHAP. XX. How Amadis, was enchaunted by Arcalaus, when he would have delivered
the Lady Grindaloya and other from prison: and how afterward he escaped the
enchauntments by the aid of Vrganda.
GRindaloya the Lady delivered by Amadis from prison, made such excessive
lamentations for him, as every one pitied her, she thus speaking to the Wife
of Arcalaus, and the rest in the company. Ah fair Ladies, behold ye not the
beauty of this brave Gentleman, who in so young years was the only Knight in
the world? mishap attend on such, who by enchauntment injury men of virtue: D
sovereign creator, why do thou suffer so bad-minded people to live? The
Wife of Arcalaus, who though her husband was addicted to shameless cruelty,
yet she being of gracious and pitiful disposition, grieved in her very soul
to behold his dealings, and continually prayed for his amendment, comforting
the woeful Lady so well as she could. As thus they were devising together, they
saw two other Ladies enter the chamber, each of the^ bringing in her hand good
store of candles lighted, which they set round about on the cantons of the
chamber: finding Amadis thus lying before the Wife of Arcalaus and the rest,
they being not able to lift or stir him. Then one of the Ladies so lately there
arrived, took (out of a little Casket she carried) a Book, whereon she began
to read, and diverse times an other voice answered her. As thus she continued
her lecture, many other voices were heard, as they imagined them more then an
hundred: then came an other Book flying into the chamber, seeming as if the
wind carried it, and fell down at her feet that read, she pulling it in four
parts, burned it at the four corners of the chamber where the candles stood.
This done, she returned to Amadis, and taking him by the right hand, said. Lord
Amadis arise, you have slept too long uneasily. Immediately Amadis awaked, and
rising up, thus spoke. Alas where am I? I marvel that I am alive. Believe me
Sir, answered the Lady, such a one as you are must not dye in this sort, rather
will the heavens permit, that they who have deserved it shall dye by your hand.
Heere-with the two strange Ladies, not saying any more, returned the same way
they came, leaving Amadis much amazed at this adventure, and looking about for
Arcalaus: but he was advertised by Grindaloya, how he was gone to the Court of
King Lisuart, clad in his Armor, and mounted on his horse, to report that he
had slain him in combat. In deed I felt, quoth Amadis, when he unarmed me,
but on my faith me thought I dreamed: and seeing he is gone with my Armor, I
will make his to serve me at this time. Having put on the Armor of Arcalaus,
he demanded of Grindaloya, what was become of Gandalin and the Dwarffe: she
told him they were imprisoned. Evil befall the villain that so hardly used
them, said Amadis: and Lady, quoth he to Arcalaus Wife, upon your life look to
the safety of this noble woman till I return. Coming forth into the court,
it was a pastime to see how Arcalaus servants fled his sight: but Amadis let
them run, and went to the dark uncomfortable prisons which were filled with
captives.

Now to tell ye in what distressed manner they were, you must note, the place
was a vault of an hundred toyses long, yet no more then one foot and a half
in breadth, without air or light, and (which was wurst of all) so full of
prisoners, as they could scantly stand one by an other. Amadis called Gandalin,
who being in a manner dead, hearing his masters voice, began to tremble: yet
thinking it was not he, because he verily imagined him to be dead, entered into
diverse doubts of himself, whether he dreamed, or was enchaunted. All this
while Amadis greatly grieved, because Gandalin made no answer, wherefore he
called aloud again: Gandalin where art thou? why do thou make me travel so
much? speak I pray thee. When he saw (for all this) Gandalin answered not, he
asked the other prisoners, if a Squire so lately brought in there, was dead or
alive: but the Dwarffe remembering the voice of Amadis, cried out: Alas my Lord,
we are both here together alive as yet, albeit we have often enough wished for
death. Then Amadis caused candles to be lighted at the Lamp, which hung at the
entrance of the dungion, commanding them all to come forth, to their no
little joy and comfort, seeing themselves delivered from such miserable
servitude: and when they came into the open court, they fell on their knees
before the Prince, thanking God and him for this happy benefit. Amadis
beholding their faces so pale, wan, and ouer-spent, seeming rather blood-lesse
ghostes, then living creatures, was moved to exceeding compassion, especially
they being an hundred and fifty prisoners in all, and thirty of them were
Knights at Arms: as he cast his eye every where among them, he made more
account of one then all the rest, who notwithstanding his sickness and
debilitie, seemed of brave and comely constitution, and he perceiving that
Amadis noted him so much, stepped to him in this manner. Who shall we say (my
Lord) has done us this grace, by delivering us from so long wretched
thraldom? Such as know me, answered the Prince, do call me Amadis of Gaul,
Son to King Perion, Knight to the Queen Brisana, and domestical servant to
King Lisuart her husband: in search of a Knight I was brought hither by this
Dwarffe, to whom I made promise in a suit he had. In sooth my Lord, replied
the other, I am a Knight likewise, and servant to the same King, who knows me
full well, as likewise the most in his Court do, with whom I have baene seen
in greater honor then now I am: because ever since my departure from the Court,
I have lived in the misery from which you redeemed me. How may I call your
name? said Amadis. Brandoyuas, answered the Knight. Full well did the Prince
remember, that he had heard report of him in the Court, wherefore courteously
embracing him, he said, Right glad am I my Stars so favored me, to deliver
you and these other from such a hellish place: and though I never saw you till
this present, yet often have I heard the King and his Barons talk of your
chivalry, your long absence being no little grief to them. The rest of the
prisoners confessed their bounden duty to him, desiring him to appoint them
what they should do: he willing them to shape their course whether they
thought best. My Lord, quoth they, albeit we know not what several Countries
may harbor us, yet will we still continue your devoted servants, to attend on
you when and where-soeuer need shall require. So each one kissing his hand,
they took their leave, limitting their iourneys as they thought good, not any
of them tarying with Amadis, but Brandoyuas.

Now go they to the wife of Arcalaus, Amadis thus speking to her. Lady, for
your sake and these other Gentlewomen, I for-beare from setting this Castle on
fire, albeit the evil behavior of your husband is sufficient warrant
therefore: but in regard of the courtesy Knights owe to Ladies, I am content
to remit all at this time. Alas my Lord, quoth she, heaven bears record of
the grief my soul has endured, through the behavior of Arcalaus my husband:
yet could I do nothing but show obedience, as beseemed a wife to her wedded
Lord, with intercession for his change, notwithstanding, I remain at your
disposition. What I will do, answered Amadis, I have already told ye, it now
remains, that at my request you give this Lady Grindaloya honorable
attirements, because her birth and behavior deserves no less: in like
manner, I woold have an Armor for this Knight, to requite his own which was
taken from him, and a horse as beseems one of his profession. If you mislike
of my demand, do more or less as you think good, but for mine own part, I
will have hence the Armor of Arcalaus in liew of mine, and his horse, by
reason mine own was better: yet must I tell ye withal, that he has taken a
sword from me more worth then all the rest. Sir, answered the Lady, your
request is so reasonable, that beyond the power you alone have here, I stand
bound in duetye to fulfill your commandment. Then sent she for the self-same
Armor belonged to Brandoyuas, and caused a horse to be deliuerd him: as for
the Lady, she brought her into her chamber, where she clothed her in most
sumptuous accoustrements, and returning to Amadis, desired him to eat somewhat
before he departed, whereto he willingly condiscended. Now was the best viandes
brought forth so short warning might afford, but Grindaloya was in such haste
to be gone, as she was loathe to be troubled with any: whereat Amadis and
Brandoyuas merrily smiled, especially at the Dwarff, who looked so pale and wan
with fear, that it was impossible for him to offer one word, which made
Amadis, thus to jest with him. Tell me Dwarffe, will thou that we tarry here
till Arcalaus come, and I to give thee the suit thou desire? Insooth my Lord,
quoth the Dwarffe, so dear has the request cost me I made to you, as (while I
live) neither of you or any other will I crave the like: for Gods sake then let
us be gone ere the devil come again, for I cannot stand on the leg he hung me
by, beside, my nose is so full of sulphurous and stinking smelles, as never
shall I give over sneezing till I dye. The Dwarffes words made them all laugh
heartily, and after they had repasted, Amadis bidding Arcalaus wife farewell,
mounted on horsse-back with his company, the Lady thus speaking at his
departure. I shall pray Sir Knight, that God may send peace between my husband
and you. Believe me Lady, quoth he, though I never care for it with him, yet
shall it remain twixt you and me, because you deserve it. So fortuned it
afterward these words took effect, and highly profited the good Lady, as in
some part of this history you shall hear recited.

Now are they departed from the Castle of Arcalaus, riding till the night
ouer-tooke them, lodging at a Ladies place five leagues thence, where they were
entertained with very gracious welcome: and on the morrow, after they had
thanked their freendly host, as they rode together, Amadis thus communed with
Brandoyuas. Courteous Sir, I travail in search of a Knight, as heer-to-fore I
told ye, and imagining it will be little pleasure to you to follow me, it were
not amiss then if we parted. In sooth Sir, answered Brandoyuas, I gladly would
go to King Lisuarts Court, notwithstanding, if you think it good I will
keep ye company. Little need shall I have thereof, answered Amadis, I thank
ye, because I must be constrained to wander alone, so soon as I have brought
this Lady into such safety as she thinks meet. My Lord, quoth she, I will
accompany this Gentleman if you please, seeing he trauaileth to the Court of
King Lisuart: and there I hope to find him for whom I was prisoner, who I am
assured will be glad of my deliverance. Now trust me, answered Amadis, very
well said, go then together and God be your guide. Thus are they separated,
now remaining none with Amadis but Ganda^^^ and the Dwarffe, of whom the Prince
likewise demanded what he meant to do. Mary be your trusty servant, said the
Dwarffe, if you like so well as I. I am well pleased, replied Amadis, and thou
shall do what thou will thy self. In sooth my Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, seeing
you released me, I would gladly remain in your service, for I know not where I
may be half so well: the man and the master being both agreede: they took
their way as fortune liked to conduct them.

Not far had they travailed, but they met one of the Ladies, that reskewed
him from enchauntment at Arcalaus Castle, she weeping and mourning very
grievously: which moving Amadis to pity her complaints, made him demand the
cause thereof. A Knight who rides not far before, quoth she, has taken from
me a little Casket, wherein is matter of great consequence, yet no way able to
pleasure him: for such things are therein, as within these three days one in
my company and my self, restored from death the best Knight in the world, and
she likewise of whom I tell ye, is violently carried away by an other Knight,
who is ridden before intending to force her. Here you must observe, that the
Damsel now talking with Amadis, knew him not, by reason his helmet beuer
covered his face: but when he heard how her Casket was taken from her, he never
left gallopping till he ouer-tooke him, to whom he thus spoke. Knight, you
deal not courteously, giving this Lady cause thus to complain of you, and me
thinks you should do a great deal better, to deliver the Casket again you
took from her: but when the Knight heard him, he fell in a great laughter. Why
do ye thus laugh Sir? said Amadis. I laugh at you, answered the Knight, whom
I think scant wise in giving council to him that demands it not, the less
hope may you have of speeding in your suit. It may be, quoth Amadis, you care
not for my words, yet it were good to deliver the thing is none of yours.
Belike you threaten me then? said the Knight. Not you Sir, answered Amadis, but
your overmuch boldness, in using force where it ought not to be. Is it true?
quoth the Knight: with these words he set the Casket aside in a tree, and
returning to Amadis, said. If your bravery be such in deeds as it seems in
words, come teach me know it and receive the law. So giving the spurs to
their horses, they encountered together in such sort, as the Knight being
dismounted, his horse fell so heavily on him, that he was not able to rise
again: in mean while Amadis fetched the Cofer, and delivering it to the
Damsel, said. Take your own fair Lady, and tarry here till I bring your
companion. Presently he posted after the other Knight, ouer-taking him at a
thicket of trees, where he had tied both his horse and the Ladies, trayling
her by the hair of the head into the wood, there to commit his villainous
desire, but Amadis cried to him aloud in this manner. Of an evil death may
thou dye traitor, that wrongest a Lady in this sort without offending thee. As
the Knight strougled with her to get her into the wood, he looked up and saw
Amadis, whereupon he left her, making speed to his weapons and mounted on
horsseback, then approaching nearer the Prince, he said. By my hand Knight, in
hapless time for thee did thou hinder me of my will. Such a will, answered
Amadis, as distaineth honor, both men and beasts despise. If I take not revenge
for it, quoth the Knight, then let me never wear Armor again. The world
therein shall sustain a great loss, replied Amadis, of one addicted to such
villainy, that seeks to force Ladies, who ought in all liberty and honor to
be defended, and so they be by all loyal Knights. With a brave course they met
together, when though the Knight brake his Lance, yet was he hurled against
the ground so violently, as the weight of his Armor and strength of his fall,
made him lie trembling in a trance. Which Amadis perceiving, to rid him out of
his pain altogether, he trampled on his belly with his horse feet, saying:
Thus shall thou loose thy desire of forcing Ladies. And as for you fair soul,
I hope hereafter you are rid from any danger of him. The more am I to thank
you my Lord, quoth she, would God my companyon who has lost her Casket, were
as well delivered as I am. She was the first, I met withal, answered Amadis,
wherefore first of all I succored her so well, as she has recovered what was
taken from her, and behold where my Squire conducteth her hither-ward.

Now because the heat was somewhat violent, Amadis put off his helmet to take
the air, when the Damsel immediately knew him: for it was she that at his
return from Gaul* conducted him to Vrganda the unknown, when by chivalry he
delivered her friend at the Castle of Pradoid, which made her remember him,
and so did Amadis her, when alighting they embraced each other, the like
courtesy he showed to the other Damsel. Alas quoth they, had we but dremed on
such a defender, no villain could have wronged us, half so much. On my faith,
said Amadis, the help you gave me within these three days, may not be
compared with this matter of no validity: for I was in greter exextremity then
you, but how could you possibly understand thereof? My Lord, (quoth she that
took him by the hand when he was enchaunted) mine Aunte Vrganda sent me to the
Castle of Arcalaus, by whose means we came thither, and you were recovered.
Heaven sheelde from evil that good Lady, answered Amadis, who has so many
ways bound me her obedient servant: and you fair Damoselles the messengers of
this favor, have you any thing else wherein to command me? No my Lord, said
they, take you the way you left, and we will return from whence we came.
Farewell sweet Uirgins, replied Amadis, remember my humble duty to the health
of your Mistress, telling her, she knows right well I am her Knight. In this
mander rode the Damoselles one way, and Amadis another: wherefore we must now
tell what happened to Arcalaus, since his departure from the Castle of
Valderin.

CHAP. XXI. How Arcalaus brought news to the Court of King Lisuart, that
Amadis was dead, which caused his friends to make manifold lamentations and
regrets, especially the Princess Oriana.
SUch speed made Arcalaus after his departure from Valderin, where he left
Amadis enchaunted, he being (as I have said) clad in his armor, and mounted
on his horse: that the tenth day following, he arrived near the Court of King
Lisuart, who was riding abroad in the feeldes to take the air, accompanied
with his Lords along the Forest side. They seeing Arcalaus come a far of,
having on the Armor of Amadis, imagining it was he indeed, diverse rode before
to welcome him: but when they came more near, they found themselves deceived,
by reason Arcalaus had his head and hands unarmed, wherefore without saluting
the Gentlemen, he stepped to the King with these words: Sir, I come to
accquite a promise wherein I stand bound, namely to let you understand, how I
have slain a Knight in battle, that some time bare these Arms. And albeit I
must be content to declare mine own praise, which were more honorable for me,
being reported by an other in mine absence: yet am I constrained to do no
less, seeing the covenant was such between me and him whom I have slain:
viz. that the conqueror should despoyle the vanquished of his head, and
present it before you as this day. Full loathe was I to be so cruel, because he
told me he was your Queens Knight, commonly called Amadis of Gaul, and so he
named him self whom I vanquished. As for me Sir, I told him in truth that I
was Arcalaus, whom Fortune has graced with such singular favor: for I have
slain the man, some-time owner of this Armor and horse, which as a testimony
of my victory I brought with me. Ah God, said the King, is then the most
virtuous and accomplished Knight of the world dead? you lowering heavens, why
began ye so brave a course in him, and now on such a sudden to cut it off?
These sorrowful news provoked sighs and tears, both in the King and his
royal company, which Arcalaus perceiving, not speaking any thing else,
returned the same way he came, feigning him self likewise very sad and
grieved: but you must think he went not without great store of cursses, every
one instantly desiring God, to send him an evil and speedy death, which with
their Swoordes they could gladly have bestowed on him themselves, but that
they heard how Amadis was slain by an accorded battle.

The King being overcome with pensiuenes and sorrow, returned to the Town,
where these news were so opened to every one, that at length the Queen and
her Ladies heard thereof, which presently converted their former pleasures into
mourning. At this time was the Princess Oriana in her chamber with the
Damsel of Denmark, where hearing the sudden clamor and noise, she commanded
her to go understand the cause thereof. Alas good Lady, too soon was it
brought to her, for no sooner was she acquainted with the death of Amadis, but
her immoderate passions expressed the anguish of her heart: and more to afflict
this gentle Princess, the other Ladies came weeping into her chamber, saying.
Ah Madame, what tongue can deliver this wonderful mishap? yet durst she not
(good Lady) be too forward in enquiring the manner thereof, least the cinders
of her affection might be discovered: and as if she had beheld Amadis dead
before her, she said. Alas he is dead, it can not be otherwise. It is true
Madame, answered the Damsel, but what remedy? you must not likewise dye for
company. These words made Oriana fall into a swoune, which the Damsel of
Denmark beholding, thought she had too indiscreetly brought her these bad
tidings, whereupon she called the Princess Mabila, saying: Help Madame, my
Mistress dies. She being come, saw that she neither moved or breathed,
doubted least life had taken leave indeed, wherefore she commanded the
Damsel to shut the door, to the end her love all this while so well
concealed, might not break forth into open suspicion. Then unlacing her
garments to give her more liberty, as also bathing her temples and pulses with
Uiniger and cold water, she recovered again, when delivering a fainte sigh,
with a feeble voice she thus spoke. Ah sweet friends, hinder me not in the way
of death, if you desire my rest, and would have God find him another world,
who knew not how to live one day without me. Ah flower and mirror of
chivalry, thy death is insupportable not to me alone, but to the whole world,
who is replete with grief for thee, because they have lost him who in bounty,
prudence, hardines, and all other virtues, did honor them above the compass of
all desire. And were yet any feeling in thee, I am certain thou would not
sorrow for thy lost life, but for my love, enduring by thy miss meruaylous
afflictions: for thou have left such honor in the world behind thee,
conquering so incomparable reputation in this short time of thy life, that
(reconing thy merits) thou diedst possessed with many years. Thus live thou
in place immortal, I remaining here alone after thee, can give but wounding
and unthankful speeches. Ah cruel death, suffised it not that mighty love
murdered him with his feathered steel, but thou must kill him outright with
thy curelesse stroke? well, in respect it is so, offend not thy self my love,
for thou shall soon see reason proceed from her that did thee wrong, who being
the cause, will bear thee company in death. And I may justly challenge him of
wrong, seeing equal love had united our wills, to separate our persons in this
sort: where having affoorded our ending together, we likewise might have
enjoyed one sepulcher. After these words she swouned again in Mabilaes
arms, and in such manner altered her countenance, as they reputed her verily
dead, her fair and golden locks being discheueled, her arms and legs
deprived of vital motion, even as when the soul has taken his flight, from
the body. Mabila dispairing of any life left in her, was so surprised with
greef, that she was constrained to leave the Damsel alone with the Princess,
and walking somewhat aside by her self thus lamented. Incomprehensible
wisdom, let me not live to endure these travails, seeing thou have taken
these two from me whom I loved as my life. But when the Damsel of Denmark
saw her self thus alone between two extremes, she was meruailouslye abashed:
yet as one wise and well governed, she spoke in this manner to the Princess
Mabila. Why Madame? when were you wunt to abuse your honorable virtues? is it
now time to forget your self? will you thus consent to the death of my Lady?
you rather ought to aid and comfort her, then thus to forsake her, and procure
her further danger if she revive again. Come I pray ye succor her, for now
is the time of greatest need, and let these lamentations be referred till an
other time. Mabila perceived the Damsel said true, wherefore she came to
Oriana, and feeling by her warmenes some hope of life to be expected, they
lifted her upon the bed, when soon after her sprites returned to their office:
and to quallifie this agony, they could devise no better means, then to busy
her ears with some or other speeches. Why Madame? quoth one, will ye leave us?
at least yet speak to us. Madame, said the other, your Amadis is yet alive and
well. At the name of Amadis, she opened her eyes, turning her head here and
there as if she looked for him: which good humor Mabila desirous to continue,
proceeded thus. Amadis comes Madame, and shortly you shall see him. Oriana
giving a great sighe, started up, saying. Alas sweet friend, where is he? We
understand, quoth she, that he is in very good health, and how the Knight who
brought these bad tidings, is wunt to vaunt of him self without cause, feeding
him self with false praise of deceiving Knights. Why? said Oriana, have I not
heard that he brought his horse and Armor? A matter of nothing, answered
Mabila, they may as well be borrowed or stolen, or he (happily) sent with that
false alarm, to try our constancy: then finding us thus weakly disposed, he
should have had the thing he desired. I would not have you think so simply
Madame, that Amadis could be overcome by one and no better a Knight then he,
nor were it reason to credit a commender of him self, bringing his own glory
for testimony and no other approbation: I am assured that Amadis will come ere
long, and if he find you not only dead in a manner, but thus given over to
grief: it will cost his life, so shall you deliver unhappy proof, what wicked
feigning by malice can do, and thus you both shall dye one for another. When
Oriana remembered, how by this mean she might be the death of her freende, if
by good hap he yet enjoyed life, and imagined likewise that Mabila spoke the
truth: she took courage, casting her eye on the window, where many times
Amadis and she had amourously conferred, when first he arrived at her Fathers
Court, and intercepting a number of forced sighs, thus spoke. Ah window the
witness of my abandoned pleasures, how piercing is the doubt of him whom thou
causest me remember, and by whose gracious words both thou and I were made
happy? of this I am certain, that never can thou endure so long as two so
loyal lovers might (by thee) enjoy such delight as he and I have done: which
failing me now, gives me strange and insupportable torments to be my
companions, and hence-foorth shall my sad spirit remain in bitter sadness,
until the coming of him or my death. Mabila perceiving the cheifest danger
was past, labored to confirm her opinion more strongly then she had done, in
this manner. Why Madame? think you if I held these babbling news for truth, I
could have the power to comfort you in this sort? the love I bear to my Cousin
is not so little, but rather I should incite all the world to weep, then want
consolation for you who stand in such need thereof. But I see so slender
appearaunce of belief, as I will not before time require repute you
unfortunate, because disco^forting our selves without assurance: the evil
hereby may be amended, and the good made much more wursse especially it will
be the mean of discovering, what has so long time been shaddowed in secret.
Alas, quoth Oriana, if he be dead, I care not though our love were openly
known, for all our mishaps in respect of it are nothing.

Thus debating and devising together, the two Ladies all that day kept their
chamber, not suffering any other to come in: for when the Damsel of Denmark
(who passed often in and out) was demanded for Oriana, she answered that she
accompanied Mabila, whom she would not suffer to part from her, by reason of
her grief for her Cousin Amadis. Thus was the Princesses secret sadness covered,
all night she being unable to take any rest, such were her assaults between
doubt and despair, not forgetting any thing that past between her and Amadis
since their younger years. But on the morrow about dinner time, Brandoyuas
entered the Palace, leading Grindaloya in his hand, which gave great joy to
such as knew the^, for of long time they could not imagine what was become of
them: they falling on their knees before the King, were quickly called to
remembrance, his Majesty thus speaking. Sir Brandoyuas? how chance you have
tarried so long from us? Alas my Lord, quoth he, imprisonment has been the
cause, where-out (had not the good Knight Amadis of Gaul, given liberty to
me, this Lady and many more, by such deeds of arms as are unspeakable) we
could never have been delivered. Yet was he once in danger of tarying there
himself, by the villainous coniurations and sorceries of Arcalaus: but he was
succored by two Damsels, who delivered him from all the exorcismes. When the
King heard him name Amadis, whom he verily thought to be dead: What my friend?
quoth he, by the faith thou owe unto God and me, is Amadis living? Yea my
good Lord, answered Brandoyuas, it is not ten days since I left him in good
disposition: but may it like you to tell me, why you demand such a question?
Because, said the King, Arcalaus yesterday told us he had slain him: heerewith
he declared his speeches, and the manner how. What a traiterous villain is
that? replied Brandoyuas, but wursse is befalne him then he weeneth as yet:
heereto he added what passed between Amadis and Arcalaus, as already you have
heard, whereby each one forsook the sorrow of the former false news, the King
presently commanding, that Grindaloya should be conducted to the Queen, that
she might understand these happy tidings.

Into the Queens chamber is she brought, and the Damsel of Denmark hearing
her report, ran with all speed to the Princess Oriana, who hearing by her the
truth of all, the passage of her speech was stopped for a long time, seeming as
one confounded with enchauntment, thinking in these news she gave her the bag,
or that she dreamed them, but when she recovered the use of her tongue, she
thus answered the Damsel. Alas my friend, did I rave? or toldest thou me that
Grindaloya testified to the Queen, how Amadis is not dead? In good faith,
quoth the Damsel, I came but even now from her highness chamber, where
Grindaloya declared how Arcalaus had deceived them. Happy be this hour, said
Oriana, but I pray thee go tell my mother, that Mabila intreates her to send
the Lady to comfort her: which she did, returning right soon with Grindaloya
to Oriana. I leave you to imagine whether she were well entertained or no, with
all the modest courtesies so glad tidings deserved, likewise whether Oriana and
Mabila gave her audience, when she recounted Amadis deeds of arms at
Valderin, the misery of her and many other, the danger whereinto he fell
afterward by the enchauntments of Arcalaus, from which he was delivered by two
strange Damsels. The discourse hereof so pleased and contented them, that I
think Grindaloya had an endless task in the reporting, for Oriana must hear
every thing often redoubled. But repeating the dangers of Amadis, and the
misery from which he delivered the poor captives, caused tears so thick as
winters hail to trill down her cheeks. Thus tarried Grindaloya all day with
the two Princesses, and had not so soon departed, but that she was advertised,
how that King Arban of Norgalles, (who loved her dearly) expected her return
in the Queens chamber. Good reason had she to take leave of Oriana, and seek
him from whom she suffered such sorrow: but when these loyal lovers met
together, each one was delighted so substantially, as Grindaloya thought her
griefs well recompensed. Now because the Queen understood, how she was
daughter to King Ardroyd of Seralys, and all her miseries had bin for the love
of King Arban: with instant entreaty she procured her stay in the Court, doing
her all the honor and favor could be devised. Grindaloya was not curious in
granting the Queens request, because King Arban was partaker in the same
suit: by this occasion the Queen was advertised, that she had a marvelous
fair Sister named Aldena, who was nourished in the Duke of Bristoyaes Castle,
which made her presently dispatch a Gentleman thither, with request that the
Duchess would send her to the Court. This Aldena was the friend to Galaor, she
for him suffered such injury by the Dwarffe, as you have heard before
discoursed. We have a long time continued with Amadis, now let us return
again to Galaor, leaning King Lisuart in hope to see him soon in his Court,
whom Arcalaus said he had slain in combat.

CHAP. XXII. How Galaor came very sore wounded to a Monastery, where he
soiourned five days attending his health, and at his departure thence, what
happened to him shall be declared in this Chapter.
Five days together abode Galaor at the Monastery, whether he was conducted
by the Damsel he delivered from prison, attending there the recovery of his
wounds: but when he found himself able to wear his Armor, he took leave of
the Sisters, and rode on his journey, even which way fortune pleased to guide,
for he had mind to no part more then another. About midday he arrived in a
valley, in the midst whereof stood a fair fountain, where he found a Knight
armed having no horse: Galaor meruailing thereat, demanded if he came thither
on foot, the Knight returning this answer. Believe me no, but riding through
this Forest to a Castle of mine, I met with certain thieves that slew my
horse: thus am I brought into the state you behold me, by reason my servants
hear not of my misfortune. Why? You shall have my Squires monture, answered
Galaor. I thank you Sir, quoth the Knight, yet before we part hence, you shall
know the great virtue of this fountain, for there is no poison in the world so
strong, that has any force against this water, wherefore by reason of so
sovereign a benefit, oftentimes enuenomed beasts do drink heerof, and are
presently healed: beside, diverse of this country use to come hither, and find
redress for all their infirmities. In sooth you tell me meruailes, replied
Galaor, and seeing I am now so near it, I will alight to drink thereof as
other have done. Good reason you should, answered the Knight, because you are
ignorant of coming this way again. Galaor leaped from his horse, bidding his
Squire alight to drink as he did: but while they were drinking, the Knight
clasped on his own head Galaors helmet, and taking his Lance mounted on his
horse, when leaving the Prince drinking he rode away, saying. Farewell Knight,
I must be gone, tarry thou here to beguile an other as I have done thee. Galaor
lifting his head from the water, and seeing the Knight make such haste away,
thus called to him. Ah villain, never did thief such a treacherous pranck as
thou have done: for thou have not alone deceived me, but committed an act of
great disloialtie, which thou shall well know, if ever I meet with thee. Yea
mary, answered the Knight, rest your self there, till you recover some other
mean to combat with me.

Gone is the Knight so fast as he could gallop, leaving Galaor chasing like a
mad man, but seeing there was no remedy, he mounted on his Squires horse and
pursued him, till at length he came to a double way: when not knowing which of
them to take, because he had lost the sight of him, he stood still in great
pensiuenes, till at length he saw a Damsel come riding apace toward him, of
whom he demanded, if she met not a Knight mounted on a bay Courser, bearing
in a white Sheeld a vermillion flower. What would you with him? replied the
Damsel. I would, quoth he, recover again my horse and Arms, for they be
mine, and by false villainies he has carried them from me. When happened this?
said the Damsel: wherewith Galaor told her all the discourse. Well, quoth the
Damsel, what can you do to him being thus unarmed? for I think he took them
not away to restore them again. I care for nothing else, said Galaor, but to
find him once more. Trust me, answered the Damsel, if you will grant me one
boon, soon shall I bring ye together again. Galaor being very desirous
hereof, agreed to any thing she would demand. Follow me then, quoth she, so
turning her horse, rode the same way she came, keeping company awhile
together: but the Damsel being better mounted then he, left him behind with
his Squire, and rid before so fast, that they had lost the sight of her,
travailing the space of three miles without any news of her, but at last on a
great plain they saw her return again. Here you must note, that the cause
of her riding thus before, was to advertise the other Knight (being her dear
friend) of their coming, and he had expressly sent her to fetch Galaor, to
deceive him of the rest of his Armor: which he imagined easily to do without
danger, seeing he had gotten the chiefest thing of his defense, and afterward
he intended to kill him, or put him to some notorious shame. For this cause he
tarried in a Pauillion, erected by him on the plain, and no sooner came she to
Galaor, but thus she spoke. Gentleman, to the end I might not fail in my
promise, I forsook your company awhile, only to see if the man you look for,
were in the place where I left him or no: there have I found him little
thinking on your coming, and in yonder Pauillion may you speak with him at
pleasure. As thus they devised together, they came to the Tent, wherefore
Galaor alighted to enter, but the Knight meeting him at the door, said. Sir
Knight, what moves thee to come in here without license? trust me it is but
little for thy profit, because thou must here leave the rest of thine Armor,
or dye presently. Thou may be therein deceived, answered Galaor, and the
words of such a wretch as thou art can not fear me. This reply very angerly
incensed the Knight, lifting up his Sword to smite the Prince on the head, but
Galaor runningly escaped ye blow, giving his enemy such a stroke on the top of
his helmet, as made him set one knee to the ground: then quickly laying hold
on him, got the helmet beside his head, spurning him to strongly with his feet,
that therewith he fell on his face to the earth. When the Knight beheld himself
in such danger, he called with a loud voice to the Damsel for succor,
wher-upon she stepped to Galaor, saying: that he should hold his hand, for this
was the boon he promised to give her. But he being in extreme choler, gave
no ear to her speeches, bringing the Knight into such estate, as he left no
vital motion in him: whereat the Damsel being ready to despair, breathed
forth many grievous lamentations, saying. Alas wretch that I am, too long have
I trifled time: for in seeking to beguile an other, my self am worthily
requited with deceit. And thou traitor, quoth she to Galaor, who have thus
cruelly put him to death, heaven send thee a more wursse and hapless end, for
by thee have I lost my only felicity in this world: for which (be well
assured) it shall cost thee thy life, because thou have broken promise with me,
and in such a place will I demand revenge on thee, as nothing but thy death
shall expiate my anger, were thou a Knight of greater hardines then thou art:
if then thou make refusal there, I shall have more then just occasion to
publish in all places, the pusillanimitie of thy faint hearted courage. Fair
Damsel, answered Galaor, if I had thought his death would have been so
grievous to you, I could have spared part of my displeasure, though justly he
deserved no less, but you spoke when it was too late. The wursse for thee,
replied the Damsel, because thy death shall recompense his. Galaor seeing she
continued her threatening speeches, without any other answer left her, lacing
on his helmet, mounting on the horse the dead Knight took from him: and
having ridden a pretty while, he looked back to see if the Damsel followed
him, when perceiving her hard at his horse heels, demanded of her whether
she travailed. With thee, answered the Damsel, and never will I leave thee,
till I have found opportunity to request the boon thou did promise me,
which shall be the loss of thy head by some evil death. Me thinks it were
better, said Galaor, for you to take some other satisfaction of me, and happily
might be more pleasing to you. Not any thing else, quoth she, thy soul shall
accompany his whom thou have slain, else never shall thou accomplish what
thou have promised me. Well, well, answered Galaor, I must stand to the hazard
of that as I may: thus quarrelling, they rode on three days together, and
entered the Forest of Angaduze, an adventure there happening to them, whereof
the Author hereafter makes mention.

But now he returns again to Amadis, who taking his leave of Vrgandaes
Damoselles, as you have heard before recited: rode on till about noone time,
when issuing forth of a Forest, he saw on a plain a very fair Castle,
wher-out came a goodly Chariot, to bravely equipped as ever be beheld any, it
being drawn by two brave read steedes, which were covered with imbroydered
crimosin satin, as it made a very daintye and seemly show. The Chariot was
guarded by eight armed Knights, yet Amadis being desirous to see who was in
it, drew somewhat near to lift up the rich covering, but one of the Knights
came to him with these rough words: Keep back Sir Knight, and be not so bold
to come thus near. What I do, answered Amadis, is for no harm. Whatsoever it
be, replied the other, trouble your self no further, in respect you are not
worthy to see what is here covered: for if you enterprise the like again, it
will vallewe your life, because thou must deal with all in this troop, and
some such one is among us, as is able alone to get the maistrye of thee, more
easily then may we altogether use thee as we list. I know not, said Amadis,
the Knights valor you speak of, but hap good or bad, I will see what is in
the Chariot. Here with he took his Arms, which the two Knights seeing that
rode foremost, they ran both against him, the one breaking his Lance, and the
other missing: but Amadis sped other-wise, for the first very easily he cast
from his saddle, and the other he threw both horse and man to the ground. Then
Amadis went toward the Chariot, yet was he stayed by two other Knights, one of
them being likewise dismounted, and with his sword he gave the other such a
welcome on the pate as he was glad to keep him self from falling, by catching
fast hold about his horse neck, when the other four saw their companions so
used by one Knight, they meruailed not a little, and being willing to revenge
their injury, altogether fiercely charged Amadis. With this last assault he
found him self sore combred, for one of them tainted him in the sheeld, and
another in his armor, as he escaped hardlye from being overthrown:
notwithstanding he held out valliantly, delivering such strokes to the first
he met, as he fell beside his horse in a swoun. The three yt remained turned
their faces, seeking which way they they might soonest hurt him: but he
snatched a Lance from one of them, which yet remained whole, and met one with
such a full carrire, that piercing quite through his throat, he fell to the
ground and gave up the ghost. After his death he came to an other of them, and
with his sword smote the helmet from his head: when seeing he was a very
ancient Knight, having his head and beard so white as snow, moved with
pity, he freendly thus spoke. Father, hence-foorth it were good you left the
use of arms to younger then your self, seeing you have lived so long without
gayning honor or commendation, mary your age does now excuse ye. In good
faith, answered the Knight, your speeches are very contrary, because if it be
seemly for young men to seek renown and fame by arms: it is more necessary
that an ancient man should do his endeavor, to maintain those affairs so
long as he can. Believe me Father, said Amadis, your reason is good. While thus
they talked together, Amadis saw him who was first vnhorssed make great haste
toward the Castle, and so did the other which were wounded: wherefore he
approached to the Chariot, and lifting up the covering, beheld there a tomb of
marble, having a crowned King figured thereon, clothed in his royal ornaments,
yet was his crown and part of his head somewhat severed aloof from the
rest. Hard by sat a very ancient Lady, and near her a young Damsel of most
excellent beautye, whom very graciously he saluted, speaking to the ancient
Lady in this manner. I pray ye tell me Madame, what figure is this which you
accompany so carefully? What Sir Knight? quoth she, (not knowing her gardants
were discomfited) who gave you permission to see our secrets? None other, said
Amadis, then my desire thus to do. In good faith, quoth the Lady, this is in
you a great part of presumption, and I marvel that my Knights would suffer
it: then putting her head forth of the Chariot, she saw some of them slain,
others flying to ye Castle for their safety, and some ran after their horses
that were escaped, where-at she was so amazed, as she thus cried out: Ah
Knight, curssed be the hour of thy birth, who have done me this cruel
outrage. Madame, answered Amadis, your people assailed me: but now may it
please ye to satisfy my demand? Never shall thou, quoth she, be resolved
therein by me, having offered me such monstrous abuse: so saying, she caused the
horses to hye away with ye Chariot. Amadis beholding her so agreeued, would
trouble her no more but rode on his iourneye: then were the dead bodies put
into the Chariot, and presently conuayed into the Castle.

Now had the Dwarffe heard all that passed between Amadis and the Lady, but he
knew not what was within the Chariot, wherefore he desired to know of his
master. I cannot tell thee, quoth he, for she would make no answer thereof to
me. In sooth, said the Dwarffe, it is strange that women have learned to hold
their peace. As thus they rode beguiling the time, on a sudden they espied the
old Knight now unarmed, gallop apace after them, crying so loud as he could to
Amadis, that he should stay, which he did, when he delivered him this message.
My Lord, I come to you by commandment of the Lady whom you saw in the
Chariot, and she being willing to make amends for the iniurye she did ye,
desires you to take a lodging this night in her Castle. Ah Father, replied
Amadis, I found her in such grief for the debate between me and your
companions, that I think my presence will rather be hurtful then pleasing to
her. Assure your self, said the Knight, your return will be very acceptable
to her. Amadis thinking a Knight of such years would have told no leasing, was
content to go with him, seeing with what affection he coullered his speeches:
and by the way he demanded of him, why the pictures head was made in such
sort, but he would tell him nothing, saying, the Lady would thorowlye resolve
him in all. Being come to the Castle, he saw the Lady and the Damsel
awayting his coming on the bridge, who bad him very heartily welcome. Ladies,
quoth he, I would be glad to do you good, but loathe to offend ye. When he was
entered, he saw a great many armed men, who flocking about him, cried. Yield
Knight, else thou art but dead. Nor shall you, said he, with my will, keep me
your prisoner. So he laced his helmet, but he had no leisure as yet to take his
Sheeld, so sharply was he assailed by his enemies: yet did he woorthily defend
himself, sending them to the earth he met withal, at length by the multitude
of his assaylants, he was driven into a corner of the court, which he
recovering, and keeping them therein all before him, endomaged them much better
then he did before. But while he was thus combatting, he saw the Dwarffe and
Gandalin carried into prison, whereat he conceived such displeasure, as being
exempt from fear of death, he laid such load on his enemies, that no one durst
come near him: albeit they were so many, as often times he was in danger to
fall on his knees, yet looking for no mercy at such men's hands, would dearly
buy his death among them, causing diverse of them to fall dead at his feet. And
the divine bounty regarding him in pity, delivered him from this peril by
the young beautiful Damsel, who marking his brave behavior in chivalry,
intended to save him, calling one of her women to whom she said. The gallant
mind of this Knight moves me to compassion, so that I had rather all mine
should dye, then he, therefore follow me. Why Madame? answered the Gentlewoman,
what mean ye to do? Let loose my Lions, answered the Lady, that they may be
scattered, who offer wrong to the best Knight in the world: and thou (being my
vassaile) I command thee presently to go let them loose. Which she durst not
deny, but immediately sent them forth of the Cave: then the Lady (to make them
retire that combatted with Amadis) cried to them: look to your selves my
friends, for the Lions are gotten loose by some mischance. The men being all
affrayd, fled up and down to shun the fury of the beasts, but the Lions made
such speed after them, as diverse they ouertooke and rent in pieces. When
Amadis saw himself thus rid of his enemies, seeing the wicket of the Castle
was yet open, he went out and held the door fast to him, while the Lions
devoured the other in the Court.

In this manner Amadis escaped his bloody foes, yet was he so ouer-trauailed,
as he could hardly sustain himself: wherefore he sat down on a stone,
holding his sword still ready drawn, a great part whereof was broken, and the
Lions being yet so hungry, as they ran about the Court to seek way into the
feelds: nor was there any man in the Castle so hardy, that durst come down to
shut them up again, no, not the Damsel who had the government of them, for
they were so chafed, as no obedience was looked for in them, nor the wisest of
them knew how to remedy it: except the old Lady should entreat the strange
Knight to let them forth, imagining because she was a woman, he would grant
her request sooner then to the rest. But she considering her false dealing
toward him, durst not adventure to move the suit: yet when she beheld it was
her last refuge, she put her head forth of the window, thus speaking to
Amadis. Although (sir Knight) we have entreated ye very hardly, yet let your
courtesy excuse what is past: and to save our lives, open the gate that the
Lions may come forth, to the end our present fear may be quallyfyed, and they
raunge the feelds as is their desire. This favorable kindness let us obtain at
your hands, whereby we shall yield amends for the wrong we have done ye: and on
my faith I swear to you, ^ur intent was no otherwise then to gain you our
prisoner, until you consented to be our Knight. Madame, answered Amadis, you
should have labored your determination by a more honest way: for without
constraint I would willingly have yielded my self, as I have to diverse other
Ladies who know full well my service. Will ye then Sir, quoth she, open the
gate? No, replied Amadis: wherewith she went from the window, and the young
Lady trembling showed her self, thus calling to Amadis. Ah gentle Sir, such
are within here, who could not suffer the injury done to you, the better they
deserve to find some favor. With such seemly modesty uttered the Lady these
words, as Amadis asked her, if she would have the gate opened? Yea mary Sir,
quoth she, I humbly desire ye. Presently he arose to obey her request, but she
willed him to stay awhile, till the old Lady warranted him assurance from the
rest of her servants: nor could he but commend her wit and discretion, who
getting him security from all in the Castle, made promise likewise, that
Gandalin and the Dwarffe should be delivered from imprisonment. Then came the
ancient Knight, of whom we spoke before, and calling to Amadis, he said,
Because me thinks (Sir) your Sheeld is greatly impaired, and your sword in like
manner broken, take this Sheeld and this Mace, wherewith you may defend the
Lions when they come forth: so throwing the Mace and the Sheeld down, Amadis
willingly took them up, returning this answer. Let me never be ungrateful to
them that succor me in need. By heaven, said the Knight, seeing you use
loyalty to wursse then beasts, no doubt is to be made of your mercy to
reasonable creatures. Amadis opening the wicket, the Lions furiously ran
forth, and he entered the Castle, which they within perceiving, came with the
Ladies to entertain him, desiring pardon for their offenses committed, and
presenting him Gandalin with the Dwarffe. By my soul, said Amadis, never was I
so r^isused upon no occasion, but seeing all enmity is ouer-blowen, you must
give me a horse, for your servants (I thank them) have slain mine. Sir
Knight, answered the old Lady, it is now somewhat late, if you please to unarm
your self, and rest here this might, to morrow you shall have a horse, or
what else you need. In hope you mean no wursse then you say, quoth Amadis, I
will not refuse your offer, because the time does request no less.

Forth with was he unarmed in a sumptuous chamber, and a costlye mantle brought
to wrap about him, then returning to the Ladies who attended his coming, they
were stricken in admiration of his excellent beautye, but much more at his
valor being so young: and casting his eye on her, at whose intreatance he
let forth the Lions, he reputed her one of the fairest that ever was seen,
but he spoke nothing to her as yet, by reason he proceeded in this manner with
the old Lady. I pray ye Madame let me understand, why the picture which I saw
in the Chariot, has his head so separated. Sir Knight, quoth she, if you will
promise to accomplish the covenants, before you be acquainted with the
accident: I will tell ye, if not, I pray ye hold me excused. It were no reason
Madame, replied Amadis, to promise any thing ouer-lightly being ignorant to
what end it may relate: but if you will let me hear ye covenants, they seeming
reasonable, and in compass of a Knights power to execute, fear not to tell
me, for I will employ my uttermost therein. You have reason, answered the Lady:
then causing each one to with-drawe, except the fair young virgin, she thus
began. Understand gentle Sir, that the figure of stone you beheld, was made in
the remembrance of this Ladies Father, who lies intombed in the Chariot, being
in his time a crowned King, but on a especial festival day, as he held open
court and royal, he was assailed by his brother the uncle to this maiden, who
came to tell him, that the Crown he wore was his, by as good right as he could
claim it, they being both issued from one root. Then drawing a sword, which
he had hid under his mantle, gave him such a stroke ther-with on the head, that
it parted in such sort as you saw in the picture. Long time before did the
traitor excogitate this treason, and to the end he might the better execute
it, he confederated himself secretly with certain of the Kings servants, by
whose means he wexed the stronger in his enterprise. But the King being dead,
this disloyal wretch was honored with the crown, for the murdered Prince
had no other heir then this his fair daughter, whom the aged Knight yt
brought you hither had in guard, he showing him self so faithful to her, as he
conuayed her thence ere her Uncle could take her, and performed such painful
diligence, yt he brought my orphane Niece hither for her better safety.
After-ward finding the mean to recover the body of the King her Father, each
day we put into our Chariot, riding ther-with about the feeldes as you saw us,
we having all sollemnely sworn not to show it any one, unless by force of
arms we should be compelled thereto: and though such a one happened to see it,
yet would we not reveal why we conducted it so, except he would promise to
revenge this horrible treason. Now if you be a noble Knight, bound to prosecute
virtue, and on so just occasion, you will employ the forces God has lent ye in
a matter of right: for my part, I will continue as I begun, until I find two
other Knights on this behalf, that you three for us may confound the traitor
and his two Sons, who will allow no combat, unless they fight altogether,
which they have often published abroad: how such as will reprove their
dealings, must come in this sort. In sooth Madame, answered Amadis, great
reason have you to seek means of revenge, for the most famous injury that
ever I heard of, and he who has done it, cannot long endure without shame and
misfortune, because heaven scorneth such monstrous actions: but if you can
bring it to pass, that one after another they will come to the combat, by the
help of God I shall dispatche them. Ah Sir, quoth she, they will never consent
heereto. What would you have me do then? (replied Amadis. Mary if it stand
with your liking, said the Lady, a year hence to repair hither again if you
live so long, you shall find some other here, for by that time I hope to get
two Knights more, and you the third to maintain this quarrel, I promise ye,
said Amadis, not to fail in this request, therefore never trouble your self
to seek other twain, because I mean to bring them with me, yea, such as
shall well defend the right of this Lady, and revenge the treason done to the
King her Father. These words he spoke in respect he hoped ere then to find
his brother Galaor, and intended likewise to bring his Cousin Agraies with him,
by whose assistaunce he doubted not to finishe the enterprise. Right humbly the
Ladies thanked him for his good will, and because, quoth they, they whom you
must deal withal are valiiant, rough and expert in Arms, as any the circle
of the world enjoys: we request your choice may be made of such Knights, as
shall be able to run through this woork. Believe me Ladies, answered Amadis, if
I had found one I am in search off, I would not stand long studying for the
third, were our enemies Deuilles and no men. Tell us then gentle Sir, said the
Lady, if you please, of what country you are, and where we may find ye in
tune of our need? Madame, quoth he, I am of King Lisuartes Court, Knight and
servant to his Queen Brisana.

By this time was supper ready and the tables covered, wherefore they brake off
talk and went into a very fair hall, where such good cheer and honor was
made him as might be devised, even until the hour of rest came. The good
night being given on all sides, by the Damsel that let loose the Lions he
was conducted to his chamber, where she kept him company an indifferent while,
and among other speeches, she uttered this. You have her near you my Lord, who
succored you this day more then you imagine. Wherein fair Lady? answered
Amadis. My self, quoth she by commandment of the young Princess, she
pitying your perrill and the wrong offered you: was charged to let loose the
Lions from their den. I never saw, replied Amadis, a more wise and discreet
Lady of her years. Insooth, said the Damsel, if she live, she shall be
endued with two extremities, the one in beautye, and the other in wisdom. I
desire ye, quoth Amadis, to thank her most humblye on my behalf, and how in
acknowledging the good she did me, hence-foorth I will remain her Knight. I am
well content my Lord, answered the Damsel, to carry her this message, because
I know it will be most welcome to her: so bidding him good night, she departed
the chamber. Now was Gandalin and the Dwarffe lodged in the next room where
they heard what had passed between Amadis and the Damsel, and because the
Dwarffe knew nothing as yet of his Masters love to Oriana, he imagined some
new affection was kindled between the young Princess and him, in respect of
the offer he made to be her Knight. And to such end did he retain this
opinion, as woeful Amadis after-ward had small joy thereof: for hereby he
thought to receive a cruel death, as in continuance of this historye shall be
declared. The night being spent and bright day appearing, Amadis came to bid
the Ladies farewell, requesting to know their names against whom he should
combat. The Father, quoth the Lady, is named Abiseos, his eldest Son,
Darrison, and the other Dramis, all three most valiant Gentlemen at Arms,
excelling all other in that country: which likewise is commonly called
Sobradisa, confining on the Kingdom of Serolys. Uery well, replied Amadis, by
Gods leave we shall one day see what they can do. When he was armed, as he
mounted on a lusty courser the ancient Lady had given him, the young Princess
presented him a goodly sword, which sometime belonged to the King her Father,
saying. Sir Knight, I pray ye hence-foorth (for my sake) to wear this sword
so long as it will last, and I shall pray it may be helpefull to you in all
your affairs. I assure ye fair Lady, answered Amadis, for your sake will I
carefully keep it, and thank you therefore with all my heart: hereof likewise
you may be persuaded, that I remain to obey you, and shall aid you in all
things concerning your estate and honor. Well might it be discerned in the
Lady, how these humble thanks and his former offer, pleased her not a little,
wherefore the Dwarffe, (who noted the gestures on either side) softly said to
her: Madame, you have this day made no small conquest, having so good a Knight
at your commandment.

CHAP. XXIII. How Amadis departed from the Ladies Castle, and of the matters
which were occurent to him by the way.
AMadis being gone from the Ladies Castle, rode on without finding any
adventure, til he entered the Forest of Angaduze, and the Dwarffe, riding
somewhat before, saw a far off, a Knight and a Damsel coming toward them.
When ye Knight came right against the Dwarffe, he drew his sword to offer him
outrage: but he started aside, so that the blow lighted on his shoulders,
wher-with he was in such fear, as he fell down from his horse, crying out for
help to his master, who seeing when he smote him, made have for his defense,
thus speaking to the Knight. What mooues you (Sir) to wrong my Dwarff without
cause? now trust me it is but simple manhood, to lay hand on such an excrement
of nature as has no defense of him self, but being in my guard the
presumption is great. I am sorry Sir, answered the Knight, to give you any
displeasure, but I must needs take his head from his shoulders, because it is
my gift to this Damsel. Sooner, said Amadis, shall thou loose thine own. So
encountered they together, with such force, as they were both cast beside their
horses: yet quickly recovering themselves, they began a most sharp and cruel
combat with their swords. Now were they in greater danger of their persons,
then ever they had been before, for their Sheelds being sliced in pieces,
their swords coulloured with their blood, their Armor broken, their helmets
battered, and themselves so sore labored: as they were constrained to draw
back awhile to take breath, when the Knight that conducted the Damsel thus
spoke to Amadis. My friend, you may judge the danger wherein we both may fall,
if longer we continue the Combat: therefore I pray ye let me have my will on
the Dwarffe, and I will amend the offense afterward, if it may be termed an
offense to you. What? said Amadis, do you think me of such slender stomach,
as that I will suffer any thing of mine to be wronged in my presence? not so, I
must and will defend him to the uttermost. And I must needs have his head,
answered ye Knight. By heaven, quoth Amadis, one of ours shall first acquit him
and that immediately. Heer-with they charged each other again, with such
wonderful courage appearing in either, as several desire to gain the honor
of the combat, made them show extreme violence one against another: so that
the best resolved of them both thought to dye, by abundance of blood which
issued from infinite wounds on his body, especially the Damoselles champion,
who though he felt him self greatly impairing, yet made he no show thereof but
held out with such brave viuacitie of spirit, as his enemy found he had a hard
task in hand.

At this instant an other Knight chanced to pass by, who seeing the two
combattants so fierce against each other, determined to expect who should
depart with victory: and placing himself by the Damsel, demanded if she
knew them, or the cause of their quarrel. I must needs know them, answered
the Damsel, because I set them together as you see, and this good hap is not
a little pleasing to me: for it is impossible but one of them must dye, nor do
I greatly care which of them it be, but if both end, together, my joys would
be the greater. Now trust me, said the Knight, full well do you manifest a
wicked disposition, practicing (for your pleasure) the death of two such brave
men, whose health and safety you rather ought to desire, then imagine such a
disloyal thought toward them: but tell me I pray ye, what reason you have to
hate them so? That can I sufficiently, quoth she. He whose Sheeld is most
defaced, is the only man of the world, to whom mine uncle Arcalaus wishes
most harm, he being named Amadis. And the other that combats with him, is
Galaor, who not long since slew the chiefest man I loved. It so fell out, that
Galaor heretofore made me promise of any thing I would request, and because
this day I was most affectionate to his death: I have brought him to deal with
such a one, as will hardly permit him to escape with life. For I knew the other
to be one of the best Knights in the world, on whom this Dwarffe (which you
see) attends: I therefore desired Galaor to give the little villains head,
being persuaded Amadis would rather dye then suffer it. Thus the one to deliver
me my request, and the other for his Dwarffes defense, are fallen into ye
extremity of their lives, which does me good at the heart to behold. By my
conscience Damsel, replied the Knight, I never thought such malice had
remained in a woman of your sort, and I believe assuredly (being yet so young)
if longer you live, you will accustom your self to such villainie as this you
begin withal: whereby you shall infect the air and the other elements, to the
disadvantage of the honest and virtuous Ladies living at this day. But to
sheeld them from such danger, and these two good Knights, whom trecherously
thou would should kill each other, I will make a sacrifice of thee according
to thy deserts: then lifting up his sword, he smote her head quite from her
shoulders, that it fell on the ground at her horse feet, saying. Take the
reward of thy merits, for the love I bear to thine Uncle Arcalaus, who kept
me his prisoner, till ye virtuous Knight Amadis delivered me: then running to
the combattants, he cried out aloud: Hold Lord Amadis, hold your hand, for the
man you fight against is your brother Galaor. When Amadis heard these words, he
threw down his Sword and Sheeld to the earth, and embracing Galaor, said. Alas
my friend, my brother, rightly may I be termed the most unhappy Knight in the
world, offering you such outrage as I have done. Galaor amazed at this
adventure, knew not what to say: but seeing how Amadis humbled himself on his
knee, he fell down likewise, desiring pardon, reputing himself wunderfull
unfortunate, in wronging thus his Lord and brother: then Amadis weeping with
inward conceit of joy, thus answered. Noble brother, and my friend, I esteem
the passed peril well employed, because it bears witness of what we are
able to do. So taking off their helmets to refresh themselves, they heartily
thanked the Knight that thus cause their acquaintance: whereupon he told them
all what the Damsel said, and the execution he committed on her. Now trust
me, quoth Galaor, never was false strumpet more rightly served, and now am I
discharged of the promise I made her. All the better for me, said the Dwarffe,
and thereby have I saved my head: yet I marvel why she should hate me so
much, in respect I never saw her till now to my knowledge. Then did Galaor at
large discourse, what happened between him, the Damsel, and her friend, as
you have heard already rehearsed: but ye Knight that separated the^, seeing
their Armor all covered with blood, thus spoke to the^. My Lords, your Armours
deliver testimony enough, how discourteously your swords have entreated your
bodies, wherefore me thinks long tarying in this place, will but endaunger your
wounds: let me request ye then to mount on horsse-back and accompany me to my
Castle, whether you shall not only be welcome, but find help for your hurts
by one skillful therein. We will not refuse your gentle offer, said Amadis. Let
us set forward then, answered the Knight, and happy shall I think my self, in
doing any service that may be liking to you: for you Lord Amadis delivered me
from such cruel imprisonment, as never poor Knight endured the like. Where
was it I pray ye? replied Amadis. At the Castle, quoth he, of Arcalaus the
enchaunter, when you restored so many to liberty. How are you named? said
Amadis. Balays, answered the Knight, and because my Castle is cleped Carsanta,
I am often termed Balays of Carsanta, therefore my Lords use me and mine as
your own. Brother, said Galaor, seeing the Knight reputeth himself so much
bounden to you, let us go with him.

In short time they arrived at the Castle of Balays, where they found
Gentlemen and Ladies that courteously entertained them: by reason Balays had
sent them word before, how he brought with him the two best Knights in the
world, Amadis who delivered him from the strong prison of Arcalaus, and his
noble brother Galaor. For this cause were they welcomed much more honorably,
and brought into a goodly chamber to be unarmed, where likewise stood two
costly beds, and a table furnished with sovereign medecines for their wounds,
the cure whereof, two Ladies (being Nieces to Balays) undertook, for they were
very learnedly skilled in Chirurgerie. Now did they employ their uttermost
cunning, to recompense Amadis for his worthy pains, in restoring their Uncle
from the slavery of Arcalaus: so that within few days, they felt themselves
indifferently amended, and almost able to bear their Armor as they did
before. Hereupon, Amadis communing with his brother Galaor, declared how to
seek him, he departed from the Court of King Lisuart, promising not to return
without his company: wherefore he entreated him to yield no denial, in respect
no Princes Court was better frequented with chivalry, nor could he find more
honor in any other place. My Lord, quoth Galaor, I intend to accomplish what
you please to command me, albeit I desire not as yet to be known among men of
account: first would I have my deeds give some witness, how desirous I am to
imitate your proceedings, or else to dye in this religious affection. Certes
brother, answered Amadis, for this matter you need not abandon the place,
seeing your renown is already greater then mine, if so be I have any at all:
yea it is darkened by the illustrate splendor of your chivalry. Ah my Lord,
replied Galaor, never disguise matters in this order with me, seeing not in
deeds, no, not so much as in thought, am I able to reach the height of such
honor. Leave we then this talk, said Amadis, for our Kingly Father makes no
difference of virtue between us: but will ye know what I have presently
devised? I see well we must stay here longer for our health, then otherwise we
would, for which cause I intend if you think good, to send my Dwarffe before to
King Lisuarts Court, that he may advertise the Queen of our stay, and so soon
as we are able to travail, we mean not to tarry long from her. Do as you
please, answered Galaor. Presently was the Dwarffe dispatched thence, who made
such good speed in his journey, as within few days he arrived at Windsore,
where King Lisuart was then accompanied with many good Knights.

CHAP. XXIIII. How King Lisuart being in the chase, saw a far off three
Knights armed coming toward him, and what followed ther-upon.
IT chanced on a certain day, that King Lisuart summoned a meeting in
Windsore Forest, which was well stored with red Dear, and all other game
needful for hunting. And as he was in chase of a Heart, he espied a good
distaunce from him, three armed Knights to cross the way: wherefore he sent a
Squire to them, with request that they would come unto him: upon this message
they immediately obeyed, returning with the Squire to the King, and when they
drew near him, he quickly knew Galuanes, because he had seen him many times
before: when embracing him, the King bad him heartily welcome, and the rest in
his company likewise, for he was a Prince, ye most graciously entertained all
Kniggts, especially strangers: then he demanded what the other were. My Lord,
quoth Galuanes, this young Prince is my Nephewe Agraies, Son to the King of
Scotts, and one of the best Knights in the world I dare assure ye: the other
is Oliuas, whom your majesty has well known heer-to-fore. The King embraced
them very lovingly, saying to Agraies: Fair Cousin, I must needs take this
gentleness, very kindly, that you would vouchsafe to see me. As for you sir
Oliuas, I thought you had forgotten us, considering ye long time since you were
here: and in sooth it is a matter very displeasant to me, when so good a
Knight as you are would so absent him self. Dread Lord answered Oliuas, my
earnest affairs kept me hence against my will, which has made me the more
negligent in your service: and yet I am not free from them, as (if you please)
I shall let ye understand. Then he reported, how Galuanes and Agraies came to
his Castle, by means of the Damsel that conducted them thither, whom they
very woorthely delivered from death: likewise how the Duke of Bristoya
trecherouslye slew his Cousin, for which he humbly craved justice, with free
liberty to combat before his Majesty, where he doubted not to make him
confess his treason. After the King had well pondered his discourse, and
understood the hard dealing of the Duke: he was highlye discontented, for he
knew Oliuas Cousin to be a good Knight, wher-upon he thus answered. Believe me,
seeing ye Duke has committed such a fault, and you request justice of me,
assure your self to obtain it, and I will send for him to come justify it in
person.

Presently the King gave over hunting, returning with the three Knights to his
Court, conferring on many matters by the way: among which the King demanded
of Galuanes, why the Duke of Bristoya would have burned the Damsel whom they
reskewed. Because Sir, quoth he, she brought a Knight named Galaor into his
palace, and (as we understand) it was in the night time, and no other reason
had he to allege. Why? said the King, Amadis is gone to seek Galaor, but
since his departure we were put in a terrible fear, by Arcalaus, who said he
had slain him, But are you certain Sir, answered Agraies, that he lives? yea
indeed, quoth the King, Brandoyuas and Grindaloya came hither since then, and
they gave us such credible testimonye of his welfare, as I may full well assure
ye thereof: for loathe am I to offend any other, because no one can desire his
good and honor more then I do. It is the argument of your good nature replied
Agraies, likewise in respect of his bountye and valor, he deserves to be
loved of you, even with like affection as good men wish to their like.

By this time are they come to the Court, where these news were quickly
brought to the Queen, which rejoiced very many, especially fair Oliuia, who
loved Agraies deerer then her self, and the Princess Mabila his Sister was
not sorry: for as she came from the Queens chamber, she met Oliuia, who thus
spoke to her. You cannot choose (Madame) but be well pleased with your Brothers
coming. Uery true, quoth Mabila, for I love him as mine own heart. Desire then
I pray ye the Queen, said Oliuia, to send for him to her Chamber, to the end
we may have the mean to confer with him together, so shall the pleasure of
you both be fully satis-fied. That shall I do, answered Mabila, so going to
the Queens Chamber, she thus spoke to her Majesty. It were good (Madame) you
should see my brother and mine Uncle Galuanes, in respect they are come hither
to honor you with their service. Sweet friend, said the Queen, I take it very
gently that you have so well advised me, for I promise ye I am very desirous to
see the^: wher-with she sent one of her Ladies to the King, desiring him that
they might come to her, which he liking very well, said. Gentlemen, my Queen
is desirous to see you all three, let me then request your consent herein. You
must judge if Agraies liked this motion, because he certainly knew to find
there the Princess Oliuia, the choice Lady and Mistress of his heart. But
when they came among the Ladies, their entertainment was good and gracious,
especially by the Queen her self, who caused them to sit down by her, as
meaning matter of more private conference. Many familiar speeches were
entercoursed between them, and practicing by all means to welcome them
honorably: for she was the only Queen of the world, that soonest could win the
hearts of Gentlemen, and therein took no little pleasure, by means whereof she
was loved of most and least, being reputed the most virtuous Lady living.

Now had Oliuia made choice of her place next Mabila, thinking Agraies would
soonest come to his Sister when he left the Queen: but while he beguiled the
time with her, his eye glaunced on the object of his heart, which he being
unable to dissemble, was compelled to a sudden alteration of countenance, and
could not withdraw his looks from the Adamant of his thoughts: which the
Queen somewhat noted, yet imagined his Sister Mabila was the cause, and that
he was desirous to talk with her, wherefore she thus spoke to him. My Lord
Agraies, will ye not see your Sister whom you love so dearly? Yes Madame,
quoth he, so it please you to give me leave? Heerewith he arose and came to
Mabila, who stepping forward to meet him, you must think Oliuia was not one
jot behind her, but welcomed him both with semblable reverence. But Oliuia
loouing him as you have heard, (ouer-maistring her will with reason, as a most
wise and well advised Princess) gave little in outward show: till after sundry
amiable speeches passing between them three, they had some leisure to stand
awhile asunder from all the rest. Yet did Agraies keep near his Mistress,
taking her by the hand, and playing with her fingers, often sent her a sweet
kiss in imagination: so that by entire regarding her, he was transported with
such singular delight, as he neither heard or made any answer to his Sister.
She being ignorant as yet of his disease, knew not well what to think, for
notwithstanding all her courteous speeches, his mind was otherwise busied then
on her: yet in the end she discovered the cause of this sudden mutation,
perceiving that Oliuia and her brother were surprised with each others love.
Whereupon she thought it best to favor them with more liberty, feigning a
desire to speak with her Uncle Galuanes, which she prettily coullered in this
manner. Brother, quoth she, I pray ye entreat the Queen that my Uncle may
come hither, because it is long time since I saw him, and I have somewhat to
acquaint him withal secretly. I hope to obtain so much of her, answered
Agraies: whereupon he went to the Queen, and thus spoke. Madame, if you could
spare mine uncle a little, you might do his Niece a very great pleasure, for
she is desirous to talk with him. And reason good, said the Queen: at which
words Galuanes went with him, which Mabila seeing, she humbly met him making
great reverence, when Galuanes using the like to her, began in this manner.
Fair Niece, I am glad to see you in such good disposition: but tell me I pray
ye, do you like Scotland or this country better? We shall confer quoth she,
more conveniently at the window, because I have many things to tell ye, which
were needless for my brother to understand: nor shall he, they being of such
importance as they are. These words she uttered smiling, and with a
marvelous good grace: cheefelye because her Brother might court his freende
alone. And well said Niece, answered Galuanes, our secrets are so great, as
they must needs be kept from him. So taking her by the hand, they went aside
to one of the windows, by means whereof, Agraies and Oliuia were left alone:
when the Prince perceiving he had liberty to speak, trembling in abundance
of affection, he began thus. Madame, to accomplish your commandment when you
parted from me, as also to satisfy my heart which never enjoys rest, but in
the gracious contentment, conuayed thereto through mine eyes by your presence, I
am come hither to serve and obey you: assuring you on my faith, that being
near your person, my spirits feel themselves viuified in such sort, as they
suffer with great strength the anguishes of continual affection, which makes
them dead in time of your absence. Therefore I desire ye (if it be your
pleasure) to limit me some better hap heer-after, in place where I may often
see and do you service: and as he would have proceeded further, Oliuia
interrupted him in this manner. Alas my Lord, I am so assured of the love you
bear me, and also of the grief you endure, we being absent one from an
other: as no other proof is required, then what mine own heart does plainly
testify, smothering a displeasure wursse then death it self: whereto
oftentimes I could very gladly submit my self, did not a cheerful hope
reback this despair, how one day our love shall meet together with happy
contentation. And persuade your self, that I daily travail in remembrance of
our mutual love: mean while (sweet friend) temporize and dismay not.
Mistress, said Agraies, you have already so bound me to you, as I must (in
duty) temporize till time you please, but I desire ye to consider, how I have
no forces, but such as you must fortefie me withal: so that if you continue
your graces to me as you have begun, I shall have strength to serve according to
your deserts. While I live my Lord, quoth she, never will I fail ye, be you
then so well advised, as every one may love and esteem ye: whereby I may strive
to love you more the^ any other can, in respect you are none of theirs, or your
own, but mine only. And if it happen some to speak of you, you must think I
receive incomprehensible joy therein, for it cannot be without recital of your
hautye courage and chivalry: yet my heart dreading the dangerous occurrences,
which may ensue by ouer-bolde venturing, accompanies the former pleasure with
as great a pain. Agraies abashed to hear him self so praised. vayled his
looks, and she loathe to offend him, altered her speech, demanding what he was
determined to do. On my faith Madame, quod he, I will do nothing but what you
please to command me. I will then, said Oliuia, that hence-foorth you keep
company with your Cousin Amadis, for I know he loves you entirely, and if he
counsel you to be one of this Court, deny it not. Believe me (Madame) answered
Agraies, both you and such good councelling will I obey: for setting your
divine self aside, there is no man living whom I will more credit with mine
affairs, then my honorable Cousin Amadis.

At these words the Queen called him and Galuanes likewise, having knowledge
of him in her fathers Kingdom of Denmark, where he performed many brave
deeds of arms: and likewise in Norway, so that fame reported him a right good
Knight. They being with her, the Queen remembered Galuanes of her ancient
acquaintance, at which instant the Princess Oriana came to them, wherefore
Agraies arose to salute her, leaving Galuanes with the Queen, and settled
himself to confer with Oriana: who entertained him marvelous kindly, as
well for Amadis sake whom he loved, as also the courtesy he showed her in
Scotland, when King Lisuart left her there at his return from Denmark, as you
have heard before declared: the Princess thus speaking to Agraies. Cousin, we
have daily desired your presence here, especially your Sister, who not many
days since was in great grief, by false news that came hither of Amadis
death your kinseman, as truly you would have wundered thereat. Good reason had
she Madame, quoth Agraies, to be sorrowful, and not she alone, but all the rest
of his lignage were bound to no less: knowing when our Cousin dies, the chief
and most excellent of us all dies, yea, the best Knight that ever bare Armor
on his body, and you must think, his death would have been avenged and
accompanied with many other. Ah, said she, the villain Arcalaus shrewdly
affrighted us, and evil death betide him, for troubling this royal Court in
such sort.

By this time the King was ready to the table, wherefore he sent for the three
Knights from the Queen, commanding them to sit by him, in company of many
great Lords and Barons. And as the service came in, two Knights entered the
hall, who falling on their knees before the King, the first of them thus spoke.
God prosper your Majesty with increase of joy and honor, most humbly I desire
to know, if Amadis of Gaul be in this Court. Not at this present, answered
the King, but we could wish he were here. Right glad would I be, said the
Knight, to find him, because by his means I hope to recover what I am now
far from. Tell us my friend, quoth the King, if you please, who you are. My
Lord, replied the Stranger, I am a sad Knight named Angriote d'Estrauaus, and
this other is my brother, when King Arban of Norgalles (who was there present)
heard him speak of Angriote, he started from the table, and stepping to the
King, said: Does not your Majesty know Sir Angriote? such as have dealt with
him, will say he is one of the best Knights in your Kingdom. My friend, quoth
the King to Angriote, I pray you arise, and pardon me if I have not honored you
according to your deserts: for the fault was only committed through ignorance,
but be sure you are welcome and that with heart, but say I desire ye, how came
you acquainted with Amadis? My Lord, replied Angriote, I have known him no
long time, and my first acquaintance was very dearly bought, for I never
thought to dye till I was wounded: but he that did me the harm, promised
afterward to give me help, which is very needful now to cure me: heereto he
added ye whole accident as you heard it before. In sooth, said the King, I
would be glad these matters should have a good end, but now come sit down with
us to dinner, afterward we will consider thereon as we may. Next to King Arban
was Angriote placed, and as they were about to rise from the table, Dardan the
Dwarffe to Amadis entered the Hall: whom Angriote knowing, called him,
demanding where he had left his Master, because he saw him last in his
company. Sir, quoth the Dwarffe, where soever I have left him, he makes good
account of you: then falling on his knee before the King, he thus began. Amadis
my Lord humbly saluteth your Majesty, and all the rest of his friends in this
Court. Dwarffe, said the King, where did thou leave him? In such a place my
Lord, quoth the Dwarffe, where he is of good cheer: but if you would know any
more, it must be in the presence of the Queen. With right good will, answered
the King: and hereupon sent presently for the Queen, she quickly coming,
being attended on by diverse beautiful Ladies, the most part of them the
amourous friends to the Knights then waiting on the King, whereby they
purchased leave (during the Dwarffes discourse) to devise with them, at better
leisure then long time before they could: but the Dwarffe beholding the Queen
present, thus proceeded. Madame, my Lord and master Amadis in all humble
reverence saluteth your excellency, commanding me to tell ye, that he has
found Prince Galaor his brother he sought for. Now trust me, said The Queen, I
am heartily glad thereof. But on my credit Madame, quoth the Dwarffe, never was
heard of such a perilous meeting of two brethren, for if God had not the
better provided, both the one and the other had never been seen again, so
near were they both at the point of death: but by hap a good Knight arrived
there, who names him self Balays, and he found ye means to agree them. Then
told he all the whole accident, how Balays slew the Damsel that procured
their quarrel, for which, Balays was highlye commended of them all. But where
have thou left them? replied the Queen? At the Castle of Carsanta Madame,
said the Dwarffe, where Balays dwells, from whence I was dispatched hither
with this message. But tell me Dwarffe, quoth the Queen, what think thou of
Galaor? I think Madame, answered the Dwarffe, that he is one of the goodlyest
Knights in the world, carrying a resolution not one iotte inferior to the
best: and did you see him in company of my Lord, you could make little
difference between them. I marvel, said the Queen that they come not
hither. Assure your self, replied the Dwarffe, no sooner shall they recover
health, but they will be here with you, for so they expresselye commanded me
to tell ye. So joyful was the King heer-of, that he minded to keep open Court
after they were come: commanding his Lords and Barons not to depart his
court, wher-to they all willingly condiscended. He likewise desired the Queen,
to send for all the cheef Ladies in the Realm: For ye more honorably, quoth
he, you are attended on by Ladies, the more Knights shall they find here to
deserve their love, on whom I will bestow many rich gifts and presents.

CHAP. XXV. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays determined to travail to King
Lisuart, and what adventures happened by the way between them.
SO long soiourned Amadis and Galaor, at the Castle of Balays of Carsanta, as
their wounds being thoroughly healed: they intended to return to King Lisuarts
Court, before they would enterprise any other aduenturs. Balays who desired to
bear the^ company, for the familiar acquaintance he had now with the^:
entreated them to afford him so much favor, wher-with they were very well
contented Departing thence, they ride toward Windsore, and after they had
iournied five days, they came into a four cornered way, in the midst whereof
stood a tree, and under it a dead Knight lay on a rich bed, with great wax
tapers standing burning at the boulster and feet, which not-with-standing any
great wind could not be extinguished. The dead Knight was unarmed, and not
covered with any thing, wherefore easily might a great many wounds be
discearned on his head, and a trunchion of a Lance, pierced with the iron
quite through his neck and throat: beside in such manner did the dead Knight
hold up his hands thereon, as if he would have pulled forth the Lance.
Greatly was Amadis and the rest amazed heerat, and feign they would know what
the Knight should be, but they could see no body of whom they might enquire,
nor any place near that was inhabited, which moved Amadis thus to speak.
Doubtless without some great occasion, this Knight was not brought into this
place, being alone and furnished in this strange manner: if we stay here a
while, some adventure or other must needs ensue heeron. And so think I,
answered Galaor, wher-upon he thus spoke. Brother, this rash oath, somewhat
displeases me, for I doubt it will be an occasion of our long tarying in this
place. What I have said, answered Galaor, is done: with these words he
alighted from his horse, and sat down at the dead Knights feet: which the
other twain perceiving, concluded not to leave him, but even to take such
part as he did.

Now was it between noone and evening, when they being thus dismounted, might
at more ease visit the wounds of the dead man: and Amadis seeing his hands
on the truncheon in his throat, confounded with grief and marvel, said.
Doubtless he yielded his spirit as he now holds his hands, because they
still remained in the place. And as they were thus communing together, they
heard a great noise of some coming toward them, when presently they espied a
Knight and two Squires, the one bearing a sheelde and helmet, and the other
driving a Damsel before him, she giving many shreekes and outcryes, because
the Knight smote her often with ye end of his Lance: and thus they passed by
the bed where the dead knight lay, when the Damsel seeing the three Knights by
the coarse, cried. Ah Good Knight who lie on the bed, were thou alive, I am
sure thou would not suffer me to be thus cruelly handled, if hazarding thy
body in a thousand perrilles might defend me: would God the death of these
vallaynes had excused thine. Say thou so? quoth the Knight that used her so
hardly, and thou shall know the price of thy words: then smote her with his
Lance so cruelly over the head, as made the blood in great abundance to
trickle down her face, and so rode on still beating her: which Amadis greeuing
to behold, said to his companions. In sooth, never did I see such a bad
minded Knight, to outrage a poor Damsel in such spiteful manner: but (if
God be my guide) he shall not long abuse her so. Therefore brother, quoth he to
Galaor, if I tarry too long, set forward I pray ye to Windsore with Balays, and
I will come thither with what speed I may: then mounting on horse back, he
commanded Gandalin to follow him, and gallopped after the Knight, who by this
time had gained a great deal of ground.

Thus remained Galaor and Balays alone there til night, which being very
dark, they could not see but heard a Knight come riding the same way which
Amadis took, who complaining of grief in his leg, lay holding him self
about his horse neck: but when he espied Galaor and Balays, he demanded if
they knew the Knight that rid so fast the same way he came. Why ask you?
ansered Galaor, Because said the Knight, I would he might break his neck, for
he runs so rudelye, as if he followed some Devil. What rudenes has he
offered you? answered Galaor. He would not tell me, quoth the Knight, neither
by intreataunce or other courteous mean, why he made such haste: and I seeing
him so self willed, laid hold on his horse bridle, resolved to make him pay
for boldenes, and to satisfy me either by freendship or force. Well, answered
Balays, what did he there tell ye? Nothing to my demand replied the Knight,
but peremptorily thus spoke. That he would tarry no longer to tell me, except I
first combatted with him. Heer-upon we charged each other, he giving me such a
shrowde push with his Lance, as I and my horse were tombled quite over, and
in the fall I brake my leg as you may behold. When Galaor and Balays heard his
report, knowing full well he spoke of Amadis. they fell into u great laughter,
saing: In good faith now are you taught against another time, not to be over
importunate to know any thing against a man's will. Belike you mock me then,
answered the Knight, and trust me you may happen to repent it: then coming
near Galaors horse, he gave him such a blow on his nose, as making him
furiously to break his bridle, gave him likertie libewise to run about the
feelde, and thinking he was not revenged enough, sought how to serve Balays
horse in the same sort, but they both stepped between with their Lances and
kept him off: which the Knight perceiving, giving the spurs to his horse, he
rode away, saying. If I had sped the other knight so well, I would have thought
my self half recompensed: learn you then to scorn me another time. Is it
true? said Balays, and God never help me in my need, if I make thee not leave
thy horse for the other thou have sent raunging. Presently he leapt into his
Saddle, desiring Galaor to stay for him till morning, for then at the
vttermoste he hoped to return.

By these accidents is Galaor left alone, attending news of the matter he
vowed: for he had sent his Squire to recover his horse, which by mishap took
his way into a thick wood. In mean while the greater part of the night is
spent, and Galaor could enjoy no rest, through extreme affection after his
enterprise: but about break of day he found his spirits so ouer-watched, as
(whether he would or no) he was compelled to take off his helmet and sheelde,
and leaning on them forgot him self so much, that when he awaked, he neither
saw the candles burning, or the dead Knight which lay on the bed, whereat he
became so sorrowful, as he entered into these complaints. Well I perceive,
that I am unworthy so hye an enterprise, seeing so fondly I have failed in
such an easy matter. Now see I how Fortune (through this my slothfulnes)
scorneth the little favor she showed me at the beginning: and well may she do
so, seeing I would so carelessely fall a sleep, at such a time as she
commanded me to watch. But seeing I have so wilfully o^ffended, I will amend
it by an answerable penance: for I will recover on foot with the travail of
my body, the murdered man carried from me in my sleep. Then followed he the
track of their feet, whom he imagined had conuayed thence the Knight, and
walking on warily, as loathe to fail thereof, he heard the neighing of a horse:
which made him shape his course thither-ward, albeit he could discearne no
body, yet passed he further, because he heard the like noise of other horses.
Not far had he gone, but he espied two Knights armed, one of them being
alighted from his horse, and reading certain letters engraven on a stone,
after-ward he said to his companion. In vain did they make me come to this
place, for I understand not one word of them: wher-with he mounted again, and
they rode away not seeing Galaor, but he called to them, saying. Gentlemen, can
ye not tell me who has carried away a dead Knight, who not long since lay
under a tree in the four cornered street behind? Uerily, answered one of
them, we know nothing thereof, but about midnight we saw three Damoselles pass
by, and ten Squires with them conducting a Litter. Which way did they take?
said Galaor. This on the left hand, replied the Knight: so giving them thanks,
he went the same way he was directed, and soon after saw a Damsel coming
toward him, to whom he said. It may be (Lady) you can tell me who has carried
away the dead Knight, that lay under the tree not far hence? If you will
promise me quoth she, to revenge his death, which is an exceeding great greef
to many: I will resolve you therein. I will not stick for that, answered
Galaor, for it seems by your words it is an act of justice to do it. Uery
true, said the Damsel, mount up before me on my Palfray, and I shall direct
ye to your desire. When they had ridden about two miles, she showed him a
meruaylous fair Castle, and alighting at the gate, she bad him enter: But
remember, quoth she, what you have promised. And because I have solicited you
heerto, I pray ye let me understand your name, likewise where I may find you
when time shall serve. I am called Galaor, quoth he, and think you shall
heer-after find me in King Lisuartes Court, then any where else. I am
satisfied, said the Damsel, to God I commend ye: then she turned bridle and
rode away, but Galaor entered the Castle, where he found the dead Knight laid
in the midst of the Court, and by him stood many making great lamentation.
Nevertheless Galaor approached noer, and stepping to an ancient Knight,
demanded of him what the dead Knight was. Sir, answered the old man, while he
lived he was such a one, as all the world may bemone his misfortune. Do you
know his name? said Galaor. He was called Anthebon replied the other, one of
the most virtuous Gentlemen that ever lived in Gaul. When Galaor heard he was
a subject to King Perion his Father, his heart began to storm, and as he
pitied him the more, so his desire increased to revenge his death: wher-upon
he entreated the Knight, to acquainte him with the truth of this tragical
accident: Sir, quoth he, this unfortunate Gentleman which you see, was (in
respect of his bounty and virtue) married to a wife, who now lamenteth for
him, she being the Lady of this Castle. In time they had a very fair
Daughter, and she growing in years, was beloved by a Knight our too
neer-neighbour: but the young Damsel ever hated him, and above all other
could not abide him. Whereof he getting intelligence determined by some mean or
other to steal her hence, and being so resolved, (forgetting God, as also his
own honor) watched when this good Knight, (as customely he used) should go to
ye cornered street, there to succor such as often were distressed, because it
is the most dangerous place in this country. Knowing him thus to be from home,
the disloyal wretch entered this Castle, and finding the maiden in company of
her mother, with diverse other Gentle-women hoere disporting: maugre them all,
forcibly he took her away, before we could fall the bridge to succor her.
Hoer-upon as we after-ward understood) she did nothing day and night but
grievously mourn, despising all the enticing blandishments the Knight used to
her: which in ye end displeased him so much, as be began in this sort to
reprove her. Lady you know yt I love ye with all my heart, desiring only to
have the like of you, meaning no otherwise then honorably to make you my wife:
but you scornfullye disdain me, albeit I am descended of a more noble house
then your Father is, which makes me marvel very much, what should move you
thus to be mine enemy? In good faith I will tell ye, quoth she. I
heere-to-fore made promise to my Mother, and such is still my deliberation:
that I would never match with any husband, if he were not so good a Knight,
and comparable with my Father in chivalry, for which she made choice of him
among all other Knights: to which words, he thus answered. By heaven I see
you love me now, for ere it be long I will make sufficient proof, that I am a
better man at arms then he. Within a while after, he left his Castle, being
well mounted and armed, placing him self under the tree where you saw this
Knight dead, to what intent I cannot tell: but unhappily the Lord of this
Castle came that way, having left his horse and Armor, because he only
intended to take the air. The cowardly wretch seeing what advantage he had of
him, and remembering the promise he made his Lady, thought it place commodious
to get him reputation, and no witnesses by to report the contrary, so without
giving him warning, or speaking one word to him, stealing behind him, smote
his Lance through his neck as you here behold. Thus, unprovided of defense,
likewise suddenly and most villainously, was this good Knight slain: and yet
the bloody traitor not satisfied, alighting from his horse, gave him many
needless cruel wounds with his sword, and so despightfully left him there.
In good faith, answered Galaor, the deed is monstrous, unable to pass without
common reprehension: but seeing you have vouchsafed me this favor, I pray ye
tell me, why was he afterward laid on such a costly bed under the tree?
Because it being a continual passage for Knights errant, said the old man,
to try if any would be so honorably provoked, as to revenge an act of such
shame and contempt, after we had acquainted them with this sad discourse. I
found him alone at the tree, replied Galaor, what was the cause then you left
him so? Your demand is not amiss, quoth the old man, for four Squires were
ever wunt to guard him: but because ye Knight who did the murder came and
threatened to kill them, we were constrained to bring away the body hither. I
marvel, said Galaor, that I heard not the noise, it may well be said I
slept soundlye. Are you he, replied the old man, whom we found leaning a
sleep on your Helmet? The very same man, answered Galaor. Why did you rest so
homely there? quoth the old man. To revenge his death, said Galaor, if by
reason I might do so much. Ah worthy Sir, answered the old man, heaven
grant the finishing thereof to your honor: then taking him by the hand, he
brought him to the bed whereon the dead man lay, thus speaking to the sorrowful
Lady. Madame, this Knight says (to his power) he will revenge the death of
your Lord. Alas gentle Knight, quoth she, the God of heaven keep you in that
good mind, for I can find no kindred or friend in this country, who will do
so much for me, because my Lord was a stranger: yet while he lived, every one
showed great freendship in looks, but now their kindness is cold enough.
Lady, answered Galaor, in respect both he and I were borne in one country, my
desire is the greater to revenge his death. Are you, said ye Lady, the Son to
King Perion of Gaul, whom my deceassed Lord often told me was in King
Lisuartes Court? Never came I there Madame, replied Galaor, in all my life:
but tell me what he is that did this treason, and in what place I may find
him? Gentle Lord, quoth she, you shall be conducted thither if you please:
nevertheless I stand in doubt, (considering the perrill) you will mislike the
enterprise, as many other have done, who were heer-tofore accompanied thither.
Heerin Mad Madame, said Galaor, is the difference between good and bad, yet
if you will allow me so much, as you did them that made refusal, happily I may
speed better then they did. The Lady noting his honorable disposition, called
two of her Damoselles, commanding the^ to conduct Galaor, to the Knight that
held her daughter perforce. In sooth Madame, said the Prince, little credit
shall you have by sending me on foot, my own horse I lost (not long since)
in the wood by hard fortune: I pray ye then let me have another on this
condition, that if I revenge not your cause, I may stand bound to deliver him
again. You shall have one Sir, answered the Lady, for I hope by your prowess:
not only our possessions shall remain at your disposing, but our selves
likewise your obedient servants.

CHAP. XXVI. How Galaor revenged the death of the Knight, whom he found slain
on the bed under the tree.
THus departed Galaor in conduct of the two Damoselles, who leading him the
nearest way through a Forest, at the further side thereof showed him a Castle,
being the place whether they were commanded to bring him, where-upon they
thus spoke to the Prince. Behold my Lord, at this Fortress you may revenge
the murdered Knights death. Tell me his name, replied Galaor. He is called
Palingues, answered the Damoselles. Being now come hard by the Castle, they
saw the gate was fast, which made Galaor call out aloud, whereat an armed
Knight came on the battlements, demanding what he sought fo. I would enter the
Castle answered Galaor. This gate, quoth he, is appointed to no other end, but
for the coming forth of such as remain here within. Which way shall I enter
then? said Galaor. I will show you, quoth the Knight: But I doubt I shall
travail in vain, and that you dare not come to us. Now trust me, replied
Galaor, I would feign have been within long since. We shall quickly see that,
said the Knight, if your hardines be such as you make show of: alight from
your horse and come near the Castle wall. Which Galaor did, and giving his
horse to the Damosells, went to the place where he was appointed. Then came
the Knight again and another with him, seeming of greater stature then his
companion: they two winding a winche about, over the wall let down a basket
with a cord, saying to the Prince. If you will enter here, the passage by the
basket is this high way. But if I put my self therein, answered Galaor, will
ye promise to draw me up in safety? Yea truly, quoth they, albeit after ward
we will not warrant ye. Crediting their words, he entered the basket, saying.
Draw me up, for on your honest promise I adventure. Heer-with they began to
wind up the basket, which the Damoselles seeing, meruailing not a little at
Galaors hardines, said: Ah good Knight, God sheeld thee from treason, for
doubtless thou she west a gentle and valiant heart.

By this time the Knights had drawn him up, taking him and the basket in at
the top, afterward the Knights thus began with him. Gentleman, it is necessary
you swear to aid the Lord of this Castle, against such as would quarrel
with him for the death of Anthebon, otherwise you never shall depart hence.
What? said Galaor, did one of you twain kill him? Why demand you? replied the
other. Because, quoth he, I am come to let the murderer know, how he has
committed a deed of monstrous treason. Come ye for that intent? said they, now
surely you might have been a great deal better advised: dare thou threatten
us, and art in custody? alas, we must have another manner of account at thy
hands, and we must chastise the folly wher-with thy brain is troubled: then
drawing their Swoordes, they laid upon him very furiously. When Galaor saw him
self thus wronged both in words and deeds, he entered into such choler, as
quicklye he made the^ feel ye edge of his sword, so that the Damoselles might
easily hear the clanching of the strokes on the Armor: for the two Knights
were strong and vigorous, and Galaor well moved with hot displeasure. Ah God,
quoth one of the Damoselles, hark how the worthy Knight deals with the
traitors, let us not depart hence till we see some end thereof. All this while
Galaor so labored his enemies with such sharp charges, as their hearts began
somewhat to despair, for to one of them he gave such a blow on the helmet, as
his sword entered three fingers deep into his head: afterward he buffeted him
with the hiltes of his Sword, that he made him fall on his knees to the
ground. In mean space the other spared not Galaor, but laid load on him to
revenge his companion, whose head the Prince had now severed from his
shoulders: and coming to the other, the coward began to turn his back,
running down the stairs faster then ever he came up: but Galaor followed so
nimbly, that laying hold on him, he made him sure for ever letting down the
basket again, to draw up any more Knights on the walls.

Now because the Prince knew not Palingues, and doubting one of these twain to
be he, he threw them over the battlements to the Ladies, bidding them to look
on them and afterward to resolve him: but they answered, they were so mangled
as they could not judge of them, and they were persuaded that Palingues was
neither of these twain. Where upon Galaor went down into the Castle, and as he
looked every where about him, he espied a fair young Lady who cried alowd:
Palingues, Palingues, is this the great chivalry for which thou would be
renowned? now thou flyest like a cowardly and faint hearted knight, yet say
thou were a better man at arms then my murdered Father, whom thou killedst (as
thou vauntest) in combat hand to hand. In sooth what I ever doubted is now
come to pass: why do thou not atte^d this Knight who looks for thee? if
there be any manlye heart or spirit in thee, show it now in need when thy life
dependes thereon. At these words Galaor looked more aside, and espied Palingues
well armed, who was opening the door of a Tower to save him self, wherefore he
stepped to him, saying. Believe me Knight, this flying will little advantage
thee, and less the strong hold thou would enter into: for thou must answer
the life of good Anthebon, whose death thou did compass by monstrous
villanye. Palingues seeing there was no other remedy, turned and fiercely
smote at Galaor, his sword entering so far into the Princes sheelde, as he
was not able to pull it out again: by means whereof Galaor reached him such a
blow, that therewith his right arm was cut quite from his body, the grief
whereof so pained him, as he ran into the chamber where the Lady was, thinking
by this poor shift to defend his life. But Galaor getting hold on his legs,
dregged him along on his back out again, and with his Sword smote his head
from his shoulders: This is, quoth he, the reward of thy trecheries done to
Anthebon, and payment for thy treason in the action of his death. The daughter
of Anthebon being present at this deed, having heard Galaor often name her
Father, fell on her knees before him with these words. Alas my Lord, you have
bound me in such duty to you, as never shall I be able to requite your pains,
my self being of such simple and slender ability: but the good will I have
to recompense this benefit, has imprinted dayelye prayers in my heart to God
for you, having to justly revenged the death of my father, and the wrongful
forcing of this traitor. Galaor courteouslye taking her up, embracing her in
his arms, thus answered. On my faith fair friend, he were a man of little
sense, that would offer displeasure to such a one as you are, seeing you much
better deserve to be loved and served, then with grief or favor to be
offended: but tell me, have you any more enemies in this Castle? No Sir,
replied the Damsel, those which remain, are to do you honor and obeysaunce.
Let us go then, quoth he, to let in two Damoselles, who were my guides hither
from your Lady mother. So taking him by the hand, she commanded the gate to be
opened, and the two Damoselles entered leading Galaors horse: but when they
saw their young Mistress, they humbly made her reverence, demanding if her
fathers death were revenged to her desire. Yea verily, quoth she, I thank God
and this Knight, who has done that many other could not do.

It was now the vehement hot time of the day, wherefore Galaor took off his
helmet to refreshe him self, when the Lady seeing him so young and beautiful,
as also so valiant in deeds of arms: began to be touched with love, and
setting aside both fear and bashfulnes, she began to embrace and kiss him,
saying. My honorable Lord and friend, more cause have I to love you then any
other creature living. In good faith, quoth he, and I love you likewise, as well
in respect of your beauty and good grace, as also for your deceassed Fathers
sake, he and I being borne in one Country. May if it please ye Sir, said
she, to tell me your name? Such as are acquainted with me, answered the Prince,
term me Galaor. In sooth my Lord, quoth she, often have I heard my father
speak of Sir Amadis your brother, and of you likewise, saying you were the
sons to the King of Gaul, his liege Lord and sovereign. As thus they
devised, they entered alone into a chamber, while the Damosells with the rest
were providing viands: wherefore Galaor seeing time and place so commodious, to
request the love of her that used him so kindly, she being a Lady, young,
fresh and fair, named Brandueta, him self likewise active and desirous of
such sweet baytes, thus spoke, Madame, if Palingues loved you as I have heard,
he had great reason for it, knowing you to be such a one as I see you are: for
my self, who have so little acquaintance with you, am already so deep in
devotion to your gracious nature, as I would repute my self happy, if you
granted me the favor I desire, accepting me as your friend and servant. The
Lady not one jot behind him in amorous affection, shaped him this answer. I
have told ye my Lord, that I love you more then any other living creature,
therefore you may be certainly assured, how my desire is to please you in all
things what-soeuer. During these speeches, Galaor still held his love in his
arms, kissing and toying with her so pleasantly, as Diana soon after lost her
interest in the maiden, whereto Brandueta yielded with greater contentment, then
all her former resistaunces to Palingues: from whom she kept her virginity so
long, that she was now content to bestow it on the French Prince, and he
having a good stomach to such daintye diet, made her love him the better for it
while she lived. But see an unhappy inconvenience, after many imbracinges and
amourous conferences, as they would once more have besieged the Fortress of
love: the Damoselles came to tell the^ that dinner was ready, wherefore (though
loath) they were forced to leave off, accompanying the Damoselles to the place
where the tables were covered, which was under a Gallarie environed with trees.

As they sat at the table, and discoursed of many matters, among other things
Brandueta declared to him, how Palingues (standing in fear of him and his
brother Amadis) caused this Castle to be kept so stronglye: considering that
her Father Anthebon was of Gaul, and King Perions subject, the sooner would
they assaye to work revenge for his death. For this reason, quoth she, he
allowed no other entrance then by the basket into this Castle, where I have
lived in meruaylous greef and sorrow, as never shall I desire to tarry here
longer: therefore right gentle Lord and friend, might it so like you, without
any longer stay I would gladly see my mother, who will not be a little glad of
my return, and yours likewise. Galaor was very well contented, and though it
were late, yet got they to horsse-back, departing from the Castle: but for all
their haste they were two hours benighted, which brake no square in respect of
the good news, the good Lady with all her family joyfully receiving them,
with all honorable means could be devised, beside, the comforted widow cast
her self at his feet, using these speeches. Woorthye Lord, both I and mine
are bound to you for ever, referring to your disposition what-soeuer we enjoy,
because you are the restorer and confirmer of all. I thank you Madame,
answered Galaor, for your freendly offers, but where no desert is, the
requital must of force be far more easy. Now the greater part of the night
being spent, they brake of talk and bequeathed themselves to rest, and
Galaor being alone in his chamber, remembered his lovely breakfast before
dinner with his new freende: who likewise was so deep in consideration thereof,
that she could wish such another ere supper, and whether she did or no, judge
you. For no sooner knew she every one to be in bed, but secretlye she came to
Galaors chamber, where she had no churlishe speeches to drive her away, but
most daintye, sweet, and gracious entertainemente: what else they did I know
not, but she tarried there till morning, and then returned unseen of any.

CHAP. XXVII. How Amadis pursuing the Knight that misused the Damsel, met
another Knight with whom he combated, and what happened to him afterward.
YOu have heard what haste Amadis made after the Damsel, whom the Knight led
away perforce, beating and misusing her very cruelly: but he happened to meet
with another Knight, who demanded of him why he ride so fast. What have you to
do? answered Amadis, whether it be my pleasure to ride fast or soft, In good
faith? said the Knight, I speak it as one willing to help you, if you be
offered wrong by any, that you may go in better assurance if you be afraid.
Truly you may spare this labor, replied Amadis, for at this time I have no
need of your help. When the other heard this answer, he imagined that Amadis
mocked him, which made him come and lay hold on the bridle of his horse,
saying. By God Sir, you shall answer my demand, otherwise, I mean to break
your pate. I know not what thou can do, quoth Amadis, but I will dispatch my
self of thee by combat, and that way resolve thee in thy request: for rash
minds must have rough medicines, and such as seek to know more then they
need, often feel more then they would. So fetching their carrire, they
encountered together, the Knight shiuiring his Lance in pieces: but Amadis sent
both horse and man to the ground, and with such violence, as the Knights leg
was broken in the fall, and Amadis had leisure to follow his journey: this was
the same man you heard of before, that made Galaors Squire go look his
masters horse.

But now to proceed with Amadis, who tarryed not to help the Knight up
again, such speed made he after his intent, as at length he ouer-took him that
led away the Damsel, and coming near him, thus spoke. Forbear Sir I pray
ye, and wrong the Lady no more. What wrong have I done her? answered the
Knight. The most shamefullest, said Amadis, could be devised. What? quoth the
Knight, you would then chastise me? Sir no, answered Amadis, but advise ye by
reason for your own benefit. I hear ye well enough, said the Knight, but you
may return as wise as you came. Is it true? quoth Amadis, then stepping to the
Squire that led the Damoselles palfray, he stearnely said. Uillaine let the
woman alone, or thou dyest the death. The Squire being affraide, fled away,
which the Knight seeing, and being very angry thereat, he came to Amadis with
these words. Believe me Sir, you command very audaciously: but if I know not
how to charm such brauers, let Armor never come on my back again. So placing
their Lances in their rests, they brak their staves in the encounter: but the
Knight was cast headlong out of his saddle, and before he could recover him
self again, Amadis stood ready with his sword to take his life, which he
perceiving, and that he must be forced to beg his pardon, thus spoke. Gentle
Sir take pity on me, and look what offense I have committed by any hard
deling, shall be amended by better usage. Swear then, said Amadis, never to
wrong Lady or Damsel heer-after against her will. With all my heart, replied
the Knight, and as Amadis was coming to receive his oath, the villain thrust
his sword into the Princes horse belly, which made him presentlye fall down
dead, and Amadis underneath in very great danger: so that before he could get
up again, the Knight delivered him many cruel strokes, saying. By God Sir,
now shall I dearly teach ye, how you enterprise another time to correct your
better. At length Amadis recovered footing, and gave his enemy such a blow
through the sight of his Helmet, as cut the one side of his face clean away:
wher-with he was so astonnied, that he fell to the ground, when Amadis setting
his foot on him, quicklye separated his head from his shoulders. The night
enduring all this while, yet comfortably lightened by fair Cynthia, whereby the
Damsel saw the death of her aduersarye, which made her fall at the Princes
feet with these words. Alas worthy Knight, the God of heaven (not I) must
requite this honorable kindenes, for without your help, much better had death
been to me then life: yet let me request this further courtesy, no more but
your company to a Castle not far hence, where I shall be in safety to mine
own desire, and to travail alone thither will be dangerous for me. Nor shall
you fair Damsel, said Amadis, be in such fear, for I will not leave ye
till you be where you would: so he willed Gandalin to bring him the knights
horse, and to help the Damsel up on her palfray, afterward they rode as she
conducted them. Of many matters they conferred by the way, she acquainting him
with the whole historye of the dead Knight, whose death you have heard how
Galaor revenged. And coming into a meddowe by a rivers side, they alighted
from their horses, betaking themselves to sleep a little, because it was
night, she lying on a mantle that Gandalin spread for her, and Amadis leaning
on his helmet as his best pillow. But as they all thus slept, it chanced a
Knight came riding by who saw them, and without making any noise, with the
great end of his Lance, he iogged the Damsel till she awaked. When she
beheld him on horsse-back, thinking it was Amadis that conducted her, she
started up as one half a sleep, demanding if it pleased him to depart. Yea
marry, quoth the Knight, and taking her by the hand mounted her up behind him:
Why do you so? said the Damsel, your Squire might help me to mine own
horse, without troubling you in this manner. It were needless, answered the
Knight, for seeing a booty is so well offered, I mean to have the carriage of it
my self. These words made the Damsel suspect her self deceived, and
looking back, she beheld where Amadis lay still fast a sleep, wherefore she
cried out to him so loud as she could. Ah help me Sir, quoth she, for here is
one I know not will forcibly carry me away. When the Knight heard what a noise
she made, he gave ye spurs to his horse, riding away in a maine gallop: but
Amadis awaking and not seeing the Damsel, was greatly displeased, hastelye
calling Gandalin to bring him his horse, afterward he posted the same way the
Knight had taken. At length he got a sight of them, marking their entrance
into a thicket of trees, where he mistook his way in such sort, as he knew not
which side of the wood to take: when (though he was one of the most pacient men
in ye world) he conceived this grief meruaylous unkindly, saying to him
self. Now may the Damsel well report, that I have done her as much shame
as succor: for if I defended her from one forcer, by my slothfulnes I have
left her in the power of one wursse then he.

Thus riding in and out among the brambles, offering much injury to his
horse, at length he heard the winding of a horn, which made him follow the
sound thereof, imagining the Knight did it for his pleasure. Soon after he
espied a strong Castle on the top of a mountayn and approaching near,
perceived it was beguirt with a high wall, whereon were many great Towers, and
the gate made sure with mighty bars. As he was seeking some place of
entrance, the watch descrying him, said. What man at so late an hour comes
armed so near? I am a strange Knight, answered Amadis. What would you have?
said the watch. I seek for one, quoth Amadis, who not long since took a
Damsel from me. We saw none such, answered the watch. Heer-upon Amadis passed
further, and discerned a little door open, and the Damsel with the Knight to
enter thereat on foot, because they could not come near it on horsse-back:
then Amadis calling to the Knight, thus spoke. Stay a while I pray you Sir, and
tell me before you shut the gate, if you be the man that took a Damsel from
me? If I took her from you, answered the Knight, you had the less care of her
keeping. And the less manhood, said Amadis, was in you, to steal her from me
while I slept, being assured you could no other-wise have carried her from me so
lightly. My friend, quoth ye Knight, I have her indeed, and of her own good
will she came with me, without any manner of soliciting or forcing. In good
faith, answered Amadis, if you show her me, and she affirm as much, I shall
rest contented. It is not long to morning, said the Knight, and then I will
let ye see her here, if you will enter upon the custom of the Castle? What
is the custom? replied Amadis. You shall be told it, quoth the Knight, and I
think you will find it too hard for your enterprising. If I could presently
agree thereto? said Amadis, might I now enter? Not as yet, answered the Knight:
but if you tarry till day light, we shall behold what you can do. So going
in, he clapped too the door, wherefore Amadis was contented to awaite the
break of day, under a tuft of trees hard by the Castle, and when the Sun
began to appear, he heard the gate open, which made him quickly mount on
horsse-back: then coming forward, he saw a Knight armed at all points, and
under him a lusty courser, wher-upon the Porter called Amadis, demanding if he
would enter. Why have I tarryed here else, answered Amadis, all this while? But
first, quoth the Porter, you must understand our custom, to the end you may
not say afterward that you were deceived. I therefore thus advise ye, how when
you shall be entered here, you must enter combat with this Knight, and if he
get the victory, you must swear to do the commandment of a Lady here
within, or else be committed to a miserable prison. If he chance to be
vanquished, it is nothing in respect, for you must be commanded to another
gate, and there enter combat with two other, whom if your fortune likewise be
so good as to overcome: you have then to deal with three other, they being
right valiant and tried men at arms, and all these you must fight against
under the first condition: but if you bear away the honor in each of these
attempts, right shall be done in what-soeuer you demand. On these conditions,
replied Amadis, I am well content to enter, and the rather because I would see
the man, who took the Damsel from me this night past. So soon as he was
entered, the first Knight and he encountered together: but Amadis ouer-threw his
enemy so furiouslye, as his right arm was broken in the fall, which made him
glad to yield for safety of his life. At the second gate he found the other
two ready tarrying for him, thretning him with prison, if he did not well
defend him self: I must buy my liberty, quoth Amadis, with your dearest
blood, keep it therefore from me so well as you can. Then covering themselves
with their sheeldes, he met one of them so directlye, that he fell to the
ground and his horse upon him, very sore shaken and bruised with his fall, then
coming to the other with his sword drawn, he smote the helmet quite beside
his head, when being loathe to proceed any further with him, he said. Now
trust me Knight, it is the greatest folly in the world to fight, thy head
being bare. Care not you for that, answered the Knight, I will keep it as
safe as you shall do yours. And I will try your cunning, quoth Amadis: then
striking a full blow at him, which the Knight shifting his body aside to
escape, lost his stirrops and fell beside his horse, when Amadis quickly
stepping to him, got hold of him by the neck, saying. See Knight how well thou
defendest thy head, art thou not well worthy to loose it for thy words? When
the Knight saw what danger he was in, he fell on his knee, and thus spoke to
the Prince. Ah woorthye Sir, for Gods sake mercy, and seeing you have so well
advised me, never will I hereafter be so rash in folly, therefore I yield my
self to your mercy.

Amadis being thus pacified, took a fresh Lance and mounted on horsse-backe
again, riding now to the last gate, where he espied Ladies and Gentle-women on
the walls, who said to each other: If he pass the bridge in despite of our
three gardants, he shall perform a most rare deed of chivalry? While thus
they communed, the three Knights came forth to assail Amadis, the first of
them using these words. Knight yield thy self, or swear to do the
commandment of this Lady. These are but words, answered Amadis, from which
I can defend my self well enough: I cannot put on the mind to yield my self or
accomplish the Ladies will thou speak off, because I know not what she is.
Heer-upon a fierce combat began between the prince and the^ three, who showing
themselves to be right hardye Knights, and Amadis full loathe to receive the
foil, made a long doubtful judgment of victory: till at length by many
wounds and great loss of blood, the Knights were able to hold out no longer,
flying into the Castle for safety of them selves, yet one of them fell down
by the way, whom Amadis swear should dye if he yielded not presently. Alas my
Lord, quoth he, with all my heart I submit my self, and so ought all other to
do that combat against you, considering your happy fortune since you came to
this Castle. With these words he delivered his sword to the Prince, who
gave it him again, and followed the other twain into the Palace, where he
met diverse Ladies and Damoselles, when the choice of them all in beauty thus
spoke to him. Stay a while Sir Knight if you please, for already you have
done so much, as you shall obtain what you demand. Lady, quoth Amadis,
command the^ your champions to yield themselves vanquished. And what shall
you be the better for that? said she. When I accepted the conditions of
entrance here, answered Amadis, it was said, that I must either be killed, or
vanquishe him that I combatted withal: otherwise I have not the right was
promised. You mis-understood it, replied the Lady, for it was told ye, that if
perforce you entered thus far, you should have reason in what you demanded: say
now therefore what is your pleasure? I demand a Damsel, quoth he, which a
Knight took from me this last night past, while I slept by the rivers side not
far hence, and hither he brought her against her will. I pray ye Sir, said
the Lady, to sit down and rest ye: in mean while I will send for the Knight
who shall answer ye. Then sat they down together, and she proceeded on this
manner. I entreat ye Sir to resolus me, if you know a Knight that is named
Amadis? Why ask ye Lady? quoth he. Because, replied she, all the guarde you
found in this Castle was appointed for him, and assure your self if he entered
here, he never should depart hence again, if first he denied not a promise
that he made. What was it? answered Amadis. I will tell ye Sir, said she, on
this condition, that with your vtter-most endeavor you will cause him to
acquit, it either by Arms or otherwise, by reason he has not done it
justly. In sooth Madame, quoth he, if Amadis has promised any thing wherein he
is to be touched, I will (if I can) cause him to discharge it. She who
understood not to what end he thus spoke, answered as follows. I heartily
thank ye Sir, wherefore understand, that Amadis promised Angriote d' Estrauaus,
how he would procure his Ladies liking to him, and yet she never could love him
in all her life: this is a matter against all right, seeing forced affection is
no love, but dolor and misery, then according to your promise, you must
labor to cause Amadis revoke this unreasonable offer. Now trust me Madame,
replied the Prince, you say right well, and seeing you may not justly be
denied, assure your self I will endeavor to make him acquit you. These
words procured many thanks from her, she not comprehending his meaning
heerin: for he hoped to accomplish his promise both to Angriote and her,
without derogation either to one or other, as you heer-after shall understand.
But Madame, said he, are you she whom Angriote loves so? Yea truly, quoth
she. I know him very well, answered Amadis, that he is one of the best Knights
in the world, and me thinks there is no Lady or Gentlewoman so rich or
fair, but might think her self happy and fortunate to have such a Knight as
he. Nevertheless, what I say, is not to exempt my self from the promise I
made ye, for I will perform it if I can, because he is a much better Knight
then Amadis, albeit he made him that gentle offer.

CHAP. XXVIII. How Amadis combatted with the Knight, that did steal the
Damsel from him when he slept, and vanquished him.
WHile thus they were devising together, there entered an other Knight of large
proportion and strong, all armed except with his helmet and gauntlets, who thus
spoke to Amadis. It is told me Sir Knight, that you demand a Damsel which I
brought hither yester night, and how I did it against her will: but assure your
self, she would more willingly go with me then stay with you, therefore you
may be ashamed thus to quarrel, nor have I any reason to deliver her again to
you. I would feign see her, answered Amadis. It must be then, said the Knight,
whether I will or no: but if you will maintain yt I have wronged her, and she
ought not to be mine, I presently will approve the contrary on your person by
combat. Thou can not please me better, quoth Amadis, and in this cause will
I stand not only against thee, but resolutely against all other: that by right
she appertains not to thee, if willingly she gave not her consent. Let us see
then, said ye Knight, which of us shall have her. This man of whom we speak,
was Uncle german to Angriotes Lady, named (...) loouing and honoring him
abooue all her other (...): for he was the best Knight of his race, wise and
discreet, so that she was altogether governed by his counsel. A goodly horse
being brought forth for him, he laced on his helmet, and stood provided to
enter the combat: which Gro^^e^sa the Lady perceiving, she came to her Uncle
with these words. Certes my Lord, it were better you should forbear this
difference, because I would be sorry any harm should come to either of you, in
respect you Uncle are the only man of the world whom I am most bound to love:
and this Knight I have greatest hope in, for he has promised so to deal with
Amadis, as he shall acquit the offer made to Angriote. What Niece? answered
Gasinan, think you that he or any his like, can dissuade the most gentle
Knight on the earth from accomplishing his promise? I know not, quoth she,
what you imagine of him, but I repute him one of the best in the world:
otherwise he could not have entered here by strength of Arms as he did. Say
you so? replied Gasinan, you praise him overmuch, for passing the defended
gates, when men of such mean account had them in charge. I say not this, but
that he may be a gentle Knight, yet hope I to take him forth a new lesson, and
a better then he if he were here: in witness of my words, your self shall
presently be judge, seeing him vanquished, and my self peaceably possessed of
the Damsel we quarrel for. Herewith the Lady left them, and they giving the
spurs to their horses, brake their Lances gallantly in the encounter, and
with such fury met their bodies, that Gasinan was dismounted, having a shrewd
fall against the ground: yet he arose quickly, and drawing his Sword, stood by
a Marble pillar in the midst of the court, thinking Amadis could there little
endomage him being on horsseback, and he on foot. When Amadis saw how his
enemy dallyed with him, he wexed very angry, and striking fiercely at him, by
mishap his Sword lighted short on the pillar, and so was broken in three
pieces: now grew he into greater choler, and seeing in what danger he was,
unprovided of a weapon to defend himself withal, he leaped from his horse so
quickly as he could, when Gasinan thus spoke to him. Knight, thou seeste thy
death at hand, if thou grant not the Damsel to be mine. Nor will I yield
thereto, said Amadis, unless her self do first consent. Thou shall see,
quoth Gasinan, how dear this foolish humor will cost thee. With these words
he delivered him many sharp strokes, but Amadis awarded them very cunningly,
so that the most of the^ were bestowed in vain, rather wearying his enemy,
then doing him any harm. And so long endured the combat, as the beholders
were not a little amazed thereat, wundring that Gasinan got not the victory
all the while, considering what advantage he had of the Prince: but Amadis
concluded with himself (being thus extremely handled) to hazard rather a
speedy conquest, then a lingering shame, and therefore ran violently upon
Gasinan, getting fast hold about his body so suddenly, as he had scant leisure
to lift his arms for resistance, but was constrained to let fall his Sword and
struggle with Amadis, who griped him terribly, so strove they to overthrow each
other. But Amadis threw him with such might against the Marble pillar, that he
was not able to stir hand or foot, and afterward taking up Gasinans sword,
brake the buckles of his helmet, then catching him by the head, he said.
Knight, thou have offered me great wrong since my Sword brake, but now shall I
be revenged on thee: then made he a proffer to smite off his head, which
Grouenesa seeing, cried: Ah gentle Knight, have pity on him and me together.
With abundance of tears trickling down her cheeks, she came and fell at the
feet of Amadis, showing the affection of her request, and her inward grief to
behold her Unckles death: all which Amadis well noting, feigned himself more
willing to kill him then before, saying. If your suit were reasonable, I would
consent thereto: but he has so wronged me and without occasion, as I cannot be
satisfied but with the loss of his head. Alas my Lord, quoth she, for Gods
sake demand some other satisfaction, for I will do whatsoever you please, to
redeem his life. Lady, answered Amadis, there be but two things which may save
his life: first the deliverance of the Damsel again to me: secondly, that
you swear to me as a loyal Lady, to meet me at the first open Court held by
King Lisuart, and there to grant a boon I shall desire of you. Gasinan
beholding the danger of his life, said to her: Fair Niece, suffer me not
through your default to dye, but take compassion on me, and promise the Knight
faithfully what he shall demand: which she presently did, wherefore Amadis
permitted him to arise, and said to the Lady. I assure ye Madame, ye suit I
must obtain of you, gain-sayeth nothing of my promise concerning Amadis: for I
will accomplish it to my uttermost, see then no default be made on your
behalf. In sooth my Lord, quoth she, I will perform my duty effectually,
knowing well, such men ought (...) be honored for virtue, in whom so singular
prowess is apparent: much less then need any doubt be made, of any thing
prejudicial to my unstained report. Be bold thereof, said Amadis: then was the
Damsel sent for, and she being come, Amadis demanded if she would accompany
him any further? Worthy Sir, answered the Damsel, I will do what you please
to command me, in respect I have been so painful to you, as while I live I
am yours in all obedience. But were it to your liking, considering the
affection Gasinan bears me, as he would rather hazard ye co^bat, then deliver
me, albeit by treachery he carried me away: I gladly could afford to stay with
him. By heaven fair Damsel, replied Gasinan, most true and sincere is my
affection toward you, and as I request ye not to forsake me, so do I desire
your good opinion. You have chosen (Damsel) one of the best Knights in the
world, said Amadis and seeing you like each other so well, with all my heart I
leave ye together. They both thanked him very humbly, entreating he would rest
him self there certain days: but he would return to his brother Galaor,
whom he left under the tree by the dead Knight, by means whereof he excused
his departure, and mounting on horsse-back, commanded Gandalin to carry the
broken pieces of his sword with him. By hap Gasinan ouer-heard him, wherefore
he presented him with his sword, which he accepted, and a Lance that
Grouenesa gave him: then leaving the Castle, he took the way again toward the
tree, where he hoped to find Galaor and Balays.

CHAP. XXIX. How Balays behaved him self in his enterprise, pursuing the
Knight that made Galaor loose his horse.
BAlays of Carsanta offended, as you have heard, with the Knights injurious
pranckes to Galaors horse, followed him so fast as possible he could: but the
other had gotten so far before, as Balays heard no tidings of him,
neuer-thelesse he rode on till about midnight, when he heard a voice a long by
a Rivers side. And shaping his course thither, he found there five thieves well
armed with Corselettes and hatchets, who villainously would force a Damsel:
one of them dragging her by the hair of the head in a strait way on the
mountain, and the other beating her forward with great staves. Balays seeing
them vilely abuse her, entered among them saying: Traiterous murdererers, dare
you so boldly lay hold on a Damsel? let her alone, else shall you dye
according to your deserts. Then running fiercely at one of them, his Lance
passed quite through his body, so that he fell down dead without any more
moving. Wher-upon the other four would revenge their companyons death, and
altogether environed Balays with such sharp assaults, as one of them smote
down his horse under him: yet B^lays dismayed nothing thereat, but being
couragiouslye resolved, quickly recovered footing, and drawing his sword,
laid so fiercely about him, that another of them fell down head-lesse at his
feet. In brief, two more of them accompanied their fellows in like fortune,
when the last seeing he could not prevent like doom, fell on his knees before
Balays, saying. Good my Lord have compassion on me, for if I dye in this wicked
life I have so long time used, undoubtedly both body and soul will perrishe
together. Since thou do, answered Balays, so willingly acknowledge thy
fault, thy life I give thee, to the end thy repentance hereafter may make
amends for all: and faithfullye he kept promise with Balays, for soon after
he became a religious Hermit, spending the rest of his days in great devotion.

But now returns Balays to the Damsel, who being not a little glad she was
so happily delivered, gave him thanks for the succor she found in such
necessity, and he requesting to know how she happened into this danger, she
thus begun. Having occasion (Sir) to travail in these parts, in the narrow
way on the mountain they stayed me, it being the common place for their
theeuish assaults: and after they had slain my servants, they brought me into
this place, all of them swearing to force me one after another, but God and you
have graciouslye delivered me. Her modest behavior in speech and comely
beauty, made Balays to wexe somewhat enamoured, which made him thus to
interrupt her. In sooth fair Damsel, I perceive they have dealt with ye
ungently, for they were very loathe to part with ye: but seeing fortune has
allowed such a convenient meeting, even where we may lay a foundation of love,
let me request this favorable kindenes, that we may not loose so good an
opportunity. I know not Sir, quoth she, how you are minded, but had they
compelled me to their lascivious desires, both God and the world might hold
me excused: contrari-wise, if I should willingly grant you such an
dishonorable request, what excuse might the^ serve either you or me? Hitherto
you have shown your self a well disposed Knight, let me entreat ye to
accompany chivalry, with continence and virtue, as by duty you are bound.
When Balays heard her answer so soberlye, he repented that he had offered her
such indecent words, saying. With reason (fair virgin) you have fully
satisfied me, yet pardon me for attempting so bad a suit: in respect it is no
less seemly for Knights to move Ladies with love, then for them modestly to
deny as you have done. And albeit at the first we imagine it a great conquest,
to obtain of them what we most desire: yet when wiselye and discreetly they
resist our inordinate appetites, keeping the thing (without which) they are
worthy no praise: they be even of our selves more reverenced and commended.
This is the cause, quoth she, why I more esteem your succor to mine honor
then my life, because the difference between them is far incomparable. Well,
said Balays, what will you now I shall do for you? Let us leave these dead
carcasses, replied the Damsel, and go where we may stay till day light. I
like your council, answered Balays, if I had another horse, but being now
destitute, I know not what to do. We will ride on my horse, said the the
Damsel, till we find other remedy: so he mounting up before the Damsel,
they rode till they came to a pleasant meddow, where they rested themselves
till Sun rising, and then they went to horsse-back again. Now because Balays
intended to seek the Knight, who caused Galaors horse to escape away from
him, he asked the Damsel what should become of her. My Lord, quoth she, not
far hence is a house, whether when you have brought me, you may depart to
what place you please.

As thus they rode communing together, he saw a Knight come toward him,
carrying his leg on his horses neck, but drawing nearer, he put foot in
stirrope, couching his Lance against Balays, and running at him, threw him
and the Damsel both from the horse, after-ward he used these speeches. In
sooth Lady, I am sorye for your fall, but to amend the wrong I have done ye, I
will bring ye-where you shall be contented, because he that has the charge of
you, is unworthy to have so fair a creature in his custodye. Ere this had
Balays recovered him self, and knowing him to be the Knight he sought for, he
drew his sword, saying. By thee villayne have I lost my horse, and my
companyon thou have in like sort abused, now finding me unprovided, thou
take delight in offering me wrong: but both for him and my felfe will I be
revenged on thee, else let me be thought unworthy of my order. What? quoth the
Knight, art thou one of them that mocked me as I rid in the dark? I hope now I
have put the mockery on thee. Heer-upon they presentlye fell to the combat,
and many sharp blows were given on either side, till Balays at length
fastening hold on his enemy, got him under foot, when renting the Helmet from
his head, he took his life as ransom for his villainye: and breaking his
sword in pieces, laid them by him, then mounting on his horse, and the
Damsel on her own, they took their way toward the tree where he left
Galaor. But because their stomachs well served them to meat, they alighted at
a little Lodge, where dwelt two women of austere and holy life, who bestowed
on them such cheer as they had: the Damsel acquainting them with all her
mishap, and how Balays delivered her from the thieves, at what time they
intended to dishonor her, having slain her servants, and she destitute of
help, whereof the holy women were very glad, by reason those thieves did much
harm in that countey. After they had refreshed themselves, Balays and the
Damsel took their leave, and coming to the tree, met Amadis there newly
returned from his enterprise: wherefore they concluded no more to sunder
themselves, until they arrived at King Lisuartes Court. By this time the
night drew on apace, wher-upon the Damsel earnestly entreated them, to lodge
that night at her Fathers which was not far off: they liking well of her
freendly offer, went with her, being there entertained and used very
honorably. Early in the morning arming themselves, they thanked their gentle
host and his daughter, framing their course toward Windsore, but by the way
you must note, how Balays (according to his promise) presented the horse to
Galaor which he wun from the Knight, and he refused it because he had another,
so that Balays saved his oath thereby.

CHAP. XXX. How King Lisuart held open Court most royally, and of that which
happened in the mean time.
I Have heretofore declared, the joy and content of the good King Lisuart, for
the news brought by the Dwarffe, concerning the health of Amadis and Galaor:
but the more to show his princely mind, he concluded at their coming to keep
a most royal and magnificent Court, as all his ancestors in great Brittayne
never did the like. Which Oliuas perceiving, who came (as you have heard) to
make his complaint on the wrong done him by the Duke of Bristoya, in putting to
death traitorously his Cousin german: fell on his knee again before the King,
desiring he might have justice in the cause. When the King had considered
thereon with them of his blood, as also diverse other Knights and ancient
Gentlemen: he decreed that within one month (all excuses set apart) the Duke
should come in person to answer Oliuas, and if with two Knights more beside
himself he would justify his cause, Oliuas should likewise prepare two other
Knights. Warning hereof was presently sent to the Duke, and open Proclamation
made the same day: that all Gentlemen following Arms, should be ready at the
City of London, on the day of our Lady following in September. Like summons
was sent abroad by the Queen, to advertise the Ladies and Gentlewomen of the
country, by which means great resort came to the Court, where all kind of
pastimes and sports were invented: without respect of fortunes malice any way,
who commonly in great assembly of states, when least they think of her
variable changings, often tells them, that men purpose, but she will dispose.
All this royal company being in joy and pleasure, a Damsel strangely attired
entered the Palace, and a Gentleman that bare her company, demanding where the
King was: whereof being resolved by his Majesty himself, the Damsel thus
spoke. In sooth (my Lord) well do you seem a King by your port and
countenance, yet may it be doubted what your heart is. Damsel, quoth the
King, you must judge of what you see, and hereafter know the rest when you
have occasion to prove. Me thinks my Lord, answered the Damsel, you speak
according to the magnanimity of your mind, and even as I my self do desire:
remember therefore what you have spoken before so many great persons, for
seeing you make me such a liberal offer, I hope one day to try the matter I
doubted. Nevertheless, I will defer it till the feast of September, because
I hear you will then keep Court at London, where must be assembled many
valiant men, who shall know by the promise you have made me, how worthy you
are to govern such a noble Realm, and how highly Chivalry is honored by you.
Damsel, said the King, so much as effects may better my words, so much the
more will it glad me, to see good store of hardy Knights there present. My
Lord, quoth she, if effects answer your words, I shall have great reason to
be contented. So took she leave of him, returning the same way she came,
where-at every one was much abashed, and displeased with the Kings rash
promise, not knowing any reason for it: and now they began to misdoubt, that
the enterprise of this woman would bring the Kings person into some danger. But
his heart was so addicted to magnanimity, as (whatsoever happened) he would
not be reproved with cowardice: and so dearly did his subjects love him, that
they rather desired a thousand deaths, then to see him suffer any mishap or
injury. Whereupon the Lords and Barons persuaded him, (greatly fearing some
threatened inconvenience) to alter the promise he had so lightly made: showing
it was not beseeming his Majesty, to deal with affairs of Knights and
Gentlemen, he being placed in authority over them.

While they stood on these terms, there entered three Knights, two of them
being very well armed, and the third having on no Armor at all, for he was a
man of ancient years, as seemed by his white head: yet in his countenance
appeared a more cheerful couller, then commonly has been noted in a man of
his age, who likewise was of tall and comely stature. This Knight carried in his
arms a very costly Cofer, and demanding for the King, the Gentlemen showed
where he sat, making him way to his Majesty, before whom he fell on his
knees, thus speaking. God bless so good a Prince as is King Lisuart, for
within these few days he has made the most woorthye promise, that ever King
did, if he intend to keep it. Believe me Knight, answered the King, I never
promised ought, but it was in my power, and therefore the easier to be
performed: but I would feign know your meaning herein. I understand Sir,
quoth the Knight, that you intend to maintain chivalry in the very highest
honor, a matter wherein (now adays) few Princes delight, therefore are you to
be commended above all other. Herein you were told truth, said the King,
and you may be well assured, that I will do my uttermost to advance the
cause of virtue, while I live. Long may you continue in this mind, replied the
Knight, and because I have likewise heard, how you have summoned the Princes
and Lords of your Country, to be ready at your Court the next feast of
September: I have brought you here a thing with me, which such a King as you
are ought most royally to receive. Then opening the Cofer, he took forth a
Crown of gold, so sumptuously embelished with Oriental Pearls and precious
Stones, as never was seen a more costlyer Jewel: every one being of the
mind, that it was to impale the head of some especial mighty Lord.

When the King had long and earnestly beheld it, he was very desirous to have
it at what price soever, which the Knight perceiving, said. This Crown my
Lord is of such workmanship, as no Ieweller in the world can make the like,
and beside the invaluable riches thereof, it has a virtue highly to be
esteemed: for the King that keeps it in his power, shall increase in all
felicity and honor. So will it happen to the King who must enjoy it while he
lives, and long time have I kept it, no King but you that ever saw it: but if
you like it so well, I will make ye a present thereof, provided, you help to
save my head, which I am in some danger to loose. All this while was the
Queen in place, earnestly wishing that the King her husband might have it,
where-upon she said to the King. Me thinks (my Lord) it would full well become
your Majesty, if you may have it at so easy a rate as he demands. Madame
quoth the Knight, I have a better thing for you if you please to buy it, it is
this mantle, the richest and fairest that ever was seen: for beside the
precious stones wherewith it is beautified, it is imbroydred with all sorts of
beasts and birds, which nature has given life to. On my faith, answered the
Queen, it is a most rare and curious piece of work, not wrought (as I
think) by humane capacity. You say true, Madame, replied the Knight, for the
like hereof is not to be found, yet may not the riches compare with the
property and great virtue of this mantle, which is such, as it rather
belongs to married Ladies then any other: because she that wears it, shall
never be offended with her husband. A virtue of chief regard, answered the
Queen, if it have any such indeed? I have told ye true Madame, quoth the
Knight, if you will buy it, you may prove. Now grew she meruaylous desirous of
it, what-soeuer price should be paid for it, especially to conserve peace and
love between the King and her, wherefore she said to the Knight: Say Sir, how
do you estimate this Mantle and the Crown? My Lord, quoth he, and you good
Madame, I beseech you to understand my fortune. I am but lately escaped the
hands of him, who long time kept me prisoner on a strange condition, which is
no little cause of grief to me, for I am out of all hope to find remedy
while I live: and because I know not well the valewe of these Iewelles, I will
leave them in your custodye, until the day you hold open Court at London,
where you shall deliver them again to me, or give so much for them as I then
demand. In mean while, you may make trial of them if you please, for having
experimented what I have said, you may the more willingly pay well for them.
Now trust me, said the King, seeing you repose such confidence in me, assure
your self to have what-soeuer you request, or else they shall be restored
again. It suffiseth, quoth the Knight, then turning to the Lords, he thus
proceeded. Worthy Lords, you have all heard what the King has promised me,
that he will restore the Mantle and ye Crown, which I leave in your presence, or
give me what-soeuer I shall demand. So much his Majesty has said, replied
the Lords, and we are witnesses thereof. Adieu then, answered the ancient
Knight, for perfocre I must return to the most cruel prison, that ever poor
Knight was enclosed in. But here you must note, how during the time of this
conference, the two armed Knights which conducted the old man, was still in
presence, the one of them having the beuer of his Helmet open, and seemed a
young man, the other held down his head as loathe to be known, being of so
tall and mighty stature, as no Knight in the Kings Court might be equalled
with him. So departed they again all three together, leaving the Mantle and
the Crown in the Kings custodye.

CHAP. XXXI. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arrived at the Court of King
Lisuart, and what happened to them afterward.
AMadis, Galaor and Balays, being all happily met together, rode on without
any occasion to trouble them, until they came to the Court of King Lisuart,
where they were welcomed with exceeding joy, because Galaor was never there
before, nor known but by renown of his famous chivalry. Beside, each one
rejoiced to see Amadis, who by ye false report of Arcalaus was thought to be
dead: and graciously did the King entertain them all, conducting them to a
chamber where they were unarmed, blaming the villainous invention of Arcalaus.
and the Damsel that caused their combat together, practicing the death of
two so noble Princes, who were but even now in the prime and flower of their
youth. Right soon did the King advertise the Queen of their arrival, when
accompanied with Agraies, Galuanes and King Arban, he went with them among the
Ladies: but Amadis casting his eye on Oriana, and she on him, I leave their
joyful passions to your judgment, remembering that when long absent lovers
meet, looks, sighs and tears are familiarly entercoursed, being the only
means to content each others heart. Yet Amadis thought it not best to stand still
thus musing, least every eye should grow cunning in coniecturing the cause:
which to avoid, he fell on his knee before the Queen, saying. Madame,
according to your charge at my departure from the Court, I have brought this
Knight, whom I present as only yours. I thank ye Sir Amadis, quoth the Queen,
both he and you are welcome to our presence. In good faith Madame, said the
King, you do me wrong if you take them both: Amadis already is yours, me
thinks you should be content with him, and leave Lord Galaor for me. You ask
no small matter, answered the Queen, but if he be so pleased, I am not against
it, albeit such a present was never given in great Britain:
not-with-standing, seeing you are the best King that ever reigned here, so good
a Knight is well bestowed on you. But what say you Lord Galaor? the King is
desirous to have you, will ye then be his? Madame, quoth Galaor, me thinks
that any thing so great a Prince demands, should be granted if it were
possible: here am I to obey you in every respect, so please my Lord and
brother to like thereof, because he has greatest authority over me. It
contents me very well, said the Queen, that you should do as your brother
commands, for through him shall I have title in you, by reason he is mine. I
am yours indeed Madame, answered Amadis, and brother you must be my fellow
servant to the Queen. With all my heart, replied Galaor, I am content, and
seeing you have given me to her service, for ever I shall remain at her
disposition. I thank you Sir, quoth the Queen, now may I boldelye give you to
the King, for I see he would be glad of so good a friend: then stepping to the
King, she said. My Lord, you are desirous of this Knight, I give him you, on
this condition, that you love and entreat him according to his deserts, which
may not be valued at any mean rate. Believe me Madame, answered the King, I
take this gift most kindly at your hand, assuring you, he shall soon perceive
how I love and esteem him: nor can I be so affectionate to him, as he has
noble virtues whereby to induce me, which none can valewe or compare withal.
But if Amadis durst have spoken, he gladly would have maintained the contrary,
for he persuaded him self, that he loved his Oriana beyond his brothers
deserte, or any other what-soeuer. So remained Galaor in the Kings service,
from which he could not be separated, for any quarrel concerning Amadis, as we
shall have occasion to declare hereafter.

All this while Oriana, Mabila, and Oliuia, had withdrawn themselves from the
other Ladies, likewise Agraies and Amadis were talking together, when Galaor
was thus graciously entertained by the King and Queen: wherefore Mabila called
her brother, saying. I pray ye cause the Knight to come hither that stands
with you conferring, because we are desirous to see him. Agraies returned where
he left Amadis, who dissembled as if he thought not on the Ladies, till the
Prince thus spoke: My Lord, these Gentlewomen would feign speak with you, and
desire you to come a little more near them: which he presently did. But Mabila
being wise and discreet, not ignorant what medicines should be applied to
passionate minds: after they all three had saluted them, Mabila took Amadis
by the hand, desiring him to sit between Oriana and her, leaving Agraies to
court his Oliuia: they being set, she merrily thus began. Although I am now
among those four friends, whom I have most cause to love and regard: yet have
I such present bus^nes elsewhere, as I must of necessity leave you awhile.
Thus devised she to bring the loouers together, and by a pretty wyle gave them
opportunity, to content their thoughts with secret communication. Now
begins Amadis to confer with his Lady, and thinking to declare the great
affection, which under good hope gave him life and essence: extreme love took
from him the facility of speech, yet his eyes not unmindful of their office,
supplied the defect of the tongue, delivering testimony to their divine object,
how far the sad and languishing heart was transported by ease and pleasure.
Which Oriana perceiving, she secretly took his hand under her mantle, and
wringing him by the fingers sighing thus spoke. My Lord and friend, what dolor
and grief did the traitor procure in me, who brought hither tidings of your
death? never was poor maiden in greater peril, and not without cause: for
never did woman sustain such a loss, as I should have done in loosing you.
And as I am better loved then any other, so has my fortune graciously favored
me, that it should be by him who is of higher desert then any other. Heerewith
Amadis cast down his looks, as bashful to hear himself so praised, by her
to whom all commendation was due: and feeling his spirits altered, strove to
make answer, but the words dyed in his mouth, which caused Oriana thus to
proceed. How can it be otherwise my Lord, but I must needs love you above all
other, when they that never saw you, do highly love, honor and esteem you?
and I being she whom you affect most dearly, have I not great reason to love
you better then my self? On my faith Madame, answered Amadis, your sweet and
gentle words, are sufficient to make me dye a thousand deaths, and as many
times to revive me again: but how? I pray you at this time only to excuse my
extremity with pity, enduring wursse then death by loving you too vehemently:
for if I had dyed as Arcalaus reported, even then had begun my rest and quiet,
if I had not known you before. And albeit the hour of your acquaintance is my
entire felicity, yet am I assaulted with such violent passions, as my heart
would altogether consume in grief, without the pleasure it receives in doing
you service, and the good it sustaineth by your remembrance of me. But
necessity constrains me, to crave the mercy as yet undeserved, by such
intreatance as no desert may value, only to increase my ability in serving
you, which if you grant me not, a sudden and cruel death will take hold on
me. These words were accompanied with such abundance of tears, as was no
small grief to her to behold. Alas my Lord, quoth she, forbear these often
repetitions of your death, the thought thereof is insupportable to me, for
should you dye, I were unable to live one hour after: considering all the
pleasure I have in this world, is in the joy of your health and welfare. Nor
can I but be assured of your words, by reason mine own case is sufficient
therein, being copartner with you in every torment: but if yours seem more
violent, this is the reason, my will being equal with yours, wants the
strength you have in suffering, and cannot effect the desire of our hearts,
which urges love and grief more in you then me, albeit my share is not one
jot the less. But this I promise you on my faith, if fortune or our own
endeavor, can compass no mean to yield us content, my self will search some
way whatsoever happen, be it hate of father, mother, kindred, and friends: for
we may not thus procrastinate our joy, and groan under the weighty burden of
desire, the flame whereof climeth so high, as the martyrdom of our hearts may
easily be discovered. No doubt these words were pleasing to Amadis, and gave
such cheerful life to his hope, that he was ravished with inward conceit
thereof: when she seeing him mute, trod upon his foot, saying. Discomfort not
your self my Lord, for I will not fail what I have promised, nor shall you
depart till you perceive it: and shortly will the King hold open Court, when
both he and the Queen must depend on your assistance, knowing well that your
presence shall honor the company.

As they would have continued in longer talk, the Queen called Amadis,
causing him to sit down by Galaor, for the King was gone to his chamber. Then
began the Ladies to censure on the brethren, but they resembled each other so
like, as little difference could be discerned between them: every one being of
the opinion, that these twain were the most perfect among all Knights, both in
beauty, noblenes, bounty, and good grace: but Galaor was somewhat whiter in
complexion, and Amadis of bigger bone, his locks more crispe and fair, and
having a little more red in his face then Galaor had. Soon after, the Queen
willed Galaor to go see her daughter and the other Ladies, when he regarding
the excellent beauty of Oriana, imagined such an other was not to be found in
the world, and by her often sighing with alteration of couller, he suspected
her to be the only cause, that his brother liked so well to stay in King
Lisuarts Court. Right courteously was he welcomed among the Ladies, and diverse
familiar speeeches passed between them: till the King being set to meat, sent
for Amadis and Galaor to bear him company, as also Agraies and his Uncle
Galuanes.

CHAP. XXXII. How King Lisuart departed from Windesore to the good City of
London, there to hold open and royal Court.
IN the beginning of this book it has been declared, how the divine bounty
calling Lisuart to the Realm of great Brittayne, soon after, of a
disinherited Prince, made him the peaceable King of such a Monarchy, by the
death of his elder brother Falangris, who dyed without any heir of his body
begotten. Likewise how he was reputed such a great Lord through the world, as
many Knights came from strange Countries to serve him, not thinking themselves
happy, except they might be named Knights of his Court. But within a while
after, whether this fortunat King forgot ye author of his good, or else it
happened by divine permission: this happy Realm fell into persecution, and
the illustrious state of King Lisuart was troubled and obscured, that all men
might know: how he only is Lord and King of all living creatures, who exalts
and abaseth when him pleases, according as you shall here understand. For
King Lisuart having concluded, to hold the most royal and stately Court, that
ever King did in the Realm of great Brittayne, commanded that on the fifth day
following, all the Lords of his Kingdom should appear personally at London,
there to determine on matters of chivalry, which he intended to maintain with
all honor might be devised. But in the selfsame place, where he thought the
greater part of the world should yield him obeysaunce, began the first
mutabilities of Fortune, bringing his state and person into danger of utter
ruin, according as you shall understand at large.

King Lisuart departing with all his train from Windsore, to keep his Court
at the famous City of London, it was wonderful to behold the Lords,
Ladies, and Gentlewomen that gave their attendaunce, especially so many young
Gentlemen being there present: some to regard the magnificence of the Court,
other to do service to their lovely mistresses, and nothing now generally
minded but pastime and pleasure. The King likewise (for greater majesty of his
Court) ordained that none of this assemblye should lodge in the City, but to
erect their Pauillions in the feeldes and meddowes, along the bancks that
hemmed in the fair River of Themes, least the extream^ heat might be hurtful
to them: all which being done according to appointment, the feeldes seemed as
a most royal Camp, or as if the greater part of the world were there
assembled. But because the King arrived there two or three days before the
feast, he went to his palace, accompanied only with his Queen, Amadis,
Galaor, Agraies, Don Galuanes, and certain other his most favored: the rest
kept themselves in their Tents, according as the Herbingers had in quarters
limited them. With sundry sorts of pastimes was the King entertained, which
continued till Fortune (envying his felicity) changed them into grief and
tears: by the means of a Lord, no subject to ye King, but his nearer
neighbor then friend, named Barsinan, a man opulent in riches, and endued with
few virtues, as may be gathered by the matter ensuing.

This Barsinan was Lord of a country, called Sansuegua, and very familiar with
Arcalaus the enchaunter, who not long before came to him, and co^ferred with
him in this manner. My Lord, quoth he, the great desire I have to do you
service, has made me invent the mean (if you like thereof) to deliver in short
time the Realm of great Brittayne quietlye into your hands, without much
hazarding your person, or any great expense. When Barsinan, (who was a very
ambitious man) heard the words of Arcalaus, who promised to make him King if
he would: he thus replied. In good faith my dear friend Arcalaus, if thou
can perform the thing thou vauntest of, no fear shall hinder me to hazard
my person, much less will I reckon of expense, if I see any likelihood in the
compassing. It is a thing, said Arcalaus, very easy to be done, and
presently shall you understand by what means: provided that you swear to me,
after you are seated in the regiment, to make me super-intendent and chief
master of your household. That will I, answered Barsinan, with any thing else
thou shall desire. Mark then the platfourme, quoth Arcalaus. You know how King
Lisuart has openly published, this feast of September to hold open Court,
whether you must go well accompanied with Knights, then shall I order the
matter in such sort, that I will carry away the King prisoner, no man alive
being able to succor him: in like manner will I carry thence his daughter,
whom you shall take to wife, and afterward will I send ye the Kings head. Thus
in respect the Princess is right heir to the crown, and you enjoying her in
marriage, being well accompanied with Knights as I told ye: easily may you
make seazure on the Realm, nor shall you find any to speak against it. In
sooth, answered Barsinan, if such an enterprise might sort to effect, I would
make thee more rich and mighty then ever were any of thy lineage, as also the
chief commander in my house. It suffiseth said Arcalaus, your self shall
soon perceive, that sildome I enterprise any thing, but it comes to pass:
then fail not to be present in the assembly at London. So came the traitor
Barsinan to king Lisuart, feigning his intent to do him honor, wherefore the
King sent many of his Knights, entertaining him as a most noble friend,
appointing his lodging and all things else necessary for him, and being with
the King in his Palace, he entered into these speeches. My Lord, understanding
what royal magnificence you mean to keep in your Court, as also the good
Knights and brave men were here to be seen, this day I intended to honor you
with my person: not as your vassaile or subject, holding my Countreye of God and
by the sword, but as your good neighbor, and friend if you please. Trust me,
quoth the King, you do me very great pleasure and honor, and I thank you for
this gentle pains, that you would be seen in so good company: assuring you
Lord Barsinan and my friend, this courtesy shall be remembered in what I may,
for I make very especial account of you. Your Majesty deals very kindly
with me, replied Barsinan, and I protest on my faith, to be ready in
councelling your affairs for the best, according as I have a long time
desired. See how the traitor lied in every word, but the good King
misdoubting nothing, requited his offer with many thanks, and to do him the
greater honor, appointed his lodging in his own Palace, him self and his
Queen going forth of the City with their Tents and pauillions, imagining
he could not do too much for the traitor. And first he acquainted him with
his whole enterprise, and wherefore he caused this great assembly, declaring the
means and Sirnames of the best commended Knights, their hautie prowess and
resolutions, among whom he forgot not Amadis and Galaor, whose hardines was
impossible to be equalled, they two being accomplished with all the virtues
required in chivalry. When the King was with-drawen to his Tents, and
Barsinan to the Palace, he began to consider on the strength of his Majesty,
as also the love and obeysau^ce so many great Princes showed him: which made
him unable to enjoy any rest, and oftentimes he repented his foolish
enterprise, seeing how hard it would prove in execution. Now he minded to alter
his determination, when suddenly another opinion entered his brain, so that
wavering up and down in his thoughts, he could not resolve on any certainty.
On the next morning he came to ye King, who was now clothed in his royal
ornaments, because it was ye first day of open Court: and be commanded one to
go to the Queen, willing her to send him the Crown he had of the Knight, and
she to clothe her self in ye sumptuous mantle. Hereupon she presently sent
for the Cofer, and opening it, found nothing therein, whereat she was greatly
amazed, considering she trusted no body with the keye thereof, but her own
self, and evermore carried it about her. But knowing not how to remedy this
mishap, she acquainted the King therewith, who in great displeasure came to
her, saying. I marvel Madame you have kept so badly, the Jewel which would
have so greatly honored this time, considering under what condition it was left
with us. On my faith my Lord, quoth she, I know not what to say, I found the
Cofer fast locked, and none but my self has kept the keye of it. But in a
dream this last night, me thought a Damsel willed me to show it her, which I
did: afterward she demanded the keye, and I gave it her, when opening the
Cofer, she took forth the mantle and the Crown, locking it again, and
laying the keye where I took it. This done, she put the mantle about her, and
the Crown on her head, they beseeming her so well, as I received great
pleasure in beholding her, and thus she spoke. That her self, or she from
whom she came, before five days, should rule in the country of a mighty
King, who at this time labored to defend it, and to conquer it from other.
Hereupon I demanded what she was, and she answered: You shall know at the
time I have spoken of. So she vanished from me with the Crown and the mantle:
but on my faith I know not if this vision came to me sleeping, or whether it
be of truth. The King was now in greter marvel then before, willing her to
dissemble the matter, and not to reveal it to any body: then taking her by the
hand, they left the chamber, coming among the Knights and Ladies, in the place
appointed for the ceremonies of the day, where sitting down in two chayres of
state the King called his Knights about him, and the Queen her Ladies, with
whom she communed. Now had his Majesty given order, that nearest his person
should be Amadis, Galaor, Agraies and Don Galuanes, and at his back King Arban
of Norgalles well armed, holding his Sword ready drawn, and two hundred
Knights for his guard, then by a Herald he commanded silence. But as the King
began to speak, there entered a most beautiful Lady very richly attired, and
with her twelve other Damsels in like bravery: For in those days, the great
Lords and Ladies were wunt to bring their people to such assemblies, clothed
according to their own persons, without any difference at all between them:
this fair Lady addressed her speeches to the King, delivering them in form
following. My Lord, most humbly I beseech ye to grant me audience, and give
me reason in a matter of difference, which I have against the Knight that
stands by your Majesty, meaning Amadis. Long time have I been requested by
Angriote d' Estrauaus to be his Wife, who I am assured is in this royal
presence: heereto she added how every thing happened, the cause why he kept ye
vale of the Pines, and how Amadis travailing that way, made him perforce to
aba^don Arms. Nevertheless, quoth she, they departed friends, and Amadis
sollemnely promised Angriote, that he should enjoy me as his Wife: whereof when
I attained knowledge, I withdrew my self to a Castle of mine, where I kept
such a strong guard and custom, as it was thought impossible for any strange
Knight to enter there without license: but that Knight coming thither,
vanquished my gardants, and has utterly abollished the drift I intended. Yet
afterward of his own good will he promised me, to cause Amadis recall his
offer to Angriote: then chanced an unhappy combat between him and this
Knight mine Uncle, who being at the latest extremity of his life, at my
request he was spared, on this condition: that on the first day your Majesty
held open Court, I should here present my self, to grant a request he must
demand of me. To satisfye my promise I am come hither, and desire to know
what he will command me: at which words Amadis stepped forward, saying. My
Lord, the Lady has told ye nothing but truth, concerning the several promises
at the combats: therefore am I ready here to accomplish, that Amadis shall
call back his word to Angriote, provided, she perform her own promise. On my
conscience, quoth she, if you effect what you have said, you pleasure me more
then you can imagine: and to let you know I am ready to fulfill my offer,
demand what you please, for if it be in my power you shall prevail. I request
nothing else, answered Amadis, but that you would accept Angriote as your
husband, he loving you so dearly as he does. Out alas, cried the Lady, what
manner of demand is this? I wish Madame, said Amadis, that you would mary with
such a one, as is well worthy to have so fair a Lady. In sooth Knight, quoth
she, this is not according to the promise you made me. I promised nothing,
replied Amadis, but I will perform it: for if I stand bound to you, to cause
Amadis discharge his word to Angriote, herein I accomplish it. I am Amadis,
and I revoke the promise I made him, wherein you must needs confess your
self satisfied: he gladly would enjoy you as his Wife, and I join with him in
the same request, thus stand I free discharged to you both. May it be possible?
quoth she, that you are the man so highly renowned? Credit me Lady, answered
the King, this is Amadis. Ah wretch that I am, said she, now do I well
perceive, that art nor cunning can prevent what God has appointed, for I have
done my uttermost to escape Angriote, not only for the evil I wish him,
disdaining his good and virtuous deserts: but carrying this resolution, that
keeping my self chaste and single, I would not bring my liberty into
subjection: and now when I thought to be furthest from him, I am come nearer
then ever I intended. Lady, quoth the King, you have great occasion to rejoice,
for you being fair and rich, he is a young and brave disposed Knight: as you
are rich in goods and possessions, even so is he in bounty and virtue, not
only in deeds of Arms, but in all other good quallities beseeming a Knight,
therefore your marriage together is very requisite, and I think all in this
presence are of mine opinion: heere-upon, she stepped to the Queen, saying.
Madame, you are esteemed one of the most virtuous Princesses in the world, most
humbly I desire your council what I shall do.

Fair friend, answered the Queen, according to the reputation Angriote has
gotten among the good, he well deserves, not only to be abundant in riches,
but to be loved of any Lady he shall choose.

Why Lady? said Amadis, think not that by accident or affection my promise was
made to Angriote, for had he compelled me to one of these twain, then might
you well have condemned me of folly: but making trial of his valor and
hardines, yea, to mine own cost I dare assure ye, and knowing likewise his
earnest love to you: me thinks the justice of the cause commands, that not
only my self, but all such as are acquainted with him, ought to labor in
seeking remedy for you both: in him, the extreme passions he endures through
your love, in you, by making his restless greefes known to you.

Now trust me Sir, quoth she, such praise have I heard of your usage to every
one, as I imagine you would not say (before such an assembly) otherwise then
truth: wherefore following your council, as also the pleasure of the King and
Queen, I will forget my former stubborn opinion, and am ready to accomplish
what you shall command me. Then Amadis taking her by the hand, called
Angriote, and presenting him his love, said: Sir Angriote, I promised to do my
uttermost in this matter, say now, is this the Lady you would have? Even she,
quoth Angriote, is the life and essence of my soul, and I am devoted to none
but her. Then here I give her you, replied Amadis, on this condition, that you
shall be forthwith married together, and continue in honorable love to her as
she deserves. I thank you my Lord, quoth he, with all my heart, and will
observe your gentle commandment. Presently the King called for the Bishop of
Saleme, wha^ conducted them to the Church, where they were espoused in the
presence of many great Lords. Afterward they returned to the City, and there
the wedding was sollemnized with great joy and Triumphs: wherefore we may well
say, that not men, but God appoints marriage, who perceived the honest and
continent love, which Angriote euer-more bare to this selfe-willed Lady. For
albeit he had her in his custodye, never did he mean dishonorably against
her, but by virtuous cogitations brideled unlawful desire: only to express
how entirely he loved her, and by obeying her severe charge, lost his life
wel-neere when he combatted with Amadis.

CHAP. XXXIII. How King Lisuart would have the advice of his Princes and Lords,
as concerning his former determination, for the high exalting and entertaining
of Chivalry.
AFter the end of this marriage, which by diversity of opinions caused much
talk, as commonly it happens in such cases: the King commanded silence
again by his Herald, when every one being attentive to hear what he would
say, he thus began. My friends, no one of you is ignorant of the heavenly
favor toward me, by appointing me the greatest earthlye Lord, that lives this
day in all the Isles of the Occean: wherefore I think it convenient, that as we
in this country are ye chief, so should we be second to no other prince, in
rendering immortal thanks by good and virtuous woorks, whereon we are now
minded to determine. In this respect I entreat and command, albeit Kings are
the heads of their Monarchies, and you the members: that you would altogether
take advise, and give me council even from your consciences, what you think
most expedient for me to do, as well for the benefit of my Subjects, as also
for our estate. And this I assure ye, I am fully minded to believe your
opinions, as proceeding from loyal and faithful subjects: wherefore again I
desire ye, that without fear, each one would in particular and generallye
advise, what we ought to do as matter most commendable. Heere-with he held his
peace, and Barsinan Lord of Sansuegua, was entreated by all the assistantes to
speak his opinion, which they did for no other reason, but because the King
would have every one honor him: wher-upon, after many excuses on his own
behalf, he arose from his seat, and making humble reverence, thus spoke.
Seeing it likes you, I should first declare my censure, I desire the King and
this company to pardon my ignorance, being unworthy of this honorable and
gracious favor. But me thinks (under submission to his pleasure, and better
advise of all you my Lords) that we should withdraw our selves a while from
the presence of his Majesty, where we may more freelye conceive our several
humors. This answer was generally well liked, wherefore the King and Queen
left them together, walking into an other of their Pauillions: then Seroloys
the Fleming, County of Clare, began in this manner. You have all heard my
Lords, the good zeal the King has to the government, not only of the common
wealth in his Realm, but perticularly to the honorable increase of chivalry,
which he desires to continue in greater preminence then ever it has been.
And therefore my Lords, humbling my self to better opinion, I think it good
(to supply the intent of our King) yt we all ought to council him, to
strengthen him self with men and money: for they are the sinnewes of war and
peace, whereby, all Kings on the earth are maintained in their puissant
authority. For it is most certain, that treasure is for Soldiers and men at
Arms, by whom Kings reign, nor ought it for any cause to be else where
dispended, without committing of true sacrilidge: for these affairs are
termed holy, causing the state to live in tranquillity, and win glorious
conquestes of such as seek to invade them. Beside, to attain the better
heerto, his Majesty must seek means to get all the good Knights he can
hear of, as well strangers as other: entreating them with liberality, to send
his renown on wings through the world, which will fetch from the furthest
parts men to his service, in hope of condign recompense to their labor. By
their aid he may easily make him self Monarche of all the Princes by East and
West, for it has never ^een read or heard, that any Prince could make him
self great, except by the assistaunce of valiant and hardye Knights, having
bought their valor in brave attempts. I term it bought, by favoring,
honoring, and distributing their treasure among them: that they may receive no
occasion of dislike, but with unconquerable resolution to pursue victory. As
he would have proceeded in further persuasion, the greater part of the Lords
seemed to allow of his opinion, affirming that better council could not be
given: which when Barsinan heard, he requested audience for him self, and
having grant thereof, he intended to reuerse this first advise, because he
might very hardly else go forward with his secret purpose: the^ silence
being made Barsinan thus begins. It seems by your countenaunces my Lords,
that the County of Clares opinion is a grounded truth, for I see the most
part of you auerre the same, not having heard any thing to the contrary (...)
they and you shall remain contented. Nor are you ignorant my noble friends,
that the better we be accompanied, the more we shall be feared of our enemies,
our state in greater safety, and your selves more securely defended and loved.
If then any virtue at all abide in us, you may easily judge, how new friends
cannot make us forgetful of our old: let none then differ from the request I
have made, but rather yield and consent thereto. Again I entreat ye, and
expressly command, that each of you presently name such to me as you know,
happily they being yet unknown to me: to the end if any be in this Court, they
may receive such favor of us, as the absent may be the better affected to our
service, likewise we entreat them, not to depart our company, without giving
us some advertisement. All which was presently done, many openly called, and
their names set down: but because the tables were covered for dinner, the King
arose from his chair, withdrawing himself into the appointed Hall, where
many Tables were provided, which he commanded to be well furnished with
Knights. You may easily conjecture, that during the service, they diversely
communed together, some, on the Kings deliberation, and other, of his
magnificence, until the Tables were with-drawen again: when the King caused
them all to be called, and thus spoke. You see my good friends, how earnestly I
love and desire your company, wherefore you must grant me one request, not to
depart this Court without my leave: for I would particulerly know the service
you have done me, and you taste such reward of my treasure, as may continue
your love to me. Hereupon they were severally called by name again, and every
one confirmed the Kings request, except Amadis, because he was the Queens
Knight: and all this while was she present at these matters, wherefore after the
noise was somewhat appeased, she framed her speeches to the King in this
manner. My Lord, seeing it has pleased you so to favor and honor your
Knights, me thinks it were reasonable that I should do the like to the Ladies
and Gentlewomen, of what part soever they be. Wherefore I humbly desire one
boon, with assurance likewise if you consent, these Gentlemen after you shall
not deny me: considering that in semblable company, good things deserve to be
demanded and granted. Then the King looked on all the assistants, saying:
What answer (my friends) shall we make the Queen? shall we agree to her
demand? Yea Sir, if it be your pleasure, answered they. What? said Galaor,
were it possible to deny a Princess so virtuous? Seeing you are all so well
content, quoth the King, she shall obtain what-so-euer she asks. At these
words the Queen arose, and thanking her Lord, said, Seeing it pleases you to
give place and favor to my request, I desire henceforth you would do such
honor to Ladies and Gentlewomen, as to take them into your protection and
defense: maintayning their quarrels against all such, as would mollest them any
manner of way. Beside, if you have made promise of some suit to a man, and the
like to any Lady or Gentlewoman: you first shall accomplish the woman's request,
as being the weakest person, and who has most need to be helped. This
granted, hereafter they shall be better favored and defended then ever they
were: for villaynes that are wunt to do them injury, meeting them in the
feelds, and knowing they have such Knights as you are for their protectours,
dare no way wrong them. In sooth Madame, said the King, your request is
reasonable, and I think none will gainesay it: we will have it therefore
registered and set down as a law inviolable.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How while this great and joyful assembly endured, a Damsel
came to the Court clothed in mourning, requesting aid of King Lisuart, in a
cause whereby she had bine wronged.
Mean while this honorable company thus continued, free from all danger and
mishap, thinking on nothing but pleasure and delights: there entered a Damsel
clad in mourning, who falling on her knees before the King, thus spoke. My
Lord, each one is merrye but my poor self, who am so crossed with grief and
sorrow, as death were the best friend could come to me: yet would your Majesty
take compassion on me, I easily might recover my joy again. These words were
dipte in such abundance of tears, as the King being moved ther-with to
pity, thus answered. Lady, I would be very glad to relieve your sadness, but
tell me who is the cause thereof? Dread Lord, quoth she, my father and uncle are
detained prisoners, by a Lady who has vowed never to release them, until they
deliver her two so good knights as one was whom they killed in fight. On what
occasion did they kill him? said the King. Because he vaunted, replied the
Damsel, that he alone would combat with them, and so proud he grew in
speeches, as at length he defied them. Not long after, they meeting one day
together, the Knight used such reproouing terms of cowardice, as my Father
and Uncle could not endure the injury: but falling to the combat, the Knight
was slain in the presence of a Lady, named Galdenda, who as she said,
procured his coming to maintain a difference, which she had with a neighbor
of hers, being her great enemy. Wherefore seeing him dead, she caused the
conquerours to be taken, and put them into the most miserable prison in the
world: albeit my Father and Uncle often told her, that they would perform
for her what the Knight should have done. But she answered, how she well knew
they were not sufficient for the cause, and therefore should never be
releassed, until they delivered her two Knights of like account, each of them
valuing him in strength whom they had slain, to finish the attempt himself
was able to do. Know you not Damsel, said the King, against whom they
should combat, or the place where it is appointed? No truly Sir, answered the
Damsel, but I have seen my Father and Uncle cruelly put in prison, where
their friends can compass no means to see them. Heerewith she began again to
weep, that every one pittyed to behold her, which made the King ask her, if
the place were far off: In five days my Lord, quoth she, it may easily be
gone and returned. Now trust me, said the King, you shall not want your joy for
two Knights, wherefore look among all these gallants, and choose such as you
best fancy. My Lord, replied the Damsel, I am a stranger, and know not any
one in this Court: but if you please, I will entreat the Queen to do me so
much grace, as to appoint me twain after her own mind. Do so, said the
King, if you think good: then came the Damsel, and falling at the Queens
feet, proceeded thus. Madame, you are said to be one of the wisest and most
virtuous Dames in the world, you understand the cause of my mourning, and the
gracious offer the King has made me: most humbly I beseech ye then, for the
honor of God, to take compassion on a poor Gentlewoman, and council me which
two Knights I shall choose, that are best able to supply my want. Believe me
Damsel, answered the Queen, you demand a matter of great importance, yet in
such sort do I pity your cause, as I am the more willing to give you advise:
albeit I would be loath to forgo them twain, whom I could name in this
company. Then she showed her Amadis, saying: This is my Knight. And poynting
to Galaor, said. This other is the Kings, yet be they both brethren, and the
best Knights (as I have heard) this day living. I desire your Majesty, quoth
the Damsel, to tell me their names. The one, said the Queen, is called
Amadis, and the other Galaor. But by your favor, replied the Damsel, is this
Amadis the Knight so much renowned? I am very certain Madame, so soon as he
and his brother shall ariue where I can bring them, my cause will be
sufficiently executed, therefore I desire you to obtain me their company.
Heer-upon ye Queen called them, saying: I beseech ye both to succor this
woman, who stands in need of your assistaunce. Amadis was somewhat flow in
answering, for he cast his eye on the Princess Oriana, to note if she would
like of his departure: and she who likewise pitied the woman's cause, let fall
her Gloves, which was an appointed signal between them, and thereby he was
certified of her consent, wherefore he thus spoke to the Queen. I am at your
disposition Madame, to do what-soeuer you shall command me. Go then, in Gods
name, quoth she, and return again with all possible speed, without tarring
for any thing that may happen. Heer-to they willingly condiscended, and taking
leave of her, Amadis fained he would speak to Mabila, when coming near her
and Oriana, he said to his Goddess. Madame, well may I say that the fairest
Lady in the world, sendes me to succor the most woeful woman I ever did
behold. Sweet friend, quoth Oriana, I repent that I gave you so much
liberty, because my mind tells me, this attempt will prove somewhat
dangerous to you, which I hope the heavens will power-fully defend. I am
persuaded Madame, answered Amadis, that as the wonderful woorke-man of the
world has enriched you with beautye beyond all other women, he will not
suffer you to feel displeasure, by any misfortune happening to me: for being
yours as I am, I imagine my self so happy, as I think no evil can chance
unto me, if I continue in your gracious favor. If it lay in my power, replied
Oriana, I would revoke your license of departure: but seeing it may not be, I
will remain in prayer for your prosperous success. So taking leave of her, he
and Galaor went to arm themselves, then doing their humble duty to the
King, they rode away in company with the Damsel. As thus they travailed,
about mid-daye they entered the Forest, which commonly was called the
unfortunate Forest, because never any Knight errant entered into it, that could
escape without some mischief: and so these two brethren dearly experimented,
for such mishap bef^ll them, as they verily thought to lose their lives. Still
rode they on without any adventure, till the Moon began to grace the evening,
yet would not the Damsel show any sign of stay, which made Amadis ask this
question: Gentle woman, shall we rest our selves here a while? Yea mary, quoth
she, here before we shall find Tents ready provided, and people in them who
expect your coming: make then a little haste I pray you, because I will go
before to advertise them. They were very well content ther-with, and so the
Damsel left them, till soon after they espied the Tents, where they saw her
among other Ladies and Knights, who bad them welcome at their arrival: and
being alighted from their horses, they were conducted into a Pauillion,
having servants standing ready to take their Armor, which they had no sooner
put off, but was carried by them into an other room, where-upon Amadis
demanded why they did so. Because, replied the Damsel, you must lodge where
they have carried your Armor. He imagining she said true, made no further
inquiry, but sat down with his brother on stools that stood ready for them,
attending the hour of supper. Not long had they sitten there, but five
Knights well armed entered furiously upon them, saying: Yield your selves,
else you are slain. When Amadis heard and saw their bad behavior, he knew
right well they were betrayed, and starting up, said to Galaor. By God
brother, we are trecherouslye deceived. Then finding no remedy but present
death, after they had strugled with the Knights, who easilye might have taken
their lives, Amadis thus spoke* Ah villains, you have us now at too much
advantage, deliver us our Arms, and this quarrel shall be otherwise discided.
These words will little profit ye, answered the Knights, yield your selves
our prisoners, or we will kill ye. So may you do, said Galaor, like traitors
as you are, and I will maintain my words against two or three of you, if you
dare deliver me mine Arms. We need no such proof, replied the Knights, but
if you contend in further speeches, you shall deerelye buy them with the loss
of your lives. Now trust me, quoth Amadis, we rather will dye, then be
prisoners to such villains as you are. Heer-with one of the Knights went
forth, and coming to a Lady, he said. Madame, they will not yield, shall we
kill them? Stay a while, quoth she, and if they grant not my will, deal as
you please with them. Then came the Lady (who was marvelous beautiful) into
the Tent, and showing the countenannce of a very angry woman, thus spoke to
Amadis and Galaor: Knights yield your selves my prisoners, otherwise you must
dye. Brother, answered Galaor, it may be she will pity us, let us yield our
selves to her. And Madame, quoth he, we beseech ye deliver our horses and
Armor, when if all your servants can conquer us, we will be content to submit
our selves: but if you deny us this reasonable request, we must esteem the
less of you, and they that deal with us so discourtuoslye. I will give no
credence to you at this time, replied the Lady, but would council ye to yield
your selves to me. Whereto at length they accorded, seeing they could no way
else save their lives: yet knew she not their names, for the Damsel that
conducted them thither, would not tell her, because if her Mistress understood
what they were she knew they might not escape the death. Wherefore she was
content to conceal them, in respect of the offense she should commit, by
causing ye death of two so good Knights, beside, she repented her vnhonorable
iourneye, which now she could no way remedy, but only by keeping their names
unknown. They being thus prisoners to the Lady, she entered into these
speeches. Knights, you may see in what estate I hold ye, and there is no mean
but one for deliverance, which I will acquaint ye withal: mary if you do not
fulfill it, in steed of giving you liberty, I will cause you to be enclosed in
such a dolorous prison, as shall be woorsse to you then death it self. Lady,
answered Amadis, the matter may be such, that we shall easilye consent thereto:
and in some sort again, we will rather dye then obey you. I know not (quoth
the Lady) how you may conceive thereof* but I can assure ye, that if you promise
me not to forsake the service of King Lisuart, and to go tell him at your
departure hence, how you do it by commandment of Madasima Lady of Gantasi,
who enuies his welfare, because he keeps one in his Court, that slew the
most renowned Knight Dardan: you never shall escape this merciless captivity.
Madame, said Galaor, if you do this, thinking thereby to offend King Lisuart,
you much abuse your self: for we are two poor Knights, who have no other
riches then our Armor and horses, and he has such store of redoubted
servants, as he will little care whether you imprison us or no: yet shall it
be such a shame to us, as you can never imagine ye like, because we are unable
to do it. What? quoth she, love you better to spend your life time in a most
miserable prison, the^ to forsake the service of ye most disloyal King living?
Now trust me Madame, answered Galaor, but, ill beseemes you these bad speeches:
for he is one of the best Princes in the world, and against any Knight I will
maintain, that never was disloyalty found in him. In lucklesse time for thee,
said Madasima, have thou uttered thy love; wher-with she commanded their
hands to be bound. That shall I do, replied a Knight, and cut off their heads
if you please. Hereupon he laid hold on Amadis, who was so offended thereat,
as he lifted his fist to give him a blow on the ear: but the Knight escaping
it, Amadis caught him about the middle, throwing him so violently against the
ground, that he thought his heart was broken, for he lay still and moved not.
Now grew the Lady and her Knights into such anger with Amadis, as presently
they would have slain him, and he had not escaped, but that an ancient Knight
stepped before him with his Sword drawn, using such threatenings and other
behavior, as he caused them all to go forth of the Pauillion: yet could he
not defend him so well, but Amadis was wounded on the right shoulder, then
stepped the ancient Knight to Madasima, with these words. By God Madame, you
deal like a very unreasonable woman, causing your people in your presence to
murder two Knights, after they have yielded themselves your prisoners. Why Sir?
quote she, did you not see their presumptuous boldness? especially this varlet,
who before my face has so used this man, as he is not able to rise again?
Madame, replied Galaor, we rather choose to dye, then any other but your self
shall bind us: for you by nature are gentle and courteous, and we as prisoners
will show obeysaunce to you. Seeing you saya so, answered Madasima, I will
bind you my self: hereupon she bound their hands with strong cords, and
presently taking down the Tents, they departed thence, Amadis and Galaor
being set on horses without Saddles, and led along by two Sergeants: as for
Gandalin and Galaors Squire, they followed on foot, having their hands bound
behind them, in manner as if they had gone to hanging, and thus were they
constrained to travail all night through the Forest.

But Amadis was weery of his life, not so much for his hard usage, in respect
he could govern himself with wonderful patience: but for the matter Madasima
would enforce them to, the refusal whereof, gave hope of no better usage at
her hand, but for ever to be deprived of his fair Oriana. And contrariwise, if
he consented, he should in like manner be banished from her presence, being
compelled to serve King Lisuart no longer: these two extremities troubled his
thoughts, which the ancient Knight well perceived that saved their lives, yet
he imagined the cause to proceed from his hurt, and was moved to pity him,
for the Damsel had told him, that he was one of ye best Knights in the world.

Here you must observe, how the Damsel was the ancient Knights Daughter,
and repented her treason in deceiving them, seeing how discourteously they were
entreated, which made her earnestly to persuade her father, to practice some
mean for their safety: for, quoth she, if they be put to death, perpetual
shame will attend on my life. Have pity then (good father) on them and me, in
respect the one is famous Amadis of Gaul, and the other his brother Galaor,
who slew the Giant at the Rock of Galteres. Full well ^new the Knight the
cause why his Daughter brought them, and therefore pittyed their usage the
more, devising how he might compass the means to sheeld them from death,
which was near at hand, so coming to Amadis, he thus spoke. Be of good cheer
Sir Knight, for I hope (by the help of God) ere long to deliver you from this
cruel Lady: and if your wound offend ye, I will persuade her to let you have
some cure. When Amadis heard him speak so freendly, knowing likewise it was
the man, who delivered him from them that would have slain him, he thus
answered. Father, I have no wound which greatly annoyeth me, but I have more
cause to complain of the Damsel, she that brought us hither by ye falsest
treachery in the world. I know very well, said the Knight, you have been
deceived, and can tell what you are better then you ween, which makes me the
more careful in seeking your good: therefore I shall give you profitable
council if you will accept it. But did the Lady know you, you should dye
without any remedy, because nothing might serve else to expiate her wrath:
believe then what I say, and put it in practice. You are fair, young, and of
gallant stature, beside, Madasima has been told, how you are one of the best
Knights in the world, whereby she conceiueth good opinion of you: now must you
cunningly close with her, requesting she would accept you as her husband or
perpetual friend: for she is a woman not to refuse you, if you can never so
little dissemble with her. But what you do, do quickly, because at yt place
whether we are now going, she intends to send one of her servants to King
Lisuarts Court, whose errand is only to enquire your names: for she that
conducted you hither, (perceiving you should assuredly dye, if her mistress
knew the names of you both) disguised the matter so with her, as she said she
forgot to ask your names: only thus persuading her, that you were two of the
very best Knights in the world. The danger thoroughly considered, I swear to
you by the faith of a Christian, that I can devise no better mean for your
deliverance, then this I have told ye: and shall I say more? if you do it not,
wursse will come to you then you suspect. But Amadis loved the Princess Oriana
so dearly, as he rather desired death, then to hazard himself in such a
composition, whereupon he thus replied. I thank you Sir heartily for your great
kindness, but I have no such authority over my self, as will permit me to
proceed so far: though your Lady her self entreated never so deeply, yet
liberty nor life can persuade me. Alas Sir, answered the Knight, I wunder you
will not consider how near your death is? It is all one to me, quoth Amadis,
but if you will deal herein with my brother, he is a Knight more brave and
beautiful then I am: happily he will consent to follow your devise. Presently
he left Amadis, and coming to Galaor, delivered the whole discourse he did to
his brother: which he liking very well, made this reply. Good Father if you
could bring it to pass, that the Lady would accept me as her friend, my
companion and I were for ever at your command. Refer the matter to me, quoth
the Knight, immediately will I go to her, and I hope to strike it dead on her
behalf. So departing from Galaor, he went to Madasima, who rode foremost, and
thus began to break with her. Madame, you carrye two prisoners with you, but
you do not know what they are. Why ask you me such a question? answered
Madasima. Because the one of them, quoth the Knight, is esteemed ye best Knight
that ever bare Arms, and the most accomplished in all other good gifts. Is he
not then named Amadis? said she, whose death I have so long desired? No Madame,
answered the Knight, I speak of him which rides next us, whose youth and
beauty had you well regarded, your self would say you have been too outrageous
in injury. What though he be your prisoner, it is not for any offense
committed against you, but only through the hatred you bear to another: all
which you may yet redress in much better sort then you began, considering if
he conceived liking of you, you may thereby easily induce him to love, and under
that cerimonye, draw him to do what your self shall desire. In sooth, replied
Madasima, I will assay, to know if he be such a one as you report him to be.
Do Madame, quoth he, and you shall find him one of the fairest Knights that
ever you beheld.

Here you must note, that the Knight no sooner left Galaor when he went to the
Lady, but he took occasion thus to talk with his brother. You see (my Lord)
the estate wherein we are, which requires some notable dissimulation at our
hands: I beseech ye therefore moderate your anger, because already it
endangereth our lives, and for a while follow my direction. By heaven brother,
answered Amadis, death had been very welcome to me: but since you wish me to be
governed by you, I am content, desiring the conservation of our honors, which
being lost, we are unworthy to live. Further they could not proceed, because
Madasima came and interrupted them, when calling him aside, and fair day was
displayed on the earth: his beautye and good grace so especially contented her,
as she became surprised with his love, which she shaddowed under demanding how
he fared. Madame, said Galaor, I fare wursse then you should, were you in my
power as I am in yours, for I would do you what service and pleasure possible
I could, and you use the contrary to me, I having given no occasion of
offense: reason wills I should rather be your Knight to love and honor you,
then your prisoner thus unkindly bound as I am. And surely I cannot but
marvel heerat, considering the simple conquest you have thereby: use then such
rigor to us, as women so divinely adorned are wunt to do. Madasima hearing
his gentle language, was more and more enflamed with his love, yet striung to
dissemble it, she merrily said. Tell me fair Sir, if I choose you as my friend,
and deliver you from prison, will you (for my sake) leave the service of King
Lisuart, and afterward tell him how you did it by my means? With all my heart
Lady, answered Galaor, and to perfourm it, you shall have what oathe you please,
both of me and my companyon, for he will do no more the^ I request him. Credit
me, quoth Madasima, if before this company you will promise to obey me,
presently you shall enjoy your liberty. Behold me ready, replied Galaor. Yet is
not this enough, answered Madasima, for you shall swear it in the presence of
a Lady, where I am intended to lodge this night: in mean while you must
assure me, not to depart my company. We will not on my faith Madame, quoth
Galaor: and calling Amadis, caused him to affirm as much, wher-upon they were
unbound and set at liberty, their Squires likewise as freendly used, and
mounting on their own horses, rode at their ease as they did before. But
Madasima and Galaor still continued their amorous discourses, till they arrived
at a Castle named Albies, the Lady whereof received them very honorably, in
respect of great freendship between Madasima and her. Needless were it to
tell ye of their good cheer, it could not but be answerable to the time and
company, but after supper Madasima demanded of Galaor, if he meant to keep
his promise he made her by the way. What else Madame? quoth he, provided, you
be so good as your word to me. Make no doubt ther-of, replied Madasima: then
framing her speeches to the Lady of the Castle, and also to two Knights that
were her Sons, she proceeded in this manner. My good friends, I pray you hear
a covenant between me, and these two Gentlemen, because heer-after you may be
my witnesses. They are my prisoners, and under these conditions I have released
them, that one of them shall continue my friend, and both of them forsake the
service of King Lisuart, telling him: how for my sake, and in despite of him,
they have done it. Heer-upon I entreat this favor at your hands, as to
meet me at the Court of that wretched King, on the day they must declare this
message, to see how contentedly he will take it: but if they fulfill not their
promise, hence-foorth you shall publishe in all places, the heinous offense by
them committed, and ten days I give them to execute this charge. I am well
pleased, said the Lady of the Castle, to do a greater matter for you then
this, if they as willinglye consent thereto. We pray you, quoth Galaor, not to
fail heerin, for we have promised and will perform it. Receive then your
liberty, answered Madasima, yet must you not depart this night: these words
she spoke, because she intended to seal the bargain with Galaor. When the
time came that summoned them to rest, Amadis was conducted to one chamber, and
Galaor to an other, whether soon after Madasima repaired, she being young,
beautiful, and aduenterously given: Galaor likewise, a man forward to such
fortunes, when Love had erected his scaling ladders to the walls, quicklye got
possession of the Forte. And so well liked she these amorous skirmiges, as
afterward she reported in many places, how she never tasted a more pleasant
night, and had she not promised him departure, hardly would she have let him
go so soon, nor did she but in hope of his speedy return. Thus was she
inclined to voluptuous desire, as without care of her honor, she often fell in
this sort. By these means escaped Amadis and Galaor, under the conditions you
have heard, which they hoped to prevent without impeach, as hereafter shall be
declared unto you. All that day they rode, not hindered by any thing, and at
night were freendly entertained in an Hermitage, setting forward the next
morning to the Court of King Lisuart.

CHAP. XXXV. How King Lisuart was in danger of his person and his state, by
the unlawful promises he made too rash and unadvisedly.
Four days after Amadis and Galaor departed from the Court, the ancient
Knight came to the City of London, who left the Crown and the mantle with
the Queen, as you have heard: when falling on his knee before the King, he
began in this manner. I marvel my Lord, that in a time of such honor, you
wear not ye Crown I left with you. And you Madame, quoth he to the Queen, is
it possible you should make so slender account, of the sumptuous mantle I gave
you in charge, not deigning as yet to prove it, or how it will become ye? When
the King heard his words, knowing they were lost, he sat a good while without
any answer, which made the Knight thus begin again. On my faith I am glad you
like them not, for had you pleased to keep them, you must likewise have
granted my demand, and happily it would prove greater then you expect:
otherwise, in falsifying your promise, you might procure the loss of my head.
Most humbly therefore I beseech ye my Lord, to will them be delivered me
again, because I may tarry no longer here. Now was the King more offended
then before, which made him shortly thus to answer. Knight, what promise I
made thee, I intend to keep, although the Crown and mantle be both lost, to
my no little greef, as well for thy sake, as mine own. Heere-at the Knight
gave a loud shrieke, saying: Ah wretched and miserable old man, now commes my
latest and unlucky exigent: have I not long enough endured torments, but now
must finish mine age in the cruellest death was ever heard of, having by no
offense deserved it? While thus he complained, the tears abundantly trickled
down his white beard, which moved the most constant to pity his grief, and
the King himself overcome with compassion, returned this answer. Fear not
(Knight) to speed any thing the wursse for my loss, you must be satisfied
whatsoever it cost me, according as I faithfully promised. At these words the
Knight would have kissed his feet, but the King restrained him, saying:
Demand what thou will, for thou shall have it. I know my Lord, quoth the
Knight, you remember your promise to deliver my Crown and mantle, or
whatsoever I requested for them: God is my witness, I intended not to desire
what now I must needs, by reason I have no other mean whereby to be
delivered, if I had? I would acquit you of the grief I know you will endure,
granting me the thing I must of necessity demand: but now it may not be
otherwise, except you infrindge your faith and loyalty. Rather will I loose my
Kingdom, replied the King, then make a promise and not fulfill it, say boldly
therefore thy mind. I thank your Majesty, quoth the Knight, there now
remains nothing, but to have assurance from the Lords of your Court, that
they seek not to take from me the gift you must deliver: otherwise your
promise cannot be performed, or I satisfied, having a reward now, and taken
from me annon. Great reason, said the King, my word shall stand for their
warrant. Seeing my Lord, quoth the Knight, Fortune has so permitted, that you
have lost my mantle and the Crown, it is impossible to save my head, except
you give me Madame Oriana your Daughter. Be therefore now advised, either
restore my Jewels, or give me her, albeit I love the one better then the other:
for never can I have so much good by her, as I sustain harm by your unhappy
loss. Now began all the Lords and Barons to murmr against the Knight,
persuading the King to deny his word: but he rather desired death, he was such
a good and loyal Prince, and this answer he made them. Be not offended my
good friends, the loss of my Daughter will not be so prejudicial to me, as
the breach of my promise: for if the one be envious, the other is injurious,
and to be shunned every way. The proof is ready, if subjects find not their
Prince faithful, and his word inviolable, what care will they have of the love
and fidelity they owe to him? much better unborn then any such blemish: this
Knight therefore must have my Daughter, and I will deliver her according to my
promise. Hereupon he sent for her, but the Queen being present all this
while, little thought the King would so forget his fatherly love: and when she
heard this rigorous sentence pronounced against her Daughter, she good Lady
fell at the Kings feet, when weeping (as a mother for the loss of her child)
she said. What will ye do my Lord? will ye be more inhumane to your own
blood, then the brute Beasts are to their contraryes? Notwithstanding all their
brutish quallities, yet be they never so unnatural, to show any violence to
their young ones. May it then be thought reasonable, under shadow of an
accorded promise (without knowledge thereof) to commit so great wrong, not only
against your self impitious father, or me a woeful and unfortunate mother, but
likewise against the whole common weal of this Realm? Alas Sir, let my
incessant tears persuade you, to bethink some other mean for your discharge,
and also to content the Knight. Madame, quoth the King, my word is past, I pray
you talk no more thereof to me. Thus speaking, the tears streamed down his
cheeks, whereat the Lords were not a little agreeued, and that which most
troubled him, was the acclamations of the Ladies, wherefore the King commanded
them to their chambers. The Queen seeing she might not prevail, fell in a
swoune, but by her Ladies she was conuayed thence, the King giving charge on
pain of death, that no one should seek to alter his promise. My Daughter,
quoth he, I commit to the pleasure of God, but my promise shall not be broken
if I can help it.

By this time the news came to Oriana, how her Father had consented to her
departure, whereat she fell down in such a trance, as they never expected life
in her again: when Mabila and the Ladies reputing her dead indeed, thought
best to acquainte the King ther-with, yet by forced remedies she revived
again, breathing forth many dollorous sighs. Now the most of the women
severed themselves, some near, and some further from her, because she should
not hear their complaining: and such compassion took they on her, as would
have converted a stony heart into tears, especially, when the Princess
recovered the power of speech, and faintely uttered these regrets. Full well,
quoth she, do I now behold mine own ruin. Ah sweet friend, were thou
here, easily would thou deliver me from this pain: but thus much my heart
foretold me, even at the very hour of thy departure. Ah curssed be that
hour, because I consented to it. When thou shall hear of these tidinges, I
fear (being unable to endure them) thou will dye immediately: yet this is the
best hope, we shall not be long one after another. Ah death, the only refuge to
the unfortunate, see thou not me foremost in this rank? why stayest thou?
Fortune will triumph over thee, in dealing so extremely as she can with me,
albeit I know thou art able to revenge thy self: make haste therefore, and let
her not get such preeminence on me, in despite (as it were) of thy authority.
Adieu then sweet friend, for never shall we see each other more in this life:
at these words she fell in a swoune again. When the King saw she tarryed so
long, he sent to command her make more speed: but the messenger found her in
the deadlye agonye, and staying till she was recovered again, as she began to
renew her mones, he thus spoke to her. Madame, the King is offended because you
come not to him. When she heard this message, she arose, having her heart so
sealed up with grief, as it seemed to enable her vital forces, and being
followed by none of her women, but the Damsel of Denmark, she came before
the King, and casting her self at his feet, said. My Lord and Father, what is
your pleasure with me? Fair daughter, quoth he, I must accomplish my promise.
These speeches provoked her former pains, when the King greeuing to behold
the sight thereof, turned his head aside, saying to the Knight. See my friend,
here is the gift you demand, and the only thing in the world I most love:
but intend you to carrye her hence alone? My Lord, said the Knight, she shall
be accompanied with the two Gentlemen and their Squires, which were in my
company when you made me this promise at Windsore: and more may I not allow,
until he have her, to whom I am constrained to deliver her. Yet let her have
the company of this Damsel, said the King, for it were unseemly, she should
be alone among so many men. Well, quoth the Knight, for one woman it matters
not. So taking the Princess in his arms, she being scant revived from her
swoune, he set her up on horsse-back, and caused a Squire to sit behind her on
the horse, who might hold her fast least she should fall: and very sad
coun^enaunce showed the Knight, saying there was none in the Court more
sorrwofull then him self. After the Damsel of Denmark was mounted, the King
entreated her not to leave his daughter what-soeuer happened, and while they
were thus preparing, the Princess looking woefully about her: a tall Knight
well armed came among the^, who not taking off his helmet, or saluting the
company, took Orianaes horse by the bridle. This was Arcalaus the
enchaunter, and came in this sort least he should be known: soon after he
commanded the Squire to ride away with her, which the Princess perceiving,
and seeing there was no other remeeye, delivering a sigh as if her heart would
have split, she said. Ah my deer friend, in a hapless hour for you was the
boon granted, because it will be both your death and mine. Heerin she meant
Amadis, whom she gave leave to depart with the Damsel, yet the standers by
understood it of her Father and her self.

Thus departed Oriana with them that conducted her, who rode apace till they
were entered the Forest near at hand: and the King himself was mounted on
horsseback, to conduct his Daughter somewhat on the way, as also to forbid any
reskewe from following, according to his former promise. But the Princess
Mabila standing at a window, to see this sad and pensive separation, could come
no nearer to Oriana, her heart was so surprised with grief: yet by hap she
espied Dardan the Dwarffe that served Amadis, making speed after the Princess
on horsseback, when calling him to her, she said. Dardan, if thou love thy
master, stay not any where till thou acquaint him with this mishap: if now
thou fail him, it may return to thine own danger, for this is the time of
greatest necessity. By God Madame, answered the Dwarffe, I will with all
diligence perform my duty. So giving the spurs to his horse, he gallopped
the same way his Master rode with ye Damsel.

But leave we him posting, and tell what now happened to King Lisuart, who
accompanied his Daughter to the entrance of the Forest, causing all such to
return as followed him. Even in the hour of this trouble, a Damsel came to
him mounted on a swift Palfray, with a Sword hanging about her neck, and a
Lance richly painted, having the point gilded over: after she had saluted him,
she thus spoke. My Lord, God increase your joy, and make you willing to
perform what you promised me at Windsore, in the presence of all your worthy
Knights. At these words the King knew her, remembering it was she that said:
how she would prove the virtue of his heart, whereupon he thus answered. In
good faith Damsel, I have now more need of joy then ever I had:
notwithstanding, I am ready to accomplish any thing I promised you. It is the
only thing my Lord, quoth she, of my return to you, being the most loyal
King in the world, wherefore humbly I entreat ye, presently to revenge my
cause on a Knight that passed through this Forest, who not long since slew my
Father, by the most horrible treason that ever was heard of: yet not content
therewith, the villain violently took me away, and perforce made me yield to
his unlawful will. But in such sort is he enchaunted, as he can not be done to
death, except the most virtuous man in the Realm of great Brittayne, give him
a wound with this Lance, and an other with this Sword: both which he gave in
keeping to a Lady, of whom he had good hope to be loved, yet therein he was
deceived, for she hates him above all other, for which cause she gave me this
Sword and Lance, whereby we might both be revenged on him. Nor can it be done
but by you only, who are the chief and most virtuous man in this Country:
wherefore as you promised me before so many valiant men, may it please ye to
execute this just action of vengeance. And because I have often told him, that
by this day I would be provided of a Knight to combat with him, he is come
alone into this Forest, attending only for my Champion. It is likewise
ordered, how you must have no company but my self, for he little thinks that
I have the Sword and Lance so hurtful to him: and this is our agreement
together, if he remain conqueror, I must pardon him mine injury, but if he
be vanquished, he must do what I command him. Presently the King sent a
Gentleman for his Armor, which when he had put on, he mounted on a brave
Courser, girding the Damsels Sword about him, leaving his own that was one of
the best in the world: then without any other company, he rode on with her, she
carrying his helmet. Not far had they ridden, but she caused him to forsake
the high beaten way, conducting him by a little path among the shrubs, where
not long before they had past that led away Oriana: then the Damsel showed
him a huge Knight armed, mounted on a black Courser, whereupon she said. My
Lord, take your helmet, for this is he you must deal withal: which the King
quickly did, and approaching near the Knight, said. Proud Traitor, defend
thy self, and thy lawless lust. So coutching their Lances, they encountered
together, when ye King perceived how his painted Lance brake like a stalk of
hemp* having no strength at all in it: which made him draw his Sword to
charge the Knight, but at the first stroke, the blade broke close to the hilt,
whereby he imagined himself betrayed, for the Knight did what he pleased to
him. But as he would have killed his Horse, the King being quick and nimble,
caught hold by his gorget, and in such sort they strugled together, as they
both fell to the ground, the Knight underneath, and the King upon him, by
means whereof, he got his Sword from him, and unlacing his Helmet to smite
off his head, the Damsel cried out so loud as she could: Sir Arcalaus,
help your Cousin quicklye, or else he dies. When the King heard her name
Arcalaus, he looked up, and saw ten brave Knights come running to him, the
one of them using these words: King Lisuart, spare the Knight, otherwise thou
shall not reign one hour. If I dye, answered the King, so shall you all for
me, like traitors as you are. Then one of them gave him such a blow with his
Lance, as not only sore hurt him, but made him fall on his face to the ground:
yet did he recover himself very quickly, like one resolved to defend his life,
albeit he saw death present before his eyes. But being unable to resist so
many, at length they got sure hold on him, when renting off his helmet and his
Sheeld, they bound him fast with a double chain. Afterward they set him on a
simple horse, two Knights still holding the ends of the chain, and so leading
him along, sought where they might find Arcalaus, Oriana, and the Damsel of
Denmark: but the Knight against whom the King first fought, rode before
apace, and wauing his gauntlet aloft to Arcalaus, said: Behold Cousin, King
Lisuart is ours. A very good prize, answered Arcalaus, hence-foorth shall his
enemies have no cause to dread him. Uillaine, quoth the King, well know I thou
wast never other then a traitor, and though I am wounded, yet will I maintain
my words if thou dare combat with me. By God, said Arcalaus, never should I
make reckoning of my self, to vanquish such a Lord as thou art. Thus
contending as they rode, they came to a double way, where Arcalaus stayed, thus
speaking to his Page. Sir, ride with all speed to London, and say to Lord
Barsinan, that he must execute what I willed him, for I have begun
indifferently, if he can make an end as well. Gone is the Page toward the
City, in mean while Arcalaus devised, to send the King one way, and Oriana
another, wherefore he said to his Cousin. Take ten Knights with you, and conduct
Lisuart to my prisons at Daguanel: these other four shall keep me company,
for I will lead Oriana to mount Aldin, where I will show her strange and
wonderful things. This mount Aldin was the place of his most usual abode,
being one of the strongest and fairest in the world: thus the ten Knights
carried away the King, and Arcalaus with the rest had charge of the Princess.
But certaynely, if here we consider the properties of Fortune, we may easily
repute her as mutable, or rather more, toward great Princes and Lords, then the
meaner sort: as well she witnessed by King Lisuart, even in the time when he
intended most honorably, to be thwarted with such a contrary chance. For at
one instant, he saw himself in the hands of his greatest enemies, his
Daughter (and heir to his Kingdom) taken from him, and all his estate in
danger of ruin. He that was wont to be honored of all, was now injuriously
despised, bound, and led as a thief, by a villainous Enchaunter, a mean
Gentleman, and out of any other hope then death. Is not this then a fair
example for such, as at this day are called to the greatest honors in the
world? wherewith oftentimes they are so blinded, that they forget both God and
themselves. King Lisuart was a right good, virtuous, and wise Prince, yet the
divine ordenaunce suffered him to fall in these dangers: to the end he might
remember, how all creatures remain at his heavenly disposition. This lesson he
taught him, for in short time he was brought so low as might be, and
afterward restored again, as you shall presently understand.

CHAP. XXXVI. How Amadis and Galaor understood, that King Lisuart and his
daughter were carried away prisoners, wherefore they made haste to give them
succor.
WE have before declared, by what means Amadis and Galaor escaped from
Madasima the Lady of Gantasi, who would have put them to death if she had known
their names likewise how they took their way toward London, as men right
joyful of their good success. But by the way, they met Dardan the Dwarff so
fast as horse could gallop, wher-upon Amadis thus spoke to Galaor. Brother, me
thinks my servant Dardan comes toward us, and doubtless about some matter
of importance, for do you not see what speed he makes? By this time Dardan
brake off their talk, rehearsing every thing that happened since their
departure: but when he told, how the Princess Oriana was carried from ye Court
against her will, and what sorrowful lamentations she made: Amadis entered into a
dispairing fury, demanding which way they went that had her in charge. In
sooth my Lord, answered Dardan, they rode through the Forest, which lies on
the other side of the City. Without more words Amadis gave the spurs to
his horse, galloping amain toward London, so confounded with the terror of
these news, as he could not speak to his brother Galaor, who left him not but
followed at hand. Through yt City they ride not making any stay, enquiring
which way they took that led away the Princess, and every one showed it him
very readily. As Gandalin came posting after his Lord, it was his hap to pass
by the Queens lodging, where she standing at a window overcome with greef:
espied Gandalin, whom she called to her, and asked where he had left his
Master. Madame, quoth he, he is gone after them that have away the Princess.
Stay a little I pray thee, said the Queen: then sent she for the Kings
sword, which was accounted one of the best in the world, saying. I desire
thee carry this sword to Amadis, and tell him the King for-sooke it this
morning, he being gone with a Damsel to combat for her, and she has given
him another sword: as yet we hear no tidinges of him, either when he will
return, or whether he is gone. Gandalin having received the sword, set away
with speed after his master, whose impacience urging him to more haste then
care of his journey, made him ride so far into a foul sloughe, as he was
feign to alight ere he could get forth again. And leading his horse by the
bridle to escape the mire, Galaor and Gandalin ouertooke him, acquainting him
with the Queens message, and delivering the Sword she sent him. When he heard
how the King was likewise gone, his desire of speed increased to give him
succor, but his horse was so wearied with striving in the bogge, as he was
constrained to take Gandalins: which travailed much wursse then his own, yet
with the help of his spurs he made him go. At length they found the tract
of horses, and by good hap met with certain poor laboring men, whom they
asked if they met not any by the way. Yes my Lord, quoth one of them we met
certain men leading a Knight and two Ladies, albeit we durst not show our
selves, but kept us hidden in the thickest of ye wood, for doubtless they be
some bad people: here to they added such a description of the prisoners, as
they easilye gathered them to be the King and Oriana betrayed. But tell me good
friends, said Amadis, know you none of the other? For the prisoners are the
King and his daughter. In sooth, replied the poor man, we are altogether
ignorant what they are, yet we heard one that led the horse of the fayrer
Lady, often times name Arcalaus. Now trust me, quoth Amadis to his brother, it
is the villain which enchaunted me: Oh that it might be my hap to find him.
Gentlemen, said the man, ten of them went this way on the right hand with the
knight prisoner, and five more this way on the left hand with the Ladies.
Brother, quoth Amadis to Galaor, I beseech ye to follow the King, least wursse
befall him then we can remedy, and I will after the Princess Oriana. So
shaking hands in equal resolution, they parted the several ways: but Amadis
found his horse so ouer-laboured, as he was able to hold out no longer. Being
thus hindered, by chance he looked aside, and saw where a Knight lay slain,
with a Squire standing by holding his horse: wher-upon Amadis stepped to him,
demanding who committed that murder. A traitor has done it, answered the
Squire, who is not yet gone very far, and leads with him the fairest Lady in
ye world: no other reason had he for my masters death but because he asked
what the Lady was. What will thou do, said Amadis, tarrying here? I stay sir,
quoth he, til some one come, who may help me with my masters body to some
burial, and afterward I intend to seek my fortune. If thou answered Amadis,
wilt give me the horse thou hold, I will leave thee mine, and my Squire to
help thee, and one day will give thee two better beside. The Squire, was
content, when Amadis mounting on the horse, commanded Gandalin to help him
burye his masters body, and afterward to follow him the same way he rode.

Thus Amadis hyes so fast as horse can run, and espying an Hermitage, went to
see if any body were within: at his call, the Hermit came forth, of whom he
asked, if he saw not five Knights pass by leading two Ladies. No verily,
answered the old father: but do you not enquire for a Castle, which is not
far from this place? Why ask ye such a question? quoth Amadis. Because a
Nephewe of mine told me, said the Hermit, how Arcalaus the enchaunter is
going thither, and two Ladies with him, whom he carries perforce. Ah father,
replied Amadis, you name the traitor I look for. Trust me Sir, quoth the
Hermit, he has done many mischeefes in this country, would God we were either
rid of him, or his life amended: but have you no body to help you? Nobody, but
God and my self, answered Amadis. Why Sir? said the Hermit, you tell me they be
five in company, and you but one, beside, Arcalaus is counted one of the best
Knights in the world, and with whom few or none dare meddle. What-soeuer he
be, quoth Amadis, I am certain he is a disloyal traitor, and they no less
that keep him company: what less cause then have I to fear him? for God is
just, in whom is only my confidence. I pray you Sir, replied the Hermit, know
you of whence the Ladies be? One of them, said Amadis, is the Princess Oriana,
daughter and heir to the virtuous King Lisuart: the other is a Lady attending
on her. The God of heaven, answered the Hermit, further your intent, that so
good a Princess may not be long in such a wretches custodye. If you have any
prouender father, quoth Amadis, I desire you give my horse a little. The
Hermit brought forth such as he had, and while the horse fed, Amadis
demanded to whom the Castle belonged. To a Knight called Grumen, said the
Hermit, Cousin german to proud Dardan, who was slain at the Court of King
Lisuart, which makes me the rather conjecture, that he will lodge such as are
enemies to so good a Prince. Good father, replied Amadis, I beseech you have
mind of me in your prayers, and now show me the nearest way to the Castle.
Which the Hermit did, when Amadis mounting on horsse-back, took his leave,
following the way he was directed. Not long after, he got a sight of the
Castle, which was compassed with strong Towers and high walls, wherefore so
closely as he could he approached near it, where he heard what joy they made
for the arrival of Arcalaus, when marking how many gates of issue it had, he
found there was no more but one, wherefore tying his horse where he might not
be seen, he hid himself so conveniently, as none could pass in and out but he
must needs see them, thus was he glad to watch there all this night. At the
break of day, doubting least the watch of the Castle should descrye him, he
entered a little thicket, where long he had not staid, but he saw a Knight come
forth on a little hill before the Castle, looking all about if he could
discern any ambushe: which done, he went in again, and very soon after,
Arcalaus with his four companions issued forth well armed, conducting the two
Ladies, whom Amadis well knew so soon as he saw them. Heer-upon he fell
down on his knee and prayed, that God would strengthen him in this enterprise,
then looking to the well guirding of his horse, and yt every part of his
armor were as it ought to be, taking his Lance, he mounted, tarying till they
passed by him. But because this place was unfit for the combat, he intended to
suffer them enter on a plain near at hand, still keeping him self hid in the
thicket: and so near did Arcalaus with his company pass by Amadis, as he heard
the Princess Oriana thus complain. Alas sweet friend, quoth she, great
reason have you to bid me adieu, when I would permit you to go succor her,
that seemed the most woeful woman in the world: for I fear this shall be our
latest conge, and never may you see me again, because death gives such due
attendaunce, as it is impossible for me to escape. These words were of such
virtue, that albeit Amadis could not refrain from tears, yet did they so
lively inflame his heart, as ouer-reaching them ere they knew any thing, he thus
spoke to them. You lie false traitors, for these Ladies shall pass no
further. The voice of Amadis was quickly known by Oriana and the Damsel of
Denmark, when imagining themselves already reskewed, their minds were
joyfully cheered, especially to see their conductours so suddenly amated. But
Arcalaus perceiving how Amadis outraged his friends, approached more near him,
and Amadis well knowing him from the rest, met him so bravely, as he sent him
headlong to the ground: then entering among the other four, he gave such a
charge to Grumen, the Lord of the Castle where they lodged, that his Lance
passed quite through his body, and breaking therein, he fell down dead from
his horse. Now drew he the Sword the Queen sent him, wher-with he laid so
valiantly about him, as his enemies were clean dismayed in their hope, when
they beheld Arcalaus not yet recovered, whose power they reputed able to
ouer-throwe an Army. As he continued the combat with them, the Damsel of
Denmark seeing the friends of Arcalaus fight so timorously, and him self lie
still as one in a trance, she said to Oriana. Madame, behold how your Amadis
honoreth your love, see you not how he has used Arcalaus and our host? in
sooth we are already succored, for these other villains can hold out no
longer. Ah happy Amadis, quoth Oriana, the mirror of all virtue and
chiualrye, heaven give thee grace to finishe our deliverance, with victory
over these malicious traitors. When the Squire who had the charge of Oriana,
as you have heard, understood that she named Amadis, he was in such fear, as
presently he leaped from ye horse saying. By my faith I might full well be
reputed a fool, to tarry for such blows as my companyons have: and with these
words he ran away so fast, that he never looked behind if any pursued him.
In this time Amadis had dispatched three of the Knights, and the fourth
misdoubting like lot would fall to him, trusted to his horse legs for
safety of him self: but as Amadis followed him, he heard the Princess give a
loud cry, when looking back, he saw that Arcalaus had got her with him on
horsse-back, and gallopped away so fast as he could. Heer-upon he let go the
Knight, to help Oriana, ouer-taking Arcalaus ere he got much ground, and
lifting his sword to strike at him, he doubted least he should hurt the
Princess: but turning on the other side, he gave him such a wound on the
shoulder, as he was glad to let fall Oriana, that him-self might escape away
more lightly: for he knew if Amadis laid hold on him, all the treasure in the
world could not save his life. When Amadis saw him self sure of his Lady, he
still pursued the cowardlye runaway, saying: Tarry Arcalaus, tarry, and thou
shall see if Amadis be dead, according as thou lyedst not long ago. But
Arcalaus had no leisure to answer, he rather took his Sheeld from his neck
and threw it to the ground, because nothing might hinder his horse in
running. At length as Amadis struck at him, the blow fell short on the horse
buttocke, and the beast feeling him self wounded, made greater haste away then
he did before, leaving Amadis very far behind, who earnestly desired the
death of Arcalaus: but seeing all his labor was in vain, and doubting least
some harm might happen to his mistress, to loose her again by negligence,
having by hardy valor so well recovered her: he turned back again, and
attaining the place where she stayed for him, he alighted from his horse, then
falling on his knee humbly kissed her hand, saying. Madame, heaven has
affoorded me more grace, in strengthening me to succor you, then ever it did
to any other Knight, for I was out of hope to see you again. But she good Lady
remained still so passionate, in respect of her ungentle usage, as also
affrighted with fear when Arcalaus let her fall: that she could return no
answer, but gave him thanks by many kind embracinges. By this time, the
Damsel of Denmark came to them, and by the way found the sword of Arcalaus,
which she bringing to Amadis, thus spoke. See here (my Lord) a very fair
sword. Right soon did Amadis know it, to be the same was found with him on
the Sea, which Arcalaus took from him when he lay enchaunted, being not a
little glad he had recovered it.

While many affable speeches passed between them, Amadis still comforting his
dismayed mistress, and she rejoicing in her lovely friend: Gandalin arrived,
who had sought his master all that night, and happily found him there with his
Lady. Now minded they to tarry no longer in this place, wherefore making choice
of the Knights Horses to their own liking, they all amounted, Amadis leading
Orianaes Palfray by the bridle, and she rehearsing to him by the way, what
injury the dead Knights had done her, as in her lifetime she never endured
the like. Madame, answered Amadis, much greater grief have I suffered by a
living creature, yet less to be feared then the dead, who can do no harm:
but beauty only has hazarded my life. Albeit Oriana well knew his meaning,
yet she demanded who was the cause thereof. Even you Madame, quoth he, who
hold me in a life more yrksome then death. My Lord, said the Princess, never
with my consent did you sustain any harm, and very sorry would I be you should
think me so unkind: for rather could I afford to ease your grief, were it in
my power to compass the mean. Ah Madame, replied Amadis, as by you only I
took my hurt, so from you only must I have my help, and reason reputes it a
matter of great inconvenience, that such rare perfections should cause so rough
passions. But if you be endued with such pity, as the rest of your
excellencies do plainly promise, you will not behold that in me, which you
grieve to see in your cheifest enemies: even death gentle Princess, who in my
torments awayteth on me, forbearing to strike, being conquered with this hope,
that did opportunity and place serve, your passed promise should ease your
thoughts, and deliver me from this weighty oppression. But see how sweet
occasion favors us, and fortune stands aloof from hindering our content:
do not you then (good Madame) let slip this gracious offer, when time and
place challenge it at your hand, considering the argument is urgent, and being
now loytered, may hardly be again so well recovered. Oriana (not so much for
these reasons, as because her pain was equal with his, and had not he begun
the motion, her self would have solicited the same) thus answered. Great is
the force of your persuasions, but greater the unfeigned love I bear you, which
has such authority over me: as when you shall have least occasion to demand,
I am content and constrained to obey, yea, to repose such a thing in your
trust, as very hardly can I hold fast in my thoughts. Yet I desire you, albeit
you see me not stored with providence, that you will carefully manage our
enterprise, by wary keeping it from knowledge or suspect: rather submitting
our selves to the highest displeasure, then common reproof, which is containd
within no limits. Sufficient protestations made Amadis hereof, but little
battery needed when the hold was won, and riding through a very thick wood,
the Princess became desirous of sleep, because the night before she enjoyed
no rest: whereupon she acquainted Amadis therewith, saying, she must needs
sleep ere she went any further. He being no unprofitable counceller, and
seeing a dainty plot by a river side, shaddowed with boughs from the heat of
the Sun: advised her to rest there awhile, and dismounting from their
horses, he thus spoke. So please you Madame, in this place we may stay till
the heat be gone, and you rest in tarying for the cold evening: in mean space
I will send Gandalin to the Town, to bring some viaunds to refresh us withal.
Your reason is good, said Oriana, but how shall he come by meat? He shall leave
his horse in pawn, answered Amadis, and return on foot. Yet I (quoth
Oriana) have a better help then that: he shall sell this King, which can do
us no better service then now in our need. So pulling the King from her finger,
she gave it to Gandalin, who taking his leave, as he came by his Master, said:
So good time lost, will never be had again. Amadis knew his meaning well
enough, yet made he no show thereof, but unarmed himself, and Oriana
spreading the Damsels mantle on the grass, laid her down upon it: the
Damsel likewise went aside into the wood, where she fell soundly a-sleep, by
reason she watched all the night before. Thus remained Amadis alone with his
mistress, so glad of her gentle grant, and the favorable hour at hand: as
he could not withdraw his eyes from their comfort, which made him delay time
in needless gazing. In the end, though his hands had been slow in vnarming
him, all his other members were in better state, for not one of them but did
his duty. The heart was ravished in thoughts, the eye, in contemplation of
excellent beauty, the mouth, with sweet kisses, the arms, with kind
embracings: and no one mal content in any point, except the eyes, which wished
themselves in number like the stars in heaven, for their better ability in
function, thinking they could not sufficiently behold so divine an object. In
great pain were they likewise, because they were hindered from the pride of
beauty, for the Princess held her eyes closed, as well to disguise her desire
of sleep, as also for the discreet shame conceived by this pleasure, so that
she durst not boldly look on him she most loved. Heere-upon, carelessly
spreading her arms abroad, as though she slept in deed, and by reason of the
exceeding heat, leaving her gorget open, two little alablaster bowls lively
showed themselves in her bosom, so fair and sweetly respiring, as Nature
never showed more curious workmanship. Now Amadis forgetting his former
bashfulnes, seeing Fortune allowed him so queint a favor, let loose the reins
of amourous desire with such advantage, as notwithstanding some weak
resistance of the Princess, she was enforced to prove the good and bad
together, which makes freendly maidens become fair women. Dainty was the
good grace and subtlety of Oriana, in shaddowing her surpassing pleasure, with
a delicate and femenine complaint of Amadis boldness, showing in countenance
such a gracious choler and contented displeasure: as in stead of consuming
time in excuses, Amadis re-saluted her with sundry sweet kisses, as also an
other cause to chide if she would. But she being loathe to mix angry speeches
with amiable sollace, or with frowning looks to cross an equal content,
thought it better to commend the control of so kind a lover, and therefore
continued this pleasing recreation, as nether party received occasion of
mislike: rather with kisses (which are counted the seals of love) they chose
to confirm their unanimity, then otherwise to offend a resolved patience. Ah,
how many repetitions made Oriana, of the pains she suffered in expectation of
this day? confessing those private particularities, which none but she and her
desire were acquainted withal. How many matters likewise alleged Amadis,
expressing thereby his singular contentment, and credible assurance of his
perpetual faith? now reckoning all his travails well employed, and more then
sufficiently recompensed. In these discourses and pleasures they spent most
part of the day, carried so far from remembrance of any thing else, as they
thought not on the time, how day wasted, and night ensued, whether Gandalin
were returned, or the Damsel awake, all these things were now cast into
oblivion. They imagined to have viands good store, being thus delighted the
one with the other, which seemed more delicious to them, then all the Nectar or
Ambrosia of Jupiter. Yet at length they remembered themselves somewhat better,
when hearing the Damsel and Gandalin so near them, their pastime ended, and
taking each other by the hand, walked among the trees to take the air: in the
mean while Gandalin and the Damsel spread a cloth on the grass, and set
there-on such victuals as they had. Now though there wanted rich cup-boords of
plate, as were in the houses of King Lisuart and Perion, as also the
sollemnitie of great services: yet the fortunate entertainment at this time,
was held by them of higher estimation. During their repast, as they regarded
the woods and fountains, they began to esteem it no strange matter, why the
Gods some-time forsook the heavens, to dwell in groves and delightful
Forests. Jupiter they imagined wise, when he followed Europa, Io, and his
other friends. Beside, Apollo had reason to become a Sheep-heard, for the love
of Daphne, and the daughter of Admetus. They being willing to imitate their
example, wished continuallye to tarry there, without returning to the Palace
and royal pomp: reputing the Nymphs of of the woods most happy Goddesses,
excelling such as remained in the walled Cities. Pity were it to trouble
these lovers in their amorous devises, wherefore we will leave them, and see
what happened to Galaor, following the search of King Lisuart.

CHAP. XXXVII. How Galaor rescued King Lisuart from the ten Knights that led
him to prison.
GAlaor parting from his brother Amadis, in such sort as you heard, followed
the way whereby the King was led prisoner, and making great haste, in respect
of his earnest desire to ouer-take him, had mind of nothing else he met by the
way. As thus he continued gallopping, he saw a Knight well armed come riding
toward him, who meruailing why the Prince used such extreme diligence, when
he came near him, said. Stay a while Knight, and tell me what affairs cause
you make such speed. Forbear Sir I pray ye, answered Galaor, for by my
tarying may happen too great an inconvenience. By God, said the Knight, you
must not so escape, for you shall tell me whether you will or no. I may not
trifle the time, quoth Galaor, and so rode on still without any tariaunce. Nay
Gallant, replied the Knight, I I will be resolved in my demand, though to your
cost. Heer-upon he posted after Galaor, still exclaiming on him with hard
words, weening he fled away for fear of him, and oftentimes he thought to
smite him with his lance, but the Prince euer-more escaped his attempt: yet
his horse being sore wearied, hindered him very much, when the Knight
ouer-taking him, thus spoke. Infamous palliard, and without heart, of these
three things choose the best, either to combat, return, or answer my
demand. Now trust me, said Galaor, the easiest of these three is hard to me,
wherein you make no show of courtesy: for return I may not, and if I combat,
it must be against my will. But if you desire to know the cause of my haste,
follow me and you shall see: for I should tarry too long in telling it, and
happily you would scant believe me, so horrible and disloyal is the deed which
compels me to this impacience. Believe me, quoth the Knight, and I will
follow thee three whole days, only to see whether thou lie or no.

Thus Galaor held on his way, and the Knight hasting after, till having ridden
the space of a mile, when they espied two other Knights, the one being on
foot running to catch his horse, and the other gallopping away so fast as he
could. He on foot was Cousin german to ye Knight that followed Galaor, who in
iousting with the other Knight, had been dismounted: and knowing his kinseman,
acquainted him with the whole accident, requesting his assistaunce in revenge
of his wrong. It may not be now, answered the other, till I have followed the
Knight you see before, three days together: heerto he added all the speeches
between Galaor and him. In sooth, replied his Cousin, he should seem (by your
words) the greatest coward in the world, else minds he some enterprise of
higher consequence: therefore I will adiourne the revenge of mine injury, and
bear you company, to the end I may behold the sum of your attempt. While thus
they talked, Galaor had gotten very far before, which caused them make the
more haste after him: till at length the Prince espied the ten Knights that
conducted the King, they riding up a narrow strayte, five before him, and five
behind. Now did he fully resolve to dye, or purchase his deliverance, for he
was so offended to see the King bound with chains, as he imagined him self
able to conquer them all, and as many more if they had been there, wher-upon
he thus cried to them: Traitors, durst you irreverently lay hand on the best
King in the world? with which words he met one of them so directly, as his
Lance passing through his body, he fell down dead beside his horse. When
the other four saw their companion slain, they willed the foremost five to
guarde the King, for they would revenge his death sufficiently: but they found
themselves very much deceived, for though the Princes horse, (by reason of
his sore travail) often s^umbled, and thereby put him in danger of falling,
yet laid he such load upon his enemies, as two more of them accompanied the
first, and the other twain were brought into hard extremetie. Then came the
other five with a fresh charge upon him, when Galaor perceiving his own
danger, intended to revenge his death and the Kings together, entering
couragiouslye among the chickest, showing most rare and hautye chivalry. When
the two Cozins that followed him beheld his behavior, confounded with
marvel, the one said to the other. By God we did him wrong to term him a
coward, for he is the most hardy Knight that ever I saw: except the world
shall twit us with shame, let us not see him dye in this extremetie, least the
beutie of chivalry be gone for ever. Resolved thus to succor him, they
valiantlye thrust themselves into the skirmishe, delivering such freendly
blows on every side, that Galaor soon felt him self well assisted: because
his enemies were somewhat more dispearsed, and he had leisure to take a little
breathing, but wundering whence this aid should proceed, he fell to work
again, giving them good cause to misdoubt their lives. When the Cousin to
Arcalaus saw how his side decayed, and his Knights dishartened, slain and
sore wounded: he purposed to kill the King: who by this time found the means
to unbind himself, and alighting from his horse, got one of the slain
Knights swoordes, wher-with he resisted his enemies bravely. As the Cousin to
Arcalaus followed his intent, the King gave his horse such a blow over the
face, as by rearing up, he fell down backward, yet the Knight recovered him
self, and Galaor seeing one fight with the King, came to assist him, when
snatching off his Helmet, he would have smitten his head from his shoulders:
but the King would not suffer him, saying, he should live and dye a thief. The
two Cozins, who were named Don Guilan and Ladasin, pursued an other Knight,
whom they slew, and returning back again, they knew ye King, which struck
them into no little marvel, because they heard nothing of his mis fortune:
then alighting from their horses, they took off their helmets and did him
reverence, when he knowing them right well, embraced them in his arms, saying.
My friends, you have succored me in a needful time, for which I may live to
requite you with thanks: yet have you wronged me by your absence from the
Court, and for your love to each other I lost you both, especially, you Lord
Guilan, your mind being elsewhere, made you forget me. These words caused
a modest blush in Don Guilan, because the King disciphered his love, which was
the Duchess of Bristoya, who was not one jot behind him in affection: as well
witnessed the good entertainment she gave him, tasting together the fruit of
their contentment. Which the Duke so doubted, and daily conceived such
suspicion thereof, as it procured the iniurye was done to Galaor, when the
Dwarffe espied him in the Garden, at his return from fair Aldena, whereby the
Damsel was in danger of burning, as the historye heer-tofore has declared
to you.

But while the King thus communed with Don Guilan, Galaor had gotten the
Nephewe of Arcalaus beside his horse, and tied the chain about his neck the
King was bound withal: then taking the best horses belonged to the dead
Knights, they rode toward London. And by the way, Ladasin recounted to the
King, how he contended with Galaor for riding so fast, offering him the combat
which he refused, because he would delay no time for his succor: which caused
the King to requite him with many thanks, that he could so well forbear in a
case of such necessity. But my Lord, quoth Don ^uilan, my hap was more hard,
for by thinking on her, who oftentimes makes me forget my self, a Knight
encountered with me, and by force of his Lance, cast me from my saddle. In
sooth, answered the King, I have heard talk of many lovers, and what they
enterprise for their Ladies, yet never of any folly comparable to yours: which
gives me good cause to conjecture, that you were not in vain named Guilan the
pensive, for you are ye greatest muser I ever heard of. As thus they beguiled
the time, they arrived at the house of Lad^sin, which was not far thence,
whether soon after came Galaors Squire, and Dardan the Dwarffe, who thought
his master had taken that way. Then did Galaor tell the King, how his brother
Amadis was gone to reskew his daughter, and in what manner they heard of their
separation by the poor laborers, wherefore he advised him to send speedily to
London, least his mishap being published in the City, might raise some
commotion among the people. Credit me, quoth the King, seeing Amadis undertook
to follow my daughter, I will not as yet account her lost, if the traitor
Arcalaus work no new villainie by his enchauntments: but as concerning my
happy deliverance, I like well that my Queen should understand thereof.
Wher-upon Ladasin called a Squire, whom the King presentlye sent to the Court
as Galaor advised. After they had well refreshed themselves, they were
conducted to their chambers, and on the morrow set forward on their journey,
the King communing with the Nephewe of Arcalaus, as concerning the enterprise
of his kinseman: which made him reveal the whole determination, and how
Barsinan was in hope to be King of great Brittayne. Heere-upon the King
concluded to make the more haste, thinking to find Barsinan as yet at London,
and to punish him for his audacious presumption.

CHAP. XXXVIII. How news came to the Queen that the King was taken: And how
Barsinan labored to usurp the City of Landon.
IF you have well noted the former discourse, you may easily remember, how the
poor laboring men, (not knowing the King and Oriana) seeing how iniuriouslye
they were entreated by Arcalaus and his accomplices, were glad to hide themselves
in the wood: in like manner, how afterward they understood by Amadis and
Galaor, that the prisoners were King Lisuarts and his daughters. Where-upon, so
soon as the two Knights were parted from them, they hasted to report these
news in London: which caused such a murmuring thorough the City, especially
among the Knights, as they presently Armed themselves, and mounted on
horsseback in such troops, that the feelds were quickly covered with men and
horses. At this time was King Arban of Norgalles talking with the Queen,
little thinking on any such misfortune: when one of his Squires bringing his
Armor, said. My Lord, you tarry here trifling too long, arm your self
quickly and follow the rest, who by this time have gotten so far as the
Forest. What is the matter answered King Arban. Ah my Lord, quoth the Squire,
news is brought to the City, how certain villains have carried the King
away prisoner. Prisoner? replied King Arban, may it be possible? Too true my
Lord, answered the Squire. When the Queen heard these unhappy tidings, not
able to undergo so great an oppression, she fell down in a swoune: but King
Arban having more mind on the King, left her in her Ladies arms, hasting with
all speed he could to horsseback. When he was setting foot in stirrup, he
heard the alarm sounded, and the assault which Barsinan gave to the Castle,
whereby he gathered they were betrayed: wherefore he caused the Queens
lodging to be guarded, and returning to the City, saw every one ready in
Arms, when choosing so many as he pleased, as also two hundred well approved
Knights, he sent two of the cheifest to the Tower of London, to understand the
cause of the alarm. To them it was reported, how Barsinan had forcibly entered
with his train, killing and casting over the walls all that he met. Herein
he followed the message of the Page from Arcalaus, finding very slender
resistance: for most part of the Knights and men of account, were gone to
succor the King. Highly displeased was King Arban at these news, persuading
himself the King had been betrayed, wherefore to prevent such other
inconveniences as might happen, he dorayned his men in battle, placing good
watch about the Queens lodging. And thither Barsinan now prepared, hoping to
take her as he had done the Tower: but he met with stronger resist then he
expected, and the skirmishes proceeding on either side, Barsinan took a
prisoner, by whom he was advertised, how King Arban would withstand him even
to the death. Now began he to devise, how by fair speech and falsehood he might
take the King, craving a parle with him, whereto King Arban willingly agreed,
and silence being made on both sides, Barsinan began in this manner.

I ever thought till now my Lord, that you were one of the best advised
Knights in the world, but by proof I perceive a man may find the contrary:
yet this I think withal, that what you do, is for safety of your honor.
Heerin you appear of simple judgment, considering in the end, it will be but
the loss of you and your men: in respect King Lisuart your late Lord is dead,
for proof whereof, even he that slew him, will ere long send me his head. Since
Fortune then has dealt so hardly with him, and I at this instant am the
greatest Lord in this Country: dare you deny to make me King? Alas, you abuse
your self, the best will be for you, to yield your self lovingly, and I
shall entreat you so well as any Prince in my Realm: suffering you still to
enjoy the Country of Norgalles, and particulerlye beside will so honor you, as
you shall have great reason to be content. Auaunt villain, answered King
Arban, full well do thou manifest thy horrible treason: for beside thy
trecherye in compacting the death of my Lord, thou would have me become a
traitor to his friends, as thou thy self have proved. Thou art deceived,
do the wurst thou can: thy villainie only will take vengeance on thee
according to desert, with such good help as we will put thereto. What? said
Barsinan, think thou to hinder me from sitting as King in London? Never
shall traitor, replied Arban, be King of London, by Gods leave, while the most
honorable King of the world lives. I called for thee, quoth Barsinan, in
respect of thine own good, because I favored thee more then any other,
imagining thou were of sound discretion: but (as I have said) I find my self
deceived, wherefore reason requires, that thy ouer-weening should fall, and (in
despite of thee) I will reign King in great Britain. Assure thy self,
answered Arban, I will keep thee from such climbing, as if the King my Master
were here personallye present. Then began the assault afresh, King Arban
withdrawing him self to harden his men, being meruailously offended at
Barsinans words. Now though he were very sharply assailed, yet stood he
brauelye on his defense, many being slain and sore wounded: neuer-thelesse,
he was euer-more formoste in the fight, and last at the retreit, which was
caused by the night ensuing. Nor need we doubt, considering the puissaunce of
Barsinan, and the few on the contrary side, but King Arban would take his
advantage in resistaunce, by compelling them to the narrow streets, where
four on a side could hardly deal together, which turned to the great
disaduauntage of Barsinan, because Arban well fortified every place in good
order, and with fresh supply still encouraged his men.

The retreit being sounded, and either side with-drawen, King Arban seeing his
Soldiers sore wearied, by the hot skirmishes they had endured: as is the
office of a good Captain indeed, he came and comforted them in this manner. My
loving companyons and friends, this day have you so woorthily fought, as none
of you but deserves estimation, among the most forward men in the world, and
having begun so well, I hope you will proceed better and better. Remember the
cause of your fight, not only to maintain your good King, but your own
liberty: against a tirant, a traitor, and what worsse? who would buy his
usurping in this Kingdom, with the blood of you, your wives and children. Saw
you not how he used them he took in the Tower? Behold you not the end of his
purpose? which is to ruinate this noble Realm, that has (by divine
providence) been so long time preserved, and evermore continued in reputation,
floorishing with loyal subjects to their Prince? Heard you not the flattering
persuasions, which the Rebel used before the assault, thinking to conquer us
by his golden tongue? In vain is his labor, I am right well assured, that no
one of you but will dye a thousand deaths, before he shall conceive any other
mind in you. I see by your resolved countenaunces, if I should think or say
otherwise, I were a monstrous offendour: for if he have more men then we, we
have more hearts of courage then he, which forbids all occasions of
dismaying, setting before your eyes, the famous account you shall live in
heer-after. By their looks you might discearne at their retire, how unwilling
they will be to try you again: and respect not the traitorous words of
Barsinan, our King lives, and will right speedily come to succor us. In mean
while I entreat as my freendly companyons, let nothing dismay your hope, but
continue as you gave begun: with this famous resolution, that it is more
honorable to dye for liberty, then to enjoy a life by thraldom and slavery,
under a wicked, injurious, and traiterous Prince. When the King had ended his
oration, there was no one in the company, how sore hurt soever he was, but
would couragiouslye encounter Barsinans power, and bid him bravely good morrow
the next day in the Tower: wherewith the King not a little contented, returned
to the Queens lodging, his face covered with sweat, and his Armor all
bloodye, by reason of five wounds he received in fight. The Ladies seeing him
in such pittious plight, were meruaylouslye abashed, especially the Queen,
who well-neere dead with grief and fear together, then as a woman in midst
of despair, she said: Alas dear Nephewe what shall we do? we are all but
dead. Madame, answered King Arban, all will go well if God be pleased, in
vain do you thus discomfort your self, for I hope to hear good tidinges of
the King: and the traitors that seek to usurp his Kingdom, by your good and
loyal subjects shall receive deserved punishment. God grant it, quoth she,
but you are so wounded, as I think it impossible for you to be at the battle,
if Barsinan come to morrow again, nor can our men do any thing without you.
Be not you troubled ther-with Madame, replied King Arban, for while my soul
suckes her spirit from the air, I will not for-sake my charge. So bidding her
good night, he went to have his wounds dressed, and after-ward turned to his
Soldiers, merilye passing the night among them.

Barsinan on the other side, got into the Tower of London which he had wun, and
numbering his men, found that his power was greatly weakened: yet would he make
no show thereof for dismaying the rest, but showing a dissembling countenance,
thus spoke to them. My friends, it suffiseth that I have showen mine enemies
what you are, and they (if I think good) to stand at my mercy: wherefore I am
determined (without any further loss of you) to rest our selves five or six
days, till Arcalaus send me the head of King Lisuart, and then the sight
thereof, will make them not dare to resist me any longer, but in hope of favor
will yield themselves. Each of you therefore rejoice and be of good cheer,
for when I am King, right richly will I reward you all. So went they to rest
till the next morning, when Barsinan (being armed) mounted on horsseback, with
twenty Knights in his company, and came to a Port which one of King Arbans
Knights kept, who seeing this troop, presently sounded an alarm. But
Barsinan sent him word, how he came to parle only, and desired truce beside
for six hours: whereof King Arban was immediately advertised, who granted the
truce Barsinan required, and likewise for five days. Conditionally, that he
should offer no violence to any house in the City, or practice any entrance
during the limited time: beside, if the King returned in that space, the
difference should be left to his disposition. Barsinan was contented with
these conditions, because he accounted King Lisuarts death certain, where-upon
he said to Arban. I hope this little truce, will be an entrance into a
perpetual peace between us: for I dare assure ye, King Lisuart is dead, and
his Daughter must be my Wife, as within these five days ensuing you shall
evidently see. What? quoth King Arban, thou have then put him to death: and
could thou deal so traitorously with him, that gave thee such honorable
entertainment in his Court? rather will I presently dye, then continue one
hour of peace with thee, get thee gone therefore quickly, or I will send thee
hence in pieces. Is it true? quoth Barsinan, well may thou threaten me, but
it is in me to make thee repent it. Thus returned he to his Soldiers,
acquainting them with his honest offers to King Arban, and the audacious
answer he returned for them.

CHAP. XXXIX. How Amadis came to the succor of the City of London, when it
was in this distress.
NOt long ago we left Amadis in the wood, familiarly devising with the
Princess Oriana, thinking on nothing but their sweet contentation: and among
other discourse, Amadis entreated her to tell him, what speeches Arcalaus had
with her by the way. On my faith Sir, quoth she, he confounded my senses with
persuading me to rejoice, saying: Before five days were expired, I should
reign as Queen in great Brittayne, enjoying Barsinan to my husband: himself
likewise should be cheef governor, and master of his house, in recompense of
the services he did for him, in giving him my fathers head, and me to be his
wife. Ah heavens, said Amadis, what treason is this in Barsinan, who showed
himself such a friend to the King? God shield he do no wrong to the Queen.
In sooth I greatly doubt it, replied Oriana, it were good therefore we hasted
to see. With all my heart, quoth Amadis: so mounting on horsseback, they rode
toward London, meeting many Knights by the way that followed the King, whom
still he directed in their course, certifying them that Galaor was gone
likewise in his search. Within a while after, Oriana espied Don Grumedan an
ancient Knight of honor to the Queen, and twenty Knights more with him, who
all that night had searched the Forest for the King: but when he saw her, the
tears stood in his eyes with joy, desiring to hear some news of the King her
father. Credit me Sir, quoth she, not far from the City were we sundered,
when God ordained so well for me, that Amadis delivered me from the villains,
and ransomed me with the price of their lives. They were unwise to resist, said
Grumedan, when you had so good a champion: but I pray you my Lord, what is
become of your brother? Even in the same place, answered Amadis, where they
separated the father from the daughter: we severed our selves, he posting after
the King, and I followed Arcalaus, who led away Madame Oriana. The better hope
have I of his succor, quoth Grumedan, seeing so good a Knight has taken it in
hand. Heerevpon, Amadis told him the horrible treason of Arcalaus and Barsinan:
Let me therefore entreat ye, quoth he, to conduct the Princess leasurably
after, while I make have before least the Queen be distressed, because I doubt
the traitor will offer her injury. I think it likewise expedient, that you
cause all the Knights to return you meet withal: for if the King should be
reskewed by multitude of men, there is enough before already, and more then
needs. So leaving his Lady with Don Grumedan, he made all the haste he could
toward London, ouertaking the Squire by the way that came from the King, who
told him all the news of his deliverance, which was no little joy to Amadis,
hearing the fortunate success of his brother Galaor. There met he with an
other likewise, who made report of Barsinans dealings at London, wherefore
entering ye City so covertly as he might, the first he met withal was King
Arban, of whom he was lovingly embraced and welcomed, with request of what
news he brought. None but good, answered Amadis, and such as you are desirous
to hear: but because I doubt the Queen is scant merry, let us go see her, for
happily she will be glad of our coming. So rode they to the Court together,
Amadis still keeping the Squire with him that came from the King, and when they
entered the Queens presence, Amadis falling on his knee, began in this manner.
Madame, this Gentleman left the King well this morning, and at liberty,
whereof his Majesty certifieth you by him: my self likewise (not long since)
left your Daughter with Don Grumedan, and very shortly they will be with you.
But because I understand that Barsinan mollesteth you with treachery, suffer us
I pray you to go see what he can do. When the Queen heard these joyful
tidings, her inward content took away the liberty of her speech, nor could
she do any thing but lift her hands and eyes to heaven, applauding his name
from whom this good proceeded, and by gestures delivering some sign of thanks
to Amadis. At length, having overcome this delightful passion, and intending
to question further concerning these news: the alarm was sounded, wherefore
King Arban and Amadis hyed to the bars, where they found Barsinans men giving
an eager charge, as hoping to conquer the contrary part. But Amadis thrusting
himself foremost, caused the bars to be taken down, and accompanied with
King Arban, brake in courageously upon the enemy, a noble president to their
Souldyours, who being cheered by this onset, took heart and followed. Now wexed
the skirmish to be hot indeed, so that on both sides very many were slain,
which Barsinan perceiving, and trusting in his multitude to suppress the
weaker part, came foremost himself in person, thinking (now he saw the bars
open) to drive his adversaries back again into the City. When Amadis noted
his forwardnes, he stepped back, and changed his Creast and Sheeld with a
simple mercenarie Soldiour: yet reserving his Lance, which with a strong
carrire pierced through his Armor, and wounding Barsinan, brake in pieces in
his flesh. Then drawing his Sword, he gave him such a stroke on the Helmet, as
he was astonnied therewith, and redoubling his blow, cut his right arm quite
from his shoulder: when Barsinan (feeling him so wounded) would have retired
back, to save himself by the speed of his horse, but he fell to the ground
as deprived of his senses. Wherefore Amadis left him, and set upon the rest,
who being unable to endure these hot assaults, likewise beholding their Lord
dismounted: took themselves to flight for safety of their lives, yet were
they so closely followed, as the most part of them were slain in the feeld,
and some few of them escaped into the Tower, causing the bridge to be quickly
drawn up after them. Heere-upon Amadis returned where he left Barsinan, and
because he was not yet dead, commanded he should be carried to the Queens
lodging, there to be kept till the Kings return: and as he would have put up
his Sword, he saw it soyled with blood, wherefore in wiping it, he said. Thou
trusty Sword, in a happy hour was the Knight borne to whom thou belongest:
and as thou art one of the best in the world, so is thy Master the most
virtuous Prince living. He used these words, because it appertayned to King
Lisuart, and was sent him from the Queen by Gandalin, as you heard before: but
now returns he with King Arban to the Queens lodging, to comfort her with
news of this happy victory.

All this while the King is hasting toward London, giving order to return all the Knights he met by the way, among whom were Agraies, Galuanes, Soliuan,
Galdan, Dinadaus and Bernas: all which were highly in the Kings favor, as men
of virtue and no small deserving, and his Majesty having embraced them, said.
My noble good friends, you had almost lost me, but God be thanked, you have
recovered me again, by the help of these three worthy Knights, Galaor,
Guilan and Ladasin. In sooth my Lord, answered Dinadaus, so soon as your
mishap was known in the City, each one prepared to bring you succor. I
know my good Nephewe, quoth the King, that I am greatly beholding to you all:
but I pray you take good store of these Knights, and post with speed to assist
the Queen, for I doubt she is in no little danger. This Dinadaus was one of
the best Knights of the Kings lineage, and well esteemed among men of account,
as well in respect of his virtues, as also his brave behavior in chivalry: so
according to the Kings command, he rode away presently very brauelye
accompanied. The King likewise followed an indifferent pace, least his Nephewe
should stand in need of help, and by the way he ouer-tooke Don Grumedan with
his daughter Oriana, how joyful his meeting was you may easily conceive, that
the separation was not so grievous, but this was as gladsome. Grumedan told his
Majesty, how Amadis left the Princess with him, while he rode before to
assist the Queen: thus with repetition of many matters, they beguiled ye time
till they arrived at London, where he understood the success of Barsinans
enterprise, and how valiantly King Arban had resisted him, not forgetting the
woorthye behavior of Amadis, in taking him prisoner and discomfiting his men,
except a few that saved themselves in the Tower. Here would it ask a world
of time, to report the joy, pleasure, and contentment between the King and
Queen at their meeting, likewise the Mothers comfort having recovered her
Daughter again: but as your judgments can better conceive then I set down,
matter above the reach of common capacity, so do I leave it to you, and
proceed to the King. Who to terrify the traitors thus gotten into hold,
besieged them seuerelly, and to disharten them the more, brought Barsinan and
Arcalaus Nephewe before the walls, where before all the people they confessed
their treason. Which being done, a great fire was made, wherein they were
alive consumed, but when they in the Tower beheld this spectackle, and that
they were in great want of victualles, they yielded themselves to the Kings
mercy, the most part of them being (for examples sake) hanged on the
battlements, and the rest set at liberty upon humble submission. Yet this
matter bred great trouble afterward, between them of great Britain and
Sansuegua: for the Son of Barsinan being a good Knight, vexed King Lisuart
with contagious war, as the Historye heere-after at large is mentioned.

After the King had escaped these misfortunes, the former joys and pastimes
began again: during which time, the Lady and her two Sons, (the messengers of
Madasima, who were witnesses when Galaor and Amadis promised to forsake King
Lisuarts service) arrived at ye Court. When the two Princes were advertised
thereof, they went and freendly entertained her, she saying: Gentlemen you know
the cause of my coming, are you determined to keep your promise? We are, quoth
they, and will not break our covenant with Madasima, but presently will
perfourm it before the King. Entering the great hall, the Lady fell on her knees
before his Majesty, delivering these speeches. My Lord, I am come to your
Court, to see if these two Knights will observe a covenant, which in my
presence they made to a Lady. What was it? answered the King. A matter that
will scant like you, quoth the Lady, or any such as bear you affection: and
thereto she added ye whole circumstance. Whereat the King wexing some what
offended, told Galaor that he had very much wronged him. My Lord, replied
Galaor, it was better to do so, then be trecherously slain, for had we been
known, neither you or all the world could have saved our lives: but let not
your Majesty be offended, for the remedy shall be more ready then you
expect. In accomplishing my promise to Madasima of Gantasi, my Lord I take my
leave of you, departing altogether from your service: certifying you, that it
is her will to do you this displeasure, and wursse if she could compass it,
for the extreme malice she bears to you. Amadis affirmed what his brother
had done, then Galaor turning to the Lady and her two Sons, said. Have we
not now accomplished our promise? Yes truly, quoth the Lady, we must needs
avouch so much. You may then return when you please, answered Galaor, but tell
Madasima, she did not so much as she weened, as you may perceive by the present
effect. Now my Lord, quoth he to the King, we have fulfilled our promise to
Madasima, and because in granting her earnest desire, the time was not
limited how long we should leave your service: we may enter ther-into again
when you please to command, so that we are yours as faithful as before, When
the King and all that were present heard what had past, they rejoiced
exceedingly, esteeming Galaor and Amadis well advised heerin, wher-upon the
King thus spoke to the Lady. According to her great treason under shadow of
good meaning, they are bound to no more then they have accomplished: for to
deceive the deceiuer is no deceit. And say to Madasima, seeing she hates me so
unreasonably, she once had them in her power, who might have grieved me all my
life time: but God having in other places delivered me from many perilles, will
not suffer me to perish by so bad a woman as she is. I desire ye my Lord, quoth
she, to tell me their names. The one is Amadis, answered the King, and the
other his brother Galaor. May it be possible, said the Lady, that Madasima had
Amadis in her power? Credit me, quoth the King, I have told ye truth. Their
fortune was good, replied the Lady, for they might not have escaped if she had
known them: and in sooth the deed might be reckoned ominous, if two such
woorthye persons had perished. Yet when she shall know hereof, said the King,
I think she will forbear to wrong me any further. With that the Lady took
her leave, shaping her course the same way she came.

CHAP. XL. How King Lisuart held open Court in the City of London many
days, in which time, sundry great personages were there feasted, the greater
part whereof remained there long time afterward.
Twelve days together (after these mishaps) did King Lisuart continue his
Court in all magnificence, many noble personages being there assembled, as
well strangers as other, hoping now to make little stay but to return home to
their own houses: yet the greater part of them abode with the King, in like
manner did sundry worthy Ladies accompany the Queen. Among other Knights
attending on the King, were Don Guilan the pensive, and his Cousin Ladasin, who
(as I have said) were very good Knights: but Guilan was the better of the
twain, for very few were found in the Realm of great Britain, that carried
more account for deeds of Arms, and all other graces beseeming a Knight,
setting aside his musing and melancholye. By means whereof, few or none could be
pleasant with him, or have any words from him in company: but love procured
these extremes, busying his thoughts in such sort with his Lady, as he had
mind of none but her. And she of whom we speak, was endued with singular
beautye, being named Brandalisia, sister to the Kings wife of Sobradisa, and
joined in marriage with the Duke of Bristoya: who now was arrived at the Court,
to answer the accusation Oliuas laid against him. The King gave him very
gentle welcome, and being in the presence of many great Lords, the Duke began
in this manner. Sir, you have commanded my appearance here this day, to
justify my self before your Majesty, concerning a crime Oliuas charge me
withal: whereof I hope sufficiently to clear my self, by the rightful
judgment your self shall give, and he rest condemned like a varlet as he is:
for here am I ready to approve against him, or any other he shall bring, that I
never committed treason or so foul a deed. At these words Oliuas arose, and
with him a great number of Knights errant, all resolved to maintain this
quarrel against the Duke: when the King beheld them in such a mutiny, he
meruailed whence the cause should proceed, when Grumedan speaking for all the
rest, said. My Lord, because the Duke of Bristoya has threatened and defied
all Knights errant, we are ready to answer his challenge. In good faith,
answered the King, if it be so? he has attempted an ouer-fond war, for I
think there is no King in the world so puissant, that will be induced to such
an enterprise. But for-beare at this time, and offer him no injury, because he
is here to receive justice: which shall be done, according to the council of
the Princes and Lords present, without favoring any one. Then Oliuas falling
on his knee before the King, began in this wanner. My Lord, the Duke who
stands before your Majesty, has slain a Cousin german of mine, he never
giving him occasion of offense: wherefore I will justify him to be a villain
and a traitor, and will make him confess it with his own mouth, else shall
I kill him and cast him forth of the feelde. The Duke told him he lied, and
he was ready to accomplish what the King and his Court should ordain:
wher-upon it was determined, that this emulation should be discided by combat,
which the Duke accepted, desiring the King to permit him and his two Nephews
in this cause, against Oliuas and two other Knights. This being granted, the
Duke was very glad thereof, for he made such account of his kinsemen, as he
thought Oliuas could not bring their like: notwithstanding, all was deferred
till the morrow following.

In mean while, Don Galuanes asked his Nephew Agraies, if he would assist
Oliuas against the Duke, and he consenting there-to, Galuanes came to Oliuas,
saying. Sir Oliuas, seeing the Duke is desirous to fight three against three,
my Nephewe and I are determined to take your part: which when the Duke heard,
he remembered that he had defied them in his own house, when Agraies combatted
with the Dwarffes champion, at what time the Damsel should have been burned,
wherefore he became very pensive, in respect though he esteemed his Nephews
approved good Knights, yet he repented his wilful offer, and gladly would
have excused the matter if he could, being too well acquainted with the
behavior of Galuanes and Agraies. But considering his promise past before the
King, and so many noble personages there present, he must of necessity stand
there-to: where-fore the next morning he entered the Lysties with his Nephews,
and Oliuas on the contrary side with his copartners. Now were the Ladies
standing at the windows, to behold the issue of this quarrel, and among the
rest stood Oliuia the fair friend to Agraies, who seeing him ready to enter
such peril, was so dismayed, as she could scant tell what countenance to use.
By her stood Mabila, she being in no less grief for her Uncle and Brother
together: likewise the Princess Oriana, loving them both, in respect of the
reasons heere-to-fore declared, accompanied the two Ladies in sorrow, fearing
their danger: but the Knights being ready to the combat, the King by a Herald
commanded the Champions to do their deuoyre. Heere-upon, with a brave carrire
they encountered together, Agraies and Galuanes vnhorssing the two Nephews, and
albeit Oliuas received a wound on the stomach, yet had not the Duke caught hold
about his horse neck, his fortune had proved as bad as his Nephews. Then
drawing their Swoords, they smote so violently against each other, as the
standers by wundered at their fiercenes: beholding their Sheelds defaced, their
Armor battered and coullered with their blood, that the victory hung a long
time in suspense. For Agraies horse being slain under him, brought his life
into marvelous hazard, because the Duke and one of his Nephews strove to
keep him down, seeking to thrust their Swoords into his belly, or else to
smite his head from his shoulders: but he was so well armed, and of such
courage withal, as he held them both play though with exceeding peril. Well
you may think, that his friends grieved to see him in this distress,
especially the three Ladies, of whom we spoke so lately, whose cheeks were
bedewed with whole fountains of tears, and woeful Oliuia seemed rather dead
then living. But had he long continued in this extremity, her latest hour
must needs have ensued, yet at length he recovered himself, charging the
Duke and his Nephewe with such puissant strokes, as well declared his hardy
courage. Oliuas all this while was in such case, by reason of the sore wound
the Duke gave him, that he could hardly defend himself: which the Duke
perceiving, he left his Nephewe with Agraies, and assailing Oliuas very
roughly, made him fall down in a great astonishment. But as he would have
slain him, Agraies stepped between them, (having already dispatched his enemy
of his head) and hindered the Duke from his determination, wounding him in many
places on his body, that he could scant tell which way to turn him. Don
Galuanes likewise having slain the other Nephew, came to assist Agraies
against the Duke, who seeing his life at the latest exigent, turned his horse
to escape away: but Agraies gave him such a stroke on the Helmet, as he fell
beside his saddle, with one of his feet hanging in the stirrup, when the
horse being at liberty, feeling his burden hang on the one side, ran
flinging up and down, none being able to reskew the Duke, till his neck was
broken with dragging along. Heere-upon Agraies left him, returning to his
Uncle to know how he fared. Uery well I thank God, answered Galuanes, but it
greeueth me that Oliuas is dead, for he lies still and moves not. Right
sorry likewise was Agraies to hear these words, wherefore commanding the
Duke and his Nephews bodies to be thrown forth of the feeld, they came both
to Oliuas, and finding him alive, as also his wounds not to be mortal, they
bound the^ up so well as they could, saying. Friend Oliuas, be of good cheer,
for though you have lost very much blood, yet doubt we not of your health,
because we find little danger in your hurtes. Alas my Lords, quoth Oliuas, my
heart faints, and albeit I have been heer-tofore wounded, yet never was I in
such debilitie. Then the King desired to know whether he were dead or no, and
when it was told him, how he wanted nothing but speedye cure: he commanded
him to be honorably carried into the City, and his own Chirurgions to attend
on his health, even as it were his own person: which they did, promising, to
deliver him well again within few days.

Thus every one returned, disputing diversely on the end of the Combat, and
according to their particular affections, so that soon after, the Queen (who
was one of the best Ladies in the world) was advised to send for the wife to
the deceassed Duke, that in the Court she might wear away the cause of her
melancholy: and to dispatch this business she sent Don Grumedan to her,
requesting she would bring her Niece Aldena with her, whereof Galuanes was not a
little glad, especially Don Guilan, who was the friend and beloved of the
Duchess. Not long after, she and her Niece arrived at the Court, where they
were right nobly feasted and entertained. Thus the King spent the time in the
City of London, accompanied with many great Lords, Knights and Ladies,
because the same was blazed through the world, of his honorable courtesy to
strange Knights: which drew an exceeding number to his Court, whom he
rewarded very bountifullye, hoping (by their means) not only to confirm his
Realm in peace, but likewise to conquer other, which sometime had been subject
and tributarie to his Crown, yet through the pusillanimitie and negligence of
the Kings his predecessors, were lost and discontinued their former obedience.

CHAP. XLI. How Amadis determined to go combat with Abiseos and his two
Sons, to revenge the Kings death, who was Father to the fair Briolania, and
of that which followed.
Heretofore it has been declared, how Amadis being with Briolania, promised
to revenge the King her Fathers death, against Abiseos and his two Sons,
which in one year after he should perform, being accompanied with two other
Knights. Also how when he took his leave of her, she gave him a Sword,
because his own was broken, desiring him to wear it for her sake: which
Sword was afterward broken at the Ladies Castle, who was the beloved of
Angriote d' Estrauaus, when he combatted with Gasinan, and commanded Gandalin
to bring away the pieces thereof: which occasioned great harm not long after,
not by any fault in him, but by the indiscretion of Dardan the Dwarffe, who
imagined his master loved the fair Briolania, in respect he offered himself
to be her Knight.

One day therefore, Amadis being with King Lisuart, evermore delighting with
his Lady Oriana, to the no little contentation of them both: Love, who
oftentimes provoke his subjects, would no longer continue them in so great
ease, but raise some cinders of division, whereby they might receive
coffeehouse. For this cause he made Amadis remember his promise to
Briolania, that he should combat against Abiseos within one year, the end
whereof was now at hand: and being loathe to fail therein, he sought all
convenient means to take his leave of the Princess Oriana, determining to
acquaint her with the whole cause, in what sort Briolania was disinherited of
her Fathers Kingdom. Such were his discourses on her behalf, that although
Oriana was loath to grant what he demanded, or to permit his absence from her:
yet being overcome with compassion, she restrained her will, and in midst
of her sorrow, said: Dear friend, I know well that your speeches are
reasonable, but the wrong you do me allows no excuse: yet in respect I love
ye, as you are well assured, it is convenient I should prefer your honor
before mine own pleasure. You have promised (as you tell me) to succor a
disinherited Lady, I am content, seeing there is no other remedy, though my
consent be with greater grief then you ween: for my mind is persuaded, some
mischief will happen to me by this voyage. Madame, answered Amadis, unwilling
am I to give you any occasion of dislike, or to attempt any thing against your
mind, rather could I wish never to have been borne: let Briolania then
pardon my tarying, for I hold my self sufficiently excused, seeing my
departure is not agreeable to you. Not so sweet friend, replied Oriana, I am
willing you shall go: but make a speedye return I pray you. With twenty
kisses was this separation sealed, and she desired him to acquaint the Queen
ther-with, that this journey might be shaddowed under her commandment: which
he did, and on the morrow departed with Galaor and Agraies, when they had not
ridden past half a mile, but he asked Gandalin, if he had brought with him the
pieces of ye sword, that Briolania gave him when he left her. No my Lord,
answered Gandalin. Return then, quoth Amadis to the Dwarffe, and when thou
have them, make what speed thou can to ouer-take us. Alas, had he but
misdoubted the mishap followed heeron, he never would have sent such a
messenger: for by his rechlesse speeches, he endaungered the lives of Amadis
and Oriana together, as shall hereafter be largely described.

Gone is the Dwarffe to his Masters lodging, and finding the pieces of the
Sword, in the place where Gandalin had directed him, returned hastily toward
his Master: but passing by the Queens lodging, he heard one call him, when
looking about, he espied the Princesses Oriana and Mabila, who demanded
wherefore he had left Amadis. Madame, quoth he, I have not been so long from
him, but I can quickly ouer-take him: for this which I carye, will let him make
no great haste till I come. What is it? said Oriana. What? answered the
Dwarffe, I can assure ye Madame, he prizeth them more then they be worth, for
her sake that gave him the Sword. What is she? quoth Oriana. The Lady, replied
the Dwarffe, for whom he now undertakes the combat. And though you be daughter
to the best King in the world, as also fairer (in mine opinion) then any
other: yet rather should you have gained her conquest, then all the wealth in
this kingdom. I know not what thou meanest said Oriana, unless thy master
have given him self to her? You have guessed right Madame, answered the
Dwarffe, he is altogether at her commandment, thinking him self happy to be
her Knight. So taking his leave, he posted to ouer-take his master, who little
thought on these slanderous reports: but Oriana entered into such a iealouzie,
as without regard of any thing what-soeuer, she would have cast her self
forth at the window, had not Mabila and the Damsel of Denmark stayed her.
Now rises frowning anger in her brows, and she to misconceiue of the man,
whose only desire was to do her service. With often wringing her hands she
calls to remembrance, in what earnest affection he desired leave for this
voyage, which augmented her suspicion of the Dwarffes words: and in such sort
was her heart shut up, as no tear might fall from her eyes, because those
vapors were withdrawn to the most worthy place in her. Hereupon her
torments redoubled in extremes, as Dido for the tromperie of Aeneas, or sad
Medea, seeing her self forsaken of her friend Jason, never felt like anguish:
and in fatal fortune she would have succeeded them, but that she was hindered
by them about her, who found the means to defend her from such mishap.

By this time the Dwarffe ouer-tooke Amadis and the rest, when they began to
ride somewhat faster, Amadis not requiring any thing of him, nor he reciting
what he told the Princess, but showed him the pieces of the Sword he
brought. Nor far had they ridden, but they met a Damsel, who after she had
saluted them, demanded whether they travailed, saying, she would advise them
to forsake that way. Wherefore? answered Amadis. Because, quoth she, for the
space of fifteen days, no Knight errant passed this way, but he has been
either wounded or slain. And who has done them such displeasure? said
Amadis. A Knight, answered the Damsel, the most valiant man at Arms that
ever was seen. I pray ye Damsel, quoth Agraies, bring us where we may see
him. You cannot ride far in this Forest, said she, but he will quickly show
himself. So travail they on with the Damsel, and long time they neither
heard or saw any one, which made them think she spoke these words to fear
them: yet soon after, Amadis espied the Knight, who seemed a man of goodly
stature, and ready prepared for the combat. As he and his companyons stood
beholding him, they saw him speak to a Squire, who reared four Lances
against a tree, and afterward came to them, saying. Gentlemen, my Master
gives you to understand, how during the space of fifteen days, he has
undertaken the guard of this Forest, in all which time his fortune has been
not to be vanquished by any one: and though it be a day and a half since his
intended term is expired, yet stays he here till now for the pleasure he
has in Iousting, and as he was departing hence, he espied you coming:
wherefore he lets you know, that if each of you will break a Lance, he
cares not to try his fortune with you, provided, that the combat at the
sword be spared, because he sildome proceeds so far without doing more
harm then willingly he would. When Agraies heard this message, he took his
Arms, returning this answer: Friend, go tell thy master I am content to
try the Ioust with him. Hereupon, he gave the Spurs to his horse, and the
Knight seeing him coming, gave forth to meet him, their Lances being broken
in the encounter: but Agraies was easily cast from his horse, of which foil
he could not but be ashamed. Galaor beholding his Cousin dismounted, determined
to revenge his wrong, bidding the Knight to prepare himself, who taking an
other Lance, ran against Galaor with such fury, as after their staves were
broken, their bodies met together so vehemently, that Galaors horse being
more feeble then the other, fell down with his master on his back, but the
Prince not recovering himself, was left on the ground, when the horse arose,
and ran about the feeld, as the other of Agraies did. Amadis abashed at these
accidents, preparing himself, said to the Knight. I know not what thou art,
but thou may vaunt, that thou have dismounted two approved good Knights. So
coutching his Lance, proceeded forward, but Galaor stayed him, calling the
Knight to the combat, which made Amadis thus to answer. Brother, find not
your self agreeued with him, because he sent us word before the Ioust, that
he would not combat with the Sword: but I hope to take revenge for all.
Heerewith they encountered valiantly together, breaking their Lances so
courageously, and meeting with their bodies so violently, as Amadis was thrown
to the earth, his horses shoulder being broken in the fall: in like manner was
the Knight dismounted, but keeping the reins of his bridle in his hand, he
quickly mounted on horsseback again, when Amadis thus spoke to him. We must
try one course more, if thou will have the honor, for as yet it is not wun,
because we both were vnhorssed. I will not now Ioust any more, answered the
Knight. Then you do me wrong, replied Amadis. Redress it if you can, said the
Knight: for according to my order before the Ioust, I am bound to no more then
what I have done. After these words, he gallopped away through the Forest
so fast as he could, which when Amadis and his companyons saw, they being all
on foot: they stood as men ashamed, for they could not imagine what he was
that had thus entreated them, where upon Amadis mounted on Gandalins horse,
saying to his friends: Follow me if you please, for it would grieve me not to
know the name of this Knight. In sooth, answered the Damsel, it were the
greatest folly in you, above all the Knights belonging to King Lisuart, to
think you can find him in one whole year, unless you be directly guided.
Fair Damsel, said Galaor, it may be you know what he is, and the place where
he abides. On my faith, quoth she, if I know any thing thereof, I mean not
to tell it you: for never will I injury so good a Knight. Damsel, replied
Galaor, by the affection you bear to the thing you most love in the world,
tell us I pray ye what you know in this matter. You conjure me in vain,
quoth she, for never will I discover his affairs, except you deliver me some
good present. Demand what you will, answered Amadis, and you shall have it, on
condition you help us to find the Knight. I am content, replied the Damsel,
if first you will tell me your names, and afterward each of you grant me a
boon, at what time I shall demand them of you. With all our hearts, quoth
Amadis, as for our names, the one is Galaor, the other Agraies, and my self am
Amadis. When the Damsel heard this, she was very glad, saying: Certes my
Lord, my journey is shortened, for I seek you. Then you have now found me,
answered Amadis, what is your will with me? That you shall know, quoth she,
when time serves: but do you not remember the combat, which you promised to
perform for the King of Sobradisaes daughter, when she succored you by
means of the Lions? Yes that I do, said Amadis, and now am I riding toward
her. Would you then, quoth the Damsel, follow a Knight so hard to be found,
and the time for the combat being nearer then you ween? She says very well
my Lord, answered Galaor, do you therefore and Agraies proceed on your journey,
and I will seek the Knight with this Damsel: for never shall I rest til I
have found him, and if it be possible, I will be with you before you deal with
Abiseos. Be it so, replied Amadis, but she promised us to tell his name, and
where we may find him. His name, quoth the Damsel, I cannot tell ye, for I
know it not my self, and yet I have been a month with him, in which time I
have seen him do such deeds of Arms, as without sight thereof I would never
have credited: but where he now is, I can conduct him thither that will go
with me. It is all I request, answered Galaor. Follow me then, quoth she: so
taking their leave, they separated themselves.

Thus Amadis and Agraies hold on their way, arriving within few days after
at the Castle of Torin, where they found the fair Briolania, with the
ancient Lady: but when Amadis beheld her, he found her meruaylouslye changed,
for if she were fair when he first saw her, she now seemed of such excellent
perfection, as (except Oriana) he reputed her the most beautiful creature in
the world, wher-upon he said to Agraies. If nature was desirous to express
her cunning in a creature, in this Lady she has most sufficiently
accomplished it. My Lord, quoth she, full long have we expected your coming,
for in you consists our only hope. Madame, answered Amadis, by the help of
God I trust you shall recover your loss, and we will do our uttermost therein.
As thus they devised, they entered a fair chamber, where mantles were brought
to wrap about them, and Briolania help to unarm Amadis, for she could not be
satisfied with beholding him, because she counted him the fairest knight that
ever was seen, being now but twenty years of age. And so piercingly did he
regard her, as long time after she wexed very amourous, so that when she had
recovered her Kingdom, she wished him sole Lord of her and her country
together, as shall heer-after be declared. But Amadis was elsewhere addicted,
and gave sufficient proof to her, that the extreme anguishes he endured for
his Oriana, were manifest examples of his steadfast loyalty. Neuer-the-lesse,
the young Lord of Portugal pitying fair Briolania, would disguise this
historye in another manner, describing far otherwise the love of her and
Amadis, which report is woorthye of no credit. For he says, that Briolania
being restored into her Kingdom, providing for the health of Amadis and
Agraies who were wounded, she continuing euer-more amourous of Amadis, seeing
by no means she could win him to be her friend: took aside the Damsel, to
whom Amadis, Galaor and Agraies made the several promises, at what time she
conducted Galaor to the Knight that ious^ed with them in the Forest, and
discovering the secrets of her heart to her, with abundance of tears and
affectionate sighs, requested her council and remedy in these amourous
passions. The Damsel compassionate on her Ladies sickness, promised to give
her redress for it, wher-upon she said to Amadis, that the boon she would
desire of him, was his entrance into a Tower, from whence he should not depart,
until he had begotten of Briolania a son or a daughter. Amadis willing to
keep promise with the Damsel, yielded thereto, yet without any will to touch
Briolania: whereby he grew into such melanchollye, as he refused all bodily
sustenaunce, and fell into such danger of his person, as every hour he
expected death. Which being heard in the Court of King Lisuart, as also his
deadly dangerous extremetie: Oriana (loathe to loose him) sent him word and
license, that he should do what the Lady requested. Whereupon Amadis
considering he might no way else escape, and his gracious Mistress pittyed him
so much, he begat a son and a daughter of Briolania, whereof she was delivered
at one labor: but this historye is altogether false and feigned. It might be
that Amadis was prisoner in the Tower, and Briolania beheld his daily pining
away: but she desired the Damsel to remit him this boon, on condition he
should not depart till his brother Galaor returned, as willing to comfort her
self with the sight of him, while she attended his brothers arrival: for
Galaor espoused her afterward, as you shall read in the fourth book of this
Historye. Let it then suffice at this time, that Amadis and Agraies so^ourne
certain days in the Castle, while all needful things were ready for their
combat.

CHAP. XLII. How Galaor went with the Damsel after the Knight that dismounted
him and his companyons in the Forest, whom when he found, they combatted
together, and afterward in the sharpest point of their combat, they knew each
other.
Four days together, rode Galaor with the Damsel, seeking the Knight that
vnhorssed him in the Forest, for which he was so overcome with anger, as every
Knight he met withal deerly felt it, because in combat many received their
death. Then espying a fair Castle on the top of a high mountain, the
Damsel told him, there was no other place near where they might lodge that
night, wherefore he being glad to accept thereof, they came to the Castle,
finding many Gentlemen and Ladies sporting together, among whom was a Knight
aged about threescore years, who taking Galaor by the hand, did him all the
honor might be devised. My Lord, quoth Galaor, your courtesy to us is so
great, that albeit we were determined to pass further on our way, yet for your
sake we are content to stay with you this night. Then the Knight conducted
Galaor into a fair chamber, leaving the Damsel among the other Ladies, and
after the Prince was unarmed, the Knight spoke to him in this manner. Here Sir
may you rest and take your ease, calling for any thing you stand in need of:
for God knows I have used such entertainemente not only to you, but to all
Knights errant that passed this way, because some-time I have been as now you
are. Yet has nature given me two sons, whose only delight is in search of
adventures, but now they lie sick in their beds, being cruelly wounded by a
Knight, who with one Lance cast them both from their Saddles. But they were
so ashamed at this foil, as they mounted again and pursued the Knight,
ouer-taking him as he entered a Barque to pass the water, where my sonns said
to him, that in respect he had iousted so well, they would try his fortune in
combat with the Sword, but the Knight made answer he could not now intend
it, yet would they needs press him so far, as to hinder his entrance into
the Barque. Wher-upon a Lady being in his company said, they wronged her
overmuch to stay her Knight: but they were not to depart, til he had combated
with them at the Sword. Seeing it will be no otherwise, replied the Lady, he
shall enter fight with the better of you both, on condition, that if he be
conqueror, the other do forbear the combat. They answered, if the one were
vanquished, the other would revenge his foil, which when the Knight heard, he
was so angry: as he had them both come together, in respect they were
importunate and would not rest contented. In the trial, one of my Sons
sustained the wurst, wherefore his brother seeing him in such peril, strove to
reskue him from death: yet all was in vain, for the Knight handled them so
roughlye, as he left them like dead men in the feeld, and afterward passed away
in the Barque. No sooner heard I of this mishap, but I sent for my sons, and
home were they brought in this dangerous plight: but yt you may give credit to
my words, behold here their Armor cut and mangled, as I think the like
strokes never came from any man's hand. Galaor meruayling at this discourse,
demanded what Arms the conquering Knight bare: when he was answered, his
Sheeld to be of vermillion couller, with two black Lions figured therein. By
these tokens Galaor knew him, that it was ye same man he travailed to find,
which made him demand of his freendly host, if he had no further knowledge of
the Knight. No verily Sir, quoth the ancient Gentleman. For this night,
answered Galaor, let us take our rest, and to morrow I intend to seek the man
you talk on. For already I have travailed four days in his search: but if
I meet with him, I hope to revenge the iniurye of your sons, and other
likewise whom he has offended, or else it will cost the price of my life. I
could rather wish, said the Knight, that leaving this perilous enterprise,
you would take some other course, seeing my two sons have been so hardly
entreated, their own wilful follye being cause thereof. So breaking off talk,
Galaor took his rest till the next morning, when taking leave of the ancient
Knight, he rode away with the Damsel, who brought him to the place of passage
in the Barque: where crossing the water to the other side, they came to a very
beautiful Castle, whether the Damsel rode before, aduising the Prince to
stay her return. She tarried not long, but coming back again, brought another
Damsel with her of excellent beautye, and ten men beside all on horsse-back:
after the fair Gentlewoman had saluted Galaor, she said. Sir, this Damsel
that came in your company tells me, how you seek a Knight, who bears two
black Lions in a vermillion Sheelde, and are desirous to know his name: this is
very certain, that you nor any other can find him for three years space, but
only by force of Arms, a matter not so easy to be accomplished by you, for
persuade your self, his like is not to be found in all the Isles of great
Britain. Lady, quoth Galaor, yet will I not give over his search, although he
conceal him self in this sort: and if I meet with him, it shall like me
beter to combat with him, then to know my demand by any other way. Seeing
then, answered the Damsel, your desire is such, I will show you him within
three days ensuing, for this Gentle-womans sake, being my Cousin, who
according to her promise has earnestly entreated me. Galaor requited her with
many thanks, and so they travailed on, arriving in the evening at an arm of
the Sea, where they found a Barque ready for passage to a little Island, and
certain Mariners in it, who made them all swear, if they had any more then
one knight in their company. No credit me, replied the Damsel: heer-upon they
set sail and away. Then Galaor demanded of the Damsel, the reason why they
took such an oath. Because, quoth she, the Lady of the Isle whether we go,
has so ordained it, that they shall let pass but one Knight at one time: and
no other must they bring till his return, or credible intelligence of his
death. What is he, said Galaor, that vanquisheth or kills them? The
selfsame Knight you seek, answered the Damsel, whom the Lady has kept with
her more then half a year, entirely loving him, and the cause of this
affection proceeded from a Tourney, which not long since he maintained in this
country, for the love of her and another fair Lady, whom the Knight (being a
stranger here) conquered, defending her cause with whom he now is, and ever
since she bare him such affection, as without grant of his love she would have
dyed. Sometime he is desirous to seek after strange adventures, but then the
Lady to detain him still in this place, causes such Knights as come hither to
pass one after another, against whom he combatteth, and not one has yet
returned vn-vanquished: such as dye in fight are there interred, and the foiled
sent back again, despoyled of their horse and Arms, which the Knight
presents to his Lady, she being one of the fairest creatures in the world,
named Corisanda, and the Isle Brauisande. Know you not the cause* ^aide Galaor,
wherefore the Knight went not many days since, to a Forest where I found him,
and kept the passage there fifteen days together, against all such as
trauayled that way? Yes mary, quoth the Damsel, he promised a boon to a Lady
before he came hither, wehrfore she entreated him to keep the Forest for the
space of fifteen days: yet hardly he got license of his fair Mistress, who
allowed him but a month to stay and return.

By this time they were landed, and come before a goodly Castle, where stood a
pillar of marble, with a horn hanging on it, which the Damsel bad him wind,
and the Knight would come forth at the sound thereof. After he had given a good
blast, certain Pages came forth of the Castle, who set up a Pauillion in the
midst of the feelde, and six Ladies (soon after) came walking forth, one
of them seeming by her gesture and countenance, to be commander of the rest,
taking her place accordingly in the Tent. I marvel, said Galaor, the Knight
taryeth so long, I desire one of you to will the Lady send for him, because
business else where of great importance, forbids me to trifle time here in
vain. One of the Damoselles fulfilled his request. What? answered Corisanda,
makes he so small account of our Knight? thinks he so easily to escape from
him? has he such mind of other affairs, before he see the end of this
attempt? indeed I think he shall return sooner then he expects, but with
slender advantage for him to brag of: then calling a Page she said. Go, and
bid ye strange Knight come forth. The Page quickly did his message, and soon
after, the Knight came forth one foot, being all armed except with his
helmet, which was brought after him with his Lance, and another Page leading
his Courser: when he came before his Lady, she said. Behold Sir, here is a
brave Knight, who thinks lightly to overcome you, and accounts him self
assured of the victory: I pray you let him know the price of his folly. After
these words she kissed and embraced him, but Galaor noting all these
mysteries, thought he tarried too long from ye combat: at length the Knight
being mounted, they prepared themselves to the carrire, and breaking their
Lances in the encounter, were both wounded. Galaor presently drew his Sword,
but the Knight entreated him to ioust once more. With all my heart, replied
Galaor, yet I am sorry my horse is not so good as yours, for if it were: I
could be content not to give over, till one of us lay along on the ground, or
all these Lances broken in pieces. The Knight made him no answer, but
commanded a Squire to bring them other staves, and meeting together, Galaors
horse was almost down: the Knight likewise lost his stirrops, being glad to
catch hold by the maine of his horse, whereat as one somewhat ashamed, he said
to Galaor. You are desirous to combat with the sword, which I have deferred,
not for any doubt of my self, but only to spare you, not-with-standing, we must
needs now try ye issue thereof. Do what you can, answered Galaor, I mean to
be revenged for your kindenes in the Forest. These words made the Knight
soon to remember him, saying: You must do no more then you can, and happily
before you depart hence, you may sustayn a foil wursse then the first.
Heer-upon they fell to the combat, which began and continued with such furye,
as the Ladies were driven into wonderful amazement, yea, themselves were
abashed that they held out so long, having their Armor mangled, their sheeldes
defaced, their bodies sore wounded, and the blood streaming down upon their
horses: Galaor never being in such danger of his life, but when he fought
with his brother Amadis, which made him carry better opinion of the Knight, and
both of them being glad to breath a while, Galaor entered into these speeches.
You see Sir I have the better of the combat, let me therefore know your name,
and why you conceal your self so closely: wherein you shall do me very great
pleasure, and we may continue friends, else wursse will ensue then you imagine.
Be well assured answered the Knight, our strife shall not be ended so easily,
nor am I to be overcome so lightly as you ween, beside, I was never more
desirous to prolong a combat, then I am at this instant, because I never met
with the knight that tried me so well: but to you nor any other will I be
known, except one Knight who has power to command me. Be not so opinitiue,
replied Galaor, for I swear to you by the faith I owe to God, never to leave
you til I know what you are, and why you conceal your self so secretly. And I
swear to you quoth the Knight, while breath is in my body you shall not know
it by me, and rather would I presently dye, then any but two should understand
what I am: yet I know not them, but they may and shall have knowledge of me.
And what are they, said Galaor, you esteem so much? Neither will I disclose
them to you, answered the Knight. Both them and my former demand, quoth
Galaor, I will know, else one of us shall dye, or both together. I am well
pleased ther-with, replied the Knight. So begin they to charge each other a
fresh, as if they had not fought together before at all: but the strange
Knight received many cruel wounds, which made his strength more and more to
fail: and the Lady seeing the great danger of his life, would suffer him to
endure no further peril, but coming to Galaor, said. For-beare Sir Knight,
would God the Barque and Mariners had suncke, before they brought you hither.
Lady, quoth Galaor, you ought not to blame me in doing my deuoire against this
Knight, who has outraged me and many more beside, for which I mean to be
revenged this day. For-beare, said ye Lady, to wrong him any more, otherwise
you may fall into an extremity without any mercy. It matters not what may
happen, answered Galaor: but nothing shall make me give over, until he have
satis-fied my demand. And what is that? quoth she. He must tell me his name,
replied Galaor, and why so closely he concealeth himself, likewise, what ye two
Knights are of whom he told me but even now. Proceed no further in combat,
said the Lady, and I will satisfye your demand. This Gentleman is named Don
Florestan, concealing himself in this secret manner to find his two
brethren, who are in this country accounted such men at Arms, that albeit he
has well tried himself with you, yet will he not be commonly known, till he
have accomplished such deeds in chivalry, as may deserve to equal him with
them, who are at this time in King Lisuarts Court, one of them being named
Amadis, the other Galaor, and all three the Sons to King Perion of Gaul.
Alas, what have I done? quoth Galaor, here brother, take my Sword, and
therewithal the honor of the fight, for I have offended overmuch. What? said
the Knight, am I then your brother? According to this Ladies speeches, answered
Galaor, you are, and I am your brother Galaor. Florestan amazed at this
accident, fell on his knee, saying. My Lord, I desire you to pardon me, for
this offense in combatting unknown with you, was caused by no other reason:
but that I durst not name my self your brother, till I had made some imitation
of your noble virtues. Galaor courteouslye embraced him in his arms, the
tears streaming from his eyes with joy, and greeuing to see him so sore
wounded, doubting least his life was in great danger: but when the Lady saw
them so good friends, and the enmity converted into such humility, as one
right glad thereof, she said to Galaar. Worthy Sir, though first you gave me
occasion of great heaviness, yet now with sufficient joy you have recompensed
me. So taking each of them by the hand, she walked with them into the Castle,
where they being lodged in two sumptuous beds, her self (skillful in
Chirurgerie) cured their wonndes. Thus remained the two brethren with the rich
and beautiful Lady Corisanda, who desired their health as her own welfare.

CHAP. XLIII. How Don Florestan was begotten by King Perion, on the fair
Daughter to the County of Zealand.
AT what time King Perion sought after strange Adventures, he arrived in the
Country of Almaigne, where he soiourned the space of two years, accomplishing
many brave deeds of Arms, the renown where-of continues to this day. And
as he returned toward Gaul, he lodged in the Counties house of Zealand, where
he was entertained very royally, as well in respect of his own reputation, as
also because the County himself had some-time been a Knight errant, which
made him love all such as followed Arms. After supper, the King was conducted
to his chamber, where being in bed, and somewhat weary with travail, he fell
a sleep soundly: but to shake off this heaviness, he felt him self embraced and
kissed he knew not by whom, when starting up to arise, he was so held down
that he could not. Why Sir? quoth she that thus maistred him, take you no
pleasure in me who am alone with you? The King looking on her, by means of the
light which still burned in his chamber, he discerned her to be a most
beautiful Lady, wherefore he thus answered. I pray you fair friend, tell me
what you are. What soever I am, quoth she, I love you exceedingly, as one that
freely gives her self to you. In sooth, replied the King, I very gladly would
know your name. You trouble me, said the Lady, with this importunity, yet can
I use no other continence then you see. But it were necessary, quoth the King,
I should know your name, if you mean to be my friend. Seeing you constrain
me there-to, answered the Lady, know that I am the Counties Daughter, who has
so freendly entertained you. Now trust me Madame, replied the King, you must
hold me excused, for I had rather dye, then abuse the man I am so much
beholding too. Will you then refuse me? quoth she, well may you be termed
the wurst nurtured Prince in the world, in denying the conquest, which all your
life time you might have failed of. You may speak your pleasure, answered the
King, but I will do what is convenient for your honor and mine, and not offend
in so foul a manner. I shall, quoth she, cause my father to think himself
more iniuried by you, then if you grant what I desire. So starting from the
bed, she took the Kings Sword, (even the same which was afterward found with
Amadis, when he was taken up on the Sea) and drawing it forth, she set the
point against her heart, saying. Now shall my Fathers life be shortened by my
death, whereof you are the only cause. As she uttered these words, she offered
to stab her self with the Sword: when the King suddenly staying her hand, and
meruailing at her impacient love, thus replied. Hurt not your self Madame, for
I am content to satisfye your will. Hereupon he kindly embraced and kissed
her, passing the night with her in such sort, as her hot desire was quallifyed,
and at that instant she conceived with child: the King little thinking thereon,
for the next morning he took his leave of her and the County, returning with
all speed he could into Gaul. But the time of deliverance drawing on, and she
(desirous to cover her offense) determined to go visit an Aunt of hers, whose
dwelling was not past two or three miles off, and many times she resorted
thither for her pleasure. So taking no other company with her but a Damsel,
as she rode through the Forest, the pain of travail made her alight from her
Palfray, she being soon after delivered of a goodly Son. The Damsel that
was with her, seeing what had happened, bringing the child to the mother, said.
Madame, as your heart served you to commit the offense, so must it now practice
some present remedy, while I return from your Aunt again. Then getting on
horsseback, she rode apace to her Ladies Aunt, and acquainted her with the
whole matter: which caused the old woman to be very sorrowful, yet she
provided succor for her Niece, sending a Litter with all convenient speed,
wherein the Lady and her child were brought to her Castle secretly, every
thing being so cunningly handled, as the County never knew his Daughters
fault. After such time as these matters require, the Lady returned home to her
Father, leaving her Son in her Aunts custody, where he was nourished till
the age of eighteen years, having Squires and Gentlemen attending on him, who
daily enstructed him in managing Arms, and all brave quallities beseeming a
man of value. He being grown of goodly stature, the old Lady brought him one
day to ye County his Grandfather, who gave him his Knighthood, not knowing
what he was: and returning again with his motherly Nursse, by the way she
brake with him in this manner. My Son, I am certain you are ignorant of your
parentage, but credit my words, you are the Son to King Perion of Gaul,
begotten on his Daughter that gave you your order of Knighthood: endeavor your
self therefore to follow your Fathers steps, who is one of the most renowned
Knights in the world. Madame, quoth Florestan, oftentimes have I heard great
fame of King Perion, but never imagined my self to be his Son: wherefore I
vow to you, being my long and careful Nursse, that I will travail to find my
Father, and not make my self known to any one, till my deeds declare me
worthy to be his Son. Not long after, he departed from the old Lady, and
accompanied with two Squires, iournyed to Constantinople, which at that time
was greatly vexed with war, where he remained the space of four years,
perfourming such hautie deeds of Chivalry, as he was counted the best Knight
in all those parts. When he perceived himself in some account, he intended to
visit Gaul, and make himself known to the King his Father: but coming into
great Brittayne, he heard the fame of Amadis to be marvelous, which was the
cause of his stay there, to win some report by Arms, as his brethren had
done, whom he longed to acquaint himself withal. At length he met with them
both in the Forest, as you heard, and afterward combatted with his brother
Galaor, which caused their abode at the Castle of Corisanda, until such time
as their wounds were healed.

But now let us return to Amadis and Agraies, who stayed with fair Briolania
five days together, preparing their Armor and every thing in order: which
being done, they set forward on their way, accompanied with Briolania, her
Aunte, certain waiting Gentle-women, and Squires to do them service by the
way. When they drew near the Realm of Sobradisa, they came to the Castle of
an ancient Lady named Galumba, who some-tune lived in Briolanias Fathers
Court, and there they were welcomed very honorably: yet whether Briolania
trauayled thus accompanied, the old Lady Galumba could not choose but marvel,
which made her request to be satisfied therein. Briolanias Aunte told her, how
Amadis was one of the best Knights in the world, and had promised to revenge
the murdered Kings death: likewise how he discomfited them that guarded the
Chariot, and afterward ouer-came the rest in the Castle, at what time the
Lions escaped, as you have heard. Galumba wondering at such singular prowess,
answered. If he be such a one as you make report, his companion must needs be
of some estimation, and well may they bring your enterprise to end, considering
the truth and justice of the cause: but take heed least the traiter^us King
work some treason against them. That is the cheifest point of my fear,
answered Briolania, wherefore we came to crave your advise heerin. Heer-upon she
wrote a letter, and sealed it with the Princesses seal at Arms, then calling a
Damsel, after she had given her instructions, she bad her make haste in
delivering the letter. Presentlye went the Damsel to horsse-back, and
travailed so speedily, that she arrived at the great City of Sobradisa, which
the whole Realm took this name by. There was Abiseos with his two Sons
Darison and Dramis, and these three must the combat be waged withal: for
Abiseos slew the Father of Briolania, by covetous desire he had to the Crown,
which he ever since usurped and held, more by tirannie then any consent in the
subjects. The Damsel entered the Palace on horsse-back, when diverse Knights
came to her, requesting her to alight: but she made answer she would not, till
she saw ye King, and that he commanded her to leave her palfray. Soon after
came the King, accompanied with his two sons and many great Lords, and after
she had saluted him, he boldly bad her say what she would. My Lord, quoth she,
I shall fulfill your command, on condition I may abide in your protection, and
receive no injury for any thing I say. By my Crown, said the King, I warrant
your safety: wher-upon the Damsel thus began. Sir, my Lady and Mistress
Briolania disinherited by you, greets you with this letter, which may openly be
read before this royal company, and I after-ward receive answer for my
discharge. When the King heard the name of Briolania, remorse of conscience
touched him with the wrong he did her: yet was the letter openly read, which
was to give credit to the Damoselles words. The most of the Lords there
present, who sometime were subjects to the slaughtered King, seeing the
messenger of their lawful Queen indeed: pittyed she was so unjustly
disinherited, and in their hearts desired of God, to plague the treason done to
her Father. Proceed Damsel, quoth the King, and let us hear your message.
My Lord, said she, by treason you murdered my Ladies father, and unjustly keep
her from her inheritance, wherefore according to your former promise, which you
have not once but often times made, that you with your two Sons would
maintain by Arms, the right you pretend to have in this Realm: she sendes
you word by me, if still you stand upon such trial, she will bring two
Knights hither, who shall in combat maintain her cause, making you know your
disloyaltye and treason committed. Darison eldest son to the King, hearing
his Father menaced in this sort, grew into great choler, and as one moved
with despite, he arose, when (without the Kings consent) he thus spoke.
Damsel, if your Mistress Briolania have two Knights with her, men resolved
to fight on her behalf: here do I accept the combat for my Father and
Brother, and if I fail, I promise in the presence of all these Lords, to send
her my head in requital of her Fathers, whose death was not accomplished
without great reason. In sooth Sir Darison, answered the Damsel, you speak as
a Knight of hautie mind, yet may I doubt these words to proceed from
choler, because I discern an alteration in your countenance: but if you will
request the King to confirm your speeches, I shall think your proffer came
from a heart of courage. This answer Damsel, quoth he, may you boldly make
her that sent you hither. Cause then his Majesty, said the Damsel, to give
my Ladies Knights assurance, that for any mishap you may receive in the
combat, they shall sustain no injury, nor be meddled withal but by you
three: and if you purchase them such a safe-conduit, they shall be here within
three days at the vtter-most. Darison falling on his knee before the King,
said. You hear (my Lord) the Damoselles demand, and the promise I have made
before your Majesty, in the presence of al these great Princes and Lords:
humbly therefore I beseech you, seeing my honor is yours, that both you and all
the rest will confirm her request, otherwise, to our great disaduauntage, the
presuming Knights, who dare adventure in the cause of foolish Briolania, will
imagine themselves conquerours, and us dismayed fainte hearted cowardes: having
openly published, that if any one will touch your illustrious renown for
matters past, by the combat of us three you intend to be purged. And albeit
you would make them no such promise, yet ought not we to refuse them, for as I
understand, they be some foolish Knights of King Lisuarts Court, who by
their ouer-weening and aspiring thoughts, make high account of their own
deeds in the contempt of others. The King who loved Darison as him self,
though the death of his brother condemned him culpable, and thereby made him
fear the combat: granted the^ safe-conduit, according as the Damsel
requested for the two Knights, and such as came in their company. Here is to
be considered, that the period of this traitors fortune was now limited, and
the just auenger of all wrongs, pointed out reward for the treason of him and
his sons, as in this discourse may be evidently seen.

The Damsel seeing her message had taken such effect as she desired, said
unto them: Make your selves ready, for to morrow without fail shall this
difference be discided. So mounting on her Palfray, she returned to the Castle
of Galumba, where being arrived, before the Knights and Ladies, she reported
her answer: but when she told them, that Darison reputed them foolish Knights
of King Lisuarts Court, they were so offended, as Amadis entered into th^se
speeches. By God, there are such in company of that good King, as can easily
abate the pride of Darison, and humble his head so low as they list: but I
think his choler ouer-maistred him, when he uttered words of such great
indiscretion. Trust me my Lord, answered Briolania, you cannot say or do so
much against these traitors, as they justly deserve. You know what villainie
they did to the King my Father, and how long time they have disinherited me:
let pity then prevail on my behalf, seeing in God and you I have reposed my
self, with assured hope of sufficient revenge. Amadis, whose heart was
submisse to virtue and all gentleness, moved with compassion, said. Madame, if
God be so pleased, ere to morrow at night, your sorrow and sadness, shall be
converted into pleasure and content. Heerupon they concluded, to set forward
very early the next morning, which made them depart to their chambers, except
Briolania, who sat conferring with Amadis on many matters, when oftentimes she
thought to motion marriage between him and her: but suspecting by his
continual sighs, as also the tears streaming from his eyes, that some other
Lady was cause of these passions, she kept silence, and taking her leave, bad
him good night. On the morrow they go all to horsseback, and coming to the
City of Sobradisa, their arrival was very welcome to many, who seeing the
Daughter of their late sovereign Lord, and knowing the monstrous treachery of
his brother, they instantly desired her prosperous success, because they bare
her singular affection. Abiseos remembering the wrong he had done her, and his
bloody treason so unnaturally committed, seemed terrified in countenance,
because the woorme of conscience revived his heinous offense: yet having been
so long obstinate and indurate in his sin, thought fortune would now assure
his quietness, and confirm his state to continue in tranquillity. But when he
saw how the people flocked about her, not showing any reverence to him and his
Sons, albeit they were royally accompanied with Lords, he exclaimed on them
in this manner. Ah wretched and bad minded people, I see what comfort you take
by the presence of this Girl, and how your senses are carried away with her:
now may I well judge, you rather could accept her as your Sovereign, she being
a woman not capable of such an office, then I yt am a hardy Knight. Her
weakness you may note, because she has in so long time gotten but two Knights,
who are come to receive an ignominious death, which in sooth I cannot choose but
pity. When Amadis heard these taunting words, he was so enraged, as if the
blood would have gushed from his eyes, and raising himself on his stirrops,
that every one might hear him, he thus answered. Abiseos, it may be easily
discerned, that the arrival of the Princess is scant pleasing to thee, in
respect of thy horrible treason committed, murdering her father thy eldest
brother: but if thou have any feeling of virtue, and art repentant for thy
foul misdeed, yield to her what thou have unjustly usurped, so shall I
discharge thee of the combat: provided, thou ask God forgiveness, and use such
repentance as beseems a sin so heinous, that by loosing honor in this
world, thou may seek the salvation of thy soul hereafter. Darison provoked
to anger by these speeches, anaunced himself, and before his father had
leisure to reply, he prevented him in this manner. Thou foolish Knight of King
Lisuarts Court, hardly can I endure thy injurious words to my father in my
presence: but I am content to defer them, till we proceed to the effect of
thy demand, then shall I take such vengeance for them as I desire, for when
thy heart shall faint in time of need, weening to save thy life by flight: if
thou make not good haste I will so chastise thee, as each one shall pity thy
miserable estate. This is too long a process, said Agraies, to defend thy
fathers treason withal, go arm thy self, and come to the combat as thou
did promise, then shall thou see if fortune be so favorable, to give thee
the victory which thou reckonest assured: if she do otherwise, persuade thy
self, ^oth thou and thine shall have the meed of your wicked deserving. Say
what thou will, answered Darison, ere long thy imurious tongue pulled from thy
head, shall be sent to the Court of thy master King Lisuart, that such as
behold thy worthy punishment, may be afraid to hazard the like by their
liberal language. So calling for their Armor, the King and his two Sons
were quickly Armed, then mounting on horsseback, they went to the place
appointed for Combats. Where-upon, Amadis and Agraies lacing their Helmets,
took their Sheelds and Lances, and afterward entered the feelde. Then Dramis
(who was the youngest brother, yet a Knight so valiant, as two of the best in
that Country durst not deal with him in combat) said to his Father. My
Lord, where your Majesty and my Brother are present, well may I be excused
from speech, but now effects must show it otherwise, by such strength as
heaven has enabled me withal: therefore I desire to try my fortune with the
Knight who has so wronged you, and if I kill him not at the first tainte of
the Lance, never shall Armor come on my back again: but if I meet him not so
right as I desire, he shall have but little respite of life, for at the first
stroke of my sword, I will dispatche him. Many heard the words of young
Dramis, and esteemed highly of his enterprise, nor did they greatly doubt the
perfourmaunce, considering what deeds of arms they had seen him accomplish.
Now place they their Lances in their rests, and Dramis prepared him self
against Amadis, who met him so full in the carrire, as his heart brake in his
belly, and he fell to ye ground so waightely, as if it had been the fall of an
Ore. Get thee to all the Deuilles, said Dardan the Dwarffe, my master is very
well rid of thee: but me thinks his threatening has lighted on him self, which
commonly falls out so with such great crakers. Agraies and Darison brake their
Lances in the encounter, but no other harm happened between them as yet.
When Abiseos saw his son Dramis was dead, he was meruailously displeased and
intended to revenge his death on Amadis, wher-upon he gave forth to meet him,
and piercing his Lance through the Princes sheelde, gave him a sore hurt on
the arm, which made the beholders doubt, that Amadis could hold out no
longer. If then the young Princess Briolania was dismaide, it were in vain to
demand the question: for now her heart dreaded further mishap: but he who could
not be daunted with common wounds, drew the Sword which he recovered from
Arcal^us, giving Abiseos such a sound greeting ther-with on the head, as made
him coutche his neck to his shoulders, and the Sword sliding down upon his
right arm, gave him a wound to the very bone, by means whereof Abiseos found
him self so distressed and amazed, that he fell down from his horse as it
were in a trance. Now did the people marvel not a little, to see Amadis at
two strokes overthrow two such puissant Knights, esteemed among them the best
in the world: but Amadis beholding no other resistance, returned to Darison who
fought with Agraies, they behauing themselves so manfully against each other,
as the people thought they never saw a brauer combat. At length Abiseos
recovered again, and seeing his Son Darison in danger of his life, came to
assist him, giving Agraies such a wound in the throat, as his Cousin thought he
had been slain outright: but soon did he requite Abiseos for it, by
seperating his wounded arm from his body, even the same arm wherewith he
killed the King his brother, which made him fall down dead to the ground,
where-upon Amadis called to him, saying. Abiseos, this is punishment in member,
whereby thou did thrust thy self into the Crown, and now have received
death according to thy desert. Then he turned about to help Agraies, but he
met him with the head of Darison in his hand: whereat all the people gave a
great shoute, and humbled themselves to Briolania as their lawful Queen. This
was the end of the wretched Father and his sons, serving at this day for an
example to such as shamefullye usurp the right of others: which though they
enjoy for a small season, yet when the God of power lets loose his arrows
against them, they fall into open and detested ruin. Let every man therefore
set before his eyes, that no evil remains unpunished, and the end concludes
these two principles, the eternal beatitude of ye celestial souls, and the
merciless excruciamentes of miserable damned creatures. Thus see you what lot
fell to Abiseos and his children, usurping the Kingdom by homicide and
tyranny, even by the death of his own natural Brother: therefore heaven
repaied him with a miserable end, by the conquering Sword of Amadis and
Agraies, who dragged them along out of the feelde, demanding if any other
would with-stand the right of Briolania. By one of the cheifest Lords in the
countrynamed Goman, they were answered, she had no more enemies to gainsay
her, which he testified with an hundred Knights of his own kindred: all the
people being there ready to receive their Queen Briolania, and do her homahe
as beseemed faithful subjects. Heer-upon, Amadis and Agraies conducted the
new Queen to the Palace royal, where they were presently unarmed, and
Chirurgions commanded to attend their wounds: in mean while Briolania was
confirmed in the regiment, by a general oath of the subjects taken to their
Sovereign, with such joy as never was the like in Sobradisa. But because the
two Knights were very sore wounned, and their hurtes found to be somewhat
dangerous, all sports and pastimes accustomed at such solemnity, were referred
till the time of their recovery: which to compass the sooner, their lodginges
were appointed in several chambers, that none might trouble them with tedious
talking, least a continual fever* should come upon them. Not-with-standing,
Briolania, as one not ungrateful for the good she received by them, would not
depart from them either day or night, but only at the time of repast: so that
by her kind and dilligent attendance, the danger of their sickness was
expelled the sooner. See here the true and certain historye, for what is
said more, concerning the love of Amadis and this Princess, has been
invented and falsely feigned, according as I have said before: therefore we will
cease, seeing here it goes no further, until the contrary may apparantlye be
known, as in the history following is declared.

CHAP. XLIIII. How Galaor and, Florestan riding toward the Realm of Sobradisa,
met with three Damoselles at the Fountain of Olives.
GAlaor and Florestan being at the Castle of Corisanda, as you have heard,
they soiourned there til their wounds were healed: afterward they concluded on
their departure, to seek Amadis in the Realm of Sobradisa, desiring they might
come thither before the beginning of the combat, to have part of the perrill
in fight, and glory in conquest. But when Florestan should take leave of his
Lady, her grief and tears unspeakable, able to move ruthe in a heart of flint,
although Florestan assured her of his speedy return. Not-with-standing all
these mones, forward they set to the Realm of Sobradisa, Florestan, craving a
boon of his brother by the way, to wit? that he would not combat on ye way
for any thing which might happen, until he were able to hold out no longer.
With much a do he obtained his request, and so rode they on four days
together, not meeting with any adventure woorthye the rehearsal: but toward
Sun setting they met a Knight hard by a Tower, who entreated them earnestlye
to lodge there that night, which gentle offer they accepted, and entering with
the Knight, they conferred on many matters till supper was ready. The Knight
was of comelye stature, and well spoken, but his countenance was so sad and
melancholy, as Galaor began thus to question with him. He thinks Sir you are
not so merry as you should be, but if we may any way help your pensiuenes,
tell us, and you shall find us willing to perform it. I believe assuredlye,
quoth their host, that like good Knights you would do as you say, but my
sadness is caused through extreme love, a matter not to be revealed, and
therefore the rather to be pardoned. So sat they down to supper, which being
ended, Galaor and his brother were conducted to their chamber, where they
reposed themselves til the next morning: when mounting on horsse-back, their
host would accompanye them a little on the way, and calling for his Iennet,
but putting on no Armor, he rides with them: this did he to see what should
happen to them, because in the way he guided them, he hoped to see some proof
of their manhood, when if they were vanquished or slain, he might the more
easily escape from them.

Not far had they travailed, but they came to a place called the fountain of
Olives, because in the midst of the water grew three high Olive trees.
Hereby they espied three beautiful Damsels, and a Dwarffe sitting aloft in
one of the trees: whereupon Florestan saluted them very courteously, as one not
to learn his behavior toward Ladies, then one of the Damsels requiting his
salutation, said. Sir Knight, if heaven has endued you with as great bounty
as comely perfection, no doubt but you are sufficiently enriched. Fair
Damsel, answered Florestan, if my outward appearance does please you, my
inward virtue you may try if you have any need. You speak so kindly, quoth she,
that I will presently make proof of your valor, to see if you can carry me
hence from this place. In sooth Lady, replied Florestan, if of your self you
be willing to go, I know no reason to the contrary why you should not.
Heerewith he commanded the Squire to set her on a Palfray, which was tied
(ready furnished) at one of the Olive trees: but when the Dwarffe beheld it,
he cried out aloud: Come forth Sir Knight, come forth, for here is one will
carry away your friend. Presently came out of a valley a Knight bravely
prauncing, and well armed, who said to Florestan: What mooues you Sir to touch
my Lady? I cannot think she is yours, answered Florestan, seeing she
entreats me to carry her hence away. Albeit she would, quoth the Knight, yet I
think it not at this time so convenient, because I have defended her from
better then you are. I know not how well you have defended her, replied
Florestan, but she shall go with me if I can help it. By God Sir, answered the
other, you must first talk with the Knights of this vale, and feel how safely
they can keep such as they love. So placing their Lances in their rests, they
ran courageously against each other, the Knight breaking his staff: but
Florestan smote his sheeld so strongly against his Helmet, as the lace brake,
and his head was bare, but wurst of all, he fell so heavily upon his Sword,
that with his weight it broke in two pieces. Florestan finished his carrire,
having his Lance whole and sound, when turning again to the Knight, he saw
that he moved neither hand or foot, wherefore punching him with his Lance upon
the stomach, said: Palliard, thou art dead, if thou yield not. The Knight being
recovered from trance, and beholding the present danger of his life, desired
mercy: which Florestan granted, so he would freelye resign the Damsel. She
is at your pleasure, replied the Knight, but curssed be the hour when first I
saw her. For by her follyes she has oftentimes endaungered my life. Florestan
leaving him, came to the Damsel, saying: Fair Lady, now you are mine. You
have so nobly wun me Sir, quoth she, as I remain at your disposition. As they
were departing thence, one of the other Damsels thus spoke: Alas Sir, will you
separate so good company? it is a year and more since we have lived together,
and we would be loathe now to part in this manner. If you please to accompany
her, answered Florestan, I can be content to conduct you together: and more I
hope you will not request, because I mean not to leave my conquest. I think
my self not so foul, replied the other Damsel, but some good Knight may
enterprise as great an adventure for me: mary it is to be doubted, whether such
hardines remain in you or no. Why Lady? quoth Florestan, think you that fear
can make me leave ye? I promise you on my faith, but that I would not forcibly
carry you away, you should presently go with me: but if your will be so good,
let my Squire help you up on your hackney. Which she did, and the Dwarffe cried
again as he did for the first, whereupon another Knight came immediately
forth, and after him a Squire bearing two Lances, the Knight using these
words to Florestan. You have (Sir) already wun one Lady, and (not content with
her) you seek for another: but now in one instant you must loose them both,
and your head I doubt to keep them company, because you being of no better
race, are unworthy a Lady of so high calling. Thou vauntest very much,
answered Florestan, yet have I two Knights of my lignage, whom thou, nor three
such as thou art, may be thought worthy to serve. Thy commendations extend
very far, said ye Knight, yet am I to meddle with none but thee, who have got a
Lady from him that could not defend her: but she must be mine if I conquer
thee, else by vanquishing me, thou shall be master of them both together. Now
thou speak reason, quoth Florestan: defend thy Lady well, or without doubt
she will fall to my share. So giving the spurs to their horses, they
committed this controversy to be tried by the Lance, when though the Prince
failed in the first race, and the other brake his staff very manfully: yet
(being angry at his mishap) at the second course he sent the Knight so
violently to the ground, as he thought every bone of him was broken in pieces.
Thus was he safely possessed of the second Damsel, and very loathe he was to
leave the third there alone, but she beholding their host that conducted them
thither, spoke to him in this manner. My friend, I would advise ye to be gone,
because you know these two Knights can not resist him will presently come:
then if you be taken, you are sure to dye the death. Believe me Lady, quoth he,
I mean now to see the end of all, for my horse is quick of pace, and my Tower
strong enough to defend me from him. Well, look to your selves, said the
Damsel, you be but three, and one of you unarmed, but if he were, it might not
avail him. When Florestan heard how she praised him that was to come, he was
more desirous to carry her away then before, only because he would have a sight
of him, and therefore bad his Squire set her on horsseback as he did the other,
when the Dwarffe in the Olive tree delivered these words. Believe me Sir
Knight, in an evil hour came this boldness on you, for presently comes one
who will revenge his companions. Forth of the vale came a Knight in gilt
Armor, mounted on a lusty bay courser, the man resembling a Giant in
proportion, and reputed to be of incredible strength. After him followed two
Squires armed, each of them carrying a hatchet in his hand, and so soon as he
came near Florestan, he thus spoke. Stay Knight and fly not, for by flight
thou art not able to save thy life, better is it for thee to dye like a good
Knight then a coward, especially when by cowardice thou can not escape.
Florestan hearing such menaces of death, contemning likewise as a man of no
value, incenced with anger, he returned this answer. Monster, beast, Devil,
or whatsoever thou art, reason I see thou want: so little do I esteem thy
prodigal words, that I think thou have no better weapons to fight withal. I
grieve, said the Knight, that I cannot have my fill in revenge on thee, but I
would four of the best of thy lineage were here with thee, for me to slice off
their heads as I will do thine. Look to thine own thou were best, answered
Florestan, for I hope I am sufficient to excuse them, and be their Lieutenant
in this matter on thee. Thus sundring themselves, in rage and fury they meet
together, that the beating of their horses hooues made the earth to groan,
and the breach of their Lances made a terrible noise: but the great Knight
lost his stirrops, and had fallen to the ground, if by catching hold about
his horse neck he had not escaped. As Florestan held on his course, he
caught a hatchet from one of the Squires, wherewith he smote him quite beside
his horse: and by time he returned, the Knight had recovered his seat
again, and the hatchet which the other Squire held. Now begins a dreadful
combat between them, such cruel strokes being given at each other with their
hatchets, as though their helmets were of right trusty steel, yet they cut and
mangle them very pitifully. Many times was Florestan enforced to staggering,
by the mighty blows of his monstrous enemy, yet at length the Prince smote at
him so furiously as he was feign to lie along upon his horse neck, when
redoubling his stroke between the helmet and the brigandine he parted his
head from his shoulders. Being thus conqueror of all the Damsells, and they
not a little meruailing at this strange victory, the Knight who had been
their host the night before, spoke to Florestan. My Lord, this Damsel have I
long time looued, and she me with like affection, but for the space of this
year and more, the great Knight (whom last you slew) has forcibly detayned
her: yet being now recovered by your worthy prowess, I beseech ye Sir, I may
enjoy her again. If it be so as you say, answered Florestan, my pains have
stood you in some steed at this time, but against her will, neither you or any
other can get her from me. Alas my Lord, quoth the Damsel, no one but he has
right to my love, then sunder not them that should live together. Nor will I,
said Florestan, you are Lady at your own liberty, and may depart with your
freende when you please. They both requited him with manifold thanks, then
taking leave of Galaor and Florestan, the Knight rides home joyfully with his
new conquered Lady. The other two Damselles desired the Princes, to accompany
them to their Auntes house which was not far of, Galaor questioning with them
by the way, why they were kept in such sort at the fountain, wher-to one of
the Damselles thus replied. Understand my Lord, that the great Knight who was
slain in the combat, loved the Lady which your host carried away with him,
but she despised him above all other, fancying no other then him who now
enioyes her. But in respect this Knight was so puissant, as none in this
countrhy durst contend with him, he kept her violentlye whether she would or
no, yet offering her no iniurye, because he loved her dearly, and one day
among other he thus spoke to her. Fair Mistress, to the end I may compass
your gentle affection, and be esteemed of you the only Knight in the world,
listen what I will do for your sake. There is a Knight named Amadis of Gaul,
accounted ye only man for valor this day living, who s^ew a Cousin of mine in
the Court of King Lisuart, a Knight of great fame called Dardan the proud:
him (for your sake) will I seek, and by cutting off his head, convert all his
glory to mine own commendation. But till I compass what I have said, these
two Ladies, (meaning us) and these two Knights of my lineage shall attend on
you, and each day conduct you to the fountain of Olives, which is the only
passage for Knights errant through this country: if any dare be so bold to
carry you thence, there shall you see many brave combats, and what the honor of
your love can make me do, to cause the like opinion in you toward me, as
your divine perfections have wrought in me to you. Thus were we taken and given
to the two Knights who were first dismounted, and with them we have abode ye
space of one whole year, in which time many combats they fought for us, yet
never conquered till this present. In sooth Lady, answered Galaor, the Knights
intent was too high for him to accomplish, because he could not deal with
Amadis, and escape the fortune now fallen upon him: but how was he named? He
called himself Alimias, quoth ash, nd had not ouer-weening pride too much
ruled him, he was a most gentle and courteous Knight. By this time were they
come to their Auntes Castle, where Galaor and Florestan found gracious
entertainment, the old Lady being very glad to see her Nieces, as also to
understand the death of Alimias.

After they had taken leave of the freendly Ladies, they journey toward the
Realm of Sobradisa, where they heard before they entered the City, how Amadis
and Agraies had slain Abiseos and his sons, by means whereof, Briolania
ruled as a peaceable Queen, which news highly contented them, and made them
rejoice for their happy fortune. To the Palace they come unknown of any,
till they were brought to Amadis and Agraies, whose wounds were already
indifferently recured, and they devising with the Queen at their arrival.
Here you must note, how the Damsel that conducted Galaor to find Florestan,
left them after the Combat, and coming before to her Mistress, told her and
Amadis, how Galaor and Florestan knew each other, and what issue their combat
had: which made Amadis very kindly to embrace them both, and Florestan
offered on his knee to kiss his hand, which Amadis would not permit, but
causing him to arise, sat down and communed of their adventures yast. But one
day among other, the new enstalled Queen Briolania, after many honorable
feastinges she had made them, seeing these four Knights determined to
depart, considering the good she had received by Amadis and Agraies, and that
she (being before a disinherited Princess) was by their means restored to her
Kingdom: beholding likewise the wheel of Fortune turned, and how such
personages were not alone to aid and defend her country, but puissant enough
of themselves to be Kings and mighty Lords: falling on her knees before
them, first rendering thanks to God, who had done her such grace as to
regard her in pity, continuing her discourse, she said. Think my Lords,
these mutations are the meruailes of the Almightye, which are admirable to us
and held of great account, but to him they are (in manner) nothing. Let us see
if it be good then to shun Signories and riches, which to obtain we take
such pain and travail, and to keep, endure innumerable anguishes and
distress: as superfluous therefore utterly to deiect the^, because they are
torments of body and soul, uncertain and have no permanence. As for my
self, I say no, but affirm, that they being lawfully gotten, modestly used,
and according to Gods appointment: they are in this world, rest, pleasure and
joy, and the way to bring us to eternal glory.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
THus Gentlemen is the first Book of Amadis finished, how rudely and
vnlearnedlye you may perceive, yet truly set down according to the French
historye: but if it be not so eloquently handled as you expected, you must
bear with the bad conceit, which never was capable of any such cunning. Good
will is the line whereby I level my works, and freendlye acceptance the
greatest grace in gentle minds, which is able to shaddowe all imperfections
what-soeuer, and to let that pass for current, which else were counterfeit. In
this hope I present you with my labor of Amadis, and my poor good will, being
requited with your kind accepting: shall encourage me to adventure on the
second Book of this history, which (by the favor of the first) will come the
sooner. Long may I not stand pleading for so slender a reward, the good will
think the best, their courtesy I require, the bad (not borne to say well) I
care not for their freendship.

An. Monday. Honos alit Arts.

FINIS.
A Table for the ready finding of the Chapters contained in this Book,
directing by the number to every several leaf.
OF whence the Kings Garinter and Perion were, and the Combat between Perion
and two Knights, as also how he fought with a Lion that devoured a Heart in
their presence: with the success following ther-on. Chapter I. Folio. 1. How
the Princess Elisena, and her Damsel Darioletta. went to the chamber where
King Perion was lodged. chapter. II. Folio. 5. How King Perion parting from
little Britain, trauayled on his journey, having his heart filled with grief
and melancholy. chapter. III. Fol. 10. How King Languines carried away with
him the Gentleman of the Sea, and Gandalin the Son of Gandales. chapter.
IIII. Fol. 15. How King Lisuart sailing by Sea, landed in Scotland, where he
was greatly honored, and well entertained. chapter. V. Fol. 19. How Vrganda
the unknown, brought a Lance to the Gentleman of the Sea. chapter. VI. Fol.
26. How the Gentleman of the Sea, combated with the guarders of Galpans
Castle, and afterward with his Brethren, and in the end with Galpan
himself. chapt. VII. Fol. 31. How the third day after the Gentleman of the
Sea departed from King Languines, the three Knights came to the court,
bringing with them the wounded Knight in a Litter, and his disloyal wife.
chap. VIII. Fol. 34. How King Lisuart sent for his Daughter the Princess
Oriana, for that long before he had left her in the court of King Languines:
who sent her accompanied with the Princess Mabila his only daughter, as also a
noble train of Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen. chap. IX. Fol. 36. How the
Gentleman of the Sea fought the combat with King Abies, on difference of the
war he made in Gaul. chapter. X. Fol. 43. How the Gentleman of the Sea was
known by King Perion his Father, and by the Queen Elisena his Mother.
chapter. XI. Fol. 47. How the Giant bringing Galaor to King Lisuart, that he
might dub him Knight: met with his brother Amadis, by whose hand he would be
knighted, and by no other. chapter. XII. Fol. 52. How Galaor vanquished the
Giant at the Rock of Galteres. chapter. XIII. Fol. 58. How after Amadis
departed from Vrganda the unknown, he arrived at a castle, where it chanced
to him as you shall read in the discourse, chapter. XIIII. Fol. 64. How king
Lisuart caused a Sepulcher to be made for Dardan and his friend, with an
Epitaph in remembrance of their death: and the honor he did to Amadis, after
he was found and known. chapter. XV. Fol. 72. How Amadis made himself
known to king Lisuart, as also the Princes and Lords of his court, of whom
he was honorably received and feasted. chap. XVI. Fol. 79. What were the
adventures of the Prince Agraies, since his return from Gaul, where he left
Amadis. chapter. XVII. Fol. 85. How Amadis tarying with his good will in the
court of king Lisuart, heard tidings of his brother Galaor. chapter. XVIII.
Fol. 92. How Amadis combatted against Angriote and his brother, who guarded the
passage of the valley, against such as would not confess, that their Ladies
were inferior in beauty to Angriotes choice. chapter. XIX. Fol. 97. How
Amadis, was enchaunted by Arcalaus, when he would have delivered the Lady
Grindaloya and other from prison: and how afterward he escaped the
enchauntments by the aid of Vrganda. chapter. XX. Fol. 104. How Arcalaus
brought news to the court of king Lisuart, that Amadis was dead, which caused
his friends to make manifold lamentations and regrets, especially the Princess
Oriana. chapter. XXI. Fol. 108. How Galaor came very sore wounded to a
Monastery, where he soiourned five days attending his health, and at his
departure thence, what happened to him. chapter. XXII. Fol. 112. How Amadis
departed from the Ladies castle, and of the matters which were occurrent to
him by the way. chapter. XXIII. Fol. 119. How king Lisuart being in the chase,
saw a far off three Knights armed coming toward him, and what followed
there-upon. chapter. XXIIII. Fol. 122. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays
determined to travail to king Lisuart, and what adventures happened by the way
between them. chapter. XXV. Fol. 127. How Galaor revenged the death of the
knight, whom he found slain on the bed under the tree. chapter. XXVI. Folio.
131 How Amadis pursuing the knight that misused the Damsel, met another
knight with whom he combatted, and what happened to him afterward. chapt.
XXVII. Folio. 134 How Amadis combatted with the knight, that did steal the
Damsel from him when he slept, and vanquished him. chapter. XXVIII. 138. How
Balays behaved himself in his enterprise, pursuing the knight that made
Galaor loose his horse. chapter. XXIX. Folio. 140. How King Lisuart held open
court most royally, and of that which happened in the mean time. chap. XXX.
Folio. 142. How Amadis, Galaor, and Balays arrived at the court of king
Lisuart, and what happened to them afterward. chapter. XXXI. Fol. 145. How king
Lisuart departed from Windesore to the good city of London, there to hold
open and royal court. chapter. XXXII. Folio. 148. How king Lisuart would have
the advice of his Princes and Lords, as concerning his former determination,
for the high exalting and entertaining of chivalry. chapter. XXXIII. Folio.
152. How while this great and joyful assembly endured, a Damsel came to
court, clothed in mourning, requesting aid of king Lisuart, in a cause
whereby she had been wronged. chapter. XXXIIII. Folio. 155. How king Lisuart
was in danger of his person and his state, by the unlawful promises he made
too rash and unadvisedly. chapter. XXXV. Folio. 161. How Amadis and Galaor
understood, that king Lisuart and his daughter were carried away prisoners,
wherefore they made haste to give them succor. chapter. XXXVI. Folio. 166. How
Galaor rescued king Lisuart from the ten knights that led him to prison.
chapter. XXXVII. Folio. 172. How news came to the Queen that the king was
taken: And how Barsinan labored to usurp the city of London. chapter.
XXXVIII. Folio. 174. How Amadis came to the succor of the city of London,
when it was in this distress. chapter. XXXIX. Fol. 177. How king Lisuart held
open court in the city of London many days, in which time, sundry great
personages were there feasted, the greater part whereof remained there long
time afterward. chapter. XL. Folio. 181. How Amadis determined to go combat
with Abiseos and his two Sons, to revenge the kings death, who was father to
the fair Briolania, and of that which followed. chapter. XLI. Folio. 183. How
Galaor went with the Damsel after the knight that dismounted him and his
companyons in the forest, whom when he found, they combatted together, and
afterward in the sharpest point of their combat, they knew each other.
chapter. XLII. Folio. 187. How Don Florestan was begotten by King Perion, on
the fair Daughter to the Countye of Zealand. chapter. XLIII. folio. 191. How
Galaor and Florestan, riding toward the Realm of Sobradisa, met with three
Damoselles at the Fountain of Olives. chapter. XLIIII. folio. 197.
FINIS.

