A MOST STRANGE AND VVONDERFVLL PROPHECY UPON THIS TROVBLESOME world.
Calculated by the famous Doctor in Astrology, Master John Cypriano, conferred
with the judgments of James Marchecelsus and Sinnior Guiuardo, three excellent
Astronomers under the Emperor of Christendom: sent out of Germany into Italy,
to the University of Padua, to the rarest Nigromancer in the world.

Whereunto is annexed Tarquatus Vandermers seven years study in the Art of
Magic, upon the twelve months of the year, where many secrets are revealed
unto the world.

Translated out of Italian by Anth. Hollaway Gent.

a man with an astrolabe quadrant views the moon and stars while two others
talk over a book. A horned devil is central to their conversation.

Imprinted at London (...)

A MOST STRANGE AND VVONDERFVLL PROPHECY UPON THIS TROVBLESOME WORLD.
OXford and Cambridge, VVittenberge and Padua, you glorious Universities of
Christendom, take truce for a season with your deep inspiring sciences, and
vouchsafe to fix your inienious judgments upon this rare and vvonderfull
Prophecy, calculated by the famous and excellent Doctor in Astrology, Master
John Cypriano Astronomer under the Emperor of Christendom, agreeable to the
judgments of James Marcheselsus, and Sinnior Guiuardo, two learned Clerks in
Germany, the like was never published in any age, for the angry heavens by
fearful visions, foredooming Commets, and strange conjunction of Planets
does prognosticate to this sinful world, the alteration of kingdoms, fall
of Princes, overthrow of comman vvealths, desolation of countries, the ruin
of Cities, Towns, and Villages, earthquakes, floods, and mighty tempests,
vvherby the whole world vvil be greatly anoyde, also by the variable course
of the ellements, all nations under the cercute of the sun, vvil be
grievously vexed with bloody vvarres famine, death, scarsitie, with many
other strange and fearful accidents, as well in Europe as in Africa and
Asia, al which is for our wickedness and sins, wherein the whole earth
is drowned as in a gulf, past all recovery, except the majesty of God be
merciful: to avoid the manifold miseries that is likely to fall upon the
face of the earth: and our learned Astrologisions has published this fearful
and vvonderfull Prophecy to move us to a penitent life, that God may
vvithhold his grievous scorge from us Mystically set down, for a Glass or
example to them that understand and are wise to look into and for a disdain
and reproof to them that are foolish, as hereafter follovveth.

In the Northen borders of the earth, is situated a Forest trianglevvise,
environed with a wall of Brass from which forest shall fly a fortunate
foul that shall swim even to the borders of Africa, and there light upon a
golden Tree, from whence she shall pull three branches of gold, and so
triumphantly return back to the Forest again: at which there shall an
Eagle that builds her nest upon a golden steeple so much repine, and send
forth many secret fires to burn and waste the said Forest, but every one
shall be quenched and quite extinguished before the blaze be kindled. Many
Princes of the earth shall seek by policy to hunt therein, but at the gates
thereof shall take a great repulse: so fortunate and fruitful shall this
Forest be, and so invincible her towers of brass, that all the kingdoms of
the earth shall admire her fortitude, and grace her with the title of that
blessed Pardice, which God gave Adam at the worlds creation. After this the
Sea shall be mightier then the land, for there the corners of the world shall
meet and fight a tirrible battle, wherein a mighty man shall be over
thrown.

In the VVeast shall lurk a bloody Serpent in a Den, which has not seen
the light these many years, but yet this bloody Serpent shall have many
stings, which shall stretche into all the corners of Europe, and be annoyance
to the whole state of Christendom: Then from the North shall corn a Dragon,
that shall break out the Serpents teeth, and pluck forth his stings that he
shall neither bite nor sting, yet shall the Serpent keep his Den, and receive
succor from the Eagle in the golden steeple.

In the South shall live a Wolf upon the commons blood, and quaffe down
tovvn^ into his thirsty throat but in the midst of this bloody danquet
shall he choke himself and die.

Out of the East shall come a dismal black Dog, that like a thief by night
shall enter Germany in which enterprise he shall loose one of his limbs, and
so depart with such an yeelping sound, at which the limmets of Africa and
Asia shall quake. This Dog shall afterward forsake his master, and choose
him a new name, whereby the Scriptures shall be fulfilled. This Dog does
signify the Turk, which shall forsake his Mahomet, and choose to him the
name of Christian, which is a sign the day of doombe is at hand, when all
the earth is subject to one God.

The Flovver de Luce and France, shall live long at varience, but at length
agree.

The bowels of Spain shall be spilt in sunder, and divided for want of
government, even in those days when the golden steeple shall be consumed with
fire even that seven headed city, now more brauer then Jerusalem shall be a
place more desolate then Jerusalem. Then shall the clear word spring forth
and flourish through the world, which never shall be taken from us again,
after this a milk white Dove shall be lifted up to honor by two golden
Lions, and receive a crown of gould.

But after all these things shall the end of the world approach, therefore
shall there be heavy and pitiful days with much vvarres and other
alterations of the world, all which is likely to ensue this year follovving.

Tarquatus Vandermers, seven years study in the Art of Magic, upon the
twelve months of the year: wherein many secrets are reueald unto the world.
a man with an astrolabe quadrant views the moon and stars while two others talk
over a book. A horned devil is central to their conversation.
IANVARIE. 1569.
In the month of January, the angry heavens do foretell, upon that land
where most sin and wickedness does abound, shall reign a shovver of blood
continuing for the space of an hour, which does prognosticate the
destruction of that unhappy region.

FEBRVARIE.
In February, rumors of wars shall fill the ears of all nations, every
kingdom under the frame of heaven shall muster well approved soldiers:
traffic by sea shall be denied betwixt land and land, and every country
shall be forced to live upon his own.

MARCH.
In March, the maine Seas shall be so troubled with mighty tempests and
vvindes, that they shall swell above their banks, and ouerflovve an Island
where the double cross has government, only because the sins of the
Prince is so heinous before the Majesty of God.

APRIL.
In April shall happen such a terrible battle on the sea, whereby the water
will be turned to the color of blood, more sanguinlike then is the red
seas: God for his mercy turn it to the best, and defend our innocent and
spotless blood of England.

MAY.
In May the earth shall be over burthend with bloody vvarres, and some
nations shall furnish forth so many soldiers, whereby the land shall be so
desolate of men, that seven women shall be constrained to follovv one man.

JUNE.
In June, a province in the Eastern climbes: shall fight in the defense of a
vvrongful cause, at which the Majesty of God will threaten vengeance, and
rain down fire from the throne of heaven, and so burn those wicked people
in their tents of war.

IVLIE.
In July, the vveather will be so extreme hoate, whereby Soldiers shall not
be able to wear their armor, and likewise multitudes shall die for want
of water, the earth shall be so parcht with heat that it can yield no food
for Cattle.

AUGUST.
In August, such a grievous plague and mortallitie will cover the face of the
whole earth, that there shall not be sufficient left alive to gaither in their
harvest f^uites, in which month shall come out of the East such svvarmes of
Fowls and Flies, that will devour the corn from the ground, and where they
go, leave the earth barren: Oh times of sorrovv: oh times of vvoes, oh times
of more distress then was that time of famine in Jerusalem: you horders up of
Corn, repent, repent, your cruelty against the poor, for your extreme
covetousness the whole earth will be accursed: yet God I hope will hear the
pr^iers of the faithful, and defend his new Jerusalem from such distress.

SEPTEMBER.
In September the earth will be so unnatural, that all manner of Cattle
will rotte above the ground, whereof will breed such store of varmin, that
the earth will be impoysoned, and will receive no fruit to increase.

OCTOBER.
In Octrober, such a famine and darth of Corn vvil reign, that in some
countries the Child will sterue vvhilest it is sucking at the mothers breast,
only because the mother can get no food to nourish her self nor it.

NOVEMBER.
In November, a triumphant conquest shall be bruted through the world, of an
vvorthie conqueror that takes a truce with all the earth, and sets it in a
quiet stay.

DECEMBER.
In December all vvarres shall end e, religion preached truly through the
world, all things united up in peace, treasons and rebellions never thought
upon: thus all things brought to pass, will come that happy time the blessed
souls in heaven do continually pray for.

THerefore England cast of thy cloak of sin, thy vveedes of wickedness: no
doubt but God ^or his elect and chosen sake will spare this happy Island,
where his Gospel is truly preached: and let this Prophecy be fullfilled
upon those misbeleeuing nations, that make a scorn of thy most blessed word,
and Lord we beseech thee bridle up the Turk, that rages against the happy
state of Israel, confound the popish Antichrist, with his confederate the
King of Spain, with all the residue of Englands enemies, that intends the
overthrow of thy new Jerusalem, that we may sing all holy, holy, holy, to
the mighty God of Israel: Amen.

FINIS.

