A MANVELL OF THE BIBLES doctrine, for law and Gospel, letter and spirit,
Sign and thing signified: reduced to the first chapter of Leuiticus:

Wherewith (occasionally) be plainly considered, and briefly concluded, the
most main questions wherewith the christian churches be combred.

By H. C.

At London, Printed by R. B. for Nathaniell Butter, and are to be sold at his
shop near saint Austens gate. 1606.

REVERENDISS. IN CHRISTO PATRI, DN. RICHARDO VACHANO, S. THE OLOGIAE DOCTORI,
EPISC. LONDINENSI, HVNC QVALEMCVNQVE LIBRVM DE SACRIFICIIS Dt. Dtque

HENOCH CLAPHAMVS.

To the indifferent and intelligent Reader.
NOt knowing (and that not-knowing a grievous te^tatio^) whether God shall give
me to continue, or necessarisy to Convert my studies another way (for under
this or that color, we are not as Drones to eat not laboring, as the manner
of some howsecreepers is) and setting before mine eyes, what may for the
present he best fitted to the churchesgood: without al respect of persons I
handled th'insuing argument Of sacrifices and finally concluded, for remoouing
some scandalous behavior A reason of this Epistle.
toward me (for these nine years at least) to preface my said book, with an
Epistle of such nature, as follows. Et sic ab origin panda^.

About some 9. y. since, residing then at Amsterdam in Nether-land, in an
Epistle, prefixed to my Treatise of the Sin against the Ho. Ghost. I (for the
effect) concluded as follows,

1. First that certain here This certain. were more then now would be
known: for some are turred for mere advantage: (...) in co^ners, they be mar
tins disciples, still.
at home, laboring for Reformation in an ouercariage of words (as such and
such persons, ordinations and administrations etc were Antichristian, badges of
the beast, etc) they thereby ministered occasion of Separation from our Church:
as Brown is said at first to do, and many souls since least otherwise (as they
say) they should drink of the pure wine of Gods wrath.

2. Secondly I there auerred, that such Separists ministered occasion of further
inquiry. As, if the Church, ministry and sacraments, left behind in the
English church be Antichristian, then how is it possble that Themselves so
separated should either be possessed of true faith, or true baptism: seeing
Antichrist teaches, leads and seals to himself and the Devil his parent,
and not to christ For say they, out of a bitter fountain can issue no sweet
water: and as the root is, such be the branches. Whereupon insued that some
such separists did forthwith willingly and freely root up their former faith
touching Christ, as also, puff of the former Baptism: one first baptising
himself, and then he baptising others (as Abraham first circumcised himself
and then others) so sinning I fear the fearful sin against the Holy Ghost.
Only, one thing may be a let to their committing of that sin, if so happily,
the spiritual sight and sense supposed to have been in them, were never
indeed, so deeply settled in them.

That Epistle coming over to London, o what a storm the Devil there raised
for smiting the corners of silly Jobs house? And my self coming over about a
year after, how did a sort of supposed reformists fly upon my credit couched
in my Books and Sermons, as the Shabeans and Chaldeans ceazed on Iobes
substance, charging diverse their disciples, to fly all consultation with
Clapham or his writings, eue^ as they should fly poison. The case so stan ding,
I sent them word by some of their hearers, that if they would deny, they had
defined of Antichristianity as I had charged them before; or that granting they
had so taught, they would yet deny that se paration from our Church cold
necessarily be inferred therefrom; that then I would be rea die to clear the
one and the other, either by word or writing, as they should think best.
S^d surdis auribus, what they had done, they had done: and I was not a man to
be talked withal. And so forwards they went in their evil, and by colored
craftines drew many simple hearted people after them, in a blind kind of
schism. And this not only within the City, but also abroad they practiced, to
the abusing of many. Had they had the power of our Bishops, doubtless they
would have imprisoned me, and had they had the power of our Prince, without all
question, they would, have slain me. They can speak against the power they
have not, but had they that they would, it would be greater then that which
others with us have, even a power for trampeling Kings, crowns and scepters
under their feet, little or nothing differing from Papal supremacy. He that
knows not that, is very sillily acquainted with the too true stories of our
times, and the positive doctrines of principal leaders in that kind. But to
proceed.

While thus they labored to make men hate me and my labors, I toiled in my
ministry, wheresoever the door of utterance was opened unto me, and God
mercifully gave unto me the holy likengs of many. Yea, some of these, that had
been charged not to hear me, did (God being merciful unto them) repair to
my Sermons, concluding with themselves to walk by the Apostles rule, namely,
to try all things, and then keep that is good. In fine, they perceived how
they had been hoodwinked, and bursting out of Some yet in the ministry as
Fa'coners do lead the people hood winked they know not whither: looking for
their day, as the Papists for their day: having one speech in public and
another (...) private.
the snare wherewith they had been tangled, they came unto me readily, and
confessed their fault heartily.

The work so proceedinge on both sides, let me by the way tell the gentle
reader, how a welwiller of mine, dealte with a foe of mine, for causing him
against the purpose of his heart, to justify me and my labors. And thus it
was. My Tables of houshold^ Government, being here newly come forth, a
Chi^urgian A pretty jest, ^o the shame of partial spi ^ts.
(my friend) gets them, and upon my name, he procures the name of a
certain Preacher to be cleanlye pasted, to whom many glued themselves, as if
the faith should be held in respect of persons. These Tables, my friend
brought to a certain Sectarie, desiring his judgment upon these Tables. The
Sectary espying the Preachers name below, does take them (for had he seen my
name, he would not have looked upon them) and then he falls on reading Anon,
he burstes out into such patheticall speeches: Ey marry sir, this is indeed to
the purpose: O he is a rare man etc: My friend having got what he expected,
did thereuppon pull the paisted name off, and pointed him to the Author
thereof, Henoch Clapham. The Sectarie seeing that, O how blank he was, he
stood as one looking on Medusaes head, and so my friend left him. Apiteous
thing, that hearers shall affect men rather then matter, praising and
dispraysing they know not what. But had they been taught better, then would
they (happily) have learned better.

For an ordinarye thing it is, with that people and the Separistes to proclayme
all Dunses, No-scholers, etc: that differ from them; but being one with them,
then they be very learned, and what not? But again to my fo^mer discourse.

Some few scholars about the City, having so proclaimed me an aduersarye to
their laicail discipline (not only to the banding of Citizens against me,
but also of others in the Country) have they not since been opposite to
themselves? Then mark: They being of the number that petitio nated to the King
for Reformation (not to speak of some then reconciled to the Bishops, at least
outwardly) I beseech you, what do they speak of their Lay Elders (for we all
grant Elders) what speak they of their Lay-deaco^s for we all grant Deacons)
what say they of their Lay discipline (for we all grant discipline) what say
they to the King of these matters, wherewith they had intoxicate the heads and
hearts of their hearers? They speak not a word, not so much as God save it. They
only covet some other by-things, and then all is well enough, the former
Antichristianitie shall be all true (or at least, tolerable) christianity.

But methinks I hear some say, that howbeit they desired not of the King an
intertainment of the former discipline: yet they never the lessewer of the same
opinion still, but propounded it not, for that the King seemed adverse unto it.
I answer, it is untrue, for many of them had changed their opinion. In so much
as amongst them the case so stood: some few did faintly hold Three sundry Sects
under one Gener^ll head of reformation.
that the governing Elders (as before) were but lay people, in owe in office and
anon out, as be churchwardens and Syde-men. Some other again did rather
believe, that all church-elders and presbiters ought to be apt to teach and
so to continue assistante^ to the pastor. A third sort with Master. I. B.
held and still hold, that the gouernmente of the Church by Bishops (as with
us in England) or by ruling Elders (as in other Churches of God) that neither
of them was prescribed by the Apostles of Christ, neither of them repugn^nte
to the word of God; but may well and profitablie be used, if more fault be
not in their persons, then in the callinges themselves.

Being so divided into three head of opinion, touching the very Persons that
should exercise discipline, they could not in one petition beg al three nor
could the king grant more then one, and therefore no one sort propounded. But
if the division be so manifold about the very persons that should govern the
Church, I beseech you, what abundance of difference would be found amongst
them touching the matter of d^scipline it self, in such and such cases for pro
ceeding? these that have conuersed with the Separistes and the^e proceedinges,
can best declare that their head-lesse petition beeinge gain said, and so
their affections stirred up, One says, he sees not, But ^he Brownist did
well so to separate, as I spoke before. some others again say, they do not
see, that it is good to separate so, that is, to depart as from a false
church: but to separate as from a Church near wounded to death and very
infectious, they think it good and hye-time so to do, as some before them did,
whom I willingly leave namelesse. A third sort acknowledge, that they see
not either of the said Separations to be good, and therefore will await he
Lords pleasure, mourning in the very midst of Zion. There be so three
heads, one sounding a Retreat, the other Tara^ tara to the battle: and of
these two to the battle, the one side proclaiming an absolute defiance, as
against a false Church, wherein not any one is a true visible Christian; the
other houlding that proclamation to be false: saying, howsoever it is not good
to come nere unto Job, being so vlcer^us, yet a living soul he is, and may be
so restored, as in time we may draw nearer unto him, meaning the church. So,
amongst themselves they be divided. And if the trumpet (says the Apostle) do
give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself unto the battle? No
body. Martin. mar must first better direct his people: For most absurd it
were, to march after a Champion eyelesse and handlesse. If the blind lead the
blind, both must ^umble into the ditche: that is, into the state of damnation.

Gentle Reader, consider of it soberly, and the Lord give thee understanding
in all things. Look how I taxed them at first, they have made it good at the
last. But how many of them have the grace to lay down their enmity toward
me, to confess their evil, and accordingly to make satisfaction? well, if I
have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil, but if it be but truth, why
still do they smite me? The truth is great and will conquer, and better for
them to be subdued unto it, then subdued of it. As for their followers, let
them beware they follow them not in evil, howsoever it be their duty to
reverence their good. Be followers of all, as they be followers of Christ, but
not further.

That many things amongst us need amendment, who knows not, and what honest
heart lamentes not? And that it is the duetye of every soul, so far as
calling and means extend, to labor such amendment, every discreet person
grants.

But if the laws of our Land be truly considered, evils be rather
Personal, then Legal, and the abuse in persons, must not condemn the lawful
use of things.

Let us strive in mutual exhortations daielie, while it is called to day, but
(as the Apostle commands) Let all our things be done in love: for without
love, all our talk of faith, hope, knowledge, will be but as the noise of a
tinckling Cimball, a noise, no voice: and that will never (or seldom) bring
any edification to the hearers.

And thus gentle reader, hoping that by other men's harms God will give thee to
beware as also the heart of entertaining good counsel, how base, poor, or
otherwise soever the counselor be, I leave thee to the sequel of divine
Sacrifice, which the Lord make blessed unto thee. In receiving good by it,
give to GOD the praise, and for me to god thy prayers, specially, that it
would please GOD, to give some timely issue out of my present tentation.

And so heartily farewell, this seventeenth of November, the memorial day
of our late blessed Soueraign, good Queen Elizabeth: whose name be ever
honored in the Catalogue of christian Princes.

Thine in the Lord, He. Cl.

The Argument.
From Tabernacle, does Jehovah speak
To Moses, and he speaks to Israel.
And for that Moral justice was too weak,
He unto them does preach the Eua^gell,
Of Christ in Types, he better things does tell
In Beasts, birds, bread and drink-oblatio^s te^dred,
Is Jesus Christ and al his merits rendered.
A Reduction of the Law and Gospel, Letter and spirit, Shadow and substance
unto Leuiticus, 1. Chapter.
Heavenly father, which openest to them that knock, and reuealest mysteries of
thy kingdom unto Babes, vouchsafe to remove all clouds of ignorance from my
min: that so the shine of thy countenance coming more clearly upon me, I may
discover faithfully, the saving sense of thy word: and this for the sake of
Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.
1. AND the Jehovah.
Lord cried unto Moses and Iebrue oberua^ions.
spoke unto him, out of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, saying:

2. Speak to the sons of Is raell, and thou shall say unto them: If any Adam.
Man of you shall offer an Korban.
oblation to the Jehovah.
lord you shall offer your Korban.
oblation of cattle [as] of the heard and the flock.

3. If the Gnolah.
Burnt offering be his oblation of the heard, he shall offer a male that's Tamim.
perfect, presenting it at the door of the Tabernacle of Conuention; (even) of
his own will shall he offer it, before the face of Jehovah.

4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt offering, and it shall
be accepted for his atonement.

5. And he shall kill the Hebr. The son of the Beef.
bullock before the face of Jehovah, and the Sons of Aaron (the priests) shall
offer the blood, and shall sprinkle the blood upon the Altar round about, that
is by the door of the Tabernacle of conue^tion.

6. And he shall flay the burnt offering, and shall cut it into his pieces.

7. And the Sons of Aaron the priest, shall put fire on the altar, and lay the
wood in order upon the fire on the altar.

9. But the inwards thereof and he legs thereof, he shall wash in water, and the
priest shall burn all upon the altar, it being a G^olah sheh.
burnt ^ffring, a Reia^h ^icoach.
savor of rest unto Jehovah.

10. But if his oblation for the burnt offering be of the flock [as of sheep
or of Goats) he hall offer a male that is perfect.

11. And he shall kill it at the Ierek.
thigh of the Altar upon the north, before the face of Jehovah: and the sons of
Aron (the priests) shall sprinkle the blood thereof, upon the altar round about.

12. And he shall cut it into his pieces: the head and the far, the^ the Priest
shall lay in order, upon the wood, that is upon the fire on the Altar.

13 As for the inwards and the legs ^e shall wash the in water, and the ^iest
shall offer the whole, and ^rne it on the altar, it being an ^nolah ish^h.
offering made by fire, an odor of rest unto Jehovah.

14. But if his oblation be an offering to Jehovah of the fowls, then he shall
offer of Turtles or of Helr. The (...) of the pigeon.
young pigeons.

15. And the priest shall offer it at the Altar, and wring the neck of it
asunder, and burn it on the Alter; and the blood thereof shall be squeased
upon the Kir.
wall of the altar.

16. And he shall pluck out his mawe with The feathers about the m^.
his feathers, and shall cast it besides the Altar, on the cast part in the
place of the ashes.

17. And he shall cleave it with his wings, but not divide it asunder; and the
priest shall burn it on the altar, upon the wood that is on the fire, it
being a fiery oblation, an odor of Rest unto Jehovah.

A short Poem, serving for an introduction to the Text.
THE Lord having set the Angelical spirits out of his hand, Tobh, good,
fair, amiable, behold a certain number of them Jude 6.
forsook their place, and so becoming adue se to God, they waited opportunity
of vexing GOD in his creature, coveting that the heavenly places they had lost,
might never of o^ers be supplied. Mankind no sooner created and beautifuly
seated but lo, Satan that sleeps not, aggressed woman, first perverting her at
the time of eating, and the^ having virtual possession of her (as before of the
beast) he moves her to solicit man as before he moved the beast to solicit
woman: he by woman, so came to sin, as she by the serpent, ^hereupon soon
after God expulsed them Paradise, the sacrament all sign of heauensblisse
above. But as the Lord first clothed them in Beasts skins, so doubtless he
informe^ them forthwith (upon the bles Genesis 3. 15. etc.
sed seed promised) of laws for sacrificing the flesh of beasts and birds, so
well as of a meat offering to concur threwithall; by which ^remonies they might
more familiarly be le^d (as by the hand) unto the promised seed, Christ Jesus.

Adam living in this faith, he co^me^ded the same to his sons; for no sooner
we hear of them, ^ut we hear they did sacrifice; Abel of his flock, Caine of
his ground fruits. Abel slain, the verity of sacrifice was renewed in Sheth,
whom god put in the place of Abel. Seth begot AEnosh, and he begot Kenan. Kenan
beg at Mahalaleel, and he lared. Iared begat Henoc (the 7 from Adam) he begot
Mathu selah, Mathusela Lamech, and he Noah. By these to the flud, and by Noah
the sacrifice of faith was maintaind. Noah at the. y. end, coming out of the
ark (world aged 1657) sacrifices a sweet savor to the lord* his son Shem does
specially de riue the care of continuing Shem lived 600 years.
the holy ceremony, dying but about 25 years before Abram To this Abram, the
Lord renewed the promise, telling him more particularlye, that that Seed (not
seeds as speaking of many) should be derived from his line. This holy father
continued the ceremony of faith; as also, upon a peculiar commandment,
offers Beasts, and birds undivided, in Genesis 15. whereupon he is told, that
his seed should be a stranger and afflicted, 400. years, and that in land not
theirs, that is, as the ancient Rabanus Maurus (from Eusebius) well notes, not
only in AEgypte, but also in the first unpurged Eab^s in his 2. b. 2. (...)
Exodus, (...) t^ache Neoph^t. to number the times better.
Canaan. The first open persecution of his seed, begonn in the half Egiptian
Ismael, flowting at the promise in Isaac, what time Isaac was wayned. Abraham
begat Isaac, Isaac Jacob; Jacob the twelve patriarchs, whereof came the twelve
tribes termed Israel, which went down into AEgipt for 215. years, not for 430,
as the former ancient will teach Neophyts, from the fathers age, thus: Abraham
at his hundred year, had Isaac, (then the affliction begone by one of Chams
kytes) Isaac lived 180 years, and then was gathered to his fathers. Ten years
after, Iaacob went down into Egypt with his 70 souls ^e being then aged 130.
Put Isaacs 180 unto the ten years after before the descensio^ into AEgipt and
the sum will prove ^ust 190. Add unto this 190, he sum of years before Isacs
birth unto the promise given to his father Abraham (which was in his 75. year)
and their will be 25 years: for the addition (namely, from Abraham's 75 unto his
100 year) and so the particulars from Abraham's peregrination unto Isreal's
descension, will be 25 years and 190 years, the whole sum 215 years. In Egipte
so they were but 215 more: the whole 430. according to that in Exodus 12. 40.
where from the first peregrination made by their grandfather out of Vr of
Chaldie unto that going out of his seed from Egypt with Moses, be nombred 430
years. The same number, from the Gospel preached to Abram unto the giving of
the two tabled law at mount Sinai in the wilderness, is pressed of the
apostle, when to the Galatians he says thus; The law which was 430 years
after the Gospel was preached to Abram, cannot disanull that covenant, that
was confirmed before of GOD in respect of Christ, that it should make the
promise of none effect.

Thus from the worlds beginning (Adam having sinned) unto the gift of the Law
(moral, judicial, ceremonial) at Sinai or Horeb (even, some 2513 years) was
the promised seed set out under ceremonial shadows, and not now first given at
the mount to the sons of Leui.

A DISCOVRSE UPON Leuiticus. 1.
Section. 1.
THIS book is termed of the christian church Leuiticus, What it in ^endeth.
LEVITICUS, for that it entreats of the public Leitourgy, or common form of
service, which the Lord imposed upon the tribe of Leui, one of the twelve
families derived from old Jacob or Israel. whereupon also, these ceremonies are
ordinarilye termed. Leuiticall ceremonies.

The book (in the original) begins thus: vai^kra ael Moshe, vaiedabar
Jehovah etc. word for word thus, And he cried unto Moses (even) the lord spoke
etc, where the first letter V in propriety signifies AND, howsoever sometimes
it couples not, but explaineth somewhat before spoken: which letter V (called
Vah) did even so begin Exodus, and likewise begins the following book of
Nombers, kniting so the books Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus and Nombers together.
As for Deuteronomy, it is not so coopled, for that it is but a repetition of
the things of Moses. The coo pling of the first four books of Moses together,
does so teach us one and the same faith, sealed by god the father in his son:
as also, that the same Leui discovered in Genesis, and taught the form of a
divine house or tabernacle in Exodus is the same to who^ the public form of
worship is prescribed in Leuiticus, and whose parioch-peple (with certain their
gests) is counted in Nombers. Some rese^bla^ce may be between these 4 books and
the 4 Euangel* Genesis begins with the word whereby all was made, S. John with the
same word made flesh, for effecting a better creation the^ the natural. For how
soere S. John's Euan. is pla ced last of man, yet of the word incarnate, he was
most highly beloved, and writ of that word most highly. Exodus begins with
the generation of Israel, that went down into Egypt, and S. Matthew begins
with Jesus (which came of that generation according to the flesh) who also of
his Israelitish parents, was had into Egypt; till out of Egypt God called his
son. The book of Leuiticus begins with sacrifice imposed on Leui, and S.
Luke begins also with Zachary a Leuite sacrificing, and informed touching
Him, that was the end of that ceremonial law. The book of Nombers beginns
with a Catalogue of the Heads of Israel, with their natural generation: and
the Gospel according to S. Mark, begins with the spiritual Heads of the
Church, by whom was continued the spiritual Israel of God. As for
Deuteronomy, contayuing the several Gests of Israel, it may well be matched
with the Acts and Gests of the Apostles, who with their spiritual weapons
did more, then all the natural Israel could with their carnal weapons and
warfare. As for any doctrine in the old Testament taught after the books of
Moses, it was to have his reference to, and his ground in Moses: and even so,
the doctrine, einsuing the former writings, of the 4 Evangelists, was in nothing
thereto, to be contradictorye. This book of Leuiticus divides it self into
ceremonial Persons, and ceremonial things.

Section. 2.
THe ceremonial Persons are of 2. Ceremonial persons.
sorts, the first is God himself, the second is the people of God: the term
Ceremonial I give as an Attribute unto God, for that he manifests himself
unto his people, no otherwise then by ceremony or sacramental signs. Such
Ceremonies or signs of his presence, as were the fiery pillar and clowd in the
wilderness: And such was the external sound of the word, in the ears of Adam
and all the ancient patriarchs, as also to us at this day. But here in this book
of Leuiticus he plentifully declares his might, justice, mercy etc. under types
and ceromoniall shadows. And how should the creatur which is finite, attain to
any knowledge of the creator in whom all is infinite, saving by his humbling
himself unto us by some finite forms (for so the Gentiles behoulding Romans 1.
Psalm. 19. 1.
the visible creature came to some knowledge of the invisible creator) and that
argues also his exceeding love toward us, who will vouchsafe (as unto Moses) a
view of his back, when otherwise we could not behold his face and live.

The ceremonial people be the twelve tribes of Israel, whereof one tribe is
of the Lord assumed for the work of the ministry, and that is Le^i: the other
eleauen trybes are left to be administered unto, and they be the trybes of
Judah, Benjamin, Reuben, Simeon, Zebulun, Issachar, Dan, Gad, Asher, Nephtali,
Joseph; which one of Joseph, is sometimes considered in the families of his two
sons, Ephraim and Manasses.

Now for the ministering Tribe, Leui, every familye thereof did not minister
alike, for those that came of his Son Kohath, were deputed to the peculiar
function of priesthood; but such as came of his other two sons, Gershom and
Merari Nom. 3. and 4. and 18.
they were allotted unto inferior services, as appears largelye in the book
of Nombers: neither these that came of Kohath, were all alike interessed in the
priestlye function, for Aaron (and so the eldest after him, by ordinary rule)
were preferred in the office, as going before the rest, in daily alter-duty: as
also only appointed and allowed to enter into the third part (the most secret
part) of the Tabernacle, called the holy of holies. All which (not to press
the mysteries large ly handled in my third and fourth part of my labors on
Salomons songue) does commend to the Church for ever, the Equity, first of
sufficiency; secondly of order for public administration of divine duties.

Sufficiency of these Levites appeared, first in being free from all bodily
Leuit. 21. 17. etc.
unsoundness and vnproportionability; seeing filthy diseases and lack of some
member, would debar them, though Levites. This no doubt in Figure did
fignifie, that the Archprieste of our profession, should be void of blemish
and lackes, for the integrall work of our redemption. But yet not only this
but that the subordinate of Christ should be (as Paul speaks) Kosmios,
turned sometimes Modest; 1 Timothy 3. 2. The word Kosmios, is expounded.
but in the nature and propriety of the word, it signifies a seemlinesse,
neatness, and all in proportion and good order; such as the frame of the World
is, set out of Gods hand: whereupon man is termed in the good sense,
Micro-cosmos, a little world. And consider any of the prophets or Apostles, or
Evangelists called of God and christ Jesus, and it seems that the rule was
sanctified by their example, seeing we never hear of any vnfeatured person,
allotted unto such superinte^dency. The peoples weakness (doubtless) was in such
case tendered, for that they be ouerready to except and flout at any infirmitye
in the minister. But yet, this being a let to the entrance (whereas necessity
causes not a dispensation from the common rule) it intends not a lawful
occasion of remoouing any from the ministry, who since their entrance have
accidentally met with such wants, while they have behaved themselves worthy
their function.

Secondly, the sufficiency of these Leuits appeared Nom. 4 43. compared with
chap. 8. 24. etc.
by their fulness of age, in that, first they might not enter into the service
of the Tabernacle, until they were five and twenty years aged; nor secondly,
might the Kohathites attend the altar, until they were thirty; nor were they
to continue in that laboursom service, after once they were fifty, howsoever
afterward to be trusted with things committed to their charge, concerning the
good of the sanctuary. Their experienced faithfulness, deserved such trust: but
their weaker years, deserved a freedom from killing the sacrifices and other
laborius trauails. The equity hereof continues still Cyprian. d^ ^ici. m. and
ten ^t. Non con^enit a^nis impubi bus (...) ^n Ca^hedra.
in the new testament; for our savior came not to break, but to fulfi^l the
law: and accordingly for example (for otherwise, who doubts of his abilitye at
twelve years of age?) who entered not into the public administration of
ministry, until he begone to be about 30. Nor can the phrase of Presbyter or
Elder intend less, which was a term given to the Euangelical ministry, and
not to Lay-aldermen. I know that Timothy was a young man, but not a young
scholar (having bin trained up in scriptures of a child) and in like case, I
doubt not the Church now may dispense with the general Canon. But for the
common rule, it requires sufficient agednes, seeing commonly very few in few
years attain to sufficiency; else the order of universities should be held
superstitious, where after the study of Arts and tongs. so many years are
required for attaining degrees worthy the profession of divinity. For the other
point namely, of being allowed to surcease such travail at 50. I doubt not of
the lawfulnes still (for who in their best years are sufficient for these
things?) seeing ordinarilye about these years, quick conceit is dulled, memory
weakened, and strength utterly is lacking for preaching in season and out of
season, publicly and privately thorough every household. But while they
rest, some other must take pains. The work of the Lord must not be done
negligently. Me thinks I now do hear some Nouelists say, never was sincere
preacher of this latter opinion. Yes forsooth, not to allege others, one
whom you cannot (or at least, will not) except against, was so minded. Master
Greenham leaving his pastoral cure at Draiton by Cambridge (as public brute
went then amongst his welwillers) did allege this law of 50. as a very
sufficient cause of desisting his former laborious charge: howsoever he
afterward here at London, employed himself in doing good as he could. 3.
The sufficiency of these Leuits require^ that their lips should pr^serue
Malachi 2. 5. 6. etc.
knowledge, that so the people might f^teh the law from their mouth. And the
apostle teaches Timothy that all such as desire ecclesiastic superinte^dency,
they should be apt to teach no Neophyt, able to stop the mouth of gainsaiers
etc. for that without such qualifi catio^, there ca^ be no true Bishop or
Presbiter, that being the very life and essence of a Pastor or elder. The
apostle requires sundry other particular virtues to the more com mendable
being of a Pastor, but not to his essential being (for then, where should we
meet with one true Minister?) it being a perfect example for shaping forth a
minister; even as there is a perfect example of a common Christian, wherafter
he is to contend, when as Christ says, Be perfect as your heavenly father is
perfect. And as it were gross absurdity to Mat. 5. 48.
conclude thus, No one that is not perfect as God is perfect, can be held for a
true Christian: even so absurd it is to say, No one is a true Pastor or
Presbyter, that is not absolutely qualified in all virtues as the Apostle
requires. Tully defines an Orator at such a pitch of perfection, as none
could ever attain to, and Plato draws out such a common wealth, as none ever
in this world did or shall see: was it Tullies meaning therefore to conclude
there was no true Orator to be found; or Platoes meaning that therefore there
was no true respublique in the whole world? Ierom conceiving Hieronym. ad
Oceanum
better of the rule then do a number of our fantasticks, does therefore call
it Speculum Sacerdotij the priests looking-glas, to the end that daily looking
therein, they may dolere ad deformitatem, sorrow at the sight of their
deformity, and gaudere ad pulchri^udinem, rejoice at what was beautiful in
them. So much for the minister^ sufficiency.

Touching Order o^ degrees amongst the L^ uites, it was briefly touched before,
where one was principal, as Aaron, to whom in greatest cases recourse was to
be had. Others again (as the sons of Aron) were a seat under the former, and
in the time of David were divided for the public service into 24. ranks, two
in likelihood for a month. So there were several orders for the Quier-men,
and orders of subordination between the Levites that came of G^rshom and
Merari. Nor can it ever be proved, that all of these Orders were given by
immediate note from the Lord, but sundry of them derived from the Maiestraies
discretion, as were afterward also, some festival ordinances, and
Synagogicall orders thorough the common wealth of Israel.

For the ministry of the new Testament, I have 7. Lectio^ on Salomons Songue,
part 2. See also my abstract of faith.
spoken at large upon Sa lamons songue, only for Order but thus much: Some were
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and doctors; several
degrees for order sake, and yet all preachers of one and the same Gospel. The
seven Churches of Asia to whom S. John writ, each of them had one superior
teacher, termed by the name Angel (in sense one with the term Apostle) which
is in English a Messenger, or one that's sent, namely to preach the Gospel.
Can it easily be thought that there were no more in any of them churches, to
assiste the other in teaching? It possible cannot be: the Churches in all
probability, being of some large continuance, and the Churches being also city
churches, not country Churches: and therefore of the Greeks called Me
tropolitan Churches: for in the chiefest cities, the first churches were
planted. Nay, to put it out of doubt, when the Apostle S. Paul sent from
Miletum Act. ^0. 17. etc.
to Ephesus for the presbyters of that Church, lo there came diverse, that
were Elders or over seers in that Church, all apt to teach, and therefore all
of them charged with the same work he had there undergone. One of these being
particularly charged by Saint John, it argues he had a superiority over the
rest of the overseers, so well as over the people; or else Saint John would have
directed his Epistle, not to the angel, but To the angels of the Church of
Ephesus. Worthilye therefore is that parity of ministrye hissed out of the
church. And if King David might (out of his sanctified discretion) constitute
several Orders as before: yea, if Mordecai might ordain a festival day for
their deliverance from Hamans Pur, and Judas Machaheus a (a) For the
understanding hereof, read Tremellius his note on John 10. 22
longer festival, in memorial of the Temples clearing; what should let, that
Christian Princes out of their sacred discretion, may not do the like? If they
lay a yoke upon the people which they themselves will not bear, therein they
shall sin. But for their Right in such cases, it is no way lessened by the
appearaunce of Christ, but rather enlarged: seeing the former were in their state
of nonage: but these (so well as the whole Christian church) are by Christ
Jesus, com to their Ful-age to the further ripening of their discretion. And
thus I have briefly cleared the harmonye abiding between the ancient and new
ministry.

For the second sort of Ceremonial people, it was the eleven Trybes of Israel
before spoken of, which figured out the whole of Gods people, that were to be
gathered unto Christ (the perfect Preuatler with god, figured by that one
Israel or Iaacob, whereof all the 12. tribes came) in respect whereof the
apostle terms Galat. 6. 15. 16.
all such, the Israel of God. And therefore the several Cognisaunces and
qualities attributed by Jacob and Moses upon their prophetical deathbeds, do
lively figure out, the diversity of gifts and qualities in the new testamentes
Church; one and the same spirit working diversely: not to speak of
discommendable qualities, which were never worse in the first, then be in the
last. But what the people represented, the Tabernacle represented; and
therefore to that.

Section. 3.
GOD unto this people, sacrame^tally Tabernacle, a sacramental place.
spoke, by Moses out of the Tabernacle. The Tabernacle and Temple, how in the
primarye sense they represented Christ the head of the Church: and then in a
secondarie sense, how they represented the mystical body of Christ, I have
spoken and cleared sufsufficientlye in the fiftth part of my labors upon
Salomons songue, and the eleventh lection, thither I refer the reader. Only
here remember, that as God dwells in Christ somatically or bodily: so he
dwells in his members, but virtually and by qualification: in which sense,
and by reason of their union with Christ, they are said of S. Peter, to partake
(...) of the divine nature. No marvel then, if we be called Temples of the
Holy ghost: as also of the whole it be said, Behold the Tabernacle of God with
Reu. 22. 3.
men, and he will dwell with them!

1. The differencie of stuff tending to the Tabernacles buildinge, it well
argued the difference of tongues, nations and languages, whereof the Church of
Christ was to consist. 2. The diversity of vessels therein, did well type
forth, the sun^rye qualifications, of these several Christians, but all leading
unto one and the same Christ.

3. The gifts hereto being volu^tary, does argue not only, that god loves a
cheerful giver, but also that there is no acceptance at Gods hand of any
obedience, that coms against the hair and constrainedly. 4. The hewing of the
Temples stones, without and then bringing them to the place, and conioyning
them without the noise once of an hammer (whereupon Solomon grounded that
proverb, prepare thy work Prou. 24. 27.
without, and make ready thy things in the field, and after build thine house)
it not only teaches, that God by his word and spirit, first hammereth every
soul of his apart, and then brings them into a glorious union with peaceable
affection (like to the first Church at Jerusalem, where all were of one heart
and mind) but also, that every christian (much more ministers and maiestrates)
should, aiming at a general, first look to their particulars; and they once
fitted, it is a matter of no stir to unite them for the general. Orators
had that wit for framing their Orations; but Divines often lack that care,
for well composing books and sermons. And yet the lord (imitated of the
Carpenter) gave that example in the worlds creation, that first one particular
and then another should be hewed out of the confused Chaos or Lump; and then
lastly united in one, for effecting the universe or general called the world.
5. As for the decay of Tabernacle and Temple, whereupon followed necessarily a
repairing and mending thereof, it well imports, not only external wants that
are to be supplied of the more able; but also, such spiritual wants as will
continually break out, wherein the infirm are to be supported of the stronger,
and to be covered with Love, as Shem and Iaphet covered Noah with a mantle,
whereby they got that blessing, which separating flowting Chamistes, partake
not of. 6. The scattering of the tabernacles parts, and the consuming of the
Temple by fire, carrying the holy vessels into captivity, they fitly denote. The
churches scattering in the time of tempests and fierye affliction, yea, the
carrying of them away captive by the strong hand of Antichrists army. 7. Lastly,
the new erection of the Temple, it being made more excellent (as Haggai
foresawe) by Christ his bodily appearance therein: Hagg. 2. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8.
it well foreshadowed the happy return of the Church, from out all affliction:
yea, out of the earths rubbish and ashes (after the long sleep of all flesh)
what time the Joy of al nations shall mak^ his second appearing for our fullness
of comfo^t and glory. So much brieflye, of that ceremonial house and persons.

Section. 4.
THE ceremonial Persons considered, and with the Ceremonial (...).
Persons the place (it being one with the Persons in representation) it now
rests to speak of the ceremonial things contained in this Book; which
principallye be these. 1. Sacrifices. 2. Leuies Maintenance. 3. Vncleanesses.
4. Mixtures. 5. Festiuities. 6. Vows.


But because the matter of Sacrifice is the maine thing I entend, for reducing
thereto the Law and Gospel (that is, works, saying Do h^, and Faith saying
Believe the) I therefore will superficially run over all the rest, and insist
upon Sacrifice in the last place.

Leuies maintenance was exceeding large, and Leuies main t^nance.
larger then here I mean to press. Only, as much and more, then people of our
age would willingly hear applied. To the inferior sorts of Leuits, the people
offered tenthes, as also they again their tenth unto the priesthood: the equity
is ever the same: for not only the people receiving spiritual things, are
bound therefore to administer of their temporals (yea, of all and the best good
things they have. Galat. 6: 6) but the inferior ministry are indebted to the
superior, as their Overseers in the Lord, and these that carry the mainest
burden. Nor otherwise can that litigious place be understood in Tim: 5: The
Presbyters that rule well, are worcester ^hy double h^nour, s^ecially (hoi The word
signifie^h a being tyr^d by traua^le, as our Sa^ ^r was in S. John, 4, when he
s^t d^wn on the we^l
copiontes) such as tire them selves in ^he word and doctrine: for the
scripture says, thou shalt not mussell the mouth of the Ox, etc: Every
Presbyter in the due exercise of his guiftes deserved double honor (that is, as
the Apostle expounds, double maintenance: namely in comparison of the
Diaconisses before spoken of, if not also of the Dea cons) but such of the
presbyters as tired themselves in the work (as par ticularlye the Apostles did,
who had upon them a special care of the churches) they much more deserved
large allowance. If the people be bound so to honor the meanest minister, how
much more should people and inferior ministers, honor the greater? I know some
will here babble and say, that tenths were leuiticall and ended with Leui. I
answer, it is untrue to insinuate that. Tenths were only and first peculiar to
Leui; for tenths were given to the Priest Melchisedech when Le ui was in the
loins of Abraham: Nor can it be imagined that the He^dot. (...). 1. tells,
how Cyrus having conquered C^sus and taken his city S^rdis, ^e (by the advice
of (...)) did t^the the Tenth of all the spoil unto (...), before that any
substance was carried out of the cities gates.
ancient Heathen did so de cimate to their Priests, but for that they had the
example thereof traditionally from the beginning of Sacrifice. Secondly, it
follows not, tha because it was ceremo niall together with sacrifice, that
therefore it must cease with sacrifice, (no more then because the Tabernacle and
Temple, and ministers were ceremonial, therefore all ecclesiastique houses and
ministers are to be abolished) but rather this; look what ceremonial
signification the Tenth might have, that cease with Christ: as the
ceremonial signification of the bullock, Sheep, goat, did: but not therefore
the number of Ten, nor the use of Beasts abolished: To use them continues, but
not to use them so.

Some learned and reverend do conclude, that the Tenth is merely moral, and so
always a duty. Of whom I desire leave to interpose my opinion, and the
reason; which howsoever not ^e same, yet it shall be nothing behind that, for
the good of the ministry It seems unto me, that ^ogither with the burial of
the Jewish ceremony and policy, there was a ceasement of decimations: for the
christian chur ches then established, were often taught to co^tribute unto their
ministry, but never to decimate; whereas the apostle so often handling the
argument, and by law a Pharise, P^lip. 3. 5.
it were very strange he should omit the pressing of that which should be ^oral:
the number of tenth, if not moral. (and I leave that Thesis to be maintained
of the^ which have the strength I lack) it then is to be held Iud^cial; a
number of maintenance iudiciallye held fitting of the maiestrate, for the
minister. The primitive churches at first were so zealous and fervent in
devotion, as they sold all, and gave up all to the ministers, leaving the
disposal thereof to their discretions. But as finest flowers soonest vanish,
so that devotion soon cooled. And that may appear in the Apo stles much
pressing the Churches, with the conscionable care they ought to have, of all
due provision for their ministry, as having already lost their first love in
that matter, and if in that, then also their first love was lost to the holy
religion. For never was religion loved, and the ministry neglected. I know that
some do ^n Genesis 47. 22. turn it Princes, not Priests. But the word Co^en
signifiing properly and usually a Priest, I understand it so here: Once, for
that it ^a an orna meant to the Heathens greatest prin ces t^ be ^riests and
they commonly only thereto approved. Secondly, for that Joseph seems to have
spared these priests for no other respect, then because Pharaoh did first
priniledge their portions.
The Egiptian people will witness that, in the provision was made for their
priests, when all the peo ple generally were pinched and consumed of famine.

But me thinks I hear one say, I like it well, that Tenths should be moral and
so from God, rather then from the Prince. Do thou so, then speak out plainly
what may be thy reason. This, if moral then as the minister is to have no
less, seeing God commands so much: so he is to have no more, seeing he
only commands the Tenth. And, I thought as much, Thou likest it not simply,
but respectively, that is, in respect of auantage. But stay, it follows not,
be cause God mediately o^ immediately commands the tenth, therefore he
commands no more. For to Leui was commanded a tenth and other things besides
the tenth. Not to press the cities they had etc. thou sha^t find, that of
diu^s things offered unto the Lord, a Leuit. 2. 3. 10 and chapter 10. 12. etc.
good moity came to the priest, for the furnishing of his table, as if the lord
could not be served and the minister unprovided. Nor has the grace of god
appearing by christ, taught us to Iessen our love toward his ministry, but
rather teaches us to honor him in honoring them with doble maintenance. But
o base age we live in; men seek honor in dishonoring the ministry, but an
honor that sticks to their houses and manors accordingly, to the very gnawing
and consuming of their names and houses, from the face of the earth. Let them
then that serve at the Altar, live honorably by the altar, and that I am sure
is moral. so much briefly of Leuies maintenance. The other particulars I must
handle more briefly, and so unto Sacrifice.

Section. 5.
VNcleanenesses were of sundry Uncleannesses Nouation. presb. de Cibi. In
animalib. mores de pinguntur humani, and Act^s and volunta^es.
^orts. For there were beasts and birds by Ceremony unclean and so continued
till the partition wall of ceremony was removed; and then it was lawful to
arise, kill, and eat, alimentally and phisically. S. Peter was taught in Act.
10, that the Gentiles were figured thereby, and that therefore he should not now
stand aloof from them as of yore, for that the time was com, wherein God would
purify their hearts by faith. Secondly, there was certain of mankind
ceremonially pronounced unclean: Once in respect of the living, having issues
menstrual or seminall flowing from them: having unlawful copulations, and
contagious diseases upon them: Again, in respect of the dead, seeing the
^ouching of the^ or their bones, was a ceremonial uncleanness. All these
importing such thoghts words and works as make us unclean and noysom to our
selves and others, specially unto God, before whom we are called to walk in
holiness all the days of our life.

Mixtures ceremonial were these, Garments of Linsy-woolsy, the s^w Mixtures.
ing of ground with miscellain, the yoaking of Ox and Ass together. All these
were forbidden ceremonially as actions ab hominable. And they denote to
Christians, singlenes of heart, singlenes of word, and singleness of work: for
as the Lord ca^ not brook the person that has ^ebh velebh, a heart and a heart;
so neither ca^ it be that communion can be betwixt christ and Belial,
^ghteousnes and vnrighte ousnes, light and darkness: therefore says theapostle.
com out from amongst them and touch no unclean 2. Cor. 6.
thing. Touch the dead in sin, and draw with the vnsacrificeabl^ Ass we
do, when by affection or action we like and approve their evil. From such
touching and drawing we are to withdraw our selves, but not (as Fantastiques
would have it) by forsaking the Churches communion and fellowship in God. The
apostle never taught the Corinths to separate so, nor Moses before him. For as
to ioyn with every thing in the Churches members, requires no conning, so, to
separate from all in the Church, any Ass can do: but to try all things, and
keep that is good, and then to maintain the good (so far as one, has
calling) through good report and bad report, plenty and poverty, ^ife and death,
hoc opus, hic labor est, this requires the spirit of discretion, faith, love
and much patience. And only the children of wisdom have such grace: for wise
some is justified. of her children.

There be also ceremonial Festiuities, that bring with them glorius
Festiuities.
memorials of Gods singular Love and care for the good of his church: teaching
all for such respects to do as the Apostle inioyneth when he Philip. 4. 4.
says, Rejoice in the Lord always again I say rejoice: and to conclude with
the Psalmist thus, This is Psa. 118. 24.
the day the Lord has made, let us rejoice and be glad in it. But of such
feast days I have largely spoken in the third part of my labors upon Salomons
songue, where I speak of Chronological and arithmeticall shadows.

For ceremonial vows, they be in respect of the Vows.
matter, of two kinds; the one animate or breathing, as men and beasts: or
inanimate and breathles, as houses, fields, and the like: the manner of which
vows and their redemtion, is laid down in the ^uit. 27.
last chapter of this book as the very conclusion of ceremonies. The main
thing it intends, I doubt not is this: that whatsoever we vow to the
furtherance of Gods glory (it being in our power so to vow, for else why
should we suffer our lips to sin?) it ought to be paid faithfullye unto
the Lord. for so says Solomon in Eccles. 5. 3. When thou have vowed (...) vow
unto God, defer not ^o pay it, for he delights not in fools: pay therefore
as thou have vowed. 4. It is better thou sholdst not vow then tha^ thou sholdst
von and not pay it, etc: and that can Ananias and Saphir. witness, who vowing
largely with their lips, and paying niggardlye with their hands, did so bring
upon the^, the swift judgment and heavy hand of God. Many such Ananiasses I
have heard of, who so^times wroong by the spirit of God to vow a gu^t to the
needy, and that which is more, to vow in future times (as David did, Psalm.
119. 106) the keeping of Gods righteous judgments, have afterward withdrawn
from so doing, returning in Gods just judgment to their aunciente hardness of
heart and prophanity, making so their latter end worse then their beginning.

Such things as were ceremonially devoted to the Lord, they were prized of the
Priest, and not of the vower to be had again, without giving the price and a
fifth part over, that so the Lord and his church might be sure of their own
with the best. Many of yore have vowed smaller and greater things to the
furtherance of Christ's church and his worship (this was their Genus or general
scope, howsoever there might be failment in specie, in some specialty) now have
they taken the vote^ back again not satisfying the church largelye therefore?
If they did, they had the most right. But, (...) nefandu^scelus, sacrilegium
immane, they have robbed the church of all they ca^ finger, who never gave to the
church so much as a barley corn. The fathers gave, and the children steal away;
whereupon cannot but follow, beggarly ministers and a contemptuous religion, as
having no promises of this world, whereas godliness has promise of both. Let
this sin, remain the great sin of England, fastened upon many of the
Gentrye fleecing, and upon some of the Ministers, sellinge their fleece, for a
lock of wool. Eat on, and giut your selves with the spoil of the Lords
Temple, qu^ffe in the devoted vessels as did Babilons Bell azar, but in the end
it will be gravel in your mawes, and without repentance fling you and your
houses out of the Lords balance. I speak not as having lost any thing of the
Church, for I never yet possessed penny of her dowry; but espying plots for the
Churches su^uersion, I cannot but witness against their abomination. So much
cursoriwise of Leuies maintenance, ceremonial uncleannesses, unlawful
mixtures, holy festiuities and ceremonial vows. Now I com to my main purpose,
the Sacrifices.

Section. 6.
Sundry Greeks and Latins of old, have dealt upon this argument; Sacrifice.
but not all with like success; for what marvel if the latter came a little
nearer the mark, when they had first the eyes of their ancients to see by, and
then their own for prying a little deeper. But of all the ancients, Origin was
about ^00 years after Christ.
Origin deserved best, in as much (for any thing I see) all the rest of them
(even unto this last age) did speak almost nothing, which argued not their
candle to have received light from his. O that he had been so happy, in
establishing the Letter! In this last age sundry have adventured on Leuiticus,
but in our language almost none. And these that have writ ten (with far better
success then the ancients) I would I could add unto the^, but even that which I
see to be lacking. But it is far easier to epsy a defect in a building, then
to amend it. Why then should I write? For these causes: first, for that the
Leuiticall ceremony is in our language almost unhandled, except in general
terms: 2, for that I hope to make so^what I handle (eue^ the substance of it)
more plain then for rainers have, who rather writ for satisfaction of
scholars, the^ of the common people.

But in the very beginning, I heartily lament one lack in them, which for any
thing I see, must remain a lack still for me. Some have divided and
subdivided, dichotomizd and subdichotomizd the kinds of sacrifice, laboring so
to put every kind into his own place. But alas, not once able to say what the
sacrifice in the 1. chapter is, in respect of the particul^r end whereto it was
to be referred: nor when for the time it was to be administered, it so has come
to pass, that ignorance of this, has made their division imperfect; yea
sometimes distinct sacrifices by this sort have been confounded. The
consideration whereof (I laboring of the same disease) does move me to pass by
that strait and to cast about for more sea-roome.

The sacrifices all of them, In Hebr. 5. (...) this dis tinction is ratify
(...) two w^rds, Doron and Thusia, the latter inten^ing Zabach, (...) other
^cha.
be either such as be offered up directly for expiation of sin; or secondly,
for testif^ing due^full thankfulness unto God for favors received. Sacrifice
for sin, I term all such as brought with them effusion of blood and sprinkling
of the same; seeing all such argued (as the apostle to the Hebrews largelye
presses) the Messiahs Hebr. 9. 7. 11. 12. 13. 14. etc. with chap. 10.
blood which should be shed for the remission of sin: and this sacrifice was
animate, consisting of breathing creatures: the second kind which testified
thankfulness, were unbloody offerings, consisting of creatures in animate,
breathles and bludles. Mea^offrings.
Of this kind, were flowr, oil, frankincense, salt, ears of corn. And in the
offering up of this kind, they thankfully acknowleged, that al came from God
wherewithal they were sustained. It was through the goodness Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy.
28.
of god, that the staff (or strength) of their bread was not broken; yea that
their dough was not cursed in the trough; and that which is more, that their
bread was not blasted in the ear, or spoiled with mel dew. By which bread
also, they were led unto him that is the bread of life. But o profane times
we live in! Our people have long heard our Sa uiour say in S. John's gospel;
Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for the meat that endures unto
everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: but who looks after
this? who holds out the hand and says, Lord give us ever of this bread, feed
us with this immortal meat? Nay, how many whose bodies are fed daily with
bodily food, do lift up then heart and say, I thank thee o Lord for this
bodily refection; how great is thy kindness to feed me thus at thy charges,
who have not deserved so much as the crumbs that fall from thy table: yea, which
rather have merited that every crum should have bin a curse, and every draughte
of drink, a draught of thine indignation. Of old they did write in their Halls
beyond their sidetables, W^ sits down to meat, and lets grace pass,
Sits down like a Neat, and rises like an Ass
But together with long side-tables, it seems grace is much gone. For
commonly we now give either a naked grace to God, without any grace to the
poor: or else we arise resolved to give grace neither to god nor the poor. A
wondrous thing, that God should not smite the meat in our mouths (as he dealt
with the Israelites) or rather, that he should not smite the earth with a
barraine womb (as sometime he smit the figtree) that so never more fruit might
grow upon it. Mincha in Leuit. 2.


This offering of the inanimate creature (called Mincha, a resemblance whereof
is had in our sacramental Supper) it passed through fire, arguing once, that
the interest we have in the crea tures, did cost Christ Jesus the setting on,
he fried for our benefit: as also, that we must not think to eat our bread
without all affliction and fiery trial (for here we must be made S. Laure^ces
and be cast into the furnace with the 3. young gentlemen of Judah) only let us
labor that (as this meat offering had in it oil and salt so) we may be possessed
with the oil of gladwhich Christ had above all his fellows, and so we shall not
be destitute of ioyfulnes in midst of all fiery trials. As also let us labor
to have salt in our selves for the seasoning of others by our uncorrupted word
and works, keeping our hearts always free from the leaven of malitiousnes So
shall our praises and thanksgiuings be, sweet savor unto God truly joyous to
our selves, and edifying to o there is. So much briefly of the Eucharistique
oblation; with which, the wise-hearted may Analogically compare the supper of
our Lord.

Section. 7.
Having spoken of the oblation Sacrifice for Sin.
of Thanksgiving, it follows I speak of the oblation of sin. And where should
I begin? Jerome Hieronym. ad Paulinu^.
touching the whole says thus. Every sacrifice ^n the book of Leuiticus, yea
every syllable, and the garments of Aaron and the whole Leuiticall Order,
(spirant caelestia sacrame^ta) do breath forth sacraments, or mysteries. That
he says of the whole, I may much more say of this sort of sacrifices, which
in Christ and his mystical body be so deeply sealed as they squeaze out blud
again, and pierce and press out the very life of nature.

Hitherto I have not set the ceremony on the rack (as has been usual with too
many, strayning the ceremonye to their wits, and not their wits to the
ceremony; and I would such unproportionable and fantastique strains were not
at this day forced on plainer scriptures also) but I waighed the ceremonye by
the plain, open waits of the sanctuary, for causing the sense to fall out fully
and euidentlye to the conscionable Reader of the scriptures. It remains still,
that I keep the kings hy-way, and not for satisfaction of verbal spirits (nam
haud vnqua^ aliud seculu^ tam verbosu^) I should abound with manner beyond
matter; or take up the time with by respects of the animate creatures (which
out of nature might be many) to the weakening and obseuring of the mayn end and
purpose of the Holy ghost, And so to the mat ter.

All Sin-sacrifice (as before) did properly require Heb. 9. 22.
blood (for without blood no purgation) whereupon it is probable, that Cain
offering an oblation of the fruits of the earth (termed in Leuit. 2. mincha) did
proudly intend a Thanksgiving without humiliation for sin; when as Abel
rather looked to his sin, and came to the Lord in humility for the purgation
thereof, by the blud of a lamb. This being ind^ede the humility of the
Publican in the Gospel (Lord be merciful unto me a sinner) when the other
was indeed of an elate and pu^t up mind with the Phari. see, who despising the
other said, I thank thee o God, I am not as this man, etc. but he went away
therefore unjustified.

In the second of Leuit. there is a sacrifice termed Zebach Shelamim: which
word Shelamim signifying pacifications, perfections, heal^hs, it so comes to
pass, that it is turned diversely. But let it be (as we have it turned, and
the word primordially signifies) a peace offering, it inte^deth an humiliation
before GOD for obtaining of peace. And indeed, till we be sprinkeled in our
Heb. 10. 22.
hearts from an evil conscience by the blud of christ apprehended by faith, it
is impossible to have peace with God. In the 4. of Leuit. there is a sacrifice
called Cha^aah, and in the fifth chap. on called Asha^: the first turned by some
Latins. Peccatum, the other Delictum; taking them with like difference, as
Augustine takes the two Latin words, when as he says, Perchance Peccatum
Augu. quaest. 20 in Leuit.
is the perpetration of evil, but Delictum the desertion of Good. But to
understand the Hebrewe words so, I take it to be more subtle then sure. And
the rather because the words Chattaah and Asham are confounded in Chap. 4. and
both used for the same. The sacrifice in the 4 chap. is divided into 4. ^eads,
either it is for the sin of the Priest, or of the Congregation, or of the
Ruler, or of the common people. The Jewish hy-priest could sin (though he
carried the vrim and Thummim on his breast) and what is the Romish Hy-priest
(whose breast is ordinarilye stuffed with all carnalitye) that he should not
much more sin and stand in need of sacrifice. Isreal's congregation or church
could sin, notwithstanding all the near helps they had from God, and cannot the
church now much more sin? I would it did not. The Prince of the people then
stood need of a sacrifice, and do not our Princes and rulers stand in as much
need? Yea, their sacrifice was to be presented in an He-goat for that they are
not only to be as He-goats before the flock for coming out ^erem. 50. 8.
of Babel, but also, for that their sins stink much more, and be far more
infectious then the sins of the people, though the one and the other proceeded
first from ignorance. For which respect (among others) the peoples sin
afterward is represented in a She-goat more weak in evil then the former. As
therefore good examples in rulers, are drawers unto God, and god therefore to
be much praised: so, to the other the Prophet says. The Leaders of the I say.
9. 15.
people cause them to err, and they that are led by them arc devoured.

The sin sacrifices hitherto spoken of, intend sin committed first of
Ignorance: therefore in the sixth chapter, the holy ghost lays down a
sacrifice for such as have sinned of knowledge. For the opposite unto ignorance
is not willingness but knowledge. Besides that to sin hecousio^s, that Hebr. 10.
26.
is with willingness as is intimated unto the Hebrews that best understood the
qualities and forms of Sacrifice, unto such there remains no more sacrifice
f^r sins. Willingness there, is a sin committed against knowledge fra^ckly,
freely, without restraint and check of conscience (even as the voluntary
sacrifice was to be offered to God, with a frank and free mind, and pleasing of
conscience) which indeed is the great sin against the holy ghost, represented
by such sins in Israel as Beiad Ram^ ^om. 15. 30 31.
were done not only wittingly, but also extensa ma^u, with an hy hand and all
freedom of strength: for which sin indeed, there was no sacrifice ap
pointed, but the soul that so sinned, was to be left unto the maiestrates
sword. No^atus the heretic (who denied hope of remission to all such as
sinned after baptism, and of knowledge) he was therefore (for under standing
so Hebr. 10. 26) as far wide on the one side, as others have been on the
other side, that for that verse sake have denied, or at least called into
question the authority of that Epistle to the Hebrews. Nor can but many such
grievous errors follow the ignorance of Leuiticall ceremonies; howsoever some
of our Nouelists (if they have not left their evil their devil) will, with
Ismael, flout thereat, til they have flowted themselves out of Abraham's family,
and the state of grace.

All the sacrifices the^ spoken of in this section ar either offered up for sin
don of Ignorance, or otherwis (through infirmity) committed of Knowledge.
Wherein may be observed the Lords exceeding gracious providence toward his
Church, who for every soar has provided a salve, and his Son Jesus he has
made the Physician. Only, for such Apostates, as are so far from being sore
as they are wholly Become seared in conscience, and theresore sin against
knowledge, and former feeling (spoken of in Hebr. 6. 4. 5.) and so despise the
communion (spoken of in heb, 10. 25. 38. 39.) there remains indeed no
sacrifice for that sin (which S. John intimates, when he says There is a si^ne
unto death, 1. John. 5. 16
I say not that thou should traye for it) but to such remains (as in Hebr.
10, 27) a fearful looking for of judgment and violente fire, which shall
cousume and devour adversaries. Dally therefore not with sin after
knowledge, least it eat up all conscience and leave no place for repentance. I
am not ignorant that many have spoken much of this sin against the
Holy-ghoste, but grounded on their own surmises, not on divine scriptures.
Peter Lombard (the great master of sentences) has labored to define it, but
it sticks as bird-lime on his fingers, and needs some wiser then S. Thomas a
watering to wash his fingers on it.

Section. 8.
THere be other sorts of sacrifice (then these spoken of in the former
section) Sacrifice for sin.
as the sacrifice of vows and Aaronicall installments; but al of them being
bleeding oblations arguing (as before) the blood of Christ Jesus cleansing us
from sin; in which respect the oblations blud (if any drop thereof fell upon a
garment, was to be washed out in the holy place, so holy the sign of Christ's
blood was in respect of the end intended) all of them I say, being bleeding
oblations, they are to be referred unto the former division.

There be also in Genesis 31, 54, and 1 Samuel, 9, 12, and 1 Kings, 1921, speeches of
Zebachs, which some have taken for sacrifices, as also, that the people were
feasted with these holy things. The word indeed in Zebach in all the places,
but not therefore a sacrifice, no more the^ every Corba^ or Mincha is a
ceremonial gift for the two latter places they were Zebachs, that is in
propriety, mactatio^s or slaughters, appointed for comfortable ba^quets. For as
Israel might not sacrifice, any where, but at the door of the Tabernacle,
Leui. 17, 3 etc: so, none but the Priests and their males were to eat of the
holy relics, Le. 7. As for that of Iaa^ob, either it must be concluded, that
he sacrificed aparte, and afterward made a banquet jointly of other
victuals; or else that it was as the former, but a common Ze bach or slaughter
for mutual eating together.

The sacrifice remaining to be handled, is that in Leuit. 1. which also is a
sacrifice for expiation of sin, seeing it draws blood with it; and without
blood no remission. The matter ex qua whereof it consists, is Animate
creatures, and they be of two sorts: the first be Beasts, the second be byrds.
The Beasts again be of two sorts, the first of the heard, as the Bullock; the
second of the Flock, as Sheep and goats. As for the Birds, they be also of
two sorts, Turtle-doues and Pigeons. The whole of this sacrifice was to be
burnt (as also the Bullock and Reddish-cowe spoken of elsewhere) for Leuit. 8.
16. 17. and 9. chapter etc. Nom. 19.
the which it is commonly called of the Greeks Holocauston wholly burnt, and
in the Text an offering by fire. In other kind of oblations, the Priest got
somewhat (as the remnant of the meat offering after a memorial thereof had been
sent up to the Lord in fire; and of other blood sacrifices the shoulder and
breast heaued and wagged before the Lord (representing the heauing of the heart
and the moving of the Calves of our lips Hos, 14. 3.
as the Prophet expou^ds it, and Hannah (without noise of words) prac tised)
but in this oblation, All goes to the Lord. And that which is more, all is
here burnt within the Tabernacle (as a sacrifice peculiar for such as be within
the Church;) whereas in other burnte-oblations made of the heard, the skyn,
flesh and excreme^t was had out of the host and there burnt, intimating (as
the Author to to the Hebrews spea^eth in Ch, 13, 11, 12, 3) that Jesus, to the
end he might sanctify the people (no doubt also the Na^s without) and that
^ith his own blood, he uffred without the gat^ eaching us secondly, to ^oe
forth therefore out of the camp bearing his reproach*

Wherefore this burnt ^ffring was sent up to the lord, as also, when it was ^o
be offered, I find it not particularly mentioned, nor in any writer well
observed. When as a sacrifice intimated some one or more their particular wants,
we find it (as before) bounded in his form and use. But in this not so. It
causes me therefore to think, that this oblation intimated not this or that
particular need; but rather, that it was (as Noah's sacrifice was) offered up
for the general good of the whole Israel of God: like as was the Lamb offered
Nom. 28. 23
up every day (morning and evening) and upon the Sabbath double the number,
and this for the whole Church of God milita^t here in the earth. For the time
when, I take it to be in a sort Arbitrary, and left to Isreal's voluntarye
contribution. Neither see I any thing to the contrary, but it might be an
offering according to the aforesaid vows, vnredeemed, and therefore wholye
turned unto ashes, according to that in Psa. 20. where the King offering to the
Lord before he went into the battle, all the Church of Israel is introduced
praying (seeing it tended to common good) after this manner, The Lord remember
all thine offerings, and tu^n thy burnt offering^ into ashes. This point so
cleared, or (at least) helped. I so will hasten to the particulars.

Section. 9.
THe Apostle in Hebr. 10. 1. saying that the Law was a shadow Ceremonial
sacrifices.
of good things to come, of what Law speaks he? Not of the moral law, for
that was, is, and so shall continue, a substantial Justice, unto the which
mankind is bound ever for conformity. Then it must inte^d some other law. The
Judicial law (so far as it was merely Judicial) it had, has, and shall have
a continuing equity; and so no shadow of any good things to come. The
Ceremonial Law (and some ceremonye sometimes, was joined with judicials) that
is the kind of law he means, as may appear by the Chapter afore-going,
whereupon he grounds his Illatio^, as also by that which follows as an
explanation of his meaning. Nor is the shadow ing Law, only the ceremonial
victimaes and victuals, but also (as the apostle Paul presses to the
Colossians) Holy days, New moons and Sabbath* were a shadow of things to come
(for some shadowed things, some good things, but the body or substance of them
was in Christ) Then without all controversy and further repetition, these
ceremonial Zebachs, slaughters and Gnolahs ascensions by fire, they foretyped
or shadowed forth some things touching Christ and his mystical body.

But before I press the significations of the Ceremonial sacrifices, let me
observe, the exceeding careful love of god toward Israel, touching the matter
of sacrifice, shaped forth to the abili ty of the sacrificer: every one was not
able to present a Bullock, then a Sheep or goat should suffice. Every one
was not able to prepare a sheep or Goat; then he was to offer of the Turtle
doves or Pigeons, which (as one writes) were e^sy ^o be had, and therefore
re^uired Christoph. Pelarg^s ex ^ose AEgipt^o, lib. 3 du ctoris d^orum, cap. 27.
of the poor. O merciful God, who might ^aue charged man with great things,
and yet contents himself with small: for it is but a small thing for a man to
offer, not strayning himself for much. But God accepts the will, rather then
the deed, because the deed is next to nothing, without the will. Yet, a true
will cannot neglect the deed (because two have more heat the^ one et virtus
vnita forti^r) and the rather because a cup of cold water shall not escape
unrecompensed, when it is done to any in the name of Justice and mercy (Math
10, 41. 42. as may appear in 1, Kings. 17. where the widdowe of Zarepta
giving a little water un to Elias (for to that act with the like, no doubt but
our Savior looked) she gained a great blessing, first in the enlarging of
her table; secondly, in having her Son restored from death to life. If therefore
we be liberal toward Christ, and his mystical body (which indeed is the
true Tabernacle not pight with hands) it is but to be liberal toward our
self, seeing the^ by, gods blessings are en larged and the more confirmed unto
us.

None so being destitute of all means to please God (for God so leaves every
soul excuseles) it remains to speak of the material kinds of sacrifice
first, and then of their order of disposal. The matter of this Burnt-offring
is flesh with his adjuncts, as of beasts and birds, of fish never. Fish was
spared in the deluge from destruction, as reserved in his own ark or eleme^t
and here reserved for ma^s ordinary use, seeing no one kind of the^ was
appointed for ceremonial service. Reason of the one and the other I ca^
collect none (and yet I know what some have written) that may fit anlogie of
says, saving this; Syn covering the face of old worlds earth, therefore
judgment went out only for sweeping the earth clean. But man with Jonah since
having sinned on the sea, and therefore swallowed up into the Bowels of the
sea, it remains that waters, and earth and all, be licked up and refined by
Judicial fire. The earth resined because man is of Revel. 21. 1.
earth; but the Seas having no being more (as Seas) for what be seas to man?
As chafe to the wheat. But why Go^ would not that any fish should
sacramentally lie, I know not, excepting for that earth had sinned, and earth
must satisfy, and so fish not of the earth (as Beast and bird is) but (...)
of the waters. That any corporeal substance should not be of the earth, it
is more then Philosophy can admit (as for the waters bringing forth fish and
fouls in Genes, 1. it is understood as of the womb bringing forth* but
materiallie derived from the Earth under) and yet some Chymsts would have water
the Original element of all. But having touched that over. curious question by
the way, let me return to the professed element of sacrifice, touching the
which the scriptures speak plainly.

The Lord in choosing earth-creatures for sacrifice; he culls out not only
such as could most redily be acquired; but also, such as might most safely
be hand led.

He might have charged them to have presente^ Lions, Bears, Leopards: For as
Daniell saw the Dan. 7. 1 etc
Chal-deans, Mede-persians and Greeks, to be no better; yea, as S. John, Reu.
13. 1.
John saw the Romans to be all them beasts jointly; so by nature we are al
no better conditioned. And that the Persians well understood, who once a year
kept a festival day called The death of vices, what day they practiced the
killing and destroying of all sorts of Serpents, understanding by them
varietye of vi. ces.

But as the Lord would not charge Israel with Animalls, either hardly or
dangerouslye to be acquired: so, by the tamerkind of creatures, he would teach
us more commendable qualifica tions. As all heathen invention for sacrifice
must needs be abominable, because of the lord vncomma^ded; so, to what an
height of savage im piety was Israel grown unto, after their schism from
Judah, who oftentimes stained their hands in their childrens blood offering them
up to the devil and Moloch. But a judgment easy enough upon that people
which had bid the house of David shift for it self; and no meruail that
Romanistes seek to please God by bloody unnatural Stratagems, having schismed
from little Judah, and left Jesus to shifte for himself. He will shifte for
himself and us, when al their Gu^powder inventions shall flash in their own
faces.

Amen.
Section. 10.
BEfore I touch these considerations Sacrificiall Particulers in Com mon.
that agree unto every of the Holocausts apart, I judge it fitting to insiste
of these particulars, that agree in common among themselves, both for the
manner of usage, as also, the mystical end whereunto they were referred. And
the particulars in Commune, I enumber as follow.

1. All the sacrificiall presents (for we speak It is turned by this latin
integrum. not only of ^remellius for v^, but also of Arias Mo^us for the
Romanists.
now only of the first ch) they were to be Tamim integrall perfect. I know the
word is of sundry tur^ed, immaculat or unspotted. And true it is such sense it
has, and therefore the word made attribute to beasts, not to birds: be cause the
1 might be had without spots, the 2 not. But seeing that is not the words first
and near sense, as also, for the holy ghost elsewhere alludeth hereto (as in
Mala. 1: 13: 14: and Hebr. 7: 26:) it causes me to take the word more
largely, that is, for a creature in his Sacrifices perfection.
kind perfect, not torn, re^t, lame, diseased etc: And indeed, such a one was
Christ, shall I say in his body? why, the prophet Isaiah in chap. 53.
insinuates that there should be no beautye in him, for which he should be
desired: true, but that was (as there appears) when our infirmities should be
upon him, and he whipped, buff^ted, and spit upon for our sakes (what beautye
could the^ appear?) who otherwise was wh^te and ruddy the chiefest of te^
thousand. But in his soul was al perfection (a reason why his body in the
grave could feel no corruption, for if Adams soul had not first sinned, his body
could not have corrupted:) so that the moral law could not command that
perfection that was not in him; and indeed, such a priest and sacrifice, it
besemed us to have. And is the churches head the^ perfect? and ought not his
mystical body (the church) to be perfect? Yes, we are called in ma: 5: to be
perfect as our heavenly father is perfect.
And can we in this life then be perfect? We can not, and yet we can. We
cannot in our selves (for when we would do good, evil is present leading us
captive, Rom, 7.) but through Christ we can do all things; who was made sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor 5: 21: But by
what equity does god command the fulfilling of the moral law in our selves, if
so we cannot do it, and the law curses such as do not all the things in it?
By a double equity: once for that he set mankind ou^ of his hands, enabled to
keep the law of perfection: Being now run bank-rupt through his own defalt,
it is just with God notwithstanding to crave the debt: for our wilful
pouertye, is no cause why he should cast aside his Justice. Again, he commands
perfection to his Sons disciples, because they have a new and a living way,
whereby Heb. 10. 19 ^0.
they may attain perfection, and that is, by true faith fastened upon him.
Because that no soul ca^ be justified by the moral law, but by the law of
faith they can, therefore it is, that the holy ghost says thus: The law mad^
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope made perfect -- By so
much is Jesus made a surely of a better covenant -- wherefore he is able als^
perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, heb. 7, 19, 22, 25: O happy
covenant of Grace, ^ar exceeding the covenant of works! This, Martin Luther
looking deeply into Luther on the Galat.
it causes him for prefer ring of the latter, to d^sanul Moses in a sort: and
indeed in respect of any true Peace a soul can have by the law of moral works,
Moses may be bid give place, and his two Tables be put by: for thereby we can
never be justified; and so consequently, never comforted, never saved. By the
name Ies^s, and by no other name under heaven, are we to obtain salvation.
This being vngainsayably true, how wicked be the Romanistes, that teach
Justification with GOD by works! And how woonderfullye ouerseene are some,
amongst us, that ordinarily propounds the laws perfection so to the hearts of
their hearers, as they often leave them marked for reprobates, in being found
breakers thereof. I know that the Law is holy and pure, and that we are to
strive after conformity thereto; but to pres it, as some in their Ignorance
often press it, (and I would no lamentable presidentes thereof had passed) is
to lead people from christ, and in conforming themselves to the Law, to do it
rather of a slavish fear (which kind of obedience is unacceptable) then of
Love to the laws holiness. It were good the Church were either purged of such
fantastiques, or at least of their fantastique preachinges, tending indeed to
Heretical puritanisme, the very justification of Ronanists, Anabaptists and
^amilists. Will people never understand? But to other particulars.

Section. 11.
SEcondly, the sacrifices of this Holocaust, were to Sacrifice presented at the
door, etc.
be brought-vnto the do^e of the Tabernacle, where the Priest was to receive
the same. In other sacrifices destinated to some particular necessity (as in
the 4 Chapter) the Presenter was to confess his or their sin, with their
hand or hands upon the head of the Sin offering. To bring the oblation to
the door, is generally taken, for presenting our devotions unto Christ, who
calls himself the door in S. John. 10, 9: The note is profitable, but I know
not how proper. To bring it unto the door of Con uention, was to bring it unto
the face of the Congregation, that all so might know, not only that he was an
Israelite called to the same Hope in Messiah, but also that so he might send
up his sacrifice with theirs, even in the same holy communion. Nor does the
equity thereof, but abide for ever. For besides our private devotions, we must
publicly also conuene, and so with one heart and mind praise the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. For says the Apostle, If any withdraw himself, my
soul shall have no pleasure Heb. 10. 38. 39.
in him; making (in the next words) such withdrawing to be an argument of
perdition, and opposite unto faith. As for the confession of sin, it remains
still, to be made unto the hy-priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, but not
to any minister necessarilye in the ear, as Romanists would have it. For mark,
that all here was done at the door of Conuention, where other of the people
might take notice of the sin, so well as of the sacrifice: for nothing here is
once noted to be done in Huggermugger as the lascivious undermining Romanistes
do in their Cloisters. It rather argues public confession for public
sin. The hand laid on the sin offerings head, intimated their faith in
Messiahs death for the forgiveness of sin Nor without the hand of faith, is
that sacrifice made ours. It is not sufficient sacrifice for sin but for my
sin, so well as for any other. We must therefore put the hand of our faith
upon Jesus Christ our Head, and say; Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief, and yet one of the poor members, to whom he
is an Head. If thy sins were as red as the scarlet-lace (for there-to Nomb.
19 (...) Death of the sacrifice.
doubtless Isaiah had reference,) he will make them as white as any wool.

This is a better covenant, then that of works. Hic requiescas in vmbra.

3. Thirdly, all these sacrifices were to dye, and even so was Christ. Caiphas
could say so, It is necessary that one oye for the people. So says Caiphas of
Rome, But when he has so said, he has spoken the thing he vndersta^ds not,
whereupon his bloody minded people, sets Barrabbas free, and crucifieth christ
Jesus in his members: an heavy case, that christ must die, or we could not
live.

4. Fourthly, the blood of all these victimaes, was to be sprinkled upon Blood
sprinkled.
the Altar round about: If round about besides the Altar, then it argued very
plainly, that not only the Altar of Israel was by his blood (as before) purged;
but also, that the whole earth (or nations) round about Israel, was by the
blood of Messiah to receive a purgation, according to that in Re. 7, where
after the sealing of Israel, there be an innumerable people of all nations,
tongues and languages, that stand before the spiritual throne of Christ, with
their garments made white by the blood of the Lamb. But howsoever any shall
understand the Hebrew, the altar did well enough represent the whole spiritual
Israel of God possessed of faith (laying hold on the blood of Jesus, drinking
the benefit thereof as verily in their hearts, as the hot brazen altar licked
up the blood) upon whose Phil. 2. 17
faith, not only Saint Paul, but others his successors should be willling to
be offered up (eue^ as Christ before) and that for the fulfilling of the remnant
of Christ's afflictions: not fulfilling them (as proud Romanists would for
perfecting Christ's work of Redemption; but by way of Conformity, it being
necessarily required, that the members should be suitable with the Head. Oh
sweet Jesus, wast thou willing to have thy blood sprinkled up and down, within
and without Jerusalem, and shall not I be willing for thy sweet sake to lay
down the best blood of my body? sweet Jesus enable me. Sweet Jesus make me
willing so to do: whether ever or never there be a necessity of so doing,

Section. 12.
FIstly, the burntoffring was to be made naked (the Beasts uncased, and the
Birds vnplumed) Sacrifice made naked.
which Origin and some others understand, of uncasing the word of his shall,
for delivering the Cranell; the note good. But to keep my self to the
propriety of sense in Christ and his members (for with far setcht senses I
could (as some have) soon farce a great deal of paper to no purpose, or
small), it aptlye resembles, first Christ and then his members uncasing and
displuming themselves of whatsoever external glo rye or comfort, for well
pleasing the father of heaven. Christ, for his part (heau^on ^kenose) he
Philip, 2. 7.
emptied himself, as it were, of laying aside his Godhead and glory, more
glorioas then all habit; making himself right poor for making many rich.
For his members, it teaches them herein to be conformable unto Jesus, willing
for the work of godliness sake, to be uncased and displumed of all riches,
credit, preferment, life, for glorifying of the heavenly father. So to do, is
to take up our cross and follow him: to carry a cross enforced upon a man,
deserves but an enforced thanks, and recompense.

But, to take up a cross voluntarily (when otherwise we might with false harred
christians revolt and leave it) that argues a greater love to gods glo ry, then
to a man's own worldly welfare. O sweet Jesus, wast thou (being heyr of all the
world) willing to be uncased of all, for doing good unto us: vouchsafe
accordingly, to give us the grace to be as willing to undergo with all
willingness, a readiness of departure with all for thy sake. For what is the
covering of our transitorye nature, but as Beasts hydes, wherewithal Adam and
Heuah were first clothed? And what is the glory of this world, but as a
feather driven every way with blaste, ^now up and inow down: vanity of
vanities, and the consuming of precious time thereabouts, an affliction of
spirit.

Sixthly, for all the sorts of sacrifice, it was the P^s d^t. Or^hotomein, (...)
^ur them up arighte. (...).
T^ ^e they had of (...) so to do, I have (...) o^e. Only here (...) ^ee
intended (...)?. The Apostle (...) cought up in the (...) form of-Phari^, w^o
were stricte mitatours of the words of Moses) he gives us a ^rincipal sense
thereof, when as he says to Tinothie: 2. Tim. 2. 15. Chr. Pelargus and David
Chitiae note this Or thotomian here.
study to show thy else approved unto God, (...) workman that need th ^t be
ashamed, Orthotononuta rightly cutting the ^orde of truth. Seeing Christ the
sau^our is not given an effectual sacra^ce (at least, by ordina^ rule) unto
any, saving (...) whom the word of ^d is brought and parcular'y applied;
there^re he comma^deth the ^inister, to have as much ^e for dividing the word
aright, as the l. euiticall priesthood had to cut up the victimaes aright. If
I should apply this, then who would abide it? Not many in our time, specially
that be fantastique: and yet the times be not so corrupt, but (God have the
prais) there be some that will bear it, and maintain it. Only let me
approve my self in a few Quoeres to the wise; for wisdom is justified of her
children.

1 How do they divide the word arighte, that teach the law unto iusti
fication, and in the want of moral perfection, do send people away for bra^ded
reprobates. A more damnable form of teaching I (by the ear) know not. 2 How do
they cut up the word aright, that teach ^t is no true sacrament, that has not
a Sermon preceding it; that is, in the abundance of their ignoraunte sense,
that has not a large speech framed upon a short Text; for otherwise, our
sacraments are never administered without the essential words and essential
elements that appertain to the very being of a sacrament. By a necessary
consequent, these would bring us to think we have horriblye sinned in coming
to the Lords supper, who have not had their kind of sermon in Baptism. For it
was abomination to come unto the Pas-ouer before one was circumcised: we
having Bapti^me for circumcision, and the Lords supper for their Pas-ouer: and
so we must, by a necessary consequent, come about again for baptism, how
many soever have not then had a sermon according to their understanding. If
they fumble out the Brownists answer and say, that need not; for as they that
came circumcised from Israel unto Judah, did only repent such their
circumcision, but not repeat it; even so in this, I answer they beg the
question for such Israelites might well repent their schism from Judah, but not
repent their circumcision, much less the bap tised amongst us, need repent
baptism performed in the churches unity. If the Sacrament should at first be
a false Sacrament, it could never be made true without actual correction of
the fault; even as a doctrine at first false, can never be made true, but by
actual alteration. These fantasticks would be put, first to define a sermon,
and secondly be put to search for such a kind of sermon in the Bible before
circum cision and Baptism, the pas-ouer and Lords supper. But it is
sufficient, that they bewitche the notvndersta^ding people with such toys, for
procuring a bit of bread and a handful of Barley; and yet I fear not in mean
time to say, that it is the Governors great sin to suffer it. I am not
ignorant, (nay I hold fast) that the best kind of preaching, is best to be
approved, and as it may regularlye be had, is chiefly to be desired,
according to that of the Apostle, desire the best gifts. But must 1 Cor. 12.
31.
it follow therefore, that none but the best, will qualify a Christian, a
Minister, or Sacrament? Fie for shame.

Then some of these Sermocinators must be turned out, not only for no
Sacrament makers, but also for no christians A word so for the unwise least
they seem wise, but no more words to the unwise, least they grow arrogant, as
deserving a labored answer.

3. How do they cut up the word arighte, that teach people (contrary to all
the scriptures and approved leitourgies) not to pray for their familiar,
godly, approved Christian brother, that his sins (though he cesire our
prayers) may be pardoned in Christ Jesus, without an I F after this manner,
Lord forgive to this Brother his sin? I F it be thy pleasure. Adding this
for their reason forsoothe, they know not by any Revelation whether such a
one may not be a close hypocrite and a reprobate.

Monstr' horrena' inform' ingens cui lumen ademptum. Was ever the like
vnsaithfull and uncharitable positio^ maintained to the poisoning of ignoraunte
hearers? How would such a one pray for these that persecute, when they pray
no better for such as bless? Show me one president in the Bible for such a
conceipte. Every speech containing an IF, is not prayer: Nor every petition
with an IF, is a prayer for remission of sin. Nor if such an example could
be found, does it presently follow, that it is a doctrine to us. How shall I
pray feruentlye for my brother if I doubt whether God will hear me? How can I
pray in Love for him, if I doubt whether he be indeed a member of Christ? or
may belong to Christ? Are not they well helped, that desire such new, fo^d,
fashioned prayers?

Our Savior dealte otherwise, and so did Saint Stephen, when being persecuted
unto the death (were such persecutours like al, of them to be revealed for
elected ones?) they prayed, that that sin might not be laid unto their
charge; without that adding, if so they be thine elect. We are to walk by the
commandment, Pray for all (excepting for such as have sinned against the
holy Ghost as before) specially to pray for the prosperity of all such, as wish
well to Jerusalem, that is to the Church. The secret things belong unto the
lord, but the things revealed, (and Deu. 29. 29.
that is among others this to pray for albrethren in says) they remain for us
and our children to d^e the^. Asking according to the open commandment, we
perform an acceptable duty, howsoever Lord in secret for some secret purpose)
have decreede of that particular otherwise. But if it were, but for preventing
of such fantastique forms of prayer, I maruail not, though the Churches
governors impose a set form of public prayers. Are such like to divide the
word arighte, that know not yet how to pray in faith and Charity? with as
good reason, they might debar people the sacraments, saying, that they belong
only to the faithful, and what know they but that they may be hypocrites.

4 Fourthly, how do they cut up the word of God aright; that make, things of
Indifferent na ture so essential in religion, as the admittance of them
destroy the sa cramentes, discipline, word, and Church? But a very reverend
and learned Scholar has discus sed that point artificially and yet plainelye
in hi^ book De adiaphoris. That I therefore refer Mr. Ga. Powell.
to understanding spirits wishing that Argumen^ had never so turmoyle^ our
language to the per uersion of silly judgments.

5 Fifthly, how do they cut and apply the word aright, that having pastoral
places do delight publicly to shame their own people particularly and
personaly, before all strangers, with bitter derisions and girdinges; and that
before any private dealing with them in love and meetnesse of spirit; as if
with the horn they would push the^ out of the sold, rather then trauail, bow and
bend with our savior, for getting the lost sheep home again to the fold.
Such as these would feel discipline, before they be permitted to teach
discipline.

6. Sixthly, how do they cut up the text arighte, that having once read it, do
let it fall as an hot iro^, not daring once after to touch it. These (forsooth)
would not be called bare reders (much less domb-dogs) and therefore they must
undergo to preach, though they cannot tell what. And yet if they can
declamita^e ad clepsydra^ per horam, make a declamation of an howre-longe
against some common sins (though without al powrefull enforcement of the
word) O, such a one has made an excellent sermon, and I warrant him a very
goodman. Alas, alas, that where our People for the time of hearing might be
Teachers, they should yet stand need of milk, with live upon line, and precepte
upon precepte. But they be like the women whereof the Apostle speaks unto
Timothy, that be still learning, but never able to come unto the knoweledge of
the truth. To (...). Tim. 3. 7.
harp on this stringe, is vnpleasa^t. Let me pass to other particulars of
sacrifice in Leuit. 1.

Section. 13.
SEuentlie, the inwardes of the victimaes together with the Feet, were to be
washed, arguing first, that nothing in figure could be made too clean, for
representing the inward purity and holin^sse that was in Messiah. Of who^ in
the gospel is said, that Satan coming to win^ow him, lo, he found nohing in
him; that is, no John. 14. 80
ill matter at all whereupon he might work. Secondly, it teaches his
mystical members, once to suffer the minister of the word rebuking plainly (as
in I, Cor. 14. 24, 25) to divide between their rayns and thoughts, or rather
the spirit of that two edged word acknoledging it humbly to be an effect of
the Holy-ghoste for their Hearts Purificatio^. As also it teaches all, that
would off^r up themselves a living sacrifice unto God, to purge their hearts
so well as their hands (according to S. James his advise) for outward
conformation without inward purgation, is but as a Sepulcher painted with o^t,
and full of ro^tennes within, the very sin of the Pharisees, whom our savior so
often left to a Woe. Every 1. (...). 3. 3. I^a (...), (...). ^m purgat.
one will say, I am the child of god; but he that has this hope (says Saint
John) does purify himself is he is pure. And because that every day, our
affections (which at the souls Origin. in Le^. 1.
eet) ^o attract some vnclea^nes (for evil thoghts uncleannesses etc, are from
within and defile a man) therefore our sauionr in washing the seet of his
disciples, and giving it in commandment to be practiced, has taught us
daily to wash away the uncleanness of our affections, by a heart sending out
water of con ^ition and repentance: The outward seet so leading to inward
affections; and for such ceremonial respect, both feet and bow else washed
together in sacrifice Together with washing the cups outside, let us wash that
is within: and then to such ^leane-ones, all things ^ecome clean. But unto
them that are defiled and unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and
co^iences are d filed.

The eight Commune consideration, is the Sacrifices p^rs burnt.
burning of all the parts, after that they be orderly placed on the Altar.
Touching Christ, it represented the fierye indignation of his Father, flaming
against him, and seazing on every part of him, to the making of him cry out
vehemently, ^y God, my god ^hy have thou forsaken me: for left he was (as
Isaiah foretold in chapter 63) to tread the wine press alone, not one
helping him, but his own arm sustayning him. Sweet Jesus, have thou thus
fried for our sins? O give us the Grace accordinglye, to suffer patiently
for our own sin. By way of merit we ca^ not do it (for the meri^ work is
alone in thee) but by way of conformity unto thee. For if thou (the prince of
our salvation) Hebr. (...). 10.
was consecrated through affliction, how shall no^ we thy members also be
consecrated through fiery trials?

The ninth common Sacrifice a sa uour of Rest or swee^nes.
consideration, is, that every of these oblatio^s so offered, they were, (for
the end they were referred unto) a sweet savor, (or, a savor of rest) unto
the Lord. The Original words here, be the same as in Genes. 8 21. R^ch
nichoa^h a savor of rest, (...)* (...)* (...) N^ach.
expounded, by the Apostle of Christ, when as he terms him in Ephesians. 5. 2 Os^en
euodias a sacrifice of sweet savor; arguing, that if he had not been (...)
sacrifice smelling sweet in the nosethrills of his father, he could never
have brought a Rest un to us, nor us unto the la^d of rest. That we should
labor to conform our selves unto our head in the like, who doubts? But
wherein specially shall we do that? Two (specialls I will note; the first
is prayer feruente; the second is Alms. Prayers offered up in faith not
wavering, and in Charity undefiled, be in Revelation 8. 3, 4. resembled unto
odours: whereupon legal odours the Sign, and prayers the thing signified, are
introduced, both of the^ ascending together. For Alms, they be expressly termed
in Phillip. 4, 18, Osmen and Thusian euodias, for that being given in faith
and Charity, they savor sweetly i^ the no sethrills of the almighty.
Cornelius the captain (though a Gentile by birth) by dwelling amongst the
Jews, had learned so much before Saint Peter came unto him, and therefore gave
himself to prayer and alms; Which by reason of their qualification, came up
into rememberance before God, Acts 10, 4. Teach this doctrine that shall, who
will believe it? Few of this age: For if they did, they would give themselves
more to alms, and prayer: though that which so give is but le^t unto the Lord
and no such paymaster, as the merciful know, if they had faith to trust him)
yet the Lord shall go without it, and so shall his members. And think they
never to hear of such diffident with holding? Yes, in the last day it shall be
told them before GOD, Angels and men: yea, the Lord Jesus shall thus say unto
them, Math. 25. 31. etc. ^am. 2. 13.
Inasmuch as ye have not don it to these little ones, ye have not don it unto
me: and therefore depart with the devil and his angels into hell fire. There
shall be judgment without mercy. Whereas to the merciful it shall be said,
Inasmuch as ye did it to these little ones, ye have don it unto me: therefore
enter into the kingdom prepared for ye, from the beginning: so mercy reioy^eth
against judgment. And so much for the par ticulars of the beasts and Birds,
agreeing in common for usage and end. It remains now I do speak of some
specialls excepted from the general rule aforesaid.

Section. 14.
THere be some things in the burnt offerings, that stand peculiar and
Sacrifices peculiars.
proper to their own kind: as first, in the beasts it was required, that only
Males were offered: so is it not necessarilye required in the Birds. Secondly,
the fat of the beasts was to be severed from the inwards, so not in the birds.
Thirdly, the Beasts were to be divided asunder, so not the Birds. Fourthly,
the whole of the Beasts was to be offered and received, but the maw and feathers
of the Birds were to be cast on the Eastside of the Altar amongst the a shes,
that were to be swept up and carried away out of the Tabernacle: of all these
in order, as God shall enable me.

1. First, that Males of the Beasts were required; and males being naturallye
more sufficient and strong, they best served for expressing the sufficie^cy of
Jesus for beco^ming an al sufficient sacrifice both for fying his father, and
streng thning of his members. Touching us, it taught (as Malachi teaches) that
the best things are Mal. 1. 14.
to be given unto God, and that under the pain of (...) curse. In the birds,
this seemed to be dispensed with, the reason I know not.

2. Secondly, the birds not being divided asunder, did doubtless teach some
unity in the parts of our devotion, and fellowships. But why also the same was
not admitted in the Beasts, I yet conceive not.

3. Thirdly, that the far of all inwards should be offered up to the Lord
(for neither that inward fat, nor blood might be eaten in any household of
Israel) I doubt not it intended, both in Christ Leuit. 3. 16. 17.
for merit, and in us for conformitye, an offering up to the father of heaven,
the very best cogitations within us. But why in the beasts severed, and the
other not enioy^ed, it passes my present capacity.

4 Fourthly, why nothing in the Beasts, but somewhat in the birds should be
rejected, I neither know: but what may be meant by the reiectio^ of feathers
and maw, I doubt not to speak probably and with consona^ce of faith. The mawe
and feathers being expulsed the Sacrifice and so consequently, of dislike unto
GOD, they must necessarily intend evil rejected of Christ, and to be cast
aside of us. What is more light then a feather? and what more light then unity
of mind? Christ taking our nature, did that without assuming our vanity. The
substance he took, the flickering Accident he removed: O that these feathers
did not cause us often mount as hy as fools (puffed up, as the Apostle speaks,
knowing nothing, at least as we should know) till we recule us suddenly down
again, a contrary extremity. Touching the mawe, when we remember what the
Prophet Zephaniah says to Jerusalem, woe to the maw Zeph. 3. 1. in both places
is the word, ^eah. See ^remellius thereon.
(for so the original reads) we may understand, that the mawe is mystically
wickedness, wherewith Cities and people be gorged. And because that the mawe
or gorge consists of sundry kinds of seeds (and abhominatio^ it was to sow
one plotte with sundry seeds mixed) it argues, the sundry seeds of evil
opinions and examples, which the very doves of God too readily pick up here
and there, which makes them an unacceptable sacrifice unto God, till the same
be disgorged. O good God, if this be true (and too true it is) in what a
miserye are churches ordinarily in? One pickes up evil opinions from
heretics and schismatics, and all too readily do swallowe down the corrupt
examples of the times; whereby people do make Ieru salem a mawe (I could wish
that our Jerusalem were not for that, under the hand of a continuing
pestilence) and by such collection of evil humors, they fill the body of the
common wealth with Apostems. If they break within, and have no issue out by
hearty confession, a thousand to one they stra^gle us: with S James therefore
I say, wherefore cast aside all filthiness and superfluity of wickedness,
receiving with mecknes the word ingraffed in you, sufficient to save your
sowles.

So much of the burntoffringes, in respect of considerations Common and proper
unto them, as severed from the Creatures quality, and what they mystically
intended.

Section. 15.
THe creatures destinate unto an Holocaust, they be (as before in their
methodical division) beasts and byrds. The first beast is the bullock as yet
not carrying the yoke, but The bullock
after that he came to the Priests fingring, he was yoaked and yoaked again,
with byndings, twitchinges, knockings, piero sweet Jesus, so was thou yoked for
our sins; who before thou vnderwente our nature, never carried yoke, for thou
could not, because thou then was only god blessed for ever. But unto the
God-heade uniting our manhood, how was thou drawn before the Hy-priest, how
was thou bound, twitched, smitten, hanged up and pierced, and all for our
sin! Jeremy says, that it is good for a man to bear Ier. Lament. 3. 27.
the yoke in his youth, and shall we be impatient to bear, as thou have borne
before us? David could say, that it was good for him that he had been
afflicted: and cannot we find like good in our afflictions, yea in the
afflictions of our youth? Timely crookes the Tree, that good crammocke will
be; and will we not at first bow down, take up Christ's yoke and follow
him? He was the Bullock, which was slaughtered for the Prodigal, even for
the repenting Gentile, when the Elder Brother Israel stood without. Well
through unbelief they are Romans 11 20
broken of, and thou stands by faith, be not thou highminded, but fear: For if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed least he also spare not thee.
Proud rebellious heifer, Humble thy self under the mighty hand of God, and
bear the yoke of his commandments, although thou Mat. 11. 29.
therefore be yoked unto the Horns of the Alter. So shalt thou be a sacrifice
of sweet odor in thy kind, for Conformity, as Jesus was to his father for
thee, in way of perfect Merit.

The second kind of burnt-offring was of Sheep sacrifice.
the flock, as sheep and Goats. First for the Sheep, It is a creature (for
I purposely avoid far fetched considerations, the very cause of Babel, in
exposition) that is most simple, and yet very profitable. Simple it is and
needs must be held, that is not only (as Isaiah speaks) dombe before the
shearer (yea, before the slaughterer) but also depart without noys
withfleece, to him that sheares him. With the Eunuche in Act. 8. thou may ask
this question (though not with like ignorance) ^raie th^e of wh^m speaks the
(...) this? I answer: he speaks it of Christ really, and by imitatio^in the
next place of his mystical body. For Jesus him self, who could exact more
simplicity, the^ he wittingly and willingly performed? Know ing that his time
of death drew near, as also that the traitoure was gone out to deliver him
into the bloodsuckers hands, he went into his accustomed garden for prayer,
familiarly known unto Judas the traitor. He there being met withal, and
asked if he were the man they sought for, without all equivocation he tells
them. Having smit them down with his word, he would not fly, but did as if
he should say, Lo, I come to do thy will O God. The varlets hayling him up
and down from post to pillar, from one place to an other (and the miles he
travailed that night, were more then inow) they despitefullye mocking him,
spawling in his face and deriding him, did never once return an harshe word.
After diverse questions, he answering them mildely, but they nothing bettered
thereby (good Lord, what marvel then if we speak without speeding?) he then
being again asked again the same things, was more mute then the shaddowinge
Lamb before his shearer.

For his fleece, he was willing not only to lay aside (after a sort) the
manifestacion of his glorious power; but also, to be fleeced of his clothes
(even of his seamelesse Coat) to the baring of his body unto the Cross. And
shall his simplicitye not teach us simplicitye, even the simplicitye of the
Dove?

And shall not his patience in bearing the Cross, teach us with like patience
for his sake to undergo any loss? The Apostle unto the Hebrews does
comfort some of them, in putting them in mind of their former like qualified
example: when he speaks to them thus: Now call to remembrance the day, Heb. 10.
32.
that are passed, in the which after ye had received light, ye endured a great
sight i^ afflictions: and partly while ye became (...) of the^ which were ^ed
too an^ f^. For (...) sorowe^ with ^e for my bonds, and (...) with ^y the
spoiling of your goods; knowing (...) your selves ^w that ye have in heaven, a
better and (...) end^ring s^bstaunce. A woonderous thing, i^ these times we are
all for action, nothing for passion. All for getting, nothing for loosing: as
if we had turned Christianisme into Machiauelisme, Christ into Belial, Heaven
into hell. Lord for thy sons sake, by the operation of thy word and spirit
make us true sheep of thy pasture, converting our equivocation into simplicitye
of behavior, with singleness of heart; as also, of rebellious Agents, make
us conformable Patientes; that so, if we be called thereunto, we may be
willinge for thy sake, to be killed all day long. Mean time we desire
forgiveness of our sin, and praise thy name, for bringing the gunpowder
Chemarims into their own fire, wherewith they purposed with Nebuchadnetsar to
have burned thy temple: hoping still (Lord increase the means of true hope)
that thou that have given the rebellious Ram, to dye in the place of tender
young Isaac, wilt perfect the work that thou have begone; least the impudent
Iebusites should reproachfully say, Now where is their God?

The third Animal destined here for sacrifice, The Goat sacrificed, propter
similitudinem carnis peccati: Beda in Leuit. 1.
is the Goat. The Sheep aforesaid not more harmless, then this harmefull.
In which respect, the Prophet Ezechiel in Chapter 34: 17 etc: puts a
difference between the sheep on the one side, and the sturdye Rams and Goats
on the other side, speaking thus; Also you my Sheep, thus says the Lord God,
behold I judge between sheep and sheep between the Rams and the Goats. Seems
it a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must
tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture, and to have drunk of
the deep waters, but ye must trouble the residue with your feet? And my sheep
eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and drink that which ye have
troubled with your feet: etc Of proud mounting minds be the Goats, and yet no
creature more ra^mish stinking thorough the abundance of luxury; besides that
Naturia^s note his gnawing of trees to be the death of trees: as Ezekiel
expou^ds them for people injurious and nociuous; so our Savior in the Gospel
Math. 25.
puts them on his left hand, and after that does seat them with the devil and
his Angels, by reason of their wickedness. How coms the Goat then, ceremonially
to shaddowe out Christ, who is the end of the law? Of him it is testified,
that he was in all things like unto us, Sin only excepted: verve true. Neither
did the Goat shadow him forth, in respect of any sin in him, but for sin
upon him: So that he might well say, as in Amos. Behold I am pressed under
you, as a cart is pressed, that is full of sheaues. Not a cart-load, but a
worlds load of sin was upon him, whereby in our nature he became the Lotgoat
in Leuitticus, 16. while in the other nature he withdrewe (in respect of
manifestation) unto Gnarazel a place inhabitable for sinners. Hereupon let me
lay down the speech of an ancient greek father. Typos tauta tou despotou
Theodoret. quaest. 22. in Leuit. Hesychius also by the second goat understands
the Divinity: so likewise does the Master of Sentences. 3 distinct. 21.
Christou etc, that is These things carry a type of the Lord Christ, but so
notwithstand^ng, as these two Animalls be not taken for two persons, but for
two natures. For seeing, that by one goat, both the mortality and immortality
of Christ the Lord, could not be fi^e shadowed out, necessarily therefore
two were commanded; that so the slain one might prefigure the passible
nature of his flesh, and that which was set free, might point out the
impassible nature of the godhead: so far By which Godhead th manhood being
secretly sustained, and sin (as upon the head) being so carried away captive,
that it might never be brought into judgment against Israel: the Godhead for
that might very fitly be represented by the escape goat; so well as in act: 20
28: God is said by his blood to purchase his Church.

Sweet Jesus, what disco^fortable burden did thou bear for mankind, that
indeed might fully be represented by the goat; who have not only the sin of
others upon us (as negligentmaiestrats, ministers, masters, Parents, have the
sins of their ungoverned and untaught people upon the^: and the intifers to
sin, have the sins of the intised upon them) but also the Goat fitly and
fully resembled us for sin also within us: so that, neither outside nor inside
is free from desert of judgment. O Lord, how shall we stand in thy presence?
Give us faith in thee, whereby thou may cover our iniquities, as Esaus garment
covered Jacob, whereby he got the blessing. I believe, lord help my unbelief.
And howsoever I can never purge my self, as I may merit the least of thy
favors; yet I beseech thee give me grace to labor the clearinge of heart
and hand, in way of thankfulness and conformity; that so dying to sin, as
thou dyed for sin, I may in my conversation, glorify the father that is in
heaven: Amen. So much for the sacrificial Beasts, first of the heard, secondly
of the flock. Now follows the burnt offering of Birds.

Section. 16.
THe Birds appointed for Holocaust in this Turtles sacrificed.
first of Leuiticus are first the Turtles, and secondlye the Pigeons. The
phrase in the Text, Let thy oblation be Of the Turtles, or of young Pigeons,
compared with the sacrifice of purificatio^, in Leu. 12. 8. (where a lamb being
offered, then 1 Turtle or Pigeo^ would serve: but otherwise, a pair of birds) it
causes me think, that here also is intended, a coople of the one or the
other. But to the Turtle first.

1 The Turtle is noted, for Turtle. Pelargus in Leuit. 12.
her fastnes and faithfulness to her mate, to be Fidei coniugalis emblema, an
Emblem of marriage fidelity. What greater faithfulness can there be, the^ that
wherewith christ has loved his Church? So dear has his spouses bin unto him,
as for washing her from the Leaprosie of sin, he has will linglye powered forth
his best blood. The Pelicane was never so prodigal of her blood to her little
ones, as he of his blood for his little flock. Sweet Jesus, the blood of the
goat is noted to dissolve the Adamant, and shall not thy Turtle blood,
co^straine our stony hearts to melte with love? O give unto us the heart that
David had, who in the want of thee in the Psalm. 42. 1. and 84. 2.
Sacrifices use, did breath pant, and fainte downwards. The poor Turtle
respects only her mate, and why should we spiritually wed our heart to any
but to thee? It was the sin of Israel to go a whoringe after other lovers
(false Gods and false worships:) sweet Jesus keep us unto thee in the unity
of truth and bonds of peace. To thee we gave out faith in Baptism (not to
Moses nor his law-for that way shall no flesh be justified in thy sight) give
us therefore always, specially when satan would assail us with desperation,
to look directly unto thee, who say, Believe and live, not work and live.
By thy Prophet thou thus say, They say if a man put away his wife and she
go from him, and become an other man's: shall he return again unto her? Shall
not thus land (for doing so) be polluted? But thou (speaking to the Church)
haste played the Harlot with many lovers, Yet turn again to me, says the
Lord. O Lord how slow art thou to wrath, and yet art a jealous God over thy
people: when thou sent Moses into AEgypte, for fetching out thy church; lo
(as Eze^iel thy seruante testifies chap. 20,) they were all generally wedded
to the Idols of Egypt, having in Every grove hea ped up abundance of Lovers:
yet (so great i^ thy Turtle-loue, unto thy Dove that's but one) that thou bid
them cast Cantic. 6. 8.
away their Idols, and so return unto thee. But, o egregious sin, they denied
so to do. Yet, for thy names sake, thou would not destroy the^ but still
woed them unto thee, and so finally brought them in the pascall supper, unto
thine own Table. Lord give us grace, by the conside ration of thy infinite and
endless love, to be more faithful and fast unto thee, and ready in all
distresses, firmly to believe, that thou which have begonn any good in us,
will for thine own glory, make the same in due time perfect.

2. For the pigeons, or howse-doues, they be Pigeon.
noted (and daily experience teaches it) that they do gregatim volitare
naturally desire to fly by flocks. The prophet Isaiah, foreseeing in faith ^sa.
60. 8.
the great number of Gentiles that should be gathe red to the Church by the
coming of Christ, he speaks of it by way of admiration, thus: who are these
that fly like a cloud, and as the Doves unto their windows. The multitude
of them are compared to acloud (as be all the faithful in Hebr. 11. termed
in Hebr: 121, a Clowd of witnesses) and their coming unto the church is by
flocks, as doves to their culuer house, and as thousands rolled in together, at
Saint Peter's Sermons, Christ's dove is but one, as she is considered a body to
him, her Head; but the members of that on catholic body, be many We are
enjoined in, S. Matthew the 10. Chapter to be innocent or simple as Doves. Of
innocence and simplicity. I have spoken in the sheep, nor need I here to
inculcate that. Naturians have noted that they be void of gall, teaching us to
be void of bittern: but sure I am, that howsoever they lack a bag of gal: yet
there is that matter in the^, howsoever sparsed, may appear by their pretty
kind of pettishnes. Arguing that howsoever we should not retain a bag of gall
in us (as Simo^ Magus did to the causing of a root of bitterness to grow up) yet
we are to retain an holy anger in us against sin; ac cording to that advise of
the Apostle unto the Ephesians, be angry but sin not.

These particulars con sidered, first in the Field-Doue, and secondly in the
Home-doue, I think it good to add a consideration in common to both: and that
is, the form of their Music, which is a mixed note; neither who ly glad, nor
wholly sad: and that may teach us, that our note in this world is neither to
exist wholly of gladness (for then we should soon forget God and our selves),
nor yet to rest wholly in Sadness (for then we should soon fall into desperation)
but as to be glad in the Lord who works all for our good, remembering us as he
remembered Peter, when we with Peter forget our selves: so again to be sa^ in
respect of our spiritual lacks toward him, that loves us so dearly. Such a
dove was David thorogh the book of psalms as may appear by his for rowful
gladness (the one meting other) expressed wonderful often. Hezekiah Psalm. (...).
2. the wo^de Hagah expounded.
was such a dove mour ning toward the wall, and yet not emptied of faith,
whereby he rejoiced in the living lord. The holy ghost in the 1 Psa. teaching
who is blessed, (I negatiuely, He that does not this; the^ affirmatively, but
he that does this) he in the latter place says of the blessed-man that his
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law Hagah is so expou nded in Isa
38, 14.
HAGAH he does meditate day and night. The word Hagah is turned meditate in
respect of matter there pressed, as also for that our language will hardly in a
word expres it fitly: but otherwise (which is Expositours office to de clare)
it signifies Gemere vt colu^ba to sigh it out as a dove. Which well teaches,
that spiritual chewing the cud, or meditation upon the lords word, it begets
sorrow whil we look upon the law: but looking on the gospel, we see occasion of
reioyceme^t. Now, least sorrow should cause us despair, or the joy cause us
presume above that we should; while in our meditation we cast one eye on the
law, we are to cast the other on the glad tidings of Jesus. The first will
beget and continue in us, a reverend awe of God and his judgments: and the
other will beget and continue in us an holy reioycement. God has joined this
sad-gladnesse and glad-sadnes together: and none but such as would be accursed,
will in this world go about to put them asun der. And so much of the Birds.

Section. 17.
FOr an end to the whole: first, why did God incommend so many sorts of
sacrifice to the church? Principally for these respects: once to lead people
(as by the Eye and hand) to the manifold sins they ron into: that having the
Sight and Sense of them, they might be forced to fly from themselves and any
their best works, to the one only sufficient sacrifice, christ Jesus
crucified. As also, by the variety of commendable qualities in the sacrifices,
to consider the superexcelent match les graces in Jesus, whereto every Christian
member, should strive to conform it self: for that is a conformity of
conformities, aliened from the world.

2. Secondly, it may then be demanded, wherefore these sacrifices were not
continued, though not to signify Christ to come, yet to signify the same
things in Christ passed? I answer: one mayn reason why god so abolished them,
might be for the good of Israel even for their readyer coming to Christ. For
if now after the abolishment, they are ready to follow them with dangerous
stumblings, how then would they have rushed upon them, if so they still had
stood in their way. A fore-resemblance hereof, might be that burial of Moses by
Jehovah Deuteronomy. the last chapter.
in an unknown place; that so with more readiness they might follow Joshua
(or Jesus) Heb. 4. 8.
his successor (for both the names be one: the first Hebrew, the second Greek,
in English Savior) who had they known his sepulcre, no doubt, they would not
only have idolatrizd before it, as the Romanists do upon slenderer respects,
but also had bin likely to have builded some habitations nere to him, and have
put Ioshuah to have iourneyed to Canaan alone: Because they should not rest on
Moses, but follow Ioshuah, the Lord conveyed his body away, notwithstanding that
Satan (as Saint Jude notes) strove for the contrary. And even so likewise, he
has removed the body of Moses his ceremonies, to the end that they and all,
may more readily repair to Jesus. For Jesus and not Moses must bring the
people unto heavens Rest, better then Canaan the figure: Secondly, the coming
of Christ Jesus, was the great grace of this world and therefore proportionably
to be exhibited with fewer ceremonies and less chargeable. In which respect,
Baptism came in place of all washings and purifications by water and blood:
and the Lords supper substituting the meat offerings, drink offerings and the
fleshofferings accompanying the same. Both these ceremonies right easy, and
effectually and familiarly pointing out all the former excellencies in Jesus,
the end of all ceremonies.

3. Again it may be demanded, touching the Fathers before Christ's
appearance, and us after his appearance, whether in their and our ceremonies,
Christ be received in one and the same manner of them and us. I answer, they
saw him to come by faith, and we by faith see that he is passed by. Their
faith did not re ceiue him carnallye, nor does ours: they believed that so
verily as their bodies were partakers of the sacramental signs, so their souls
should partake of christ and his graces sig nified thereby: if any should have
taught an Israelit or Jew, that after the Priest had consecrated in the
meatoffring, meal, oil, etc. as after his co^secratio^ of the victimaes, that
all these beasts, birds, meal, oil, ears of corn, frankincense, wine, that
all or any of them had bin turned into the Real carnal nature of Messiah and
that so they had eaten Christ fleshly, doubt less they would have stoned such
a one to death, as teaching but a Bellygod and a Beastlye Christ. But the
Romanistes (the vpholders of the winegod and breaden God) they will say, that
howsoever the ancient church did not in their oblations receive the very
flesh and blood of Christ (for as then he had not put our nature upon him,
howsoever some say, he did in certain appearances, sed mihi qui them opinio dura)
yet the greater Grace exhibited unto the new Church, does necessarily bring
such real eating of him, with it. I answer, the grace is more excellent and
divine to feed on him by faith, the^ to eat him really with teethe. And if the
Church in any age, should have eaten Christ so grossly, the^ it doubtless had bin
commended, to the ancient church, who in her no^age was inform Hebr. 9. 10.
ed (as the apostl speaks) with carnal rites. Besides, how coms it about then,
that they dare not say, that the water in baptim is also turned into his real
blood, for cleansing of our souls? Besides, if Judas Iscariot and unbelievers
do eat Christ's ve ry flesh in the Sacrament (for so they teach, and sure their
teeth are as able as others) how coms it they ca^ be damned; except these
Idolaters will basphemously also say, that some of Christ's real nature and holy
body is also damned with them. Proh nefandum scelus, their doctrine is like
their vaulte gunpowder practices, and their giving the sacrament for obliging
people unto massacres, and treasons matchless, argues them bolder in evil,
then the Devil himself unmasked durst be. If they shall say (and what dare
they not say) that the ancient christian doctors were of their mind: I answer:
it is foully untrue: show me that ever so much as once any of them bound any
person by the sacraments receiving, to attempt any murder: If they say, they
were of their mind touching the real eating of Christ's flesh in the new
testament. I answer: first it fol loweth not that we should believe any thing
which any of them shall teach opposite unto scrip ture: for the Apostle commands
us in such a case, to hold an angel accursed. Secondly, it appears flat
otherwise as many our learned me^ have proved; which rests upon them never to
be truly answered. A few such testimonies I will add.

Irenaeus in l. 4 c. 34) Eucharistia constat ex duabus rebus, Terrena and
caelesti,

Tertul. l. 4 contra Marcion.) Acceptum and distributum discipulis, corpus suum
illud fecit, hec est corpus meum dicendo, hoc est, figura corporis mei.

Eusebius. demonst. euang. l. 1. c. 10) Mirabilem quandam victimam, sacrificium
que eximium patri suo operatus pro nostra omnium salute, obtulit, eiusque rei
memoriam, vt nos ipsi Deo pro sacrificio offeremus, instituit.

Ambros. in Luke, 24, Non enim corporali tactu Christum, sed fide tangimus.

Chrysostom in Psalm: 22: Istam mensam praeparauit, vt quotidie similitu dinem
Corporis and sanguinis Christi, panem and virum secundum Ordinem Melchisedech
nobis ostendcret in sacramento.

Procopius Gazaeus in cap: 49 Genes.) Dedit cor poris sui imaginem vel of.
figiem aut typum discipulis, haud amplius admit tens cruenta legis sacrifi cia:

Macarius in homil: 27 offertur in Ecclesia Panis and vinum Anti-^ypon carnis
eius and sanguinis.

Augustini illud triuiale Si sacramenta earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt,
similitudinem non haberent, sacramenta non essent: vt in Baptismo; sicut aqua
exterius mundal, ita Christus lauacro aquae in verbo mundat ecclesiam

In Eucharistia, sicut panis materialis alit, sustentat, confirmat, ita Corpus
Christi est alimentum spirituale, noui seu interni hominis.

Barnard ad fratres de Monte, de vita solit.) Re^ sacramenti nemo percipit nisi
dignus and idoneus. Sacramentum sine re sacramenti mors est. Res etiam
sacrame^ti, etiam praeter sacramentum, sumenti vita aeterna est. With infinite
the like. And indeed, the Patriarchs, and we should not be sa ued by on and
the same faith (but they by one faith and we by another) if we should be
saved alone by eating his reall-flesh, and they without. The Auncientes many
times extolled The thing signified so hie, as they almost forgot the Sign:
but that was not, for that they held the Sign to be turned into the thing
signified; but because they labored to bring their hearers from sticking
superstitiously in the sign, unto the grace signified thereby; yea, exhibited
therewith unto the faithful communicant. But leaving the Romanists to their
Gods of bread, their gods of wine, and their Gods and goddesses of wood, stone,
gold, silver, tin, lead, wax: let us hold that position of Augustine, who
speaking of the old and new Sacraments, says, They be diverse in their signs,
but in the Aug. in Johan. tract. 26 In signis di uersa sunt, sed in re quae
significatur, paria sunt.
thing signified they be alike.

4. A fourth question may be this: whither all such as inioyne and undergo any
external ceremonies (specially, significatiue) as in the Bible, be not of God
directlye and expressly enjoined; whither all such people commanding be not
limbs of Antichrist, and the vndergoers bearers of the badge of Antichrist? I
answer. Antichristianisme consistes not in things commanded besides expres
scripture (for then the festiuals appoin ted by Mordecai and Judas Maccabaeus,
the rearing up of Synagogues and synagogicall orders, the rearing up of
schools of prophecy with their orders, the rough garment of the vn-Leuitical
prophets, with many things in the temple not expres ly commanded, should be
Antichristian) but the commanding and undergoing of things opposite or against
the scripture. The counsel the apost. gave the Corinths in chap. 7. he says
of it, that he had it not commanded from the Lord: and therefore besides
scripture, but not against Scripture: for had it been against the lords
word, it had been but the counsel of Satan. To command any order, ceremony
or act^ against the scripture, is mere deuellir^: And to have any ceremony in
the Church, though not against scrip ture, yet, absolutelye dumb and
vnsignificatiue, is so far from being the better, as it is rather ridiculous
and fana tique. God teaches us by the heavens, by the earth, by the feas and
their continents, and makes them all significatoures of spiritual things,
and shall churches-ceremonies be a together domb? There is a difference
between a Sign exhibi^e (for that belongs properlye to a sacrament) and a
Sign representative, which is in common to all creatures. And if al creatures
and ordinances without the church do speak significantly, let not any thing
within the church be domb. Of sou^der judge me^t was reverend Calvin who in his
institutions writes thus; The manner Calvin. in Institut. lib. 4. cap, ^0. sect
24. Also on 1. cor. 11 he says, scimus ^que eccl^siae Liber^m esse P. li^ae
formam instituete sibi aptam and v. t^em, quia Dominus NIHIL CER^I.
praescripserit.
in ceremonies respects 3 things, 1 in the number a fewnes: 2: in observation
easines: 3: and in their signification, worthiness: as for Antichristianisme, it
properly in S. Paul, and S. John's sense, consists not (which to few have
marked) either in an Antithesis or opposition un to christ's external order or
yet in an opposition to the Judicial or moral law. Eue^ such oppositio^s are
hainus and wicked, but do not therefore conclude Antichristianism; al evil even
in the members of christ, is conde^nable, but they not therefore Antichristian,
nor it antichri stianisme. Antichristianity in the new testaments sense, is an
opposition to the new covenant of Grace, called of the apostle another gospel:
Galat, 1. 6. 7.
that is, glad tidings in some other then in christ. And such were they that
went out, whereof S. John speaks, seking iustifica tion by another means then
christ, as by the observation of the moral law or the law of Ceremonies, or the
like. This ^oint held (and it is easy to be held, Antichrist being Antike^nos,
the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4.
layer of an opposite foundation) it quasheth to ground all our fanatique
spirits, that make any thing in our church, yea, all our Church it self to
be Antichristian, because of some moral wants, or somewhat otherwise, evil
only in their fancy. I would they would once smite their hand on their thigh
and say, what have I done. But for pressing this one point some years
passed, I have therefore been pricked in the eyes ever since: therefore to God
I leave such, saying, Heavenly Father forgive the (...), for they know not what
they do: and for thy Sons sake suffer not thy people to be ^onger captiued of
them. 5. The last question may be this, when shall ceremonies altogether end? I
answer: when the world is consumed, and the heavens and earth analyzed: or more
plainly, ceremonies shall cease, when Faith cease. Faith cease, when we
have fully got the thing we faithed or believed: for ceremonies be but as a
wagon for conuaiing faith to his iournies end. Faith being the apprehension
of things unseen (for I speak of the most excellent kind of faith) when once
they and we come together into full possession (and that is not, till we
attain heavens glory) then Faith stinteth. Being come to the period or full
point, it can reach no further, nor hope that held the thing believed and hoped
for. And in this respect it is, that Charity in the 1. Cor. 13. is preferred
before hope and faith: they then ceasing, but love toward god and our fellow
members, continuing for ever. And for such continuance eternal, it is also,
that God (never call led by name of faith, or Hope) is called of saint John by
the name of Love or Charity.

O God of Abraham, Isaac and Iaakob, a god of the living, that live unto thee
eternally: but more speci ally o thou the father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whom in respect of Adams fall, thou did appoint to be a new and a living a
way for justification and salvation, unto all such as should come unto thee by
him. Heavenly father, we have broken thy Law actually in our selves, so well
as originally in our fore-patents, and therefore have deserved, that all the
curses of the Law should fall upon us: so far be we from being able to be
justified by doing the works of the Law; And therefore flying from all hope of
health by that old Law, Do and live, we come unto thee by the new and living
way, Believe and live eternally. We believe o Lord help our unbelief.
Increase our faith for apprehension of all the promises, sealed up in Christ
with Yea and Amen: for they be all true, and he the way, truth, and life.
Keep us in this wildernesseworlde, with our backs upon slavish sinful AE --
gypt, wherein too long we served Satan worse then Pharaoh: and give us to
keep our face still toward heavens Rest (better the^ Canaa^s rest) until we
attain that new land wherein shall dwell only righteousness. And in falling in
this world (vouchsafe as thou did to Moses) to give us sight from above,
for discerning several lots and inheritaunces in that rest: for if there were
not several mansions (o Father) in thy house, thy Son would otherwise have
told us, but lo he is gone before to prepare a place for his people. Give us
grace to see; and in seeing, give us to exulte in thee, with care of becoming
more conformeable unto thee. To that end, bless the Ministrye of thy Sons
Gospel unto us, that so his love may constrayne us to love the doing of all
his commandments. Bless Governors and Governed, High and low, ritche and
poor, with a divine care to do, not only the holy and righteous duties
that appertain to them as they be christians, but also, as they be christians
of such and such places; that so thy name may be more generally bonored
amongst us; and in thy saving mercies sealed up in Christ Jesus, this
grievous pestilence may be far removed from us. Hear us for the sake of
thy son our sole Savior, whom in word and sacrementes thou have exhibited
mercifullye unto us. To whom, with thee and the blessed spirit, three distinct
persons, but one true and everliving GOD, be all kingdom, power and glory
ascribed, both by Angels and men, this time and for ever:

Amen.
Faults escaped.
Page. 1. line. 10. min, read mind. page 3. lin. 6. sheh, read isheh. page. 7.
line. 16. Noah the, read Noah through the flood, the etc. page 14. lin 1. vah
read vaf. page 15. line 9, Euangel, read Euangels, pa. 24. lin. 1. and fourth,
read and fifth. page 34. lin. 19. a, read as page. 70. line. 11. god, read
good. page 93. lin. 9. waits, read waights. page 133. line 20. Ma. read Mathe
vv. page 136. lin. 15. ar, read far. page 144, lin. 10. not suf, read not only
a suff. page 169. lin. 14. meetnes, read meeknes. page 171. lin. 14. live,
read line. page 178. line 1. meri read merit. page 189, line 9. us read as.


