A Chronological Discourse touching, 1 The CHVRCH. 2 CHRIST. 3 ANTICHRIST. 4
GOG and MAGOG. etc.


The substance whereof, was collected about some 10. or 11. years since (as
may be gathered by an Epistle prefixed before a Tractate, called, The visible
Christian) but now digested into better order; and first published, By the
Author himself, H. Cl.

Horat. de art. P. -- Nouumque prematur in annum. Ratio. -- Nescit vox missa
reuerti. Imprinted at London by William White, dwelling in Cow-lane over
against the sign of the white Lion. 1609.

TO THE REVEREND AND LEARNED FATHERS, AND BREATHREN MINIsters, in the
Archdeaconrie of Canterbury: Grace and peace be multiplied from God the
Father. etc.
THe Learned of the Gentiles (being to that people Tit. 1. 12.
Prophets, as S. Paul styles them) they by Parables (as Iotham by his Trees
holding Parlie) did under some shadowing-speach, both praise Virtue, and pursue
Vice. And had they not been as lamps to their Ages, for explaning the Moral
duties of the Decalogue (steps whereof remained in man's nature, even after his
Fall) the Gentiles had run away with smooth excuses. By which in-written Law,
as they did the things of the Law, as the Apostle tells the Romans; so, they
came to have notice of the out-written Law, given of GOD to Moses in two
Tables. Orpheus in him. de deo.
For so Orpheus (living in the time of Isreal's Judges) writes: -- (...)
(...).
Even as the Meaning Moses.
Water-borne described has
From God to Man, two Tables of the Faith.
Giving therefore Fools leave to blatter against Knowledge, (as if Gods reason
in his Works, should be against the reason of his Word,) let me proceed.

To Argus they attributed 100. eyes; as to Briaceus 100. hands: not properly,
but figuratively (even as Solomon saying: Eccles. 10. 2.
The heart of a wise man is at his right hand, although his proper seat be in
the midst of his Breast, depending a little toward the left side) they
thereby implying, that the Profane (with Argus) need many eyes or watchmen,
for securing such a skittish companion, as was Samsons Heifer: as also, that
Combaters with Divine powers, have need of many hands to help them. But all in
vain, seeing the eyes of the first, will be put out; and the hands of the
second, will be broken: much like to the judgment which Zechary signifies to
come upon the Idol-shepheard, Zech. 11. 7.
namely, a Sword upon his right Eye and Arm; insomuch as his Arm shall be dried
up, and his right Eye darkened. In the assurance whereof, I continue my
opposition to fanatique, phrenetike spirits.

The Gentile-artists, did many times unto men, give the title of God, (as the
Scriptures give unto Statesmen) and so they did unto Hercules, for his 12.
famous exployts; which may be reduced to two kinds: First, for his conquering
of deuowring Beasts; which indeed were Men as savage as Beasts, tyrannical
Usurpers: Secondly, for his sweeping away of much Doung with a Torrent; which
was, an expulsion of evil Manners and Customs, by the clearenesse of good
Counsel and wholesome Laws. Many we have, that will say, how by their place
they be Gods: but very few that show themselves gracious and beneficial to
Church and Commonwealth, as Gods should; but Devils will not: Many claim the
Term, but few walk worthy the term, Horat. ep. ad Quintium.
Tu recte viues, si curas esse quod audis. Justly therefore shall the heathen
Hercules, rise up against such in judgment.

The office of Priesthood among the Gentiles, was of such great respect, as
oftentimes the Kingdom was united unto it: Fenestella ex Virgil.
Rex jdem hominum, Phaebique sacerdos. When Famine pinched the land of Egypt,
to the forcing of all sorts, to set sale of all for Bread-corne, there was due
provision made for the Priests. For these that there do turn Cohanim
Princes, do it (in my judgment) not only against the very heart of the words
propriety, but against the consonance of all Story. And were the Heathen,
even by Nature so led, to prefer their Ministry? The doctrine of Grace, does
teach it much more. But a number, as if they were not only deuoyde of Grace,
but also deprived of good Nature, do so cast their cards, as if any starve,
the Minister shall: and if any amongst Clunchpokes and Swaggerers, be thrust
down to the tail of the Table, it must be the Minister. But as the Heathen in
this point also, shall arise up in judgment against such: so, I pray you, from
whence arises this evil? Sat scio, and let me speak plainly.

This evil arises sometimes from our selves, when the greater has small
respect of the lesser: From whence the contempt of Ministers arises.
for that noted of the vulgar, is as a document for having such in lesser
estimation. Secondly, this base estimate of Ministers, arises also, from the
consideration of their poverty; and their poverty is the more, by reason some
Nouelistes have taught Civil Governors, to spoil Mother Church of her
Dowry, saying; that the same is an Idolothyte and Antichristian.

And hereupon it was, that the Separists did at first in their secret
Conuenticles, appoint their Deacons to stand at the Chamber door, at the
peoples outgate, with their Hats in hand (much like after the fashion of a
Playhouse) into the which they put their voluntary. But coming beyond seas,
where a man might have seven Doyts for a penny, it fell out, howsoever their
voluntary (at the casting in) did make a great clangor, the Summa totalis over
seen, the masters of the Play, came to have but a few pence to their share.
Whereupon, a broad Dish (reasonable flat) was placed in the midst of their
conuention, that when the voluntary was cast in, others might observe the
quantity. But this way served not the turn, for a few doyts rushing in upon
the sudden, could not easily be observed, of what quantity it might be. Upon
this, the Pastor gave out, that if (besides gifts from others abroad) they
would not make him Who was Micahs Leuit now?
Ten pounds yearly at least, he would leave them, as unworthy the Gospel.
Then they stickle, for fear of a fall; and Holder the Glouer must give six
Styuers a week for his part: George Cl. the Bricklayer, more Styuers for his
part, by reason that he had good doings: and so others accordingly. The Glouer
complains of the greatness of the Cesse, and therefore said; that he would
for England. etc. But to leave their giddie devises: At home we have had too
many, that have been willing (howsoever maintenance be For this point, see my
Manual on Leuit.
Moral, and the quantity and quality thereof be Judicial) under the color
of clearing the Church of Idolothytes, to shave the Church as clean, as
Dionysius did Esculapius. To the Ministers it would be unholy, but to the
Church-robbers it would be very holy, when they may have it wholly. Pape; Have
we found out an Hypocrite, worse then a Papist?

A third cause of the Ministers contempt, has arisen from our Syncerians, who
have made it a very small matter, to preach upon the Scriptures: holding every
hours talk, a Sermon: Insomuch as, a number would not go to meat (if a few
were present of their faction) but there must be a kind of Sermon.

Master Barrowe himself, H. ^ar. then in the Fleet.
even to my self (telling him that Master Pen^y did use that fashion of
Preaching,) did exceedingly dislike it; saying of that, and of some Pin-sellers
and Pedlers that then were put to preach in their Thursedayes Prophecy, that
it would bring the Scriptures into mighty contempt.

Master Henry Smith in his Sermon upon Despise not Prophecy, did tax in his
time, that addleheaded discoursing, saying: that it was the ready way to bring
into contempt, both Prophet and Prophecy. But Vzzah has been smitten of God,
Allusion to 2. Sam. 6.
for so touching the Lord's Ark, that whosoever runs by, may read (as in
great Capital letters) Perez Vzzah: and therefore I leave it.

But what speak I of Contempt of Ministers? Actum est de capite, the whole
body of the Church is accused for an Harlot; yea, for such a one, as never was
betrothe^ unto Christ, but prostitute unto spiritual fornication ( a
cunabulis) from the very swaddling cloutes. Minxerit in patrios cineres
Schismaticus ille. To whom I say with Agur; Prou. 30.
The Eye that mocketh the Father, and despises the instruction of the Mother,
let the Ravens of the valley pick it out, and the young Eagles eat it.

The premises considered, it remains, that with Nehemiahs people, we do the
work of the Church with the one hand, and with the other we hold the Sword.
With the Cranes, Arist. de animal. 1. 9.
let us watch by turns, and rest by turns. Let no man seek his own, but
euery-one another good. In being one, against such as will not be at one, we
shall (as in the Parable) compel them to come in, or force them to silence.
Isoerat. pane gyric.
Controuersias, aut jus aut vis, finit.

And so casting my self into your brotherly arms, with reference of these my
labors to our Churches judgment, I humbly bid farewell. Norborne in East-kent
the 6. of April, Anno Domini 1609.

Your Brother in the work of the Gospel, HENOCH CLAPHAM.

TO THE ORDINARY READER.
TO read with profit (and otherwise thou had better never read) these Rules are
to be followed.

1. First, beware of a preiudicate affection; Notes for directing the Reader.
an evil, forestalling the grace of God; barring the doors of mercy against
such: For we should not dare any thing against, but for the truth.

2. Secondly desire of God, that in trying of all things, thou may keep
that is good: Otherwise, with the Spider, thou will fashion Poison* where the
painful Be would cull Honey.

3. Thirdly mark diligent^y the Arguments and Reasons whereby any point is
proved. And consider whether they be Essential and to the matter, or but
Paralogifmes, or seeming fair Colors, which we term Sophistication.

In disputation about the Being of a true Church, it must be well What is to
be observed, touching the Being of a Church.
whether speech be had of such a true Church as is Visible and known plainly
of man; or, of such a true Church as is Invisible, and so only known of God:
For, though we may hope well of such as we see and know, yet God knows who are
his. And then, if the Question be about the true visible Church, it must
further be considered, if so it be a true visible Church settled in orderly
constitution, or as yet vnestablished, or not yet constituted: for every of
these Churches (though true Churches) be differenced one from another by some
substantial mark or property, peculiar to the own kind.

In disputation about Ecclesiastical policy, or Church Discipline, What,
touching Church policy.
whether speech be had of that, which accordes generally with every true
Church, (and that is the inward regiment of the Spirit; whereupon Christ says,
The kingdom of God is within you; and the Psalmist, that the Kings Daughter
is all glorious within; and therefore not to be poynted at with Lo here, lo
there;) or, it must be waighed, if so the discipline be external and outward:
And if that; then, whether of such policy, as tendes barely to the Being of a
true visible Church stablished, or vnestablished, in whole or in part, etc.
Otherwise, thou shall swallow Quid for Quo; and when the question is of Miles,
the answer will be of Plummes.

In the lack of such a Spirit, as should discern between things that
differ, it comes to pass, that Schismatiques exceedingly seduce poor plain
people; describing a Visible Church, by such scriptures as properly appertain
to the Invisible, wherein all are really holy: and when the question is of
Discipline Essential, they cast in scriptures that speak of that is only
Accidental; as if there were no difference between the Maine and the By:
between that is naturally perpetual; or but temporary, fitting some one time.

What, touching true Ministry.
if question be about True Ministers, the Schismatikes propound for a mark
thereof, the very perfection of the Lords Canon; as if he could not be a True
Minister, except he were Perfect: as if there were no difference between a
true man, and a man that is perfect in every ornament of Nature. And yet, when
the Perfectistes have done that, the very best Minister they can make, is to be
convicted of imperfection.

What, touching the Gospel.
if question be made, What is the Gospel? or, what is the contrary thereto,
namely, Ant^christianisme? They determine neither of them by that which is
Essential, but by some Accidents, which tend not simply to the Being thereof,
but to the Decking of that Being: the most absurd kind of Sophistication that
can be. In a word, they deal as sillily as if one should define a man, not by
the verity of Body and Soul; but by so many Hairs of the head, or so many
Nails of an hand; or by having more or fewer Garments upon him, of this or
that fashion.

If thou know what I have said, then thou art the fitter to judge after
reading. If not, then read, but judge not: For he that gives false judgment,
does make himself accursed. And so, beseeching God to give thee understanding
in all things, I leave thee and my labors, to the blessing of the Almighty.

TO THE UNCONSCIONABLE READER.
ARt thou an Atheist, and so mockes all Religion? Then I leave thee to thunder
and lightning, whereby some ancient Atheistes, have been forced to fear, and
to acknovvledge a sovereign divine power over the Creature.

Art thou of some Religion? Justin. the Historian affirms, Conditores su^s
Lupae vberib. alt^s: sic omne illum populum Luporum animos habere, inexplebiles
sanguinis, atque imperij diuitiarumque auidos ac leiunos. Lib 38. Lactantius
understands Lupa to have been a vile Whore amongst Sh^pheards, and thereof
Lupanar. De vera rel lib. 1. c. 20.
What, a flouting Papist? Then I leave thee to thy mother Rome: As the last
Jericho by Hiel, so it was founded in Blood, by such as had sucked the milk
of a Wolf (at least of a vile Harlot) and it goes on in Blood, as unable
otherwise to be continued. Witness not only many bloody massachres a broad,
but many sanguiuolent attempts (of late) here at home. Specially, we can not
forget thy late Gu^pouder treason; vvherevvith thou did covet, to mingle
with our blood, the blood of thy Parents; yea, of men of thine own Religion.
How then should any Evangelical vvriting, content thy Idolatrous judgment?

Art thou a Separist? One that no sooner has crept out of the shell, but
labors to pick out the eyes of thy Mother? Look for the curse of Canaan, and
to be rooted out, for a defiler of the nest thou vvast bred in* My Mothers
son can do nothing that can content thee; for thou can do nothing, that
will long content thy self. I now this is the true Discipline, anon that: I
now some translation of the Bible may be brought into the Congregation, i now
none but the lively voice of Gods spirit in the Teacher; that is, the lively
voice of his own private fancy. I now, the Minister may have no set kind of
maintenance, I now he may. I now, the Apostate from that Church, may upon his
return, not be admitted into so much as a Collecters room, (whom they call
Deacon) anon he may. One-vvhile Psalms may not be song in the Congregation,
another while they may. One year, it is as lavvfull for a man to preach in
our Temples, M. Greenvvod (near his last cast, being come from the Fleet to
Newgate) so affirmed, as George Knifton their Elder delivered to me and others.
as for the Prophet of Judah to prophecy at Bethel; but next year, such an
act must be termed Idolatry and Antichristianisme. In a word (for thy
fooleries are infinite) thy own Apocryphal inventions, must be held
Canonical; and I must not seek to content thee. Were not a VVhirelygig in
thy brain (as may appear by thy trundling from Country to Country, from shop
to shop, prattling, inue^^iuing, railing) our writings would be read more
soberly, and judged of more conscionably.

Whatsoever unconscionable Spirit thou be, I turn my self from thee, saying
no more, then Michael did to Satan; The Lord reprove thee.

CHAP. I.
Touching the word, CHVRCH.
THe word CHVRCH, is derived of the word Kyrk; This latter, being still
retained both of German and our North-brittaine. That the letter K. comes so
to be written with CHAPTER the reason is plain, when as it is remembered, that the
word is originally Greek, and their letters Kappa and CHI, we confound, using
the one indifferently for the other. As for V. in the word Church, it having in
stead thereof, Y. in the word Kyrk, that falls out by same reason, as some
pronounce the letter, Vpsilon, others Ypsilon.

The Greek word is So Nannius Musculus, and Hospinian. de origin templ.
Kyriake (of Kyrios, Lord) for that the place so termed, is the Lords-house or
Temple. A Physician of Antwerp.
Goropius Becanus in his Amazonica, finds fault with Nannius for being on this
mind; and thereupon presses two words of their own language, Car, signifying
Amiable; and Rac, I touch. But this is too far fetched, and to no good
purpose; and the rather, for that it is no novelty to find, both their tongue,
and ours, and others, to borrow of Iauan, I mean the Greeks. Amongst
hundreds, take one familiar example. We have a certain Fruit, which we call
Cherry (mark here also, Chapter for K.) the French call it Ceris^; the Italian,
Ciriegia (frutto;) the Spaniard, Ceresa (fruto;) the Latin, Cerasum; the
German, Kirse: And all these, derived from the Greek word Kerasion or
Kerasos. And if this have fallen out in words of such quality, how much more
is it like, that the language of the New Testament (and it also, the most
universal Language of ^aphets people) should unto the New Testaments house of
Religion (so well as to the people) give the name of Kyriake, by Contraction,
Kyrk? In latter sound, Church.

CHAP. ij.
Touching the use of the word CHVRCH. etc.
THe word Church in our language is taken, either for the Place set apart for
the Lords public worship (as was the Tabernacle to Israel, and therefore
styled, Ohel mognedh, the Tabernacle of Congregation, or conuention) or, it is
taken, for the people of God, who are by calling, 1. Tim. 3* 15.
the House of God (as the Apostle speaks to Timothy;) or (as to the
Corinthes) a Temple to the Holy Ghost.

As it is a material House; so it is necessary, for fitnes of conuening unto
public exercises of Faith and Charity; as was the place of the Corinthes
meeting, remembered of the Apostle, to such purpose. And so the House, in
respect of his use, 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2.
is the Lords-house, and a place Ecclesiastique; nor less truly then the
Temple, may be called an house of prayer.

In the Primati^e times, the Christians having no Kings for Patrones, it so
came about, that the places of their meeting, fell out as they might, not as
they would. But the ten Persecutions over (so many as the Plagues in Egypt) it
then fell out, that the meeting places were not only more public, but also;
some and some, became very seemly and sumptuous. Eusebius. b. 8. c. 1. and 16.
Niceph. in b. 7. cha. 2. and 3.
About some 300. years after Christ, the Christians began to build them; but
within a few years after (even in the time of Constantine the great) they
became more countenaunced, and rich. And will any, but the Atheist; or Satan
transformed into a professor of light; will any but such, find fault with their
state and riches, they being Houses devoted unto heavenly purposes? Shall it be
lawful for us to seele and trim our common Houses, and to neglect the House,
devoted to the Lords peculiar service?

-- Hinc, hinc procul ite Prophani. And here let me remember a triuiall
Objection cast in by the Brownist and such other. They first affirm, that
these material Churches (in their phraze, Synagogues) were originally, even
from the very foundation, devoted to Idolatry: and therefore, in the second
place (from their understanding of Deuteronomy. 12. 1. etc.) they conclude them to be
Idolothytes; and so our duties to pull them down. Some others of them have
taught that they may be converted for civil use, to Barnes, or Stables. Nor is
this latter opinion, otherwise then (wel-ny) universal amongst them.

I might answer them thus: First, agree flatly on the point your selves, and
then I will shape an answer. Secondly, seeing the most and principal of you
do hold, that they may be converted to Civil uses (whereupon at Campin and
Narden in Netherland, you were contented to dwell in Monasteries, and so did) I
might demand, how that stands good, with Deuteronomy. 12? Yea, I could thirdly
say, they themselves are one in opinion, but another in action; for in such
Monasteries (raised up in far more corrupt times, the^ were the Churches)
themselves did conuene weekly, for acting their public Devotions. Yet I must
needs confess, that old Abbot (who was of opinion, that the Prelates of
England could conjure, and had by such course sent a Devil among the
Brownists, for stirring up amongst them all cutthroate contentions) he would
neither enter such place for spiritual exercise, nor any other civil respect.

But alas silly souls, the Commandment in Deuteronomy. 12. for Isreal's pulling
down all Idolatrous places, was not merely Moral and perpetual; but stood
in force for the time, wherein one house (as Tabernacle or Temple) was allotted
to the Lords spiritual worship. For they were pulled down, for teaching and
driving all people, to that One place, where God put his name. As God gave no
such Commandment to his people, before he appointed One such public place
to be repaired unto; so, neither after the Lord abolished that one place, was
the other Commandment enforced. Nay, the Apostle unto Timothy (as opposing to
that) says; that now, It is lawful in all places, to hold up pure hands
without wrath and doubting. The Commandment therefore, in respect of the
execution, was plainly Temporal: and as such an Idolatrous House stood
opposite to that one-place, so Ceremonial. And indeed, it well and aptly
taught, that we should dissolve all conuentions of Schismatikes and Heretics,
for bringing them to unity with the one Catholic body of Christ Jesus.
Wherewith let be remembered; first, that Every creature (since the remouall of
the partition Wall which stood between the sew and Gentile) it is made holy by
the word, 1. Tim. 4. 5. Act. 10. 15. and 11. 18.
and prayer. Secondly for Use, it is lawful to them that be sanctified, and so
hold it lawful. To deny this, is to Iudaize; and in effect, not only to say,
Romans 14. 14. Titus. 1. 15.
that the CHRIST is not come; but also, to blaspheme the liberty, whereto
Christ has made us free. Thus the Devil, under the color of Synceritie,
labors to annull Christianity.

But if a man should let the former truth of doctrine pass, and then should
put them to prove, that all our material Churches were from the very root
Idolatrized, should he not put them to an endless business? If they say, that
from the first Stone, they were dedicated to some Idol-saint; it is more then
they can prove, howsoever since (for distinction sake, or otherwise) they have
had some Names put upon them. But admit it from the beginning of their very
Form, what reason can there be of unlawfulness to pray in them, more then of
praying in Amsterdams Churches library (except they there study without
Prayer; and then it is like to be but a profane study:) Or their praying in S.
Annes, S. Giles or S. M^udlins parioche (be it at bed or at board) seeing these
Parioches were dedicated to such Saints as Anne, Giles; yea, some of them to
the Paternoster, Creed, Aue, Kyri^, whereof comes the word Kyrk? If they
answer, that no doubt they may do this, so well as Iudahs Prophet Preached
before Bethels Alter, or S. Paul's usage of any devotion in the Ship dedicated
to Act. 28. 11. Two breathren, who (as Poets say) were begotten by Jupiter on
Leah, in the form of a Swanne. For their scouring the Seas of Pirates, they
were held Gods of the Sea.
Cast^r and P^llux: I reply, even as lawful it is for us to pray in our
Churches, howsoever from the foundation devoted. But the ground of such lawful
and well doing, rests neither in their or our action; But in this, that so we
do according to the former Doctrine; it being a Doctrine according to godlynes,
directing us to the true use of every creature. But as Tit. 1. 15.
To the Clean all t^ings are clean, so, To the unclean and unbelieving, is
nothing clean; For, even their ^^indes and conseiences are unclean. So much
of the Material Church, considered from the Greek * word Kyriake.

CHAP. iij.
Touching the words, Synagoge and Ecclesia. etc.
THe Septuagint, that is, the Seauentie learned Jews, (or, Aristeas, of the
Septuagints time.
as Aristeas writes to his brother Philocratos 72. that is, of every Tribe
six*) they, at the request of Ptolemy Philadelph (one of the Kings of the
South in Daniel) did translate the Law into Greek. These in Moses use the word
Sinagoge for Congregation, speaking of Israel, not of the Tabernacle: for if
they speak of the Tabernacle, then they write Tou martyriou of Witness, not
(as we) of Congregation. It may be, from the martyring of Beasts in that
place, whereby their faith was witnessed to Godward.

But in Le^iticus 8. 3. they join both Synagoge and Ecclesia together thus:
And assemble, Pasan ten Synagogen ecclesias. The whole Synagogue of the Church.
1. Macc. 3. 13.
The writer of the Machabees-storie, styles the same, Ecclesian piston. The
Church of Believers. In a word, these two words, Synagoge and Ecclesia, be
used each for other in divine writing* whether we intend thereby, the place of
sacred meetings, or the people that so meet in these places.

1. Synagogue for the place, as, Ioh. 16. 2. Act. 13. 14. with other places.
And Ecclesia for the place; as, 1. Cor. 11. 18. where the Apostle opposes that
place, to their private Houses. Compare it with verse. 22. The like in 1. Cor.
14. 34.

2. Synagogue taken for a Conuention of people, as before: and also in Revel.
3. 9. And Ecclesia taken for a Conuention of people, as before; and in many
places of the New Testament: yea, for an uncivil hurlie-burly, as in Act. 19.
39. 41. called elsewhere, the Beasts of Ephesus.^

A certain August. quest. on Leuit. 57.
Ancient, puts this difference between them. Ecclesia (says he) is a
Convocation* and spok^n of reasonable creatures, Capable of a calling: But
Synagoge is properly Congregation, and spoken of Beasts of the flock (for
such the Latins c^ll, Greges) who come together rather by c^action or driving
(for so the Greek word signifies) then by calling unto as the ^^rmer word
imports. It must needs be granted for pretty, that he has said, but how
fitting in Divinity, it may be guessed, by the use of the words, in the
former allegations.

I conclude then, that the Ecclesiastical word Kyriake, and the two
Canonical, namely Synagoge and Ecclesia, they all be of us translated Church,
intending thereby (as in the former Chapter) An house of meeting, specially,
for sacred use; or, as in this Chapter more plainly, they import, a People so
meeting. For in this Discourse, we are not to speak as Ciuilians in their Law,
but as Divines in our Law.

CHAP. iiij.
Touching Church-people.
THe word Ecclesia or Church, does sometimes intend, the Coloss. 1. 18. 20.
whole mystical Body of Christ Jesus, containing not only such Christians as
be here Milita^^ (that is fighting against the Di^el, world, and flesh) but
also that part of the holy Army; which having in the last act of life trod
Satan under foot, are now in Heaven, Triumphant.

In some good sense, the good Angels ( Reave. 22. 9.
Our Fellow-seruants, and of our Brethren the Prophets) may be put into the
Churches Albe: But seeing by Church, we properly understand Mankind (with whose
nature, he has Communicated, Hebr. 2. 16.
not with that of Angels) I therefore in this Discourse must so be understood.

And passing by the triumphant Church, as they have passed from the Sanctum
here, to the Sanctum sanctorum above; we are to consider this Militant Church,
as it is Known to God, or, as it is Known to Us. As it is known to God, so
2. Tim 2. 19.
The Lord (not we) does know who are his. And in that sense, the Church is to
us invisible, or vnseeable. As it is known to us, so it is like unto Beda. on
Romans 8. from Aug. on S. John. 6. compares it so, for the Dove and Raven.
Noah's Arc, containing not only a reverend Shem, but an hollow-hearted Cham;
not only Beasts clean, but also unclean. Or it is like to the Tabernacles
Sanctum, where were not only holy oblations but also some ashes and
light-snufs, which were to be cast out of the Sanctam.

Again, this Militant Church, is to be considered, not only in the Whole, for
which it is called in our Creed, The Catholic Church, but also in the parts,
whereof every Society is termed a Communion of Sa^^tes. By which phrase, the
Brownist understands ordinarily, a Society of People Really Sanctified for
the whole, testified in obedience to the whole of Gods will revealed. Such a
Communion can they find me one? In Adams few, it was not so. In Noah's Eight,
it was not so. With Rebecca^s. Twins, it was not so. With Isreal's Conuention it
was not so. With Iudahs assemblies, it was not so. With Christ's Twelve, it was
not so. With Corinths Church it was not so. Five of Asiaes seven Churches,
were not so. And as for (...) and Philadelphia, they be praised for the
General of their obedience, not for every particular: for, James. 3. 2. 1.
King. 8. 46.
In many things (as the Holy Ghost witnesses) we sin all.

That the Catholic Wheate-field or Church (even Christ's possession through the
World; For by World there is intended the Earths Largenes, as in Psa. 2. 8.
that in it should be Weeds, yea, inseparable Weeds, our Savior teaches in
Math. 13. from which parable may be observed.

1 That it is the Quid Regnu^ caeloru^ in nouo testamento, nempe, ecclesia
fidelium. Zuingl. in expos. eius. artic. 34.
Kingdom of Heaven (never taken in the ill part, as some times the word World
is) which is there compared.

2 That the seed of the Kingdom, is sown through the World.

3 That in the midst of that good seed, the Tares be sown; and not without the
Church, as some Schismatikes would.

4 That such evil is sown, when Christ's servants are a sleep: into the midst
of Gods temple, the adversary so got.

5 The Servants awaking, see these personal Evils keeping-vnder the personal
Good. And therefore the evil ones visible, even as visible as the Wheat, and
not only Hypocrites, as some badly have taught.

6 A purgation of all such Visible evil, cannot with the Churches good be
made, till the Lord in the worlds end do come unto judgment. And therefore
mean time to be permitted, which without rending the church, cannot be
severed. That for the estate of the Church Catholic.

That a Particular Church, is no more privileged then the Total or
universal, must necessarily follow; for that Satan (as an envious man) sowes
his Tares) Ana meson tou sitou) even through the midst of that Wheat; his
malice being no less against the parts, then the whole: as may appear in
Revel. 12. where not prevailing against that Woman, he goes and wars with
the remnant of her seed. And no marvel it be so, seeing every particular
person still sins, whereupon still that petition is in force, Forgive us our
trespasses. In which respect also it is, Leuit. 4.
that in Leuiticus is appointed sacrifice, both for the whole Congregation
erring, and for the parts of that whole; Decretal. v. 5. cap. 28.
as Priest, Prince, People. So Gregory's Decretall concludes: Iudicium
D^^veritat^ quae non fallit, nec fallitu^, s^^pe^ i^nititur. Iudicium autem
Ecclesiae (...) Opinionem sequitur, quam and fallere saepe contingit and fallj
^ propter quod contingit interdum, vt qui ligatus est apud Deum, apud Ecclesiam
si^ so^utus; and qui liber est apud Deum, ecclesiastica sit sententia innodatus.

Particular Congregations, are therefore called Communions of Saints, or
Holy-ones; not because they all Really and indeed be such; but for that they be
called to be such; as also have undergone the outward Signs and Means of
sanctity or holiness: Hereupon. Israel became an Exodus 19. 6.
Holy-nation, though not al of them indeed holy. So Israel (after the Schism
from Judah) is called Gods son, and Gods people, and yet the most of them
turners aside to gross Idolatry, which (of all sins) diuorceth from God. So
the Corinths are Saints by calling, and yet amongst the^ grievous kinds of
sinners, both against Faith and good Manners. This I speak not (as the
Schismatique raileth) for iustifiing faults, but for justifying the Churches
true-being, notwithstanding such faults.

Let the Schismatique look into himself, let him search into the meanders and
turninges of his heart; and then let me see, if he can say unto God, My heart
is clean; there is no spot in me. If he be of the mind, whereof one in
Lyn-regis was, that David did lie of himself, when he said to the Lord, I was
borne in iniquity, etc. then I will say to sir Schismatique as I said to him;
I am too low, to talk with one that is so hie. Or as Constantine the great,
unto the Nouatian Bishop Acesius, Socrat. schol. l 1. ca^. 10.
Provide thee a Ladde^, (o pure Puritan) and thy self aione climb up into
heaven.

CHAP. v.
Touching the Churches Visibilitie in the earth.
OUR Savior saying, that upon that Rock which Peter then preached (and that
was 1. Cor. 10. 4. Math. 7. 24.
Christ himself) he would build his Church; against which, Hel-gates should
not prevail, cannot be understood, that he speaks of this or that particular
Church, but of the Catholic body, whereto himself is the Coloss. 1. 18.
Head.

For the Church of Rome, it was chased away from that seat, many years
together, by the Goths and Vandales; witness the Stories which cannot be
gainesayd. And no marvel, for from that place, not only proceeded the power,
whereby Christ was crucified; but also, whereby the great persecutions flowed,
for the extirpation of Christianity. Upon which foresight, no doubt S. John
has left that City under the deepest curse, in his Book of Revelation.

For the 7. Churches of Asia-minor, which S. John saw to be as Stars in
Christ's right hand (a privilege never given to Rome) they quickly vanished.
Which (among other reasons) doubtless was, for keeping us, from tying faith to
any particular place or person. And if God spared not his own peculiar people
the Jews, but rooted them out for their sins sake, what reason is there,
that he should spare any wild branches, inserted in the place of that natural
Olive?

That promise therefore in Math. 16. must (even by evidence of Consequent) be
understood of the Catholic Church, which howsoever it might be beat down in
some part, yet should continue in some other. Even as the Moon, whereto she is
compared, might to some part of the Earth be eclipsed, when to some other part,
she shyned brightly. This I note against the Romanist, which would not only tie
the Church to some one place; but also conclude that the Church has been to
this part of the world always visibly glorious.

Besides, I conclude the Euer-visibilitie of the Church, (though in such
defective manner) for conuincing of some, who have not known how to answer
the Romanist, otherwise then by denying all visibilitie, through some
misunderstanding of some Scriptures, in 2 Thessalonians. 2. as also in the Revelation.
Whereas indeed, a great departure was to be made from the Faith; but yet mean
time, it should not cease to be Gods Temple, though the Adversary usurped a
chief place in it: Revel. 7.
for (as S. John foresaw) some Trees should keep green in the Lords court,
having the saving Seal of Gods Grace printed upon them. And were it not so,
how should saving Grace be conveyed unto us, without new Apostles, furnished
extraordinarily from heaven? And how should we come by Gods Book (containing
his written will) if the Lord reserved not a Remnant, 1. Tim. 4.
the Church being only the Pillar and Ground of that truth?

The verity of all which, was typed out in the Ancient Church before Christ
came in the flesh. Before the Flood, for 1656. years, the Church remained in
some few Families. After the Flood, in a few Families, till the gift of the
Law at Mount Horeb or Sinaj. Then the Church began to be more visible, and of
more glorious constitution; first, in the Wilderness; then after, in Canaan,
till the time of Salomons son Rehoboam: Then ten Trybes schism from the two;
leaving the two in some orderly state; but betaking themselves to grievous
Idolatry: Yet during the times of such Idolatry, God did not leave them, but
stirred up many excellent Prophets among them; as Elias, Elisha, Jonah, Amos,
and others, together with excellent Schools of Prophets, as at Bethel and
Jericho; till such time, as Assure carried them away captive. In mean time, the
case stood far better with the Church in Judah, till the Lord for their
sins sake, suffered Nebuchadnezar of Babel, to carry them captive to Babel.
There they continued 70. years, without exercise of Sacrifice. At the 70.
years end, they are permitted by the next Monarchist to repair home for
building the sacramental City and Temple. Three Monarchies (as Chaldea,
Persia, and Grecia) and a Duarchj, a parted government.
But some seven seauens of years (even 49 years, as Gabriel foretold Daniel)
it was, ere that work could be finished. From that time, they continued under
the government, first of the Medes and Persians (represented by Nebuchadnetsars
siluery Breast and Arms.) Then under the Brazen Monarchy of the Greeks.
Afterward under the Duarchie of Egypt and Syria; the first, South from Judea;
the second, North; as Daniel plainly foretold them. And so they reach to
Christ, that Stone cut from the Mountain, who dashed that Image of
Nebuchaanetsars to powder. When Christ came, we find the Church (as for some
600. years it had been) quite out of order, and very few of them, that could
brook the Lord of life, or his saving Gospel. Principal Stars for this
Story, S. Luke lays down, when as he gives us the most glorious persons in
succession of pedigree, from the first Ad^m to the second; that is, unto Christ
Jesus, who is bl^ssed for ever.

From which holy typical Story, I conclude; first, an Ever visibilitie of the
Church. Secondly, but such a visibilitie, as inow was more, inow less: inow
glorious, inow the glory eclipsed: inow in constitution, inow shaken asunder.
Nor can it be thought strange, that the Daughter (I mean the Christian Church,
brought forth of mother Zion, should be subject to such mutabilitie and
change, when as she has not been inferior to her Mother for sin; and
therefore as capable of judgment. To flesh and blood, it is indeed somewhat
harsh, that Christ's Diadem in the earth should be at any time dejected (as
may appear by Ethan in Psalm. The Monk Folengi^s upon that Psalm. verse. 40.
Christianorum tempora, forsanque presentia, aptari possunt.
89.) but such deiection is the Churches lot, before the second coming of
Christ, as it was before his first coming. And that it should so fall out,
himself foretells in Math. 24. the mystery whereof begun to work, in the
Apopostles times, as the Apostle tells the Thessalonians. This point I conclude
with that of Bullinger: Bulling. in Epi^ome temp. part. 2. in Annotat.
Omnibus temporibus retinet sibi Dominus ecclesiam, etiam in medio
corruptissimi mundi et in medio haeresum, schismatum atque corruptionum.
Tempora illa, (speaking of mother Zion) ^ypum praetulere, vltimis nostris
temporibus, in quibus ho die viuimus.

CHAP. vj.
Touching a visible Christian; a visible Christian society; and a visible
Christian society established.
AFter the division of Isreal's ten Tribes from Judah (for Benjamin being mixed
with Judah was so couched under that term, together with some of Leuj) the
people of the world was distinguished ( Israel being dispearsed, as before) into
Jew and Gentile: So that, who was not of the Jews; were called Gentiles. The
difference between which two sorts of people, stood thus.

The Jew, was a people, possessed of the Act. 3. 25. Galath. 3. 26. Romans 9. 4.
Covenant made to Abraham, namely; That in his Seed, all the kindreds of the
earth should be blessed. He says not, to thy Seeds, as speaking of many; but,
and to thy Seed, as of one; which is CHRIST. Besides, of them were the
Prophets; and to them was the adoption and the glory, and covenants; and the
gift of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises. Of whom were the
Fathers, and of whom (concerning the flesh) Christ came, who is God over all,
blessed for ever, Amen. So that the Jews were as Salomons servants, standing
before him, as in his chamber of presence, having all means to make them truly
blessed. An easy matter therefore for them (had not wilful pieuishnesse
hindered them) to have become true visible Christians.

For the Gentiles, they were (as the Apostle tells the Ephesians. 2. 12.
Ephesians) without Christ, and were Aliants from the common wealth of Israel,
and were strangers from the covenants of promise, and had no hope, and were
Atheoi, without God in the world. Yea, they were not only destitute of all
saving Good, but possessed with all evil. By the Romans 1. 19. 20
work of Creation they were necessarily drawn to acknowledge an invisible
Power for the Creator, which they called God (as the world is of Mercury
Trismegistos, Trismeg. in Pimand. c. 9.
called Gods son) and that this God was (Heis d' est' antogenes) One and of
hi^^selfe, as a most ancient Poet, Orpheus in 1. Sect. de de^.
Orpheus teaches in his Hymn of God, together with other excellent respects
of God: but when they should come to worship him, they went a whoring after
their own inventions; coming to that one God, by a thousand-thousand Idols;
seeking God down in the Creature, whereas by the Creature (as by Iaacobs
Ladder) they should have clymed upwards to the Creator. An hard matter thus it
was, for a Gentile to become a true Christian. But as things impossible with
man, are possible with God: so, after the Lord had taken a first-fruites of the
Jews (as Apostles, and others) he takes this wild Olive of the Gentiles, and
plants it in the stock of the Jews; that thencefoorth, they might become
children of Abraham, by living in the faith of Abraham.

1 Who then is to us a true visible Christian? Even He (be he Jew or Gentile)
that holds the faith of Abraham. And what was the faith of Abraham? This, he
believed, that God would raise up a Seed (even Christ) out of his seed, in whom
alone, himself and others, should receive the eternal blessing: for earthly
blessings he saw to be flitting, and therefore looked after a better, as the
Apostle enformeth the Hebrews. Heb. 11.
How was this blessing to be effected? That he was taught from the Analogy of
Sacrifice; namely, that the Messiah should feel the fiery indignation of God;
and by his death, make satisfaction for Sin. Adam lived by the same Faith,
expecting the promised Seed of the Woman, which should break the head of the
Serpent. And that Faith Habel testified in sacrificing his Lamb. Sheth, Enosh,
and the rest, knew no other Faith. And Noah's Sacrifice (coming from the Arc)
could never have smelled sweet in the Lords nosethrils, otherwise then he had
that Faith which respected Christ; whom the Apostle styles, Ephesians. 5. 2.
Osmen euodias) the sweet o^^ur. Abraham, Isaac, Iaacoh, had eye to no other
means of salvation. Israel before the Law, some and some in Egypt, came (as
Ezekiel. 20. 5. etc.) to fashion themselves to the Idols there: but Moses and
Aaron were stirred up to fetch them away; to whom the Lord at Mount Horeb,
recommended the true form of Sacrifice, with rites peculiar to the land of
Canaan. And in Iudi^ (a part of Canaan) they were continued, till their
deportation to Babel. But then the outward Ceremony ceasing for 70. years,
they notwithstanding looked to the promised Seed (of the Prophets termed
Messiah;) and Dan^l in that place, was foretold by the Angel of Messiahs
coming to suffer for Sin, Seauentie-seauens of years before. When he was
come, John Baptist poynted him out, saying; This is the Lamb that takes away
the sins of the world; for that it was Christ that was shadowed out under the
Law, by the Lamb offered morning and evening All which the Apostle teaches the
Hebrews, when he says; Heb. 10. 1.
that The Law was a shadow of good things; (signifying that these good things
were in Christ.) Yea, Coloss. 2. 17.
to the Collossians, he says; that The body (of such shadows) was Christ. I
conclude then, thus; that that which is Essential, or tends to the very
B^ing of A true Christian, is not every good thing, but this one good thing,
Faith in Christ Jesus for perfect Redemption. Martha may combere her self
about many things, (and in themselves otherwise prayse-worthy) but this one
thing is necessary; and who with Mary has chose^ it, has elected the better
part. Job in the land of Vz, the* Eunuch in Aethiopia, Certain in the Court of
bloody Nero, had their Justification with God, only by this Faith in Christ;
there being no other name under Heaven, whereby (as S. Peter teaches) man is
to be saved. As for Good-workes (which necessarily do follow true Faith) they
belong not to the very-being of a true Christian (seeing some one may be saved
by the Faith, before he can come to do an external good work) but such works
tend to the true Being of a Visible Christian. For, as Faith internal
iustifies toward God (for Abraham believed, and that was counted to him for
Righteousness;) so, Works external do iusti^ie toward man; according to
that of S. James, Show me thy Faith, by thy Works. Suitable to which, is that
of Origin. Origin. on Romans 3. 27.
The Apostle (says he) says, that Justification by Faith ALONE, is
sufficient: so that the belieuer whosoever he be, is ONLY so iustisfied,
Whereto he adds (speaking of the Thief on the Cross) The Lord requires not
of him, what before he had wrought, nor did expect what work he should
fulfill, after he believed; but being justified by so^e confession (name^y, of
Faith) he joined him companion unto him, being ready to enter into Paradise.
Afterward again, Abraham might have glory for his Works, with holy and
just-men that saw them; but this glory with God, was Only by Fayth-secret. And
his Master Clemens before him, writ thus: By Faith alone, the believer is
perfected. For a Corollarie, let Scholars take what follows.

Ignatius in Ep. ad Ephesios.] Ignatius. Justin.
Principiu^ vita Fides, finis eiusdem Charitas. Justin. dial. cum Tryph*]
Purificamur fide -- Fides quae e^ ad Deum, iustificat hominem.

Clem. in Strom. 7.] Clem. Alex. Augustine.
Per fidem, efficitur Fidelis perfectus.]

Aug. ad Bonifac. l. 3. c. 5. Nostra fides (hoc est, catholica fides) iustos ab
iniustis (non operum, sed ipsa fidei lege) discernit; quia Iustus ex fide
viuit. Then he numbers up all kinds of works, but bars them out from
justification.

Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
in Gen* hom. 26. Causa bonorum omnium ( speaking of Noah) fuit sua in Deum
fides. And the same Chrysostom. against the Jews (if that against the Jews be his)
in orat. 4. he has this: Christus, non ex benefactis, nec laborib. nec
pensatione, sed ex sola gratia iustificauit genus nostru^.

Ambros. in Romans 3. Ambros.
Iustificati sunt Gratis; quia nihil operantes, neque vicem reddentes, Sola
fide Iustificati sunt dono Dei.

Basil. Basil.
mag. de humilit, Ea demum per^ecta and Omnimoda gloriatio est in Deo, quando
neque propter suam ipsius quis iustitiam extollitur, sed agnoscit se quidem
vera destitui iustitia; verum Sola in Christum fide iustificatum esse. Et
gloriatur in eo Paulus, vt suam ipsius iustitiam contemnat.

Victor Antiochenus in Marc. 5. Victor.
Haec diserte indicant, vestimenta contacta eam non sanasse, sed fidem. Igitur
neque locus, neque verba, neque aliud quippiam eiusmodi externum, hominem
saluat, sed vnu^quemque sua fides seruat.

Rabanus. l. 7. Rabanus.
in ecclu^m. c. 2. Per solam Christigratiam, ab omnis candalo liberantur Electi.

Remigius in Psa. 29. Remigius.
vita aeterna non est ex Merito, quia cadere per nos potuimus, sed per nos
surgere non potuimus; sed ex voluntate eius. 1. sola misericordia.

Idiota, Idiota.
cap. 6. de conflict. carn. and animae. Melius est iustificare quam creare; cum
creando detur Natura: Iustificando vero, et auferatur culpa, and conferatur
Gratia.

Giselbert. Giselbert.
in Alterc. c. 8. Iustitiam dei dico, non qua deus iustus est, sed qua induit
hominem, cum Gratis iustificat impium.

Theophilact. Theoph.
in Romans 10. Dei iustitia est, quae ex Fide est. Haec non indiget laboribus,
operibusue nostris, verum tota ad gratiam dei pertinet.

Barnard. ser. 3. Barnard.
de aduent. domi. Iustificabit nos Gratis, vt Gratia commendetur, And in
Annunc. Mar. ser. 1. Hoc est testimonium quod perhibet Sp. SS. dicens, Dimissa
sunt tibi peccata tua. Sic N. arbitratur Apostolus, Gratis iustificari hominem
per Fidem.

Rupertus in l. 7. Rupert.
in Job. c. 7. In Jesus Christo, nec circumcisio, nec preputium, nec Gentilis,
nec Iudaeus, sed ^ola Fides requiritu^.

Io. Bapt. Foleng. Folengius.
in Psa. 2. Quae maioriam potestee^ cum Iustitiae qua nos ex peccatorib iustos
efficit, non imputans peccata: tum bonitatis demonstratio, per quam aeternorum
bonorum ad hereditatem Gratis inuitantur, and quodammodo vel inuiti trahimur.
And on Pl. 45. Video amarem (namely, of Christ) video pacem, video iustitiam,
qua ego Gratis iustificor per fidem.

Fulgent. ad Monim. l. 1. Fulgent.
In sanctis igitur coronat deus iustitiam quam eis gratis ipse tribuit, gratis
seruabit, gratisque perfecit.

Honorius in spec. Honorius.
ecclus. de not. do^i. Fides debet ee^ fundamentum, and postquam ^am
posueritis, debetis ponere dilectionem dei and proximi.

D. Io. Ferus in 1. part. Ferus.
pass dom. Fides facit discipulum Christi, Charitas autem ostendit and probat
discipulum.

Tho. Aquinas in Lect. Aquin.
4. super Galat. 3. (see him also on Romans 3.) his tongue turned to English,
runs thus: No Works, either Ceremonial or Moral, are the cause why any man
is just before God: For Works are not the cause, that man is just, but the
execution and manifestation of his justice; because no man is justified with
God by his Work, but by the habit of Faith infused.

Let the Romanist wrangle (in the abuse of Distinction) so long as they shall,
even through their Church (as they will have it) it has through all ages
passed for undoubted truth, that unto Justification with God, no one external
Work whatsoever (no not of Baptism or Circumcision) has once been required,
for essential to the sauing-being of a Christian, but Sola fides* Faith only;
which is internal, and the gift of God also. But to become a Christian
visible unto others, there is required such outward Works (as fruits) whereby
we may be well persuaded of the Faith that is inward, as the inward life of the
tree; which is vnseeable otherwise then in the fruits flowing from it. The
first fruit of which Faith to usward, is, a free Confession, that the heart
so believes: Romans 10. 10.
For (says the Apostle) with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and
with the mouth man confesses unto salvation. The second special Work is,
subjection to Baptism (the seal of their justification, annexed to the word
of belief) and therefore the Apostles commission ran thus; First Preach, and
then Baptize. Nor would the Eunuch so instantly have craved Baptism, had not
Philip taught the necessity thereof. True it is, that it is not necessary to
salvation simply, but conditionally, as it may be conveniently had. But
Contempt, or wilful Omission, is as damnable, as Esaus base thought of Canaan;
Genesis 25, 32. Isa* 7. 11 12.
and king Ahaz his hypocritical show, in seeming not to stand in need of a
Sign. For how can a soul have true respect to Gods Word, when it shall think
lightly or vilely of that Seal which is suffixed to that Word? A third Work
flowing from true Faith, is a Desire of being further informed in the mystery
of the Gospel, which the Angels themselves desire to peire into, 1. Pet. 1. 12.
whom (notwithstanding) it so much concerns not. And who will not desire to
know the full of their Fathers Will? The fourth fruit issuing from true Faith,
is, to Love God above all, and our Neighbor as our self; and to testify the
truth of such love, in all duties of Piety and Justice, as from Gods word
shall be manifest. Such a soul, so believing and working, is to usward, a true
visible Christian.

2 A company of such gathered together, are a true Christian assembly; or
(as the Apostle sometimes calls them, finding them in some So Origin on Romans
16. So Theophilact thereon, and on 1. Cor. 16. So Haymo on Ep. to Philemo^:
Ambrose, and others.
house) a Church of God Which caused Tertull exh. ad castitatem.
Tertullian to conclude thus; Vbi tres, Ecclesia est, licet Laicj; Where be but
three, although Laymen, there is a Church.

3 A company of such, not only gathered together, but also, possessed of
spiritual Overseers and Seruitours, for the regiment of the whole, by Doctrine
and Discipline; such a people, be a true visible constituted Church. For as the
common sort of them, be but as an Ear for hearing; so, their Overseers be as
an Eye for seeing; and the Seruitours as necessary Hands to their Overseers.
As the Apostle then can say; 1. Cor. 12* 17.
If all the Body were an Eye, where were the hearing? So I by like proportion;
If all were Eye and Ear, where were the power of conuayance between them?

CHAP. vij.
Touching the Ministers of an established Church.
THE ancient Church of Israel, had constituted unto it, two sorts of
Ministers, Priests and Levites. The Priests again were divided into 2.
sorts; first, in that one was to be Hy-priest (not only for a year, as was
the corruption at last, but for the whole term of life) and he only might
enter into the Sanctum sanctorum, and in other businesses was principal. In
the second place, were many other Priests, attending the daily Sacrifice;
which after by David, were for better order, distributed into 1. Chro. 24. 7.
etc.
24. Classios. Of the Levites (simply so called, for otherwise the Priests
were of Leuj) they were divided into two ranks, each knowing what parts of
the Tabernacle he was to wind up and carry: the one sort of them called
Gershomites, the other Merarites, as all the Priests were called Kohathites,
according to the Heads of the Families they came of. But when David prepared
for a Standing house unto the Lord, he distributed them into other Orders, for
other purposes; as in 1. Chro. 25. and this by no particular precept from the
Lord, otherwise then from the general rule (whereto Natural reason leads)
namely, That all in the Church should be done with comlynesse and order.

Another sort of Ministers God provided for that Church, and these were the
Prophets and Prophetisses, stirred up out of what tribe soever. These were not
constituted to the Tabernacle or Temples businesses, but raised up of God
(besides any ordinary form of calling) specially, for calling Priest and
people into order, when they erred from the commandment. And as their calling
(for form sake) was extraordinary; so, they were furnished with guifes
extraordinary; both for knowledge and strange works working. The Ordinary
ministry therefore, constituted to the Church, were Priests and Leui^es; the
extraordinary ministry (tied not directly to any one place or people) they
were such Prophets, termed of elder times, Seers. This, for that Churches
ministry.

The New-testaments Church, has her ministry proportionable to her Mother.
Some, for calling and qualification Ordinary: some again, Extraordinary.
Extraordinary were these, Ephesians. 4 11. Non mihi Apostolorum gloriam vindico.
Quis in hoc, nisi quos ipse filius elegit Dei? Amb. offic. l. 1. c. 1.
Apostles, Prophets, Euangelist^; all whose Outward form of calling, so well
as qualification, was besides the general rule Apostles and Prophets having
their calling immediately from God, howsoever the Church might add (sometimes)
their seal unto it; as in the sending out of Paul and Barnabas. The
Evangelists had their calling immediately from the Apostles, and sometimes (I
doubt not) from the Prophets; being indeed to these that called them but as
godly, trusty servants, as Elisha was to Elias, and Ge^ezi should have been
to E^isha.

The ordinary ministry, were Bishops and Deacons; the first being as the Eye
of the Church, and therefore in English called, Ouer-seers: the other, as the
Churches hands, for better dispatch of some duties; and therefore in English
called Ministers and Seruitours. And into these two sorts (as Master and Man)
the Apostle distributes them in 1. Tim. 3. But then these Bishops (called also
Cyprian de jeiunio. Non conuenit annis impubibus sedere in cathedra, and in
Primogenitis ^oum, lege aratio est interdicta.
Elders for that ordinarily they were such for their years) they be of two
sorts; one of them having pre-eminence for place and voice, as the Hy-priest
over his brethren, and for that in R^uel. 2. and 3. he is styled, The Angel of
the congregation: and very fitly for his place, may be termed Archbishop,
which is in plain English, but, chief Bishop, or, chief Ouerseer. Objection:
Christ is the only Archbishop of our souls. Answer: So in Math. 23.
himself says, One is your Doctor, one is your Father; and that Doctor
himself says, is Christ; and that one Father, is in heaven; and therefore no
one in the earth, (teaches Christ) is to be called Father and Doctor. When the
Doctor of schism has opened Christ's meaning, let him but put the same key
unto his own Objection, and the spring flies so open, that bad eyed Leah
running by, will easily discover his folly.

The other Presbyter or Elder (for the Greek word Presbiter is, Elder in
English) he is as the Ordinary Priest unto the Hy-priest, employed in the Word
and Sacraments also. And therefore in Act. 20. 17. 18 etc. one and the same
persons be indifferently called Elders and Overseers: or as the Greek words
sound, Presbiters and Bishops. For that in 1. Tim. 5. 17. it is to be read
thus: The Elders that govern well, are worthy double honor, specially they
which Copiontes and Copos, is a wearisomenesse with much labor, as befell the
Apostles often. etc. Zuingl. upon his 62. article.
weary themselves in the word and doctrine: where the comparison is not
between Elders, some Governing, some teaching; but between Elders laboring
more or less: which caused Zuinghus (at the first starting up of such
Lay-eldership) in his expounding of the former verse, to oppose unto all
Eldership, saving the Teaching. Nor could Gualter see any use of such sole
Governors, where the civil Magistrate has his place. Before God added the
Civil Governor to the Church, there might happily have been some use of such
Lay Elders (yet I see no Scripture for proof of it) but God giving once Kings
and Princes to be of the Church, the weaker government might give place. And
indeed, the perverse holding of a Lay-eldership, as a settled function of
Christ's, it has ministered occasion to the Anabaptists, of thrusting the
Magistrate out of the Church, as having no use of his sword within.

The Deacons are called to assist the Presbiters, as Evangelists did the
Apostles: and as in the Temple of Solomon, the Common Levites attended the
Priests: Seven such were ordained to the Church in Ierushalem; but upon the
persecution of Stephen (one of the seven) the Church being scattered, Act. 8.
12 and 15. 39. 40.
Philip one of the Deacons, comes to Samaria, and there not only preaches,
but also baptiseth. Unto whom, some of the Apostles repaired, conferring upon
the Christians, the guiftes of the Holy Ghost. After that time, Philip might
well become an Evangelist, and so be assistant unto the Apostles, (as John
Mark* was to Barnabas, and Silas to Paul;) but before that, he was but a
plain Deacon, and as a Christian Deacon, he so preached and baptized; even
else where, then in Ierushalems Church, whereto he was at first ordained.

Now, leaving to contend about words (which the Apostle forbids to Timothj)
what difference of ministry is there between Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, (the extraordinary sort) and these of Pastors, (for so the new
Testament Ministers be also called) and put thereto also the Deacons, which in
Ephe. 4. may be very well meant in the term Doctor in Ephesians. 4. 11. is but
the Deacon. Unto this sense, Ambrose comes very near, when he says: They
may be such as by Lectures accustomed to instruct youth, according to the
manner of the sewes ( Super Ephesians. 4.) according to the manner of the
Synagogue. Super 1. Cor. 12. And such in the Synagogue, no doubt, were Levites.
In Ambrose his sense, were Pantaenus, then his scholar Clemens, then this man's
scholar Origin, of the Christian schole in Alexandria. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 9. and
6. 6. and 6. 8.
Doctors, seeing Bishops and Deacons be the whole Ministry in 1. Tim. 4.
where the Apostle precisely describes the callinges; as also in Philip. 1. 1.
where the salutations from the Apostle, runs thus; To the Saints of Philippj
(meaning the body of the people) with the Bishops and Deacons, intending the
whole Ministry in them two words: What difference (I say) is there, in the
matter of their ministry? Apostle, is in English, One that is sent: Whereto?
to minister the word and both Sacraments; and so does the Bishop, Presbiter or
Pastor. All the rest minister the same word; and preaching must also of
necessity minister Baptism. For the Deacon doing that (as before,) and he
being the least, it follows that the greater had no less power to do that:
specially, seeing not only in the Commission (Math. 28. 19.) Preaching and
Baptism be conjoined: but also, for that the Apostle evidently makes
Preaching the greater, 1. Cor. 1. 17. and necessarily it must be so, seeing the
Word is greater then the Seal, for that by the word of Faith, some soul can
be saved without the Seal, as before; but none by the Seal, without the Word.
As for the Sacrament of Communion, it can only be ministered to a Communion of
people; and therefore cannot be fitly administered, but by him that is
Superintendent to such a Communion of people. And that is by the Apostle that
rules over the Whole, or the Pastor that rules over a Part. Yet seeing
Prophets and Evangelists were to assist the Apostle, and Deacons to assist the
Pastor, it cannot follow otherwise, but the Masters of the work calling for
the help of their Ministers, they might also follow in the administration of
the other Sacrament, though not go before as Presidentes. And as the
Scriptures intend all this, so God has preserved the true footesteps of it,
through all ages in the Churches, which none but fantastic Nouelistes, can
but admit with Reverence. And the not admittance hereof, what has it bgeot in
the Factions? Even so many cross opinions and unresolved positions, touching
Callinges, and duty of Called, as themselves begin to stink in the
nosethrilles of their own Disciples. Which sadly also observed, will cause the
Ingenuous minded hereafter, not so easily to blot and blurre the lines of
Antiquity.

As for the Widows mentioned in 1. Tim. 5. they are not to be counted with
Church Officers. Once, for that neither they, nor any other Woman, was to
speak in the Congregation. Besides, for that the greatness of their years,
being threescore, before they might be received; as also their impotencie of
outward means considered, ere they might be admitted; do argue that they were
taken in, not so much to minister, as to be ministered unto. Touching whom,
Ignatius ad Polyca^pum.
a most ancient Father thus writes: Let not the Widows be neglect^^, but next
to the Lord, see that thou do care for them. Such a Widow was Phaebe of
Cenchrea; and such a one under the Law, Anna the Prophetess (some 84. years
Widow) who continued in the Temple night and day, with fastinges and prayers.
An Apish imitation whereof, the order of Nuns quasi Nons; as not being, these
they seem to be.
Nunns is in the Church of Rome.

As for Philips Daughters, Propetisses, that was a fulfilling of the Prophecy
in Joel. 2. 28. and a thing not common to the Church in their kind. Unto old
mother Zion, such was Deborah in the time of the Judges, and Huldah under the
reign of Josiah. Such a sweet harmony is between the Mother Church and her
Daughter, whether we respect that is Substantial, or otherwise Accidental.
Are they not then well helped up, that leave the Analogicall frame of both
Testaments, for digging to themselves Cesternes, that will never hold Water?
Ier. 6. 16.
They should (as Jeremy advises) have stood in the ways, and so have inquired
of the good and old way. But leaving these ways of sacred tradition, they
never have been able, to find out the Good and old way delivered in the
Scriptures. For, Pro. 30. 17.
as Agur teaches; The eye that mocketh the Father, and despises the
instruction of his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley pick it out, and the young
Eagles eat it. Have we seen the eye of judgment put out of so many
Schismatikes, and will we not reverence before Gods judgment, and take heed of
Going out, as our Savior premonished?

CHAP. viij.
Further Considerations touching Bishops and Deacons.
SAint Paul, being to instruct Timothj (an 2. Tim. 4. 5. with Act. 16.
Evangelist, and yet for a time after, the 1. Tim. 1. 3. etc. Tit. 1. 5.
Arch or Chiefe-Bishop of the Church at Ephesus, as Titus was in Creete,) he
in the third Chapter lays out the Qualification which is requirable in a true
Christian Minister. And this he does; first, in a description of the Bishop;
secondly, of a Deacon.

For a Bishop (in English, Super-intendent, Superuisor, or Ouer-seer; under
which term is contained also the term Elder: the first, arguing the Duty
of his place; the other, the Gravity of his years, beseeming such a place;
for in the ancient Church our Mother, none served at the Alter, till he were
aged Numb. 4. 3. etc. with Cha. 8. 24. 25. 26. for at 25. they entered, but for
being schooled in that work.
30. years, as our Savior would not enter upon the public exercise of
Preaching, till he began to be about 30. And then at 50. they were discharged
the business of the Alter, but mean time lived honorably of the Alter) for
this Bishop, he says thus generally in the first verse; That is a faithful
saying; If any man (oregetaj) do appe^ite (Episcopes) a Bishopric (Epethumej)
he minds (^alou ergou) a good (or fair or commendable) Work. Intimating
thus much, that as it is lawful to appetite an Episcopal place; so the place
is not more honorable, Honos, Onus.
then the execution of duties, onerable; that is, burdensome.

In the second place, he comes to his qualification; touching which he
propounds many particulars; some Affirmative, telling what he must be: some
Negative, saying what he must not be. In the dispatch whereof, he propoundes
unto us a more perfect Bishop, then ever Cicero did his Orator. For his Mind,
he must be apt to teach, and no Neophyt* etc. For his Body, he must be
Kosmion, composite, ornate, neat, not slouingly; and therein a true
Micro-cosmos. The translation ( Modest) does not fully express it. And in this
word, there may be reference to the description of Leui^s ministry, who were
not to be mutilate, bursten, etc. For Oiconomie, he must be abled to govern in
his own house. etc. In a word, he must be unreprovable, vncheckable; not
only of these that be within (that is of the Church) but also, of these that
be without.

Me thinks, now I hear the Schismatique euomating this Objection. True, he
must be such a one; but no Minister in England is such a one, therefore no
Mister of England, a true minister.

I answer, first by Retortion; but no minister of Anabaptisme, Brownisme,
Smithisme, etc. is such a Minister: therefore no true Minister of them.
Secondly, I answer by Explication, thus: In English we use the words Must and
Ought, indifferently for the same; yet, sometimes, we (by the word Must) do
inioyne a thing of absolute necessity; when as again, by the word Ought, we
intend a duty owing, but not of absolute necessity to be done. The Greek
word Dej, (a word of one Syllable) has as large use, whereupon some have
answered, that the Apostle sets out, what a man the Minister ought to be;
not what he needs must be. But this answer seems unto me, ouer-weake to
underprop a crazie-conscience. The impersonall Dej, as it comes of Deo to bind;
so in this place* it imports that whereto the Minister is bound and tied, by
the very law of God himself. For as our Savior enioyneth (in Math. 5.) every
Christian to be perfect, as the heavenly Father is perfect: (and yet so
perfect, none in the militant Church can be; no, not in that one particular of
loving an enemy, which there is pressed) so here the like for a Christian
Minister. The consideration whereof, caused the Apostle Paul to cry out, and
say: Who is sufficient for these things? Christian, and Christian Minister,
therefore in this case, are continually to run unto Christ; Hieromy. ad
Ocean. calls it, Speculum sacerdotij.
and in him, to seek up their perfection. Jerome therefore (very iudiciously
and truly) calls it: The Priests Looking-glass; which beholding, thereby
shall be occasioned ( Dolere ad deformitatem, gaudere ad pulchritudinem) to
sorrow for wantes, as also to rejoice in graces proportionable.

Hereupon it necessarily follows, that as in a true visible Christian, we
considerd what was Essentially required to the true being thereof; so must we
as necessarily consider, what tends to the Very being, of a true Chrstian
Minister. That is done in a very few words. For as there must first be in him
that, which makes him a true Christian; so secondly, there must be in him
somewhat besides, whereby he becomes also, a true Minister: And that is,
these two things; Calling, and Aptness to teach. For the Calling, (seeing he
is but an ordinary Minister) an ordinary form of Calling suffices: and that
can only be had of the Church. To such a calling appertains; 1. Nomination
of the party. 2. Election. 3. Approbation of the party. 4. Ordination.


To Nominate and Elect if the Lesser may do it, then the Greater much more may
do it. In the Church of Ierushalem, was generally so learned a people (most
being Jews, ever trained up of Children in the Scriptures, as was Timothj the
son of a Iewesse) as no marvel though the Election of Matthias and the
Dorotheus says, that the Deacons, Act. 6. were of the 70. Disciples.
7. Deacons were committed unto them; specially having so many fair marks to
shoot at, as were the 70. Disciples; and themselves also ready to further such
Election.

For Approbation and Ordination, that remains in other persons, greater then
the former. And thereupon it was, that not only these of Ierushalems Church so
elected, were brought to the Apostles for Approbation of their choice, and
Ordination to the work: but also S. Paul left Timothj in Ephesus, and Titus in
Creet, for looking to the same things, with special charge to Lay hands on
no man suddenly. Heb. 6. 2.
Which imposition of hands, the Apostle to the Hebrews, numbers for a
principle of the Christian Faith. Which cannot be otherwise then by that sign,
some grace was intended; as that the hand of God should be with the party so
lawfully called. In which respect, not only Aug. contra Parmen. b. 2. c. 12.
Calvin. Institut. b. 4. chapter 19. section 28. so in b. 3. c. 3. Sect. 16. and chapter
14. ^ect. 20. Bucer. de vi, and vsu. min. Melanct. in com^un. loc^s St.
Szegedin. in com. loc.
Augustine, but also Calvin, Buc^r, Melancthon, and others, are bold to
pronounce it a Sacrament. And what does Dudley Fenner (in his sacra Theologia)
less when as he writes thus? And by this ceremony, the chosen are confirmed,
as being by the hand of God separate to the function, and to be ordained with
guistes; which if they shall fulfill, He is continually in all temptations to
be present with them: But otherwise, to be by all means a sharp revenger. The
Choosers also are (thereby) informed, that they receive the man by the hand of
God, and that to him they must be subject. Nor must it be slipped over, that
this of M. Fenners, was M. Cartwrights also: which well may be pressed, for
curbing some their followers, that now are come to make Pastors and Doctors,
without any Imposition of hands: for so was Fr. Johnson, and M. Greenwood made
of some in London. True it is, that about some five or six years after, Fr.
Johnson coming to Amsterdame, had hands there imposed by the lay people, his
own children (they know who then writ against it) contrary to the Apostles
Canon; Heb. 7. 7.
which runs thus: Without all contradiction, the Lesser is blessed of the
Greater. And so without all contradiction, the Father asked the Children
blessing; and so his (or any the like ordination) more Antichristian, and more
cross to the Canon, then any Ordination issuing from the Pope ever has been.

I know, they will for them selves plead thus. In the beginning of a Church,
the case is changed: For seeing there is no other Minister to ordain, the
people may do it, as in Numb. 8. The Israelites lay hands upon the Levites. I
answer.

1. First, it can never be proved by Scripture, that of Christians there ought
to be such a Replantation, though a Reformation.

2. Second, he after so many years coming by his Ordination, it must follow,
that before, he was no Pastor, but a private man; and so a prophaner of Gods
ordinance.

3. The Israelites did that they did, upon a direct precept from God; so did
not the Lay people in this: For as the Ministry of the New Testament, begun
without all Lay-ordination, (Christ himself installing the first, and they
installing others) so, neither to the Lay people was left any such necessity,
seeing there should always be a stretched out line of Imposition, so well as of
Baptism.

4. Fourthly, the Israelites do not there Ordain the Levites: for neither any
Leuite might, nor yet durst he come unto the Alter, upon that laying on of
hands. Their laying on hands, was but their Approbation (as sometimes holding
up of hands, and scrutinie of voices be) for the Ordination came after that (as
Peter Martyr well observes) when as Aaron (the Hy-priest) takes them at the
hands of the people* Pet. Mart. on 1. Sam. 7. and in his common places, Class.
4. sect. 19. of Plaic. 1.
and then with his hands, shakes them before the Lord, and to the Lord gives
them. And thus the Separist is to seek for a Minister, notwithstanding
whatsoever is said of H. l. for the lack of that Ceremony.

Unto the said Laying on of hands, it is not of absolute necessity, to have
more or fewer hands. And therefore it is, that sometimes all the Apostles do
it; as in Act. 7. (for in Act. 1. we read not of the Ceremony, and yet well
may be, it was used, so well as in Act. 13. 3.) and so sundry of them, termed
a Presbytery in 1. Tim. 4. 14. Sometimes again, it is performed by two; as in
Act. 14. by Paul and Barnabas. Sometimes by one (there being no other to
assist;) as by Timothy or Titus in their places. The equity whereof was
delivered by Moses, when as Aaron alone Ordained the Levites; Leuit. 8.
as Aaron himself was before ordained of Moses. Oporte^ and Diacon^s
mysteriorum Christi Ministros, per omnia placere: nec enim ciborum and potuum
Ministri sunt, sed Ecclesiae dei administratores. Ignatius ad ^rallianos.
And so, between the Mother and Daughter Churches, the Harmony still holds.

For Deacons, there is required in Act. 6. that 1. they be men of honest
report, 2. full of the Holy Ghost, and of Wisdom. And in 1. Tim. 3. he
presses them two, in more particulars. The very proportion of qualities
considered, it can never reasonably be thought, that such divine guifted
persons, should only attend on Tables, or in taking and giving a little Money
or Meat to the poor. There need no such wisdom and learning for that. And
when it is further remembered (as before) that some of the 70. Disciples were
chosen to this Deaconship, and they being all of them Preachers, it can never
enter into the heart of a reasonable man, to think that they should be pulled
down from an higher Chair to a lower. Nam qui prouehitur, prouehitur a Mi^o^j
ad Majus. Doubtless then, they (as their name signifies) did service, not
only to the people in case of Meat and Money; but also, to the Bishops in the
case of Doctrine and Sacrament. And hereof we are further assured, in that all
Antiquity puts no other kind of Deacons into our hands, and for such respect
does diverse times call them Levites. And thus the old and new Testament, is
still more harmonious.

If since the Ten grievous Persecutions, the Ministers of the one and other
Order, have come in the world to greater estate in outward things (a grievous
thing to soar eyes) what wonder is it, when for 300. years after Christ, the
Church was under the government of Heathen Tyrants, enemies to Christianity?
Soon after 300. years, Constantine the Great, became Christian; by whose
example and motive, many inferior Kings became Christians also. Whereupon
followed, freedom of the Faith, and peace and plenty in all Churches. Then
our Fathers counted it an holy duty, to build material Churches, and to
endowe the Spiritual with every good thing wanting. True it is, that such
temporary blessings have since that time, been foulely profaned. What then?
So has Heaven and Earth, and all their continentes; shall we therefore spurn
at the creature? Indeed, while some so spurn, others sacrilegiously snatch to
themselves all. To the Minister it should be but an Idolathite; but to my
Church-robber, it is a very good commodity. The Fathers giving (they say) did
sin, and the Sons snatching all away (it may be, to maintain a Hound and
an Whore) they must be said, to commit a virtue. But while I live, let me
imitate that supposed vice of my Father, rather then this uncouth virtue of my
Brother.

CHAP. ix.
Touching Word and Sacraments.
THE Word whereabout the Minister is to be employed, is that Book called Bible
(of the Greek word Biblos, a Book) as being the peculiar Book, advanced
above all; as Israel above the Nations. This Book is distinguished into two
parts, Old and New. The Old part contains (not all the words that God spoke
to the Fathers and Prophets) but, the substance of all which he spoke unto
them, till the promised Messiah came. The New part (commonly called the New
Testament) it contains likewise, a substance of all Gods Will, delivered
thencefoorth by Christ and his Apostles or near followers. The Old part, was
written in Adams tongue, the language of succeeding Israel. The New part, was
written in the tongue of Iauan, the fourth Son of Iaphet; it being in
Christ's time, a tongue very universal.

This Book being a Creature, Eusebius. ex Philo. Mirabile mihi videtur, duob*
annoru^ millib. imo maiore tempore iam fere transacto; non exquisitissime
annorum possum dicere numerum; nec verbum vnum in lege illius esse immutatum,
sed c^^ties vnusquisque Iude^rum morictur, quam legi Mosaic^e derogabit.
and in the hands of sinful Creatures, it necessarily follows, that
sometimes it is likely to undergo some injury. Yet such is the watchful
providence of God over this his Book, as still it has been preserved to the
Churches assured comfort, magre every Epimanique Tyrant and Heretic.

The Minister out of this Book, is to take knowledge of Gods Will for works
of holiness and righteousness; and afterward deliver the same unto the
people, specially every such day, as Saint John calls the Lords day. But
because no Minister (since the Canonical writers, that is, since the Prophets
and Apostles) has attained to perfect knowledge in the former said two
Tongues; as also, for that in every Minister is some remnant of natural
dullness of heart (as was in the Luke. 24. 25.
Emauites for understanding all that is written) it so comes to pass (for we
but see in part, and prophecy in part) that many times (and in many things,
we sin all) the Minister aberreth from the Of the word Canon, the Scriptures
be called Canonical, that is. Regular.
Canon; that is, from the Word, which is the rule of Faith. And as one
Minister, so every Minister, whereby it comes to pass, that no one universal
consent, could ever be had, for so much as the Translation thereof. The
Septuagint, went far from the Hebrew; as it seems of purpose, to collogue
with the Grecian-heathen in somethings; specially in computation of Ages. The
Greek and Latin Christians (as may appear by the Fathers) sent about
multitudes of Translations, to the offense of many. Of late time, the Popes of
Rome have set foot into the work. Sixtus the Fifth, he mendes and marres as he
could. Clemens the eight, he does more. Yet when all comes to all, the Council
of Trident concludes, Aug. de doctr. Chr. and in Ep. 19. ad Hieromy. Hieromy.
ad Sun. etc
that the corrupt vulgar shall only bide authentike in Schools and Pulpits.
Notwithstanding their great Arias Montanus provoke to the Hebrew and Greek
(alleging Jerome and Augustine for like minded) saying of the Latin; that it
is filthily corrupted ( Latina sacrorum Bibliorum Interpretatio faede
corrumpitur) and so he boldly testifies in an Epistle to the I^terlinear
Bible, printed at the charges of the K. of Spain: the very best work that
ever he atchiued, with gold of the Indies.

If any one deny Subscription, because in his judgment, it is not all one
with the Original (for our Church presses no Subscription absolute, as to
every particular; for she believes and teaches, that the best Church that
ever was, is, or shall be; has, does, and shall err;) then hearken what
absurdities follow.

1. Such a one, so intends a perfection and absolute purity in man's labors
here; and so becomes plainly, an heretical Puritan^.

2. Then such a one condemns, or at least calls into question the credit of
Christ and his Apostles, in the use of the Septuagint; who otherwise (specially
to the Jews) could have followed the Hebrew straightly, and not any
Translation. Melanct. in his preface to the 70 printed at Basil. Anno. 1545.
Melanchton in his Preface to the Septuagint; commendes it to the Church, by
reason the Apostle Paul quotes diverse Scriptures directly from it. And upon
this ground (among others) Present Pastor of the Separation, whose Vicaris
Henry Ainsworth.
Franc. Johnson (being advised by one that talked with him thereabouts in the
Clincke at London) did press the use of our singing Psalms (neglected before
of his people for Apocrypha;) whereupon his Congregation publicly in their
meetinges used them, till they could have them translated into verse, by some
of their Teachers: Which of some of them after was attempted; but with what
barbarous success, I am not ignorant. M. Tho. Settle in Norffolke, can with
me witness this, so well as some resident now in London.

3. Then also follows, that no Subscription at all is to be made, to any
thing which the wisest and godlyest can do in that kind; seeing a plea may be
had aagainst all, as sauouring of man's weakness, in this life inseparable.
And then the next turn will be, to turn (not so good as Turk, but) plain
Atheist.

4. Then will follow, that neither such an excepter against such Subscription,
can press his people to receive for truth, any his Prayers, sermons, or
prescription of Orders; seeing he also is a man, and subject to error so well
as others.

5. Then will follow, that never we can have assurance of Faith: till either
God speak thereof unto us audibly from Heaven; or stir up some miraculous
Ministers, that may draw us a new Bible in our own Language. For if they
should draw it into another language, then we are as far off as we were. All
these be inevitable Consequentes, and fruits good enough beseeming rending
Wolves, clad in Sheep skins: under a pretext of synceritie, laboring to
bring in a far more palpable darkness, then ever the Romanist did, in his
intricate Latin service.

For the Sacraments peculiar unto the New testament (as for Heb. 6. 2.
Imposition of hands, it has in common with the Old. And let it be thought
off as it shall, sure I am, that the base esteem of it, does cause the
Ministers to be the more basely esteemed) the said Sacraments be two; Baptism,
and the Lords Supper. Baptism comes in place of Circumcision; and both of
them the Seal of that Righteousness which is by Faith; and therefore the
second as communicable to Infants, as the first: and through the mercy of our
Lord, to old and young, far more easy. The Lords Supper comes in room of
the Pas-ouer, and exhibiteth accordingly, Christ Jesus crucified, for feeding
of our souls. As the Fathers under the Law were made partakers of him, by
Faith; so are we. As herein they were led thereto by External signs; so are
we. And as we read not of any one amongst them (no not in the Idolatrous times)
that ever dreamed of eating the Promised seed corporally; so, it should be a
Christians shame, to seek union with Christ in such a Caniball manner, far
dissenting from the nature of Faith. Such a fleshly eating, if ever it had been
fitting, had rather been adapted to their times, wherein (as Children) they
were informed by most palpaple rudiments; we being called much rather, to
worship God in Spirit and spiritually. And so the Old and New Testament do (as
Mother and Daughter) kiss each other. Let Schismatikes be ashamed, to put them
asunder.

Touching the Number, let the Learned take these testimonies.
August. Augustine.
Ep. 108.] Sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis
significatione prestantiss. societatem noui populi (Christus) colligauit.

Rupert. Rupert.
l. 3. de Sapientia, c 1.] Sunt duo Sacramenta maxima, Baptisma scilicet and
viuifica corporis and sanguinis eius Mensa.

Beda in c. Beda.
19. John. and ex Augustino] Aperuit latus, vt illic quod ammodo ostium vitae
panderetur, vnde sacramenta ecclesiae manaucrunt.

Cardinal. Bessarion. Al. ab Ales.
Bess. de sac. cucharis.] Haec duo Sacramenta in Euangelio manifest tradita
legimus. The like has Alexander ab Ales, part. 4. quest. 8. artic. 2. and he
auerres it, Ex fluxione sanguinis and aquae. And from 1. Ioh. 5. Tres
perhibent* etc.

Touching Baptism, we have little controversy, therefore this.
Naz. Nazianzen. Chry. conj.
orat. 3. in sanctum lauacrum.] Omni aetati Baptisma conuenit.

Chrysostomo. coniunct. in Math. 4. hom. 5.] Constat in nobis quinque
baptismata esse; vnum in verbo -- Secundum ^n Aqua -- Tertium autem in spiritu
-- Quartum in igne -- Quintum in Morte -- Dominus, postquam ^aptizatus est in
verbo, factus est sub lege. A Iohanne autem in Aqua a Patre vero in Spiritu:
^unc a spiritu ducitur in desertum, vt baptizetur in igne tentationis.
postmodum baptizandus in Morte. A certain Rom^sh-priest in the Gatehouse,
wagering some Gold with me, that more Baptismes then three, would not be found
in any Father or ancient Writer; I did show him these Five, out of the said
Book, being lent unto us of the Keeper M. Okey. But Gold or Silver I could get
none of the Priest.

Cyp. Cyprian.
l. 4. Ep. 7. disputat. Baptismum valere, sieve Aqua perfundantur, sieve toti
immergantur qui baptizantur.

Idem de ablutione ped.] Baptismum repeti, Ecclesiasticae prohibent regulae.

Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
in heb. 6.] Qui secundo seipsum baptizat, secundo Christum crucifigit.

Gesilb. Giselbert.
altercat. cap. 1.] Quid de salute eorum coniectare possumus, qui vel ante
octauum diem mortui sunt, vel in deserto intra 40. annos nati, mortui sunt?
Credendum est quod sola fide saluati sunt; sieve propria, qui credere potuere;
sieve aliena, qui credere non potuerunt.

Touching the Lords Supper.
August. Augustine.
in Ioh. tract. 59] Cum caeteri Apostoli manducarent panem Dominum, Judas panem
domini, non panem dominum come deb^t.

Nyst. Nyssen.
de perf. Christianj forma.] Escam autem and spiritualem potum Dominum
appellans Diu^s Apostolus nos commonefacit, vt naturam humanam non simplicem,
sed ex m^nte sensuque compositam, cogitemus; cuius quidem vtrique parti sit
proprius cibus; solida n. esca corpus nutritur, spirituali alimento valetudo
animi conseruatur.

Cyr. Cyrill.
in Ioh. l. 6. c. 14.] Hinc animaduertendum, quod etsi corporis sui praesentiam
hinc subduxerit, Maiestate tamen Diuinitatis adest.

Gelas. Gelasius.
contra Eut. de duab. naturis.] Certe, Sacramenta quae sumimus, corporis and
sanguinis Christi, diuina res est: propter quod and per eadem diuinae effici^ur
consortes naturae. Et tamen non desinit substantia vel natura panis and vini.
Et certe, image and similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi, in action
mysteriorum celebrantur.

Rup. Rupert.
in Ioh. l. 7. c. 7.) Panis iste visibilis cum inuisibili filio Dei vnum factus
est, Nam filius dej (Deus and Homo) habet in se virtutem effectiuam, qua sibi
vniat panem istum visibilem.

Barnard. Barnard.
ser. de caenado.) Speciem panis aliquando rodit Sorer paruissimus, Christianus
recipit pessimus: virtutem Gratiae spiritua^is, non nisi praedestinatus recipit.

Giselb. altercat. Geselbert.
c. 1.) Sacramentum est exterius elementum, Res vero Sacramenti, Gratia
interior, quae inuisibiliter percipitur, and inuisibiliter operatur.

Haymo in Apoc. Haymo.
l 1. c 1.) Sacramentum mysterium est, vbi aliud videtur and aliud
intelligitur. Sicut (verbi gratia) in Christi corp^re, vbi cum videatur panis
vera est caro. Vnde ipsi sacerdotes dicunt: Sacramenta quae sumpsimus, Domine
proficiant nobis ad salutem corpor^is and Animae.

Martialis Cephas (said to be an Apostle, Martial.
and of Benjamin) in Ep ad Burdegalenses, cap. 3.] Sacerdotes vitam vobis
tribuunt, in Calice and viuo pane -- Cap. 4.] Nolite autem vnum and idem putare
istam humanam and diuinam escam quae nobis visibilis est, sed tamen in fide
perfecta, tota caelestis. Per vnam, enim corpus, per alteram Anima viuit.

Scot. Scotus.
in 4. sent. D. 11 qu. 3.] Veritas Eucharistiae saluari potest, sine ista
transubstantiatione -- Substantia panis cum suis Accidentib, aeque potest ee^
signun, sicut sola accidentia: Imo, Magis, quia substantia panis sub specib.
Magis est nutrimentum, quam Accidentia: Ergo magis representat corpus Christi
in ratione nutrimenti spiritualis. So that, if the Church of Rome had not
concluded Transubstantiation, this Schooleman would not have had one word for
it.

Durand. Durand*
in 4. sent. d. 11. artic 14. Patet ergo, quod e^ temerarium dicere, quod
corpus Christi diuina virtute non possit esse in sacramento, nisi per
conuersionem panis in ipsum. But because the Council of Held about An. Dom*
1215
Lateran (Vel potius Concilium Latrans) did determine otherwise, therefore (as
he confesses in the end of the 15, Article) he must be otherwise minded.

Magist. Lombard.
sent. l. 3. did. 22.] Totus Christus, non totum Christi, est vbique And this
master of Sentences, disputing, An formalis, an substantialis vel alterius
generis, definire non sufficio.
Qualis erat conuersio panis and sang. he concludes thus: Definire non
sufficio: l. 4. did. 11. a. But had not the master of Sentences lived and
writ before that Council, he must have defined on it (and that as should
please Pope Innocent the third) or his School would have been set on flame
with a Faggot.

Picos Mirand. P. Mirandula.
Apolog. quest. 6. from Damascens words, alluding to the Coal in Isa. 6.]
Carbo autem, lignum simplex non est, sed vnitum igni: ita and panis communionis
non panis simplex est, sed vnitus Deitate. It was well the Pie had not his
tongue pulled out.

Wicl. Io* Wicliffe*
vt sc^bit Widefordus in lib. dedicat. Tho. Cant. Archiep.] Sicut Johannes fuit
figurative Helias, and non personaliter: sic panis est figuraliter corpus
Christi, and non naturaliter corpus Christi. Et absque omni ambiguitate,
figuratiua est locutio (hoc est corpus meum) sicut illa in verbis Christi,
Johannes ipse est Helias.

CHAP. ix.
Touching things of an indifferent Nature. etc.
SVch things we say to be of an Indifferent nature, (speaking
ecclesiastically, and to the present purpose) as for the doing, or not doing
whereof, we have no express word of God in particular; only, by some general
rule, we are led to use our Christian Reason, for examining whether the doing
or using such a thing, may stand with Gods glory, and our neighbors good. The
Rule was given by the Apostle in 1. Cor. 14. 40. when having spoken of Schools
of Christian learning, and having set down some particular Rules of Order, he
leaves the rest unto Christian discretion, under this general rule; Let all
things be done (Euschemonos, kaj cata taxin) decently, and according to order.

The General rule so commanding Decorum and Order, and the particulars
thereunto belonging, being not of God in his written-word expressed; it so
necessarily follows, that our own Christian reason herein must be the
Determiner. And the same particulars so concluded we are to say of them (as the
Apostle does) herein; 1. Cor. 7. 12. 25.
I speak, and not the Lord: expounded afterward thus: I have no commandment
of the Lord; but I give mine advice. And upon this rule it was, that the
Apostle became all unto all, (Jew and Gentile) for winning some: that is, in
things of an indifferent nature (neither simply commanded nor simply
forbidden of the Lord) he applied himself; using, or not using; doing, or not
doing the thing, as thereby he might be of the winning hand, in furtheraunce of
some good.

And of such nature, be Orders in the Church: As, Standing, Kneeling, Lying
prostrate, at the time of Prayer: Standing, S^tting, or Kneeling on the receipt
of the Lords Supper: Sitting or Standing, Preaching: Leauened or Unleavened
bread in the Communion: This or that hour for Meeting: Forms of Garment at
the Church or abroad, etc. touching all which, the Apostle shows, that
Decency and Order must be observed; but for the particulars, he has no
particular iniunction from the Lord. But when the Church has concluded of the
particulars, then it shall be a mighty sin to oppose (as for the Child to
oppose to the Mothers honest advice, or the Subject to his Princes lawful
determination) and this falls out, rather in respect of the things Use, then
Nature. David had no particular precepts from Moses or the Lord, for such and
such which ordinances are called properly in Ezra 3. 10. the Handy work of
David, ( Gnal jedei David) translated of the 70. Epiche^ras. Of like nature is
the Feastiuall day Purim. in Hester, 9. enjoined by Mardecaj. Such also the
Feast of Dedication kept of our Savior in S. John. 10. 22. etc. though
instituted 1. Maccab. 4. 59.) by Judas Maccabeus, a Leuite, and an usurper of
Iudahs sword. The Brownist calls shutting up of shop on such a day, A mark
of the Beast in England: and yet himself on such a day, does in the
Low Countries shut up shop. Who is the Beast the^? Caelum, non actum mutant
qui trans mare currunt.
Musical Instruments, or such and such distributive classes of Priests,
Singers, etc. Nor had Solomon any express command for making the two Pillars,
Iachin Boaz, so many Caldrons united with the molten Sea, such Knops and
Flowers as beautified the Pillars, etc. And yet, he that should have been an
opposer to these particulars, should have sinned mightily against the King, and
so consequently against God: for the breach of the fifth Commandment, is a
violation to the whole Decalogue.

Objection. If the King or Church should inioyne the Minister to wear such
Garments as a Devil wears in a Play, can it lawfully be undergone, etc? I
answer: First, it has been said, that it is no Play, that has not a Devil
and a Fool. The Schismatique found out the Devil: and knew we the Obiectors
name, we could as easily find out the Fool. Secondly, what proportion is
there between Decency, and Vndecencie? Or think they it to be a true Church?
yea, think they that in the Churches Synod (or in the body of the Parliament)
that there is a reasonable spirit, that put a case of such absurdity, as no
reasonable spirit (though unchristian) ever yet committed? Had this fellow had
no more wit to hide his name, then to cover his shame, ten to one, they of S.
Dunstanes would hire him to be the Fool to S. Dunstanes Devil in the Pageant.
If I have answered a Fool according to his foolishness, I have but followed
the precept of Solomon in Prou. 26.

For a Corallarie, observe these Writers.
August. Augustine.
in l. 2. de sermon. in monte ( collected by Beda on Romans 14.) Sunt quaedam facta
Media quae ignoramus quo animo fiant (quia, and bono and malo fieri possunt) de
quib. temerarium est iudicare, maxim vt condemnemus. -- And in Ep. 118. c. 2.
ad Ianuar. Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores iniungitur,
Indifferenter est habendum, and pro eorum (inter quos viuitur) societate,
seruandum est.

Mart. Mar. Bucer,
Bucer. l. 1. de regno Christi, cap. 13. Ecclesijs Christi sua est permittenda
libertas, quo vnaquaeque cum prefiniat modum and rationem sacrarum lectionum,
interprelationem scripturarum, Catechisini, administrationis sacramentorum,
praecum, and psalmorum: item public peccantium reprehensionis, etc. Quam
posset quaelibet ecclesia confidere suis populis maxim conducturam. etc.
Exhorting afterward, Vt quantum possi^, in his reb. observes Conformit^tem.
And in script. Angl. page 454.) Has etsi (supple ceremonias) etsi seruare and
omittere, etiam extra^ candalum licet, tamen, si ex proteruia aut petulantia,
quis ordinem publica authoritate Constitutum contemnat, and turbet, non leuiter
peccat.

Calvin. Calvin.
in 1. Cor. 11. 2. Scimus vn^cuique ecclesiae liberum esse politiae forma^
instituere sibi aptam and vtilem, quia Dominus Nihil Certj prescripserit.

Melan. Ph. Melan.
in Commun. locis.) Cum Ministerium diuinitus ordinatum, debeat esse publicum
and externum, opus est aliquib. humanis ordinationibu^.

Bezae Ep. Beza.
24. etc. Res alioqui per se Medi^, mutant quoda^modo naturam, cum aliquo
legitimo mandato, vel precipiantur, vel prohibentur: quia neque contra iustum
preceptum omitti possunt si precipiantur; neque contra interdictum fieri, si
prehibeantur -- Nam etsi conscientias proprie solus Deus ligat, tamen quatenus
Ecclesia Ordinis and Decori, adeoque aedificationis rationem habens, leges
aliquas de rebus Medijs rite condit, eiusmodi leges pijs omnibus sunt
obseruandae and eatenus Conscientias ligant, vt nemo sciens and ^rudens
rebe^landi animo, possit absque peccato, vel facere quae ita prohibentur: vel
omittere quae sic praecipiuntur.

And Upon this ground, M. Burges.
John Burgess went (in his answer to our King) when as he says: I do think
and believe, touching the government by Bishops, as with us in England; or by
ruling Elders, as in other Churches of God: that neither of them was prescribed
by the Apostles of Christ, neither of them is repugnaunt to the word of God,
but may well and profitably be used, if more fault be not in the persons, then
in the callinges themselves. Secondly, I do hold and am persuaded of the
Cross and Surplice, that as our Church uses them, they be not unlawful. etc.
And this man standing as he does, his testimony (not meddling with the
application) is available against the factions. Sir Fran. Bacon, in Adu. of
lear. b. 2.
Of Fundamental points, the league runs thus: He that is not with us, it
against us: But of points not fundamental, thus: He that is not against us,
is with us. And so, that Rite, Fashion, and Form that is not fundamental in
Faith, is not against the Church, but with it.

CHAP. x.
Touching the Churches Keys.
THE Churches Keys, is a certain power of shutting the door of mercy to the
impenitent, and of opening the door of mercy to the soul that is penitent.
This power our Savior promises to S. Peter in Math. 16. 19. And is given to
that Apostle and the whole Church in S. John 20. 21. when as the Lord breaths
upon them, saying; Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins soever you remit, they
are remitted unto them; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Whereby
appears, that this power is stinted; that is, is not given to the Church to
be exercised, otherwise then she shall therein be led by the Quum ipsi
remi^tu^t, aut detinent, Spiritus qui habi^at in eis, per ^o^ remitter and
de^inet. Cyril. in Ioh. 20. Isa. 22.
Holy Ghost. The Phrase seems to allude unto Eliakim and Shebnah, Stewards to
Iudahs king, upon whose shoulders, the Key of David was laid, for opening and
shutting the treasury, at and for the Kings pleasure. All which is expounded
in Revel. 3. 7. to appertain in the first place, to Christ our Lord; who is
the true Eliakim (which sounds in English) My God standing up; or, My strong
God of Resurrection.

The Rule of proceeding in this business, is laid down in Mat. 18. where for
finding up the lost Sheep, (or sinner) the Lord enioyneth, first, private
brotherly admonishment (specially in a case private;) And not so preuayling,
then by communicating the case to one or two more; which neither preuayling,
then to bring it to the Church. And if the Church cannot prevail for bringing
the sinner to repentance, he is thencefoorth while he so continues impenitent,
to be held as an heathen person, and as a Puplicane. As a mere heathen man
might not enter into the Temple, there to communicate with Israel; so neither
must this impenitent soul be admitted to the Churches communion in prayer and
Sacraments. But as an heathen might for his conversion hear the Prophets
preach; so these may partake in a Sermon severed from the ordinary Communion.
As a Publicane likewise he is to be held, that is; not easily to be admitted to
our fellowship for eating and drinking, as the Jewish Church walked toward
the Publicane; who, in all probability was a 1. The distinction of Publicanes
and sinners, argues he was not an ordinary kind of sinner. 2. Zacheus is an
Hebrew name, which Gentiles would not bear. 3. The Publicane might enter into
the Temple, so not the Heathen. 4. The term Publicane in Math. 18. 17.
seems to be opposite to the Heahen.
Jew, ready (for pleasuring the uncircumcised Romans) to make a divorce from
his breathren, and their lawful discipline.

By all which it is evident, that upon an humble confession of his fault, with
promise to forsake it, mercy and forgiveness was preached unto him. But
contemning finally the Churches motherly admonishment, he was to have the door
of Mercy shut against him. Which latter censure, the Apostle in 1. Cor. 5.
calls, A giving up to Satan, and we commonly term it, Excommunication. If
the sinner should not only, not repent, but proceed to a Not loving Christ
Jesus, (which I take to be Hebr. 6. 1. 2. 3. 4. compared with chapter 10. 25. 26.
etc.
the sin of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; consisting, first, of a willing
desertion from the Grounds of Christian Faith: Secondly, from fellowship with
the Church in that Faith,) there then remains to him the Maranatha (1. Cor.
16. 22.) which is, an absolute declaration of the Lord, coming to quit him
with vengeance, as a soul despayred of. But as this is a sinner (happily
extraordinary) and the rule in Math. 18. is given for ordinary use: so I will
add the judgments of some Aun^ients for the Ordinary.

Origin in Math. Origin.
16. Petra est omnis, qui imitat^r est Christi -- -- Si autem s^per vnum illum
Petrum arbitraris vniuersam Ecclesiam edificari a Deo, quid dicas de Iacobo and
Iohanne filijs tonitrui, vel de singulis Apostolis? -- Apud Iohanne^ enim dans
SS. Jesus discipulis suis per insufflationem, sic dicit, Accipite SS. etc.
quasi omnibus talibus constitutis qualis erat et Petrus.

Ambrose in 1. Ambrose.
Cor. 5. Perfides, Episcopus non potest iudicare* Cum fratre autem in quo vitia
haec reperiuntur, non solum sacramenta non edenda, sed ne communem escam docet,
vt erubescat Cum vitatur and se corrigat.

Theodoret. Theodoret.
in 1 Cor. 5. Si non oportet eos communis esse cibi part^cipes, nec mystici
quidem and Diuini.

Chrysostom in English, Chrysostom. upon Psalm. 50. Non oportebat ergo clanculum.
etc.
may help to stay some in their precipitate zeal against their infirm
Brother: His speech runs thus. It behooves not a man privily to calumniate
his Brother, but as Christ commanded, to take him apart and correct him. The
reprehensions that are given publicly, do oftentimes make men impudent. And
very many sinners, while they perceive that their sin may be concealed, have
their minds easily resolved to return into the way. But if once they perceive
their credit to be lost with many, not a few, such do thence-foorth fall into
desperation, and tumble down into shamelessness. So far he. And indeed,
Upon Leuit. 6. 3.
Origin calls such preposterous dealing with a Brother, the action of an
Infamer, not of a Corrector.

Aquinas upon 1. Aquinas.
Cor. 5. gives this Verse for a rule toward him that is excommunicate: Os,
orare, vale, communio, mensa negatur.

For Mother Zion, she for certain pollutions did suspend the party a while
(till they were cleansed) and for Leaprosie did put them out of the host for
ever, except they were cured. The first signified smaller evils, for which the
Pastor in holy discretion is to bar them some things for a season. The other
signified deeper sin, as Contumacie; for which the sinner was further to be
secluded. Nyss. in Orat. de ijs qui ^olint reprehendi.
Hereupon it is, that Nyss^nus has this, Vetus est haec Eccl^siae regula, quae
cepit a lege and fuit confirmata in Gratia.

And so the Ancient and new Church, still are at unity in the substance of
their Ordinances. If inferior Presbyters do not of themselves exercise this
power for Casting out; but have joined with them, the chiefest
Super-intendentes: this is a good way to prevent such, in playing Popes over
Gods heritage; and the likelyer course also of bringing the sinner to
repentance. Maliciously foolish therefore must they be, that call such joint
exercise of that heavy censure, by the name of Antichristian. Virtus vnita,
fortior; sed quis Schismatico stolidior?

CHAP. xj.
Touching Church-leitourgie.
THE Greek word Leitourgia (signifying generally, any public ministry or
service; and so the Angels are called Leitourgizing spirits) it in
Ecclesiastique use, Heb. 1. vlt.
is taken for some Form of divine Service, prescribed for the Churches
public use. And this form contains Prayers, Lections of Scripture and
Psalme-singing, framed unto several occasions. The Ancient mother Zion, over
and besides the Priests preaching, and the Prophets prophesying, had a set
form for all their Service (as appears through Leuiticus and a peculiar
form of blessing the people, Nomb. 6. 23. and^. Even as Moses had his
prescribed form of Prayer, when the sacramental Arc removed or rested,
Nomb. 10. 3^. 36. And in after times, their Leitourgie was much enlarged by
King Da^id, framing thereto right many Psalms; some Psalms of Prayer, some of
Dedication, some of Instruction some of Remembrance, some of Degrees, some of
Halleluja^, etc. And all that was done in the time of their nonage. To the
Church of Christ, there is given a larger Body of Scripture; out of the which,
and suitable to which, the Church is to draw her form of Leitourgie; collecting
such Scriptures for common Lections, as may be held most fitting such a
purpose. And for the sanctification of all, intermixing such kinds of Prayers,
as also may be fitted to ordinary and extraordinary occasions. If any one man
think he can do this well of him self, I think it can be better done of
many, conuening and concluding upon such a form of Prayer.

And as for our public Form of Service (rejected of some in part, for that
some part of it has before been in use among Papists; as if God or the
Gospel, or good words were therefore to be rejected) it was of the holy
Martyr, Martin Bucer, of love he bore unto it, after due oversight, turned into
Latin, for use of all that should understand Latin.

Against this Leitourgie, two sorts of Adversaries insurge. One of them (as
the Brownist, and the like) does condemn all set form of Prayer, saying; that
nothing is to be brought into the Church, saving the Canonical Scriptures, and
the Lively voice of Gods graces. Now, by Lively voice, they mean Conceived
preaching, and present Conceived prayer. And hereupon it is, that they hold the
Lords Prayer in Math. 6. Not to be Prayer, but Doctrine of Prayer. I answer,
it is both Prayer, and Doctrine of Prayer. Doctrine it is, for that thereby we
are Taught how to pray: For Doctrine is Teaching. And Prayer it is, when a
faithful soul, breathes it up unto God, Mentally or Vocally also. That
Repetition of words used before (even the self same words) continues still
Prayer, consider it not only, in the Apostles Prayer inculcate in several
Epistles (namely, Romans 1. 7. 1. Cor. 1. 3. 2. Cor. 1. 2.
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, etc.) but also, in our
Saviors practice; who in the time of his agony, when most effectual Prayer
was to be used, is said of S. Matthew (in chap. 26. 44.) to have Prayed the
third time, saying the same words; even the selfsame words which he had
used twice before. And the reason lies in this, that Prayer receaueth not his
Form from words, old or new (for one may Pray without any words at all,) but
from the Spirit of Christ, advancing our Spirit to God in Faith, whether with
words, or without. Which caused the Apostle to say in Romans 8. We know not what
to pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us, with sighs
inexpressible. And yet I could round some Separist in the ear, and tell him
true of Teacher, and Teached, that have ordinarily used a set form of Prayer:
that I speak nothing of him, who in his Prayer concluded (till by me he was
better informed) thus; To whom, together with thee and the sanctified Spirit,
be all glory, etc. But let that frantique Ieronymo go by.

The other Adversary is at home: who granting the lawful and necessary use
of a Leitourgie, does insurge against some what in Ours, as not well fitting
his fancy. His objection arises, first, against Method: secondly, against
Matter. For Method, take this his maine Objection. In the beginning of our
Service, a Confession of sin is used by the Minister, in the name of the
Congregation, and that before the Congregation be present. I answer; first, it
may be a rank lie that the Obiector propounds: for, some Congregation may be
present Before, though not every member of the Congregation; no more then
sometimes at their Conuenticles. Whereat, though their Tom and Sib be present,
yet happily lynkin and Sicily may be absent. Secondly, our Minister taking his
fittest time, does desire such as be present, (not absent) to join in that
Confession with him. Thirdly, if any be absent, that should and might be
present, it is their sin, not the Ministers; much less the Books: seeing
Confession of sin, is exceeding necessary in the Exordium of our devotions.
And that Nehemiah and Daniel had well learned, Nehe. 1. 5. etc. Dan. 9.
when they begun their Devotions, with the Confession of their sins and the
sins of the people.

For exception against Matter, it is fourefold. First, for Omission: Secondly,
for Addition: Thirdly, for Translation: Fourthly, for certain Capital-letters.

1. For Omission; as in passing by the Psalms Titles. I answer; first, it is
not repugnant unto Gods word, that some Scripture be read, and othersome
omitted in the Common service; seeing neither all Scripture is Then to be read
(witness the several Leitourgies of their own drawing) nor is our Minister
debarred to handle any Scripture. Secondly, the Lections in a Leitourgie,
require the playnest scriptures; because (generally) for the use of the common
people. But that the Psalmes-titles be not a plain Scripture, will appear
thus: The Hebrew word Lame natseach, is turned, To him that excels. Yet
according to the Septuagint, who should best understand it, it is turned by
that, which (as in ancient Latin translations) valueth Unto, or, Upon the
end. By Targum, and some other Latins otherwise. Frater Faelix in sua trans.
Psa. ex haebreo in Psalm. 4.
Hereupon Friar Faelix unto Pope Leo the tenth, is bold to say; Anullo Aucthore
hactenus recte expositam inuenj; nam haec dictio manasseach, participium est
verbj nizeach (I change not his form of spelling) quod quidem verbum, cum a
nomine nessach descendat, vele conuerso, diuersas habet significationes. The
Rabbines of the Jews, who should best understand it, being at no unity in
this point amongst themselves (nor Greek Church, nor Latin Church, nor
others, daring to determine of it peremptorily, as beseems in cases of Faith)
what sauciness is it not, in this point to tax our Church, when the Taxers
themselves can (at best) but guess how the Title may be translated? Again, we
have in some Translation, to him that excels on Neginoth, or on Nechiloth.
Who can assuredly determine, whether these were Instruments, or Tunes, or what?
If the Minister will preach upon it, he may: But to be joined with ordinary
Lections, I see no necessity, howsoever it may be lawful.

2. For Addition, there be in the 14. Psalm, three Verses more in our
Common-seruice Book, then be in the Hebrew; namely, the 5. 6. and 7. verses,
the whole so, being divided into eleauen verses. I ingeniously confess, that
once I conceived, how that Exception of Addition, had risen against the three
last Verses, as it lies in our ordinary Bibles, where the whole (besides the
Title) be but seven. But now it is clear, that they mean the three Verses
inserted into the Psalm, immediately upon the fourth, beginning thus: Their
throat is an open sepulcher. etc. Hereto I answer: It is not repugnant to
Gods word, that these Verses be there read in our Common service; once, for
that the same Verses are Scripture, and so alleged by S. Paul in Romans 3.
Secondly, for that they be inserted, where for the argument, they be as
fitting, as they were in the other place for the Apostles purpose.

3. As for Traslation, Vbi autem addita est Negatiua particula, vix duos
codices potuimus reperire. Aug. in huuc locum.
they excerpe sundry places. Two principal be fetched from the 105. and 106.
Psalms. From the 105. 18. this, Velo maru aeth debarau, word for word thus;
And they bittered not his word; or They bittered not at his word. Now, as it is
questionable, who be They there spoken of (whether the Commissioners or the
People;) so the phrase, bittering not his word (as not provoking the word) or,
bittering not at his word (as being not provoked by his word) is so doubtful a
phrase, as no temporate spirit (specially, of no greater guiftes then the
Obiectors) will easily dare to oppose in this point (or the like) to the body
of an whole Church. In Psalm. 106. 30. we read, Phyneas stood up and prayed.
They say, it should be turned, He executed judgment. I answer, the original
word is, Palal, which the Jews Targum (as Pagn^^ notes) does turn, He
prayed. And, Hithpallel, in 2. Chro. 30. 18. is properly turned, Hezekiah
prayed. In Psalm. 5. 2. Unto thee ( aeth-pallal) I will pray. So Psalm. 32. 6.
and Substantiuely, it is very often used in the Psalms, for Tephillah.
tephilloth.
Prayer. The Septuagin^, whom the common Latin (in Austens times) did follow,
is Exilasato, whereof comes Hilasterion, turned Propitiatory. Now, seeing
Placation and Propitiation is properly by Oblation and Prayer, the Septuagin^
must needs also, so well as the old Latin, intend with us Prayer; rather
then, Execution of Judgment. Nor could his executing, judgment, have found
rest with the Lord, otherwise then the same were sanctified with Prayer;
specially, he being a Priest unto God, and devoted to Prayer. By this little
taste, judge of our Adversaries learning and discretion, though I (of many) be
most unfitted to propound it.

4. Touching their exception at Capital letters (an exception now very
vulgar) the case stands thus: There be in the Common-seruice Book, certain
great Letters, within whose Circumference, the Grauer of these Letters, has
sometimes put certain Pictures, resembling Triton, Hercules, etc. For which,
diverse do charge the Book, for an vpholder of Idolatry. I answer, it is
nothing to the Matter; because not of the Books matter: Nor is the Matter a
pin the worse, though the Manner of conuaying it, be not so suitable as may
be. If there be a fault in the Fashion, blame the Tailor, not the Wearer. These
Spirits by like proportion, may rail upon every Bible, as an vpholder of
Corruption: Why? for that every Printer will be found to have failed in
something; as in mistaking a Letter, displacing a Point etc.

Secondly, if they so stumble at the Pictures of persons that have been
idolatrized, why not also at the Picture of a Rose, Gerard^ hetb. in cap. Ros.
which some Mahumetistes venerate, as sproung of the blood of the most
lascivious Goddess that the Gentles over had) namely, Venus: others of them,
for that it had (as they say) the original from the sweat (sweet sweat) of
their Prophet Mahomet (a sweet sweatie Prophet) upon which superstitious
conceits, the Rose may not (forsooth) fall to the ground. And why with as good
reason do they not reject the two Capital letters T and X: the first, having
been idolatrized as the Cross of Christ: and the other, as the Cross of S.
Andrew? Or, why contend they not about the Capital I, which being the fashion
of a Pillar; under which form, Clem. in l. 1. strom.
it is said (of Clemens Alexandrine) the Gentiles did worship God? they might
also entitle it, a Monument of Idolatry. The Apostle forbids men to contend
about Words; and these hold it a virtue, to make war about Letters: yea,
about the very Ornament of Letters* I perceive that they will play small play,
ere they sit out for wranglers.

Though it be not always of Absolute necessity, that there be a Leitourgie,
yet respectively, times may bring with them a deep necessity thereof. And if
any times, then these times: for if no form be concluded of, but every one
left to his own discretion herein (as the Apostles justly were, they being
filled with spirit of Discretion) not one Congregation will be like another. But
as among the Romanistes, the multiplicitie of Monckerie begot multiplicitie of
Differences; every one affecting so his own Order, as therewithal grew a
contempt of the other: so, this Church would so affect this Form, and that
Church that Form; and a third, a third form, etc. as therewithal would arise
such praysinges, dispray singes, likinges, dislikinges, as no one Parioch would
be at quiet with another; nor any possible unity among the Teachers. Let it
remain then for Orthodoxall, not only, that such a Leitourgie is lawful, but
also for begetting and continuing unity, that such an uniform Leitourgie is
very expedient and needful. With the Apostle to the Corinths (he there
handling also matters of Order in the Church) I thus conclude: 1. Cor. 11. 16.
If any man lust to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God.

CHAP. xij.
Touching the Beginning of the Christian Chruch. etc.
When the fullness of time was come, God sent his Son made of a Woman; who
being aged about 30. years (the age whereat the Ko^athite began to wait at
the Altar) did then publicly fall a preaching and of gathering Disciples unto
him. Act. 1. and 2.
About three years and a half after, he suffered, and was buried. The third
day after, he arose, and for forty days after he appeared to his Disciples,
specially to eleven of them, who are called Apostles. Then he ascended up into
Heaven; and ten days after (the Apostles then being conuened in an house in
Ierushalem) he raines down Guiftes upon his Disciples, by the which they were
not only fitted to Teach and Govern the Church, but also, furnished with all
Language and power of Miracles. Act. 1. 8. Peter preached in Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia, Bithinia. Andrew to Scythians, Sogdians, Sacians, etc. James in
Ierushalem John (brother of James) in Asia, Philip in Phrygia. Bat^emevv to the
Indians, Thomas to Parthians, Medes, Persians, etc. Matthew to the Jews Simon
Zelotes to Mauritonia and Aphrick the less. Judas Thaddeus to Edessians, and
Mesopotamians. Matthias to Ethiopians, Paul to Illiricum, Italy, and Spain.
Mark in Alexandria. Luke to Antioch. As for the 70. Disciples, they preached
to many other places in the world. All this is affirmed of Dorotheus.


They so furnished, do take to themselves Assistants, called Evangelists or
Prophets: and the Church of Ierushalem being shaken asunder, they to Samaria,
and so to the uttermost parts of the earth, as they were of Christ foretold
and commanded, immediately before his Ascension. And as they were before
commanded, to cry that (as upon the housetop) which he had told them as in
the ear; so, they repair unto the most public and populous Cities, which
were Head-townes to the Country adjacent. So they preached in Ephesus,
Corinth, Colossus, Philippi, Thessal^nia, Rome, etc. that so the Christian
faith, might not only beat the Devil at first hand, out of his principal
fortes, but also, from these Head-townes the Law might go out to their Pagies
or Villagies: which Pagies received the Gospel at second hand, and so
subjected themselves to the Church in their City. And because many Pagies were
long ere they came to the Faith, being much remote from the holy means in the
City, they came to be called Paganes in an ill sense (as Infidels) whereas
before, it was but the term that belonged to the inhabitants of these Pagies,
or Country places.

Here I could note (and it is worthy the noting) that the Country Christians,
howsoever meeting in some Country house, might be termed a Church, as before;
yet they made not an established Church. The Church, for plenarie power of
doctrine and government, was stablished in the City; that City-church
exercising her jurisdiction over Country assemblies, came to be called the
Metropolitan Church, and the like. Ecclesiastique Histories make this point
plain: and easily from the Apostles Acts and Epistles, the thing may be
collected. The Bishop of Brownis^^ must needs in this, join with me, seeing
his Established Church at Amsterdam in Netherland, exercises authority over
some assemblies in England and elsewhere; which is a Bishoppricke of more
length, by many hundred miles, then any Bishop in England has: besides that,
between him and some of his Sheep dwelling plots, there is a large Sea, if
not Seas, by the which he is not like to ride, so much as once in a year
through the Suburbs of his Church, for keeping Visitations. But what do I
following that squeaking Lapwinge?

As the Apostles were appointed to take possession for Christ, from one corner
of the earth to another (and to the Romans he testifies, Romans 10. 10. Psalm.
19. 1. etc.
that their sound then, was gone through the earth; as David also foretold in
the 19 Psalm, though in am^sterie,) so, that blessed glad^tidinges was brought
into Britain; and our predecessors (then barbarous, rude, naked and So Caesar
in his Coment, and Martial. in epigr.
painted with Woad) were, amongst others of Iaphets seed, allured by the
sweetness of the Gospel, to come into Shems Tent, and to worship one and the
same true God, the Father of Christ Jesus.

That some of the Apostles, Origin contra Cels] Mortaliu^ vniuersam naturam
verbum peruicit, etc. nec humanum Genus aliquod licet spectari, quod non huius
suscep rit disciplinam.
or their Evangelists, or both, came hither, it must necessarily follow:
first, for that their commission stretched so far, and they were set on work
him, that would carry them to the end of their Commission. Secondly, the work
wrought, proves it; for otherwise, Barbarians could not be Christians. Thirdly,
Ecclesiastique Histories do record, that we (of any Island) were in the
Chemnitius ( in Exam. Con-Trid.) ex Sabellico.
first place, for receiving the Faith. Whether Joseph of A^mathe^, or some
other came with the Colonie, it is evident that they came hither: at the place
then called Polyd. Vergil. l. 2. hist. Angl. As ^or Theodoret (de curand.
Graec. ^ffect* he affirms that Paul came into Britain; upon his coming out
of his first captivity in Rome.
Wells, they are said to settle: from whence by degrees, the Christian faith
flowed through the Land. And this (by writing) should begin about the year of
our Lord Centuar, l. 2. c. 2. alleging our Gildas and Bale I^ Paul came, it
must be about that time: for he was deliuerd out of the Lions mouth (2. Tim. 4.
17.) Anno. 60. being the 27. year after Christ's death. And Paul's death at
Rome is cast to the year of our Lord 69.
63. Afterward, by grievous persecutions, the Church here, sowell as in
other places, began to be darkened: For, 300. years after Christ's Ascension,
the infidelious Kings of the earth did war against him that rid upon the
White Horse (as S. John foresaw in Revel.) which brought upon the wicked world
fearful judgments; as were foretold in the sixth of the Revelation.

In the neck of these grievous Persecutions, the Lord called Constantine the
Great unto the faith; whereupon the Christians had a long time of Iubile and
blessed rejoicing. But mark what accompanies Peace and Prosperity. People
grew by little and litte to sleep in security. The Devil (never idle, though
never well occupied) sowes Tares and all manner of Corruption throughout the
Lords possession; that such spiritual Physicians as should after be raised
up, should sooner purge out the heart and intrailes of the Church, then clear
her body of all the evil. S. Paul saw this my sterie of iniquity a working in
his time, and Plainly foretold that the last times should be Kairoj chalepoi,
^. Thessalonians. 2. ^. Tim. 3. 1.
mystical Dogdayes, injurious seasons. Nor can any great amendment be
observed in S. John's Revelation, but by the Rider on the White horse, who in
the last times makes his return, fighting with the beastly Adversary ( Revel.
19.) conquering, and so triumphing. Whereupon follows, the Iobilique
halleluiah. The point is plain, but the particulars belonging thereto, are
beyond my reach. All that I can do in this, is, to fall down before his
footestoole, and reverence.

CHAP. xiij.
Touching CHRIST JESUS, the Churches divine head.
CHRISTIESVS (under that term, The seed of the Woman, Gen, 3. 15. and so
expounded of S. Paul. Gal. 4. 4.) being promised to Adam for the recovery of
his fall, before any other man was; is therefore of the Apostle called Ho
Eschatos Adam, the latter Adam; that is, the Second Adam; as Eschatos is
opposed to Protos, latter, or last to first. And because it should be known
that the Second Adam (howsoever from heaven, in respect of his divine Nature,
or rather Divinity) should be true man, as the first man was (even in our
joint Natures of body and soul) the Evangelist Luke draws down his Petigree
from the first Adam, Luke. 3. Math. 1.
by Sheth, Aenosh, etc. to the very Virgin, on whom he was conceived by the
Holy Ghostes ouershadowing, and of whom (she being of the seed of Abraham and
David, as S. Matthew teaches,) he was brone according to the flesh. In which
respect also (against the heart of Anabaptists) the Author to the Hebrews
says; Heb. 7. 14.
It is evident, that our Lord sprung out of Judah.

But that he was not only man (as the Jews thought, and our homebred Arrians
have taught) but that he was as verily God in the first place, as very Man in
the second place (not only for Office, but for the very truth of Nature) than
in Philip. 2. 5. etc. plainly euinceth: Let (says the Apostle) the same mind
be in you, that was even in Christ Jesus: who Huparchon.
existing in the firm of God, held it no robbery to be equal with God; but
Ekenose.
voyded himself (as laying aside the glorious appearance of the Godhead)
assuming the form of a servant, made in the likeness of men, and was feund in
shape as a man. In respect of his Humanity, he is the Melchitse^^k, that is
without Father: and in respect of this his Godhead, he is that Hy-priest that
is without Mother. And in regard of his communicating so with God and man, he
is a fitted Mediator between God and man, reconciling so in himself God with
man; coming down by our Humanity (as by Iaakobs Ladder) unto us; and by the
same steps returning back unto the Eternal; who in this assuming nature,
had his Being from everlasting; Mich. 5. 2. John. 1. 1. 2.
and not only from the Beginning, as in the beginning all things were made by
him, and without him nothing mae, that was made. And were it not, that his
humiliation was as low, as man's pride ascended hie, his embasement could be no
sufficient plaster for our soar: but our pride was such, as of mere men (in
our fore-parents) we would become Gods: therefore, one that was verily God,
must stoop down to become verily Man. And whereas the body of our sin, was
(as it may be spoken of a creature) infinite, and therefore should (unpaid for)
have been subject to an endless curse, even to the torments of Hell for ever;
he being God, infinite and eternal, enduring the curse of the Cross, did so
by plain merit, in a trice swallow up the torment that otherwise was due unto
us. Nor could any but he that is very God, make our Nature sufficient to such
an vnder-bearing; nor any one, but he that should also with us be very man,
give in a proportionable sacrifice, for the sin of man* to the answering of
Gods justice. This to the Jew* was a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
foolishnes; but to the true Christian, it is the power of God unto salvation.

His names teach all this. In respect of his Humanity, (for with that is
visible I begin) he is unto Adam called (in valuation) The Woman's seed. To
Abram His seed, restrayning the Virgin that should bring forth this Seed, to
his line. And because that Abraham's seed in his graund-child Iaakob, was
divided into twelve Tribes, or chief-families, Judah is plainly told that the
promised Seed should arise from his line (and this, under the term Shiloh)
which afterward was renewed unto David; on whose line he should precisely be.
But not so promised to Solomon, because he was not to come of him, but of his
brother Nathan; Salomons seed ending in ler. 22. 30. Haggai. 2. 24.
Iechoniah that went to Babel, and there died seedlesse. Whereupon the Lord
takes the Signet from him, and puts it upon the finger of Zerubbabel (of
Nathans line) who finned Babel, Zerubbabel sigifieth, The fanner of Babel. Of
Zarah and Babel; and Babel of Balal.
and brought out from thence to Ierushalem, the Churches first return of
people, who had there for 70. years been captiued. To the Prophets, the same
Promise was renewed, in all the forms aforesaid, even till such time as he was
made of a Woman, that blessed Virgin Mary, betrothed unto Joseph; but not
carnally known unto Joseph.

In respect of his Divinity, he is of Moses not only called Aelohim (a Nowne
plural, given to Father, Son, and Holy Ghost) but also Ieh^uah Ae^^^im
(turned Lord-god) because every of them is Jehovah, that is, The Being of
Beinges. And as every thing has the being from him, he is called of ^satah,
Isa. 9. 6.
Everlasting father.

And in respect of Godhead and Manhood, united in one for effecting our
Salvation, he is of Isaiah called Gnim-man-ael, that is, With-vs-the
strong-God; or, The mighty God in our Nature: for that the Godhead (as the
Apostle speaks) did dwell in him somaticos* bodily, essentially. Under Isaac
the only son of his Father, that died not, Clem. Alexan. pedago. l. 1. c. 5.
Beda in Genes. 22. Aquinas in Heb. 11. lect. 4.
typed forth the Godhead: and under the Ram that died, the human Nature,
that was to the Altar of the Cross affixed. And this the Author to the
Hebrews intimates, when (having spoken of this Story) he says of his
Father, From which death he received him (kaj en parabole) even in a parable;
that is, in such a sort, as a parable intends. These two Natures also, were
under the Law figured by the two Theodoret. in qu. Leuit. and smil. dialogo. 3.
Isychius in lib. 5. sup. Leuit. 16.
Goats presented only in the Sabbaticall month, what time the Hy-priest
might only and alone enter into the Sanctum Sanctorum: the Scape-goate
poynting forth his Godhead, impassible; and the Lot-goat (with Jonah) the
Human nature, which was to die for Our sins, Dan. a. 26.
Vee^ lo not for him self. So he was the Messiah that is, the Christ; that is,
the Annoynted-one of God; and Jesus the Savior, being anointed of the Father,
for our salvation. Yet must be observed, that something may be said of the
Godhead, that otherwise is proper to the Manhood; as that in Act. Beda. in Act.
20. Non dubitat sanguinem Dei dicere propter vnionem personae in duabus naturis
eiusdem Jesus Christi.
20. ( Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood) not
that God simply considered, has any blood, or can suffer; but that God the
Son shed blood, in respect of the Manhood assumed, and with the Godhead
united. And hereof it is, that the Syriake in that place, does read, The Church
of Christ, not of God. So, that may be spoken of the Manhood, that is proper to
the Godhead: even as sometimes we attribute that to our body, which is proper
to the soul ( e^ e contra) which falls out to be true in the Concreat (that
is, the two Natures considered together, to the constituting of one person)
which otherwise could not be true in the Abstract; that is, in the Nature
abstracted from his fellow. Sybilla in aetat. 6. Vomen Iesous hibet^. vocales,
and duas non.
This is the Christ, yesterday to day, and the same for ever. Of Whom Sybilla,
long before thus prophesied in her sixth age: Tunc ad Mortales vemet mortalibus
ipsis -- in terris similis, Natus patris omniepotentis. -- Corpore vestitus,
votales quatur autem -- fert, non votalesque duas binum Geniorum. The time of
his coming she thus tells; Sed postquam Roma Aegiptum reget, imperioque --
frenabit, tum vemet. etc.

CHAP. xiiij.
Touching the Ghospel of Christ.
THE word ( Gospel the contract of Godspell) is a Saxon word, valuing in our
language (the same which the Greek word Euangell does, namely) Glad-tydinges.
In large sense, we call all the Doctrine (contained in the Book of the New
Testament) by the name of Gospel; because the main and substance of that
Book, is doctrine of Gladtidinges: otherwise, who is ignorant, that the Law
is mingled with the discourse of the Gospel; not for perfecting the Gospel
(for it is not of that nature) but for leading people to Christ, as Moses led
the people to Joshua, who only could bring them to the Land of Rest, a type of
heavens Eternal rest.

Again, the Gospel is sometimes taken for the Story of Christ, penned by S.
Matthew, S. Mark, S. Luke, S. John; whereupon they be called, The four
Evangelists, as having in a special sort dilated upon Christ, the subject of
the Glad-tydinges.

But in this dispute, I take it in that strict essential sense that S. Paul
does, when he says to the Galatians; Gal. 3. 8. Giselbert. in Alt. Syn. and
Eccl. c. 1. Fides Abrahae circu^cisionem praeueniens, gentium credentium typice
dona praeten. debat, quae Iud^^s dignitate datae celitus Gratiae, non tempore
praeuenerant.
The Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles through Faith,
preached before, the Gospel unto Abraham, (saying) In thee shall all the
Gentiles be blessed: afterward declaring by what means, namely by a Seed
(not seeds) which is Christ. This Gospel is the same to Adam before, and to
us after; neither is there any other name (then the name Jesus) by which we are
to be saved; nor any other means, whereby to be united with Jesus, then by
Faith. For as S. Peter could say, touching the Cripple healed at the gate of
the Temple, that Jesus (whom ye have crucified (His name has made this man
sound: Act. 3. 16.
even so, I may as truly say, that by Faith only in Christ, we are to be
saved. External discipline may alter with time and place, as all external
works may, but the Euangell, Gospel, Gladtydings is still one and the same;
that is, Believe, and live: whereas the Law says; Do, and live. And in not
doing all the things of the Law, a soul becomes subject to all the Curses in
the Law. By Doing then, no flesh can be justified: but by Belief in Christ
Jesus, any soul may be justified. The Law therefore but sendes to Christ; and
Christ castes none away that comes so unto him.

The Law indeed, was written in Adams heart, teaching him to Do, Quod Lex
operum minando imperat, hoc Lex Fidei credendo impetrat Anshelm. in 4. cap. Romans
and live: and he might have done his works and lived: but conspiring with the
Devil, against the holy rule of the Law; the Law is so against Man, execrating
and cursing him; whereby man is enforced to fly from himself, to another; and
that is to Christ, who (with his arms ready to embrace us) cries out, Come
unto me all you that be weary and laden, and I will ease you.

Nor does our wilful Banckrupt estate, lessen the debt owing to God: for
though we be unable to satisfy the Law, it is just with him to call for
satisfying the Law, and to clap us up in Hell, for Non-satisfaction. Able we
were set out of his hands; the fault therefore in our selves; and therewith
let every mouth be stopped.

But, o the free-mercie of God! that when we are become wilfully banckrupt, he
should provide a means; first, for satisfying our debt: secondly, for raising
us up to greater Glory. The Satisfaction, is the Death of Christ: and our
Exaltation, is his Humiliation: for, he became poor, to make many rich. Thus,
not our work, but his work: not our satisfaction, but his satisfaction: not
our merit, but his merit, is cause and sole cause of our true happiness.

Which is cause, Aug. in Enchirid. c. 99. Gratia vero nisi gratis sit, gratia
non est.
not only that Augustine speaking of Grace (as opposite to moral works) does
say, Grace is no Grace, except it be gratis: which speech excludes all merit
of our part, be our works otherwise never so glorious; Bellar. de iustif. l.
5. c. 7. propos. 3.] Tulissimum t^menest, propter incertitudinem propriae
iustitia and periculum inanis gloriae, totam fiduciam, non in operib. nostris,
sed sola dei misericordia and benignitate reponere.
but also enforces Bellarmine (after all his windinges and turninges) to
conclude the case of Justification, thus; Notwithstanding (namely, all he had
opposed before) by reason of the uncertainty of our own Righteousness, and
the danger of vain glory (meaning in a man's own works) the safest of all is,
to repose our whole trust, not in our own works, but in the only mercy and
goodness of God. So great is this truth, and therefore must prevail,
notwithstanding their distinction (some works be Legal, some Evangelical)
seeing the Free favor of God excludes all our works (howsoever termed) for
iustifiyng only Christ's merit-worke, for our justification. Objection: Faith
is a work, and being justified by Faith, we are so justified by a work.
Answer: It is a work in us, but not of us; for Faith (as the Holy Ghost
witnesses) is the Philp. 1. 29.
Gift of God, and so our justification to salvation, the free gift of God,
and not of our selves only, nor also: For if we will plant our thresholds by
his thresholds, Ezekiel will proclaim it an abomination. And because Christ
does not only begin the work, but also perfect it, the Author to the Hebrews
calls him, Heb. 12. 2.
The Author and finisher of our Faith. The premises considered (and sound in
the judgment of a Romanist, were he to die the death for his Faith against the
Turk, and not to maintain a sworn opposition against us) let me put down
the following Positions.

1. First, these Schismatikes be most heretical, that by reason our outward
form of Discipline likes them not, do affirm (as some chief of them have in
my hearing) that the Church of England, neither holds nor teaches, the
Gospel of Christ. And yet the same people holds no other Ghospel, then
here they received: except they make their Lay-eldership their Gospel, or
some of their outward works, to give being to the Gospel. And then they
fall upon the Rock of Popery, which they would seem to sail so far from:
establishing not only a Justification with God by Faith only at first; but
after that, a second justification with God by works also. Nor indeed is it
better with them, if themselves will understand themselves: Which easily cannot
be done, God having put upon them, the spirit of slumber.

2. Secondly, I do faithfully believe, that in the Romish-church (since the
first plantation of it) there has been, and still is, a true Christian people,
holding the maine C^luin upon 1. Cor. 3. 15. from hence has an hope of the
salvation of Gregory the great, Barnard, and others such, holding this
foundation. Chrysostom. in Hebr. c. 6. hom. 9.] Quod n. Fides fundamentum ^it,
catera vero superaedificationes; a duerte ipsum dicentem, 1. Cor. 3. Ego
fundam. posui.
Foundation laid in Christ's blood; howsoever (sometimes) they build upon it
Hay, Stubble, and the like; even as in the thronge of the Tares, the Lord had
his Wheat, and Children of the Kingdom. And in Babel (even after the Returns
to Judah, by Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah) God there had his Daniel, and
others also with him. God forbid, that their malice against us reforming the
Church, should beget in us a denial of any Grace, which God continues amonst
them, notwithstanding their abode in lamentable Confusion. Nor is this truth
of Christianity, which I believe to be amongst them, only an invisible Grace,
(according to secret election) as some Scismatikes make it, but in the
profession visible, witness not only many their See Trigs true Catholic in
the chap. of Iustifi.
Writings, but also many their Sermons there at home, as these can witness,
that have travailed amongst them: not to speak any thing of such, as daily do
offer up their blood amongst them, in testimony against their false Gospel.

3. Thirdly, I do verily believe, that a maine cause, why the Apostle handles
so largely Justification by Faith only, in that Epistle to the Romans, was
this; for that he foresaw, how that Church would quickly be drawing away from
that Pillar, for establishing a justification of their own in the room
thereof. That they have made a foul departure from that Faith of the Gospel,
and that we in that point, have recovered our standing, let themselves judge
(being vnpossessed of Sophistry) reading but the first eight Chapters soberly
over (or but the first four) accordingly as they be translated in their
Rhemish Testament. And will they be so bewitched, as to give more crede^ce to
the writing of any one among them, then to the Apostle Paul, enforming their
first Christian people? Let them labor to bring their opinion to the Epistle,
and not wrest the Epistle to their opinion: holding it true Antiquity, to be
one with the Apostle and that golden Epistle; and not to reject them, for
entertayning a Nouelty, covered with color of Antiquity. He that teaches any
other Gospel, then that which S. Paul taught, we are (though he were an
Angel from heaven) to hold him accursed, yea, twice accursed; as the same
Apostle teaches. Galath. 1. 8. 9.

So much of the Gospel preached to the Fathers, and exhibited to us; the
manner of Dispensation being diverse, but the Thing one and the same. Victor
Antiochen. in Marc. 4
In noua Lege vetus inclusa tenetur. And, Greg. in Ezekiel. l. 2. hom. 16.
Vna est veterum ac nouorum patrum fides. And Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 6.
one within 200. years after Christ, writes thus; Vnum quidem revera salutare
testamentum, quod a Constitutione mundj ad nos peruenit, per generationes
diuersas and tempora, etiamsi Datione existimatum fuerit esse Diuersum.
Consequens^n* est, esse vnam jmmutabilem Salutis dationem, ab vno Deo, per vnum
deum quae multis modis prodest. Propter quam causam, tollitur Maceria, quae
diuidebat Graecu^^ a Iudae^, ad hoc, vt esset populus peculiaris; and sic ambo
perueniunt ad vnam fidej vnitatem; and ex ambobus vnae est Electio.

CHAP. XV.
Touching Antichrist, and his Opp^sition.
THAT the Greek word Antichrists, does signify one Opposite to Christ, it is
out of all question. But wherein he is to be opposite (in Faith, or Manners;
wholly, or in part: and if in part, then in what part) is a mighty Question.
Besides, that there should be such an Adversary, is out of all question: but
who that Adversary (or whether One, or Many) and from whence he should arise,
is much in question.

The Fathers take the word, sometimes very largely, (as they think S. John
does in his 1. Epistle) sometimes strictly, as of one and the same person, as
they think S. Paul does in 2 Thessalonians. 2. under the terms, Man of Sin, Son
of Perdition. Sometimes they understand S. John to call all these Antichrists,
that be Ierom on Math. 24.] Ego reor omnes Haeresiarchas Antichristos esse. etc.
Heads of Heresy, under the name of Christ, teaching things that be
contrary to Christ. And such be the violaters of Faith. Sometimes, they
understand these Antichrists, Honor. in dial. de lib arb. and prodest. Intuere
principes and Iudices, ^cce posita est in eis Bestia seeds -- verte ad clerum,
and vid^bis in eis Bestiae Tentorium -- Contemplare and Monarchorum
conciliabula, and videbis in eis Bestiae Tabernacula -- Aspice etiam habitacula
Monialium, and cernis in eis preparat. Thalamum bestiae -- verte te ad plebem
relic and inuenies in ea Bestiae effigiem. etc.
of such as ouerturne all good manners and order. And so their Pope Honorius to
that purpose, writ thus: Cast eye upon the Princes and Judges, and behold in
them is plaeced the Beasts seat (then he numbers up their wickednesses:) Turn
to the Clergy, and thou shall see in them, the Beasts Pauilion (then he
numbreth up their worldliness:) Contemplate also the Conuent^^les of Moncks,
and thou shall see in them, the Beasts Tabernacles (then he fileth up their
Hypocrisies:) Behold also the habitations of the Nuns, and in them, thou
shall see prepared the Beasts Bedchamber (then go up the Nuns
abominations:) Turn thy self to the rest of the people, and thou shall find
in them, the very Image of the Beast. Thus the Master, in that Dialogue (and
that is Hono^^us) does teach his Scholar; affirming further, that the former
Many, is Babylon, and at war with Ierushalem, whose inhabitants be not so
Many. Thus understood he of that Second Beast in Reuelat^^ 13. (...). for that
the First Beast there (compacted of Daniels Lion, Bear, and Leopard) is the
Body of the Roman Empire, and the last Monarchy of the four, it is granted
of al sides. Now hear the Abbot Barn. ad Ganfr^d. Lorator. ep. 125.
Barnard, how he writ about 500. years since, of both the Beasts: That Beast
in the Apocal. to who^ a mouth is given, speaking blasphemies, and warring with
the Saints (Petri cathedr^m occupat, ta^que Leo paratus ad praedam) does occupy
Peter's Chair, as a Lion prepared to his prey. The other Beast also
(subsibilat) whish^ly hisseth toward you, as whelpe lurking in the secret
places. The other Beast is more cruel, and this more subtle: But in one they
agree, against the Lord, and against his Christ Let Barnard apply his speech to
what persons he shall, sure such be the Beasts, and such their conditions: and
so far he helps us on in our way.

As the Fathers understand Antichrist largely, so they likewise speak of one
Special one; who coming at last, should be the Head unto all that went
before: even as Jesus Christ was the Head of all such Christed or
Annoynted-ones, as Typically went before him, were they Kings, Zanch. sec.
Thesis of 14. -- Non pugnat cum sacris literis, says he.
Priests, or Prophets. And this (as Zanchius somewhat grants) may be; but
Evidence I see none as yet. Then again, some of them thought, that he should
come of the Tribe of Dan: but the Reasons for that, were far fetched. Again,
that he should rise in the Roman Empire: Tertull. de resurrect. c. 24.
So Tertullian; Iam enim Arcanum Iniquitatis agitatur; tantum qui nunc tenet
teneat, donec de medio fiat. Quis? nisi Romanus status, cujus abscessio in
decam Reges dispersa, Antichristum superinducet, and tunc reuelabitur Iniq^us.
Iren. l. 5. c. 25.
Ireneus before him, and a Greek, speaks thus: The Nowne Lateinos has the
number 666. -- they be Latins that now reign; but we will not glory in that.
The word Lateinos, being in Greek, the same as is Latinus in Latin, it is to
be cyphered as the Greeks do; whose Alpha-bet letters, serve to them for
Figures. And thus.

L -- 30, A -- 1. T -- 300. E -- stands for -- 5. I -- 10. N -- 50. O -- 70.
S -- 200*
Take the same number also in Ecclesia Italica, thus: E 5. C 20. C 20. L 30. E
(being the Greek Eta, not Epsilon) is 8. S 200. I 10. A 1. Take the same
number also in the Hebrew word Romijth (of Rome) thus: R 200. O 6. M 40. I 10.
I 10. TH 400. The same number, as if Antich^istum autem intelligo, Mahemodem,
Papatum and omnes qui cultui Christi aduersantur. Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. 4.
Mahomet were one of this Beasts horns, observe in the Greek Maometis, thus:
M 40. A 1. O 70. M 40. E 5. T 300. I 10. S 200. And if the years be cast, we
shall find, that about An. D^^. 666. The Pope for universal Supreme in the
West; and Maomet for Chief Prophet, was stablished in the East: over which
East and West, the Roman Emperor had before governed.

But passing by these more curious Diuinations (as whom time yet has not
sufficiently matured) it is granted of all, that He which under the name of
Christ shall oppose to Christ, is for that, an Antichrist And because his
opposition must be against Christ, rather then against God (though Christ be
also God) he is called Anti-christos, not Anti-theos. If he should be
Anti-pater, then we should consider some special thing in God the Father: if
Anti-pneuma, then some special thing in the Holy Ghost; but by the word
Antichrist, we must consider something in the Son, to whom this Son of
perdition is secretly to oppose: And that rests in his suborning a False
Gospel for the true. In which respect he bears in his Arms a Lamb, but (as
S. John paintes him) a Lamberising from the Earth, not from Heaven: in
appearance a Lamb, but in working a Wolf.

And because he was to be opposite to the very foundation of the Gospel (and
what that is, was in the former Chapter considered) S. Paul does style him
Antikesmenos, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
the layer of an opposite foundation. 1. Cor. 16. 9.
And when he is to speak of such as would shut the Door against 1. John. 2. 18.
that Grace offered in the Gospel, Que Aristot. Opposita idem, Antikeimena
vocat, ea Tullius Contraria. Seuerin. Boethius in Topica Cicer.
he calls them Antikeimenoi polloj, Many Antikeimenists; as S. John calls
them Antichristoi polloj, Many Antichrists. Antichrists be so Antikeimenists;
and Antikeimenists be such as lay an opposite foundation to Faith; and that is,
in stead of justification by Faith in Christ, to stablish a Justification by
human works and ordinances; but yet not apertly nor plainly, but by fair
painted iuglinges, able to beguile (as our Savior says) the very chosen, if
it were possible.

And what (I pray you) can seem sounder then this, to say Christ Jesus has
made Faith in him alone sufficient for Salvation, insomuch as he that dies
upon that Apprehensio at first, is undoubtedly saved? But, (mark this But)
such a soul living longer, he has in him from Christ, such a power to work
well, as by his works he is to be saved. And these works must not be called
works of the Law, but works of Faith, although but such works as man
deuiseth. Yea, the Romanist goes further, and says: that a man may do more
good works then he is necessarily tied unto; and so by them does supererogate,
and may give of these his works to his Brother that needs, for helping out
his salvation. Not to grant this, say they, is to make Christ idle in us. To
such effect speak many; and flesh and blood holds it very reasonable.

Mahomet speaks excellently of Christ, not only as being a great Prophet,
but also a D. Philip. Lonicerj Chro. Tur^. tom. 1. chap. 21.
Savior of his people: But when all that is done, Mahomet comes to inioyne
Azoara. 37. And yet, if one die ere he can do his good works, he may be saved
by the Saracens faith (Mahomet in Colloquio cum Iudaeis) All one with the
Romanist.
External works (of his own collection) by the which a soul must be saved.
And both he and the Apostaticall Popes, have agreed further in this, to hold
the Bibles scripture insufficient to salvation; whereupon they have devised,
either side of them, such Canons and Rules of obedience, as the doing of them
have more attributed unto them, then the obedience of Faith: When as in very
deed, all such their inventions may be said, as in Revel. 9. but to come out of
a bottomless Pit, having a reasonable face (as from man) but in the tail and
conclusion, they sting like a Scorpion; for never can soul find true rest, in
flying any part from Christ, unto their own work. The sense whereof upon the
deathbed, has forced many a Romanist then to fly altogether from his own
Works, to Christ's Merit-worke only: dying so no true Papist, howsoever in
other things popish. And here let me repeat a pretty Story, acted in the
Clink-prison in Southwarke at London, before the stayall of the last great
Plague.

A certain Romish-priest being there to Prison newly committed, and not
accustomed to bonds, became exceeding pensive, he was advised to take a pipe of
Tobacco, and to let the world slide a. He does so: but whether for that the
Tobaccoes smoke increased Melancholy, or guilt of conscience in respect of
some treason, or whatsoever the cause might be, down he falls; and the Keeper
Dauison, and some others about him, thought verily he would have died. They
will him to call upon God. He does so, desiring him for Christ's sake, to
pardon al his sins. After diverse times he had so prayed, he comes to be
reasonably well: whereupon the Keeper puts upon him this speech: I pray you
sir, how comes it about, that your breathren have still suggested unto me, that
I should go to God by Saints; and not directly by Christ; whereas I perceive,
that you in this agony, never prayed to Saint, but went to God directly by
Christ? To whom the Priest returned such answer. I pray you be content, I had
no leisure to pray unto Saints, for I looked but presently to die. So far the
story. Now I pray you, had it not been better for him to have died in the
former case, then to have returned to health, and so to his vomit again? But
say they what they shall, for maintayning Antichrists opposition against us,
many of them in their agonies, are glad to turn Protestant; and for quiet of
soul, to betake themselves to the Faith of the Gospel.

The Gospel so essentially considered, and the Antichristian opposition so
remembered, let me put down the ensuing conclusions.

1. No evil, severed from such an opposite foundation (as is justification
with God by Works) can properly be termed Antichristianit^e; no more then
every evil, against Gods good spirit, can properly be termed, The sin
against the Holy Ghost. And therefore our Schismatikes calling every thing they
like not, Antichristianitie, show themselves vntollerably ignorant. For if
every evil be Antichristianity, then (which is most absurd) every soul living
is Antichristian. And if they will not say the last, then let them be ashamed
of the first.

2. Then also follows vngaine sayably, that no outward form of discipline is
properly Antichristian, howsoever it may be tainted with evil: seeing no such
Discipline can be called an opposite or false Gospel.

3. A Church settled upon a false Ghospel, is (notwithstanding all the best
Discipline can he had) a false Church and Antichristian. The reason is,
Discipline is not an essential mark of a true Church: For one and the same
Discipline or outward form of Government, can be applied to Christ or
Antichrist. And so on the other side, a people settled in the true Faith of the
Gospel, is always in such estate, a true Church of God, notwithstanding a
thousand imperfections in Discipline. For as Job is a true man (and so Lazarus)
notwithstanding much unsoundness in their members: so, a people may be a true
Church, though much unsound. The reason is, because the spirit of life still
moves in their members. And as we know that the spirit of life is (...) sick
body, by his breathing; so, we know that the (...) of Christ is in a Church, by
her evident Confes^^^ (...), Charity will think so, for that she believes the
best, 1. Cor. 13. Romans 10. 10.
and hopes the best. For with the mouth (says S. Paul) man confesses to
salvation.

4. Then also follows, that our Nouelistes have spunne a fair thread (a
plain Cobweb, for snaring weak simple Flies) who have all this while striuen,
not about the Babe Jesus himself, but about his Swathingband, and after what
manner he is to be swathed, whether by bringing the Band cross over him, or of
some other fashion. Or, to use another Simile; they have neglected the Garden,
and all this while foughten about the fashion of the Hedge; and where the Style
should stand, on their side or ours. They that have so bad eyes, to judge of
the Garden, are in no wise fit, to be trusted with the Fence.

Let me draw to an end with the words of Ferus, Ferus on Math. 24. here is
Christ, there is Christ.
(whose speech might awake his Papists) Do the false Prophets teach Christ?
yea verily: for to preach Christ, is to preach righteousness, sanctification,
forgiveness of sins, and redemption. For Christ is become all these things
unto us. And these things the false Prophets preach, how we may obtain
righteousness and redemption. But they teach not, that we must look for, and
seek these things Only from Christ, and only by Christ: Yea, they
neglecting Christ, do teach to seek for Righteousness and forgiveness of
sins in other things. Behold, say they, here or there is Christ; which is
indeed to seduce and to lead out of the way. For these things are found no
where else, but in Christ. Act. 4. 12.
There is no other name under heaven, by which we must be saved. Has not Ferus
in this, as in a thousand things, spoken as a Protestant? When the Church of
Rome has in her, such Masters of fence to maintain our quarrel, let us not
despise them: but desire of God, that such honest Spirits, may further come out
of Babilonish bondage. For these that be with us, be not against us. If S.
Peter in Math. 16. had any promise for the Sea of Rome, let them note the
performance of it, in such as Ferus, and others now in Venice and Piemont, with
other places. And in so doing, we will not easily be found to contend with them.

CHAP. xvj.
Touching BABEL, the rising and fall thereof.
BABEL is two fold; Literal or Spiritual: The Literal, is a name given;
first to a Tower, then afterward to some City. As first, to a City whereof
the said Tower was the principal Monument; and that is Babel in Chaldea:
Secondly it was given to a City in Aegipt (now called Cair) from whence S.
Peter is thought to direct his first Epistle, as appears in the Conclusion:
For this second, I find it not Typical; but for the first I do. First (for
that the first) was a work begun by 70. Families, that schismed from Shem,
Genesis 11.
and that God that was in Shems Tents. Secondly, for that Nimrod (in English,
Apostate or Rebel) who was the impudent Hunter before the Lord, became the head
thereof: Micah. 5. 6. compared with Genesis 10. 10.
whereupon the Prophet calls that soil, The land of Nimrod. Thirdly, for
that it was the City, wherein the Church of the Jews was captiued for 70.
years.

The Spiritual Babel, has respect to this of Chaldea, for that it was still
an instrument of opposition to the Church. And this spiritual Babel, has a
twofold understanding among Divines: for either it is taken for Rome, or for
the whole political body of false Christians wheresoever. For Rome it is taken
of Tertullian in these words; Tertull. adu. Iudaeos cap. 9.
Sic et Babylon apud libannem nostrum, Romanae vrbis figuram portat, proinde et
magnae and regno superba and sanctorum debellatricis: So it is in Rhenanus his
ancient Copy. The Romanist Pamelius (out of the Margin) blots Babylon Roma,
least the Reader should mark it, thinking it too much, that Beatus Rhenonus or
any other should put an Asterisk over against that text. So Tertullian against
Martion, lib. 3, has the like; and ouer-against the same, is the former
marginall note. And Ierom is of like mind; Hierony. Fabiole de vest
sacerdatali.
who writing unto Fabiola, lately come from Bethleem to Rome, has this; Et tu
quidem optato fueris ocio, and juxta Babylonem Bethlehemetica forsuan Rura
suspas. Nor can he in this speech be thought, to take Rome for Babylon (in
respect of time passed alone, but) that it was such for the time present; else
why should Fabiola sigh after Bethleems fields again? Andreas in Apocal. c.
53.
Andreas Archbishop of Cesarea in Cappadoce says the same, thus: Vetus Roma in
Canonica B. Petri, Ansbert. in Revel. 13. and alibi.
Babylonis vocabuso designatur. And Ansbertus has this, S. John vocat Romam
Babylonem illam secundam. And so minded be diverse others.

Some take the mystical Babylon (opposite to Ierushalem) only for such an
universal corporation of Christians, as live not according to the Gospel; or
more plainly, for the Haymo in Apoc. 17. Prosperi sent. 221. Duas in toto
m^^do civitates, faciunt du^ amores: Ierushalem, ^^cit amor Dei. Babyloniam
facit amor saculi. etc.
Multitude of Reprobates. So does Haymo and others. And indeed I understand a
truth to be in both: For as S. John in Revelation 17. does depaint out Rome,^
first by the Victorius Pitabionens. Episc.] Septem montes in quibus mulier
sedel, est Romana ciuitas. Com. in Apoc.
7 Hills according to no other City: and secondly by this, that it then
reigned over the Kings of the Earth (which then Rome did, it being the
Monarchical City) so likewise, that City-fornicatrix he says sits upon
the Waters; which he expounds to be people, multitudes, and nations and
tongues; that is, Nations not of one language, but of many. So that howsoever
that City be the principal Seat or Sea, yet true it is also, that Multitudes
of people abroad (even of sundry languages) are of the the same body and
corporation. And seeing that body is called an Harlot (which term properly is
given to such a one, as has defiled the Marriage bed, by joining her self to a
Strange flesh, and such a one no Christian can be that shakes not of Faith in
Christ, for betrothing it self to some human invention) it necessarily
follows, that all such people do make up that fornicating Body, as seek
their justification with God, by any other means, then by Faith in Christ
only. Nor can it intend the spiritual fornication which Heathen have with
their Idols, seeing that is no Mystery or Secret, but this is, 2 Thessalonians 2. 7.
as S. Paul and S. John call it. And a Mystery must this needs be, Revel. 17.
5.
to hold Christ Jesus the Savior; and yet underhand to seek salvation by
their own work: Mystery in Greek, Secret in English.
much like to some Harlot, that will fight and contend for her Husband, and
yet sometimes steal aside, and say with her in the Proverbs: Stole Bread is
sweet. Such is my judgment of this mystical Babylon, called also an Harlot.

For the Beginning and continuance of this Babel, the cause stands thus.
Satan that taught Adam to neglect the Tree of life (and so consequently, the
Son of God, in whom our life is hid) taught him also, to seek a life
God-like, in his own work, opposite to Gods appointment: Here was the
beginning of Babel; that is in English, of Corfusi^: for herewith not only all
things in Man, but also Earth and all things in it, became Confused and out of
Order. Cain his eldest Son continued this work (opposite to our great Shem,
by seeking happiness in the outward work of Sacrifice, without Faith in
Christ Jesus; howsoever he would be thought to have Faith in the blessed Seed
promised to his Father in Paradise. To Cain succeeded others in the same evil,
going an whoring after their own inventions, till the Flood took them away.
After the Flood, Cham and C^naan rear up this mystical Babel again, whom
Shems people after subdued, as Noah foreprophecied. But the Duel having
broched this Wine once, he leaves not off, till he made many in the Jewish
Church (even the strict Pharisees, that ages Puritanes) to seek justification
with God, by the works of the Law Our Savior coming in our Nature, taught
the people to seek life in himself: and the Apostles afterward inculcate the
same Gospel, but the Devil still raised some up in the Christian Church,
that revived the Pharisees doctrine; as specially may appear by the Apostles
Epistle to the Ga^athians. Ambros. in Gal. 3.] Hi non putabant plenam salutem
esse in Christo, quia Legem illi aequabant.
In fine, the Church of Rome deuiseth a number of works (as Oblations,
Pilgrimages, Censinges, Devotions to Images, with a thousand the like) in doing
whereof, the doers should be justified, even (ex opere ^^orato) by virtue of
the outward work wrought. And to merit at Gods hands by such sleighty works
doing, it was so toothsome to flesh and blood, as the Kings of the Nations did
readily receive it: and they drinking of that cup, their people followed, till
the Harlots cup of Abominations made them generally drunken. So this opposite
Gospel begun; so it increased, and so Babylon was erected.

Now for the fall of it; S. John in Revel. 17. foretells, that the former
Kings shall in time, arise against the Harlot (or Malignant Church) whereupon
in chap. 18. he sees Babeis fall. How this is effected, he tells in the 19
chapter, when he attributes it there to him that rides on the White horse,
whose names or titles be these; The Word of God; the King of Kings, and the
Lord of Lords. And S. Paul to the Thessalonians, calling the former
Corporation, a Man of Sin, a Son of Perdition, a wicked Man (because they
be all one in an opposition to Christ and his free grace) he declares, that the
Lord shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth; that is, by the power of
his Gospel. For as the rising was, by propounding human Fables, and leaden
Legendes; the Gospel mean time wrapped up in an unknown Tongue: so, the
fall of it will be, by preaching Christ's Gospel in every Tongue; as unto such
purpose, to the Apostles were given, all sorts of Tongues.

And that the walls of Babel, have been a falling in these parts of the
World, ever since the time of our Wickliff, until this hour; and that by no
sword of man, but by the two edged Sword of Gods Word, experience and the work
already wrought (to Gods praise) will witness.

Tut, say the Romanistes, the Opposers have been (till now of very late years)
very few, weak, and simple. I answer, all the liker to be of God, and the work
wrought, to proceed from the power of God: for so Christ did conquer the World;
1. Cor. 1. 26. 27, 28. 29.
the Foolish confounding the Wise, and the Weak ouerturning the Strong. Had
our Churches been Reformed by the number and might of man, we should not so
easily have seen the power of the Gospel. That therefore which they call our
Shame, we hold our Glory. Decus, non dedecus.

And that the walls of this Babylon will quickly fall flat on the ground,
whereby the very Tower of their strength may be easily surprised, these Reasons
persuade me.

1. First, diverse of the Kings (which were as their Bulwarks) are fallen unto
our side: and S. John says, that the rest will follow.

2. Secondly, as their Tongues at the literal Babel, were slit, whereupon that
work declyned: so, it is well known to them that have conuersed inwardly with
them, they grow more and more divided in the language of Divinity. So that
Ferus, Granatensis, Pin^us, and many able amongst them, have much vnuayled the
Harlot, and cast the filth of her fornications in her face: not to say any
thing of the many thousands of plain Protestants, in the skirtes of Italy, at
the foot of the Alps, (as in M. More in his Tables puts their beginning in
Anno domi. 1167.
Piemont, and also in Provinces in France; who are in Tolosa called
Albingenses; in Boheme, Tabarites) who have long time been one with us, against
Rome, holding it Babylon.

Their Tongues (I speak of the Romish Synagogue) be wonderfully divided, not
only in Doctrine, but also in Discipline and Government; witness not only
the late controversy between Secular-priestes and Jesuits; over the which
soar, a skin may be drawn, but impossible to be healed at the botthom, for
that a greater right (in conscience) ought to be granted to the Priests (being
their main ministry) them to the Jesuits, being a regular irregular order
of Friars, but hatched the other day: but also, witness the controversy of
the City of Venice (instincted by Father Paulus) not to speak of any other
places. For the Opposition in all probability, must be larger, then we can
upon the sudden take knowledge of; at least, for pressing the point, with
evident demonstration.

3. Thirdly, the honest spirited among them, begin much to abash, not only at
the gross abominations in the court of Rome, and the religious irreligious
houses; but also, at their strange proiectes of Treason (as the late Gunpouder
villainy against our whole body of Parliament, and others (set a foot by their
Jesuits, or rather Iebushites, and that daily, and in every Nation. And
hereupon it is, that many return to our Church, many be daily converted in
France* and many endure torments abroad, at the hands of their bloody
inquisition. As the Jews going to Babel, were carried at three several times;
and again from Babel, had their several Returns (by Zerubbabel, Ezr^,
Nehemiah) so, the Church that Christ has had in this mystical Babel, has her
several Returns and Exodes; some at the sixth hour, some at the ninth, and
others at the eleventh. Say we therefore with the Psalmist, Psalm. 126. 4.
O Lord returns our Captivity, as Rivers in the South.

4. Fourthly, as from the Apostles words (Romans 11. 12.) If the fall of the
Jews, be the riches of the world (that is, of the Gentiles) how much more
shall their abundance be? And again, verse 15. If the casting away of them,
be the reconciling of the world, what shall the Pros^^psis (or the very
assuming of them) be (et ^ e zoe ek necron) if not life from dead-ones? As I
say, from these words I understand, that the universal conversion of the
Jews, shall bring with it a mighty advantage to the Church: and such
conversion improbable, otherwise then by much use of the Hebrew tongue (as
also, by the ministry of some in the Romish Church, within whose Territories,
that people have their resiance) and the Hebrew tongue being now much studied
and profited in by Romanistes: so, it must necessarily follow, that many
learned Romanistes must before that time turn themselves from Babel to the
Gospel, and so bring with them a mighty people, as Martin Luther has done
before them. As the means of the Jews universal calling grows, so, the
strength and glory of the Romish Babel declineth. Meanetime, the Jews are much
scandalized at Christianity, for that the Christians where they live, do fall
down and adore Images, or at best, adore men and women departed. Touching
which kind of scandale, Paulus Ricius de Mosaicae l^g. mandatis.
arising from such Adoration, Paulus Ricius (a Cabalisticall Jew, and a
Christian of the Romish fashion) he writes thus; Verum hoc vnum (salua tamen
Reuer^mia occultorum) censere and probare non formido, orthodora jam Christi
fide ad plemtudinem redacta, and Idolum cultu p^^^tus dol^to, non solum non
impium, sed etiam condecens and laudabile esse (nis^ and in hoc quoque
consuetudinis corruptela reniteretur) Templa and sacras ae^tes a^que imaginibus
construere, idsiquidem ad empyreo^ and super^aetes Sanctorum spt^^^us, hominu^
mentes extollerent, and non ad corporeas manufactas jmaginies: sicque omnem
infirmoru^ offendicul^m and nophandiss^mi erroris periculum aueretur.
Obtrect^ntum insuper Iudaeorum plures, qui prae caeteris Imagin^m ^ult^m
abhominantur, ad piam Christi religionem a r^plectendam, induci and persuaderi
possent.

The whole date of this spiritual Babel (wherein the Son of perdition has
his being, first and last) is of S. John said to be 42 months, Reu. 11. 2. 3.
and 12. 6.
more plainly after, 1260. days; which by the rule of divine prophecy, is so
many years, as in Leuit. 25. 8. Ezekiel. 4. 5. etc. Dan. 9. 24. etc. and so they
be understood of Iac. Brocard contra Iudeos, li. 2. Fr. du Ion on Apocal,
VVolphiu^ Ibid.
many. Now when these years should begin, is a question: But such as
understand Daniels Prophecy to outreach the date of mother Zion, (which
howsoever properly, may well fall out typically) does begin that date, upon the
final ruin of Ierushalem, Napeir Lo. of Marcheston, with others.
wherewith the Jewish Sacrifice ceased; and that is, some 40. years after
Christ's ascension, being from the birth of Christ 73. years. Daniels words
lie in his last chap. thus: From the time that the daily Sacrifice sha^^ taken
away, and the abominable desolation set up, there shall be 1290. days: b^essed
is he that waits and comes to the 1335. days. Hence is collected
(comparing S. John and Daniel together:) First, that the Abomination opposed
to the sole sufficient Sacrifice of Christ should be set up, (as the sudden
might bear it) about the year of our Lord 73. what time, not only the
Romans set up their Idols in the Temple, sacrificing unto them, as Authors of
their Conquest; whereof Josephus speaks at large: but also Menander, Ebion,
and the Nicolaitans, then were famous Heretics: To whom the Devil presently
joined others. By these, much poison was powered into the Body of the Christian
Church, for raising up a mystical Abomination.

Secondly, that Abomination was to continue 1260. years: but then was to
meet with a purger, for the good of Christ's mystical Body, his Church. From
Christ's birth to Ierushalems last ruin, 73. years: and from thence to
Antichrists fall, 1260. years: the whole from Christ to Babels fall, be 1333.
years. In which year of the Lord, Ockam wrote in defense of the Emperor, and
defended Michael Cicens, condemned the Decretals and Extrauagants, etc.

Now the Prophet Daniel does to S. John's 1260. years, add 30. to the First
Blessing; which reaches to the year of our Lord 1363. the time of the Irish
Bishop Armachan, who writ against Friars, and could not find four Bibles in
all Oxford. Then Daniel for the Second blessed time, adds to the former 45.
years, which bringes us to the year of our Lord 1408. At which time, the
Doctrine of our Wicliffe was not only dispearsed over Christendom, (for he
writ, says the Romanist Genebrard, Genebr. in Chron.
Plus quam 200. librorum volumina, more then 200. volumes of Books) but also,
the same Doctrine was held all over of many, at home and abroad; and of the
Romanists were called Wicliffians: Insomuch as the Ramanistes were glad to
gather in Council at Constance, for damming up the passage of the Gospel.
But all in vain, for that the date of their Babel was out foure-score years
before that wicked Council: and both the blessed times (the lesser and the
greater) mentioned by Daniel were passed, and all the said 80. years, a
parcel of the 1000. years allotted for chayning up Satan's mystical iniquity.

And it would not be forgotten, that presently upon Wicliffes death, Fox in
Acts and M.
God stirred up one Wa^ter Brute here in England; who not only held that the
1260. days of S. John, were prophetically so many years, and that from his
time back, to the first coming of the faith into this Desart-land, it was so
many years: But also, that the Prophet Daniels number aforesaid, was to
begin the account for so many years, even with Ierusalems destruction, as
above said. And because the words DVX CLERI (in English, Captain of the
Clergy) had in them according to our and the Latins account, the number of
666. he concluded the Pope to be the Antichrist.

And as God stirred up many worthy spirits at home; so, abroad were Marsilius
Patauinus, Gulielmus Ockam, Johannes de Gunduno, Luitpoldus, Vlricus Hangenor,
Dantes, Aligerius, Gregorius Ariminensis, Andreas de castro, Burdianus, Euda,
Taulerus, Franciscus Petrarcha, Johannes de Rupe scissa, Conradus Hagar,
Penitentiarius Asiai, Michael Cesenas, Petrus de Corbaria, Johannes de Poliaco
Johannes de Castilione, Franciscus de Arcatara, Joan. Richetaylada, Nicholas
Orem, Mathias Parisiensis, with troops many. Every one had his testimony, and
sundry having given in that testimony, the Beast that came out of the
bottomless Pit, did put them to death. Diverse again, were miraculously
preserved to the fullness of age, notwithstanding the plainness of their
testimony; as Wicliffe, Chaucer, and many others. The walls of Babel are so
taken, and the Tower is on fire, howsoever many at it do murmr, and labor
by watery Arguments to quench it. But all in vain, for Babel must be razed,
and no more be.

CHAP. xvij.
Touching Satan's Binding up.
SAint John in Apocalips 20. presently upon Babels fall, does see Satan chayned
of an Angel, and so put under lock and key for a thousand years; that so he
may not deceive the people any more. That this should be for 1000. years next
after Christ, or his Apostles, is against experience it self; for in that
thousand years, the contrary has fallen out. He is shut up, not from every
evil, but from deceiving the people as before. Before, he advanced a false
Gospel in midst of the Church, which brought with it 1000. other evils; but
Babel once falling, the Angel goes to chayning: and as the Essential evil
decreaseth, the linkes of the Angels Chain increase; and Babel down, the
Gospel rises up.

And if we mark it, we shall find, that Satan was fast gyued in Wicliffes
time: For as here he set much truth at liberty, so his sound by writing,
went all over; and many abroad by his writings, came out of darkness into
Christ's marvelous light. At the brightness whereof, the Romish Clergy
fretted: and to salve the matter, they conuened at Constance and there (as men
Constant in Evil) they condemn Wicliffe (a long time before that, dead) and
send order into England, for taking up his bones, and burning them. Upon which
Council, John Hus and lerom of Prage, were burnt for Wiclifians; for so, they
nicknamed the Christians. And which would not be forgotten, that howsoever this
Council of Constance was begun under one Pope (namely, John 24.) it was
quickly graced with two Popes more, Ferebantur enim tunc tres Pontifices, etc.
Su^ma council. per F. Bart. Carranzam. Printed Anno M.DC.I. Lugduni.
Benedict 13. and Gregory 12. What an head had the Romish Church then? Three
Popes at a clap, make a plain Cerberus. Such a monstrous divided head,
presaged a fall: and in the next Council (which was held at Basil) the Pope
lost his Headship, being made Subject to the body of his Council. I troe that
the Angels Chain, then came over Satan's head: and sure I am, that all Stories
make clear, that from Wicliffes time hiterto, he has been so far from
seducing Generally, as he has generally been of the loosing hand, people and
kingdoms still falling away from him. Nor need we to fear the restoration of
his mystical Idolatry, for the general. It was but an ordinary Stone which
Serajah, tying his Scrolle too, did cast into Euphrates; but the Stone whereto
this Babels curse is tied, is as a Millstone in S. John's eyes; and this thrown
down into the Sea, with these words: It shall be found no more. Amen.

CHAP. xviij.
Touching the loosing of Satan, and Gog and Magog.
AS Saint John sees Satan, first Apprehended, secondly Chayned, Wicliffe writ
a Book, De solutione Sathanae.
thirdly cast into Prison, and fourthly shut up from power of seducing
universally, and that for a thousand years: all which no doubt befall, through
the Mediation of Christ, the Churches Head: so, he foreseeth that Satan upon
the expirement of the thousand years, is loosed for a little season. Which
season (how little soever) he takes up, in using all means of seduction; for
here is the same word Planao used as before: of which word comes Plane^a,
which we term a Planet; and in S. Jude have turned it, a Wandering Star.
Whereby may be collected, the instabilitie of such spirits as Satan seduceth;
soon carried about hither and thither, as Cain was, the ancient Arch-runnagate.

Lactantius in Epit. divine. Iustit. cap. 11. may very well be admitted, and
read profitably here. If the term Chiliast was given but for that, I cannot
but think, that some maledicted that they understood not.
The universal seduction that forewent the 1000. years Iubile, was close and
mystical, growing up with the Body of the Church, and so much the more
dangerous. But after the expirement of the said 1000. years, Satan having but
a little time, cannot hope by that kind of cousenage quickly to overtake the
Church. That little time therefore he uses in another kind of seducement; and
that is, by bearing certain (without the Church) in hand, that they may easily
conquer the Christians, and subdue the whole earth unto them. The Cheifetaines
of that adverse power, are styled Gog and Magog; whose army (for number) is as
the sand of the Sea.

Some have said, that Gog and Magog signify in English, Covered and Uncovered:
as if the Covered one should be Antichrist (of Rome) that couers himself with
Christianity: and the other, an Uncovered or plain open-foe, as the Turk.
Gog indeed signifies a Covering (such as were the flat battlements on the tops
of the Israelites houses) but not Covered: the Root of them both, is, Gog,
which is Tectum.
and Magog must either be but the very same (howsoever M be prefixed) or at
most, can but stand for Man-gog; that is, one that is Of Gog, and not opposite
to Gog.

Passing by the words signification, we find Gog and Magog in Ezekiel. 38. to
intend Uncircumcised Adversaries, dwelling North from Judea (it may be sproung
of Magog, Iaphets second Son) of whom (it is held of many) the Scithians and
Tartars had their original. Gyg is famous in History, for giving name to
Mountains, to a Lake near Sa^dj, to men, and particularly to a brother of
Briareus, who was called Gyges, a Gyantlike person, at enmity with God.

The Rabbines of the Jews do hold, Paul. Ricius, in Cabal. art. Tom. 1. de
Talmud.
that the Wars of Gog and Magog, shall go before the settled Kingdom of
Messiah: or, as H. Br. in Coheleth. p. 35.
Ram bam (that is, according to the 4. radical letters, R. M. B. M. Rabbj
Moses Ben Maymony) says, in the beginning of Messiahs days, shall be the
Battles of Gog and Magog. The poor wretches speak a truth, but understand
it not; inasmuch as they believe not that Christ's coming is twofold: the
first in Humility, the second only in Glory. With the heathenish Gog-magogs,
our Savior warred by the ministry of his Apopostles, whose weapons were
spiritual: but the Gog-magog spoke of in the Revelation, must arise after the
unloosing of Satan. And indeed, upon the downfall of that enemy and his
infinite Army (which can not be done, but by the power of Christ) Messiah is to
settle a Kingdom of Glory.

1. From Christ's birth to Ierushalems final ruin (the world then being aged
4000. years) were 73. years.

2. From Ierushalems downe-fall, through the times of Antichrist, to the fall
of his Babel, be 1260. years.

3. From the Periode, to Satan's being let loose, be 1000. years. The whole
sum from our Lords birth, till Satan's loosing, be 2333. years: Then, the
Christians be to expect open Hostility. But God knows how to deliver his, in
that day of tentation, that shall come upon all the earth. Allegatur a Rau
Katina, vt est in Paulo R^cio.
A thousand years shall the Desolation be, says the Talmud.

Mean time it would be remembered, that the R^bbi^es ordinarily hold, that God
renews not the world, Nisi septem millibus annorum transactis, till 7000.
years have passed from the Creation. And we may think, that as for the Math.
24. 22.
Electes sakes, he did shorten the days of the Romans siege laid to
Ierushalem; so, he will cut short the days of Gog-magog, besieging the Tents
and City of Christians.

CHAP. xix.
Touching the last Judgment.
Together with the Fire falling from heaven upon Gog-magogs Army, even the
whole body of Heathenrie (for then the Saints living, shall be taken up aloft and
meet Christ in the Air (1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.) as the eight souls in the Arc,
were carried up aloft from the judgment of Water) S. John notes, that the great
and glorious Judgment presently follows. Take his own words, for I think
not good to paraphraze (at this time) upon them.

10. Verse) And the Devil that deceived them, Revel, 20. 10. etc.
was cast into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where the Beast and the false
Prophet, shall be tormented, even day and night for evermore.

11. And I saw a great white Throne, and one that sat on it, from whose face
fled away both the Earth and Heaven, and their place was no more found.

12. And I saw the dead, both great and small, stand before God: and the Books
were opened, and an other Book was opened, which is the Book of life; and the
dead were judged of those things which were written in the Books, according
to their works.

13. And the Sea gave up her dead, which were in her; and Death and Deapth
delivered up the dead which were in them: and they were judged euery-man
according to their works.

14. And Death and As the Latins tume Hades by Infernus, so I by Deapth. But
indeed we have not an English word that will express it.
Deapth were cast into the Lake of Fire: this is the Second death.

15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of life, was cast into
the Lake of fire.

CHAP. xx.
Touching a certain description of the Church in Revel. 21. and 22.
FInally, after the universal day of Doom, S. John draws an excellent Map
of the Church: but whether of the Church tryumphing after judgment, or of the
Church militant here before judgment, as it is seen by the eye of Faith; it
is not a little questionable.

Many have taken it for the Church Tryumphant, not only for his description in
the last place (for that will not necessarily conclude, seeing somewhat in the
last place, may be but an expositiue Commentary of that which went before) but
for that it is said of this people, Revel. 21. 4.
that All tears are wipe away from their eyes, etc. Which in proper sense
accords to the Church Triumphant.

Some again do take it for the Church here So does Conciliu^ prouinc.
Senosense in decreto 1. with many others.
Militant; not only for that the Apostle in Galat. 4. does style the Christian
Church here, by the name of Ierushalem from above; but also for that in this
Church, there be certain Leaves of a Tree, wherewith the Nations were to be
healed; Chapter 21. 24. 26. and 22. 2.
and after this life, there is no healing of any error; much less, of the
Gentile-kinges bringing their glory unto the Triumphant Church.

And I have As may appear in my Bibles Brief, in the argument upon the
Revelation.
long suspected, that it is a description of that part of the Church Militant,
which should betide the Gentiles, upon the universal addition of the Jews, or
rather of all Israel. For as, we never read of the ten Tribes united again
with Judah (howsoever it be plainly foretyped twyse over in Ezekiel. 37. and
there spoken of, next before the Wars of Gog and Magog) so, S. Paul says,
that after the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, All Israel shall be saved
(Romans 11. 25. 26.) And so, S. John sees, not only thousands of Judah,
Benjamin, and Leuj, sealed in the forehead to Godward; but also of other Tribes
( Revel. 7.) following the Lamb, and singing Moses his song of Deliverance: of
whom it is said, that there was no guile in their mouth, and that they were
without spot before the Throne of God ( Revel. 14. 1. etc.) which is the state
of all, to whom sin is not imputed. Herewith I have marked, that S. John does
here keep the same method, as did Ezekiel: for Ezekiel presently after the
downfall of Gog-magog, does describe the New Temple, and distinguish a new,
the Israelites portions in Canaan; all one (in effect) with this description of
S. John: Ezekiel ending with Jehovah Shammah, and S. John with this, that in
this new City, The Lord is there. But, let it be at the first hand, that it is
a Description of Christ's mystical Body here, whose hearts are purified by
Faith: Act. 15. 9.
yet, at the second hand, it may (as a Type) give us a resemblaunce of the
Churches final glory; and that the rather, for that to their glory, there
shall be after the destruction of all by Fire, A new Heaven, 2. Pet. 3. 12. 13.
and a new Earth; wherein shall dwell Righteousness, as S. Peter plainly
teaches.

Here I know, that some understand not according to sobriety; but, as if they
were Prophets of extraordinary spirit, they boldly determine of things yet
secret. As the light of the Righteous increases till midday, so, the light of
Gods Spirit shall be enlarged upon his Church. But every age, brings not with it
all things; and let us be contented with our present measure. Mean time, the
meditation of the Glory to come, will effect in us patience under present
tentations: because, The Afflictions of this present life, Romans 8. 18.
are not worthy of the Glory, which shall be showed unto us.

Here Neighbors cross and pierce both hands and feet;
Angels and Saints be there our Neighbors sweet:
Here famine, sword, and sickness do offend us;
There plenty, safety, soundness do attend us:
Here Sorrow sits, and hand in hand she wrings;
There Solace sweetly Hallelu-jah sings.
While Satan's seed it self does ruinate.
Turn thou aside my Soul, and meditate:
And far bejond thy earthly thoughts aspire;
Draw near to God, that he may draw the nier:
That with the That is, the Church.
Body of thy present Story,
In fine, thou may be swallowed up of Glory.
A Catalogue of Authors used in this Book; together with the times wherein
they flourished, or, at least where in they lived: as Chronicles deliver.
First, such Writers as were before Christ came in our Nature.
Mercury trismegistes, his time uncertain. Sibilla, Cl. Alex. in protreptico.
more ancient then Orpheus. Orpheus, Suida (as in the small Greek Poets)
places him in the time of Isreal's Judges.
about some 1300. years. Isocrates, 360. years. Aristotle, 300. years.
Septuagint, 260. years. Aristeas, about the same time. Julius Caesar, between
40. and 50. years Virgil, Horace, Secondly, after Christ's birth.
Martialis Cephas, about 58. years, if not before. Josephus, 73. years.
Ignatius, Ignatius, Bishop of Antioche, the third after Peter the Apostle:
Hierony. de vit. scr. eccles.
about 112. Justin, the Historian, 154. Justin, the Martyr, 170. Ireneus,
Ireneus the scholar of Polycarpe, said to be scholar to S. John, Hiero^. Ibid.
200. Clemens Alexandrine, 202. Tertullian, 210. Origin, 216. Cyprian, 249.
Victor Pitab. 261. Victor Antiochen 280. Dorotheus, Eusebius, 326. Lactantius,
338. Hilary, 347. Nyssen, 348. Ambrose, 371. Ierom, 375. Basil, 378. Augustine,
I am not ignorant, that in the third Oration against the Jews (bearing the
name of Chrisostoms) the Writer says (as Erasmus translates it) Hic
quingentesimus ex eo tempore agitur annus, as if from Ierushalems fall, at
furdest, from, Christ's birth, it were to his time 500. years; either that
must not be Chrysostoms speech (by general consent of Chronicles) or by fifth
hundred year, must be meant 500. of years current, not nearely complete. Let
the Learned determine it.
399. Chrysostom, 402. Hesichius, 310. Cyril. Alexandr, 418. Socrates
scholast, 427. Theodoret, 433. Prosper, 467. Fulgentius, 468. Rhemigius, 478.
Gelasius, 492. Boethius, 504. Gildas the Britain, 580. Gregorius Mag. 591.
Mahomet, 660. Beda, 720. Ans^ert, 767. Idiota, 848. Giselbert. 879.
Theophylact, 885. Rupertus, 1102. Barnard, 1110. Pet. Lombard, 1148. Decretals,
1232. Tho. Aquin. 1240. Durand. 1287. Scotut, 1340. Wicliffe, VVicliffe (as M.
Fox records in Act, and Mon*) was of K. Edward the 3. sent with the Bishop of
Bangor and others, Ambassador into Italy, for treating with the Popes Legates,
about affairs between the King and the Pope -- He had the public testimony
of Oxford, for good life till his death; and for learning, the testimony, is
that he had written in Logic, Philosophy, Divinity, Morality, and the
speculatiue Art, without peer. Many years after his death, the Council of
Constance condemned him: Caused his bones to be taken up at Lutterworth (his
Parioch) and burnt. In the same Council, Husse and Ierom of Prage were burnt
for followers and defenders of VVicliffe. Fiftie-foure Nobles of Morauia writ
unto that Council, in defense of Husse and Ierom, adding their several seals
and hands: with sharp reprehensions, for taxing Bobemia and Morauia of
Haeresie. Many Nobles in England, (about the year 1385. as M. More records)
did maintain VVicliffes doctrine; namely, L. Montague, L. Clifford, Earl of
Salisburie, etc. Latimer, Neuel.

From the beginning of the first Rest in Canaan unto Christ's death, be
reckoned but 28. Jubilees. And the 1400. year after Christ, bringes with it an
28. Iubilee.


1367. etc. years. Walter Brute, 1384. Wideford, 1396. Bessarion, 1433.
Sabellicus, 1482. Pol. Virgil vrb. 1520. Paul Ricius, 1537. Wolphius, 1544.
These being but modern Writers, I pass by their years.
Folengius. Melanchton. Nannius. Zegedin. Ferus. P. Martyr. Granatensis.
Zanchius. Carranza. Beza. Hospinian^. Bellarmine. Goropius Becanus. Fr. du Ion.
Ia. Brocard. More. Calvin. Napeir. Musculus. Fr. Trigge. Bucer. H. Br. Ph.
Lonicer. Gerard. Zuinglius. Burges, with others. Bullinger.

LECTORI.
HErein, against Romanistes, I allege Auncientes, even such as themselves do
grant worthy to be heard in the matter. Against Nouelistes, I allege such
as themselves hold most worthy to be listened unto. And to deal otherwise,
were to make the Plea, partial.

As for Rome, the Talmudistes dealt wittily, when not only one says, he saw
Messiah amongst poor Lazers, without Romes Gates: but also, when (by way of
parable) they teach, that what time Solomon matched with Pharaohs Daughter, the
Angel Gabriel pitched a Reed in the Sea, which grew to a Rock (a
Reedish-rocke) whereupon Rome was built. Old Idolatry ouerturned old Rome
(howsoever, some Chapels may yet stand there) and new Idolatry (doubtless)
will quickly ouerturne the New. For faithful is he, that by S. John has
spoken it.

As for the Nouelistes, who count every passage to a new faction, for grouth in
the faith (which is indeed, but the multiplying of a scab into a scurfe) Iotham
in his Parable of the Trees, annoynting the Bramble, has delivered their
destiny. The fire shall come out of their sides, and consume their
corporations as Stubble: For the Plant which God has not planted, must be
pulled up by the Roots.

When I had an irregular Conceit of our Churches Discipline (as for the Faith,
I held it close, and so much Communion with the Church, as my travails then
could well afforde) I then did perceive in the Nouelistes (not only some
Absurdities of Opinion, but also) a flat Opposition between their Faith and
Practice. As for whith cause, the Archbishop Whitguift could sometimes say; If
I were of Cartwrights opinion, I would be of the Brownistes Practice: so, the
like caused me in words and writings, still to be taxing of them. Whereupon
I found them (no less then the Romanist) injuriously implacable. Which as it
continued to the time of that Conference, which was to be held at Hamptoncourt
before the King; so then, after bragges of their unmatchable Champions, I was
braued by them in the City of London, as one that should have no part in their
expected Prey, because of yore I had not playde their prize. Sed apage, vah, I
shame to think, how they there fomed out their own shame. But more I blush,
that they should in hugger-mugger still strive to uphold their Giant of Straw,
having broken off his hands and feet so lately, in presence of the Arc of
Testimony. He may fear little Birds at the first; but no doubt, they will ere
long sit upon his pate, and pick Strawes out of his nose. In the hope whereof,
I so cease this speech.

H. Cl.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane over against the sign
of the White Lion. 1609.

Errata.
In the Title page, for Nouum, read Nonum. In A 2. backe-side, line 4.
Briareus. A 3. foreside, line 3. Viuis. B 2. foreside, line 11. sanguinolent. C
foreside, in the margin, Leda. E backside, in the margin, Quis enim hoc. E 2.
backside, line 30. 1. Tim. 3. E 3. line 1. Factious. F 4. line 3. maugre. G 2.
line 3. Sorex. G 4. line 27. blot out, etsi. H bacside, line 20. perfidos. K 2.
line 2. vocalesque.


