A BRIEF OF THE BIBLE, DRAWN FIRST into English Poesy, and then illustrated
by apt Annotations: together with some other necessary Appendices. By HENOCH
CLAPHAM

PRINTED BY Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1596.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MASTER THOMAS MY-LOT Esquier, increase of all true
happiness in Jesus Anointed.
FInding (right Woorshipful) so great utterance of your Christian affectto^,
immediately after the spiritual exercises I kept at CHESTER in the STREET: I
could not but now in dedicatio^ of Loue-memorials, signify my duetifull
thankfulness toward you, not only amidst, but that more is, in the forefront
of my Friends. Accept therefore I pray you, not a handful of the Persians
water offered to an uncircumcised Kesar: but a handful of the water of Life,
offered by the Lord his poor servant, unto an open professed Christian. A wise
Lapidarie chooses not stones so much for outward quantity, as inherent
quality: nor I hope, will you so much measure my gift with the bodily eye,
as by the Line of the Mind, or spiritual eye: whereupon setting down my
wrest, I here rest: Beseeching the Lord in all goodness, to be with you and
yours for ever, Amen.

EDINBVRGH, 1596. Your poor unworthy Kinsman, HENOCH CLAPHAM.

TO ALL YOUNG ones in Christ's School, increase of knowledge and sanctification
be multiplied daily from above Amen.
I Have here for thy use, drawn a Sum of the Sacred-writ, usually caled
BIBLE, from the greek word that in English is, BOOK: because it is the Book of
al books; with which Book, other books compared, they are but blots of man's
brain, whereas this is the Sacred-writ and wisdom of ELOHIM, or, of that ONE
ESSENCE IN TRINITY. That Holy-booke, before the Incarnation of the PROMISED
SEED, was divided into Law and Prophets: but since the CHRIST assumed our
nature, and in the same ascended to the right hand of Majesty, from whence HE
sent down the HOLY GHOST to fill all things, especially the hearts of his
APOSTLES, for speaking and penning the mind of JESUS: after that time (I say)
The Book of God was divided into PROPHETS and APOSTLES, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 20. The whole then consists in these
Books: These are called the five Books of Moses, or of the Law.
1 Genesis, 2 Exodus, 3 Leviticus, 4 Nombers, 5 Deuteronomie. 6 Job: which for
order of time might be placed next Genesis: but here for order of Books. 7
Joshua. 8 Judges. 9 Ruth. 10 Sam. 1. 11 Sam. 2. 12 Kings, 1. 13 Kings, 2. 14
Ch^on. 1. 15 Chron. 2. 16 Ezra, 17 Nehemiah. 18 Hester. 19 Psalms. 20
Proverbs. 21 Ecclesiastes. 22 Song of Songs. These be called the 4. great
Prophets.
23 Isaiah. 24 Icremiah. 25 Ezechiel. 26 Daniel. These 12. be called, the
small Prophets.
27 Hoshea. 28 Joel. 29 Amos. 30 Obadiah. 31 Jonah. 32 Micah. 33 Nahum. 34
Habakkuk. 35 Zephaniah. 36 Haggai. 37 Zechariah. 38 Malachi: The last Prophet
of the old Testament, and the last book of the OLD COVENANT.




Between this Malachi and the NEVVE TESTAMENT, have (too inconsideratlie) been
inserted, certain PRIVATE writings, called Apocrypha: an Human Breath,
betwixt the Lips of the two Testamentes. Malachi (in English, Messenger or
Angel) (prophecieth plainly, (Chap. 3. 1. and 4. 5.) that JEHOVAH will send
unto the Jews a Messenger, even Elijah, to prepare the way before the
MESSENGER OF COVENANT, viz. CHRIST. These speeches of Malachi, (or last ANGEL
of the old Covenant) are the very Face of the New Testament or Covenant made
for Many. Matthew, he reports the ANGEL from Heaven, Chapter 1. 20. bringing
news of JESUS: and Chap. 2. 1. The Messenger of Covenant is borne: and Chap.
3. JOHN BAPTIST the PREPARER of Christ his way, is introduced in that work.
Mark begins with the same: and Luke (Chap. 1.) brings in the ANGEL
publishing the birth of the Messenger appointed to prepare the way: as also
proclaiming the birth of the ANGEL of the NEVVE COVENANT, for whom he was to
prepare the way, calling this JOHN, ELIAS: because he goes before Christ in
the SPIRIT and POWER of ELIAS, or Eliiah. The Evangelist John in his 1.
Chapter, brings in the saving LIGHT Jesus, and the MAN SENT from GOD, viz.
John. Thus the last BREATH of the old Testament in Malachi, and the first
BREATH of the New Testament in the mouths of the EVANGELISTS, is all ONE
BREATH CANONICAL from Heaven. They look not with Ianus, into two contrary
Coasts: but Hand in hand they join, kissing each other, and both of them
looking into the EAST, from whence the Glorious DAY STAR did visit the Earth.

Who now dare hinder their lips from meeting, by inserting Vn-canonicall
writs, a Darke-Cloude, and Private (if not, a stinking) Breath. The Jews that
kept the Canon, received them not: As also, they were not written in Hebers
sacred tongue: a sufficient Brand, that they were no Orackles from JEHOVAH to
Hebers People. Leaping the^ over them Logs, we come unto the New Testament,
whose Books be these: 1 Matthewe. 2 Mark. 3 Luke. 4 John. 5 Acts of the
Apostles. 6 Paul his Epistle to the Romans. 7 Corinthians* 1. 8 Corinthians,
2. 9 Galatians. 10 Ephesians. 11 Philippians. 12 Colossiaus. 13 Thessalonians,
1. 14 Thessalonians, 2. 15 Timothy. 1. 16 Timothy. 2. 17 Titus. 18 Philemon.
19 The Author to the Hebrews. 20 The Epistle of James. 21 Of Peter, 1. 22 Of
Peter, 2. 23 Of John, 1. 24 Of John, 2. 25 Of John, 3. 26 Jude. 27 Revel.


Exercise thy self in pervsing the Bible, the whole of al these several writs,
and thereby thou shall easily (God his Spirit assisting thee) discern the
true Christ from False, the True Church from the False: True writ from False:
and so consequently, all holy Truth from Falsehood. And for helping thy weak
Memory, as also, for giving a taste of that large Truth, in short speech, I
have (through God his help) manifested my poor power, but rich goodwill, in
this little book. First, I have in English Poesy (drawn according to an
ancient staff) delivered summarily the history of the old and new
Testament: Secondly, upon the most difficult points of the Poesy, I have
dilated by way of Illustration, not only for the fulfilling of the history:
but also for discussing sometimes, some necessary question: as also annexed
hereto, such certain computation of time, for special joints of the Story, as
whereby the spiritual minded, may something be furthered to deeper points
contemplative. As thou shall receive any good hereby, so I pray thee be
thankful unto God therefore, and quickly thou shall find his hand upon thee to
every good work. The Lord be with thy spirit Amen.

Dedicate to show all duty, chiefly to England. H. C.

A BRIEF OF THE BIBLE, WITH NECESSARY Annotations upon the most material
points in the Poesy.
1. Staff.
When Elohim (a) El, (b) Shaddaj, (c) Jehovah,
(d) Iah, (d) Ehjesh (that is, GOD (e) in Persons Three,
But (e) Essence One, On whom all things do stay,
Cause of all Causes and Sufficiency)
when (f) HE the Heavens and Earth and Host has framed:
He create (g) Man and (h) woman, (i) Ada^ named.
(a) signifying Strong o^ Potent: The first Atribute or Name of the Strong GOD*
given in the Holy Book ( Gene. 1. 1.) by Moses. Elohim, is the Plural number
of EL: so that ELOHIM did Create, is as much as: (...), the strong One did
create: the Plural number denoting the plurality of Persons; but joined with
a word of the Singular Number, it pulls us back to considder, that That
Three, are but One ^ssence of S^bstance. The Essence then is one and
spiritual, ( John 4 24.) but distinguished (not divided) into Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost. 1. John 5. 7.

(b) Signifies, All sufficiency.

(c) Signifies B^^ng or Eternal: namely, such a Being as has his Being of
None, and by whom All other things have their Being ( Act^ 17. 28) and so
Eternal, as is not only without Beginning and End, but by and in whom, All
things begin and end. This woonderful Name, is deeply graven on the Forehead
of the Ten Commandments, I JEHOVAH, Exodus 20. 2.

(dd) signifying, I AM, so he speaks to Israel by Moses, I AM, THAT I AM. He
speaks of himself in the Present Tense or Time, because All time with us
passed and to come is presentay before him: we should so shape our selves as
having our first Creation, Fall and future Judgment, always present before us:
then we would not content our selves with I was good, or I will be good: but
we would labor, that how sodainl^ soeve^ God come upon us, even at that
Present, to be found watchful and sober. Hear not the High sacred Titles of
God, but be thereby in all estates edified.

(ee) This one God is distinguished into Three Persons, the Powerful Name,
into which Man was first Created, Genes. 1. and lastly baptized. Math. 28. 19.
not one Person before the other in Time, but in a certain respect, or order,
whereof anon.

(f) In the beginning of Time (and each Motion must have a Moover before it)
that mighty Elohim steppe^^ ^oorth (according to his Eternal Decree) and
creates Creatures for his own sake, Prove. 16. 4. which work, he manifests by
dividing it into parts: every part declared within a certain Number of Motion
or Time.

First, he of Nothing, created Something: namely, the Heavenly and Earthly
Matt^r (Genes. 1. 1.) whereout, Al other Creatures were to be diduced. And as.
To Create is properly to make Something of Nothing, so this said Matter is
only prope^lie Created, and the Creatures formed out of That, properly M^de.
These, that by Heaven and Ear^h, in that first verse, have understood the whole
Subsequent (as though the first verse delivered generally, what afterward is
handled particularly) have therein failed. If this were no^ so, then Moses
should afterward tell us, that Man was made of Earth, and then have omitted
the Creation of Earthly matter, without which first known, we cannot
conceive the second. Having Created that Heavenly and Earthly Matter. ^oe it
was as a confused Chaos, or rude Lump, but over-covered by the Breath (or
Spirit of EL) as eggs covered by the Hen, for bringing soorth a more excellent
Creature: without which sitting upon, as not only there would be no new
Creature, but also the egg would in time cease to be that it first is so (and
much more than so) without that over-spreading of the Spirit, that first Matter
would have returned into Nothing, and have ceased Being. But briefly, (for I
profess brevitie in this Book) that Matter Created, all being darkness, ELOHIM
calls Light out of darkness, and separating them, he calls Darkness (for it
first had Being) Night; and the Light, day, and so was Created the first day.
Into which day, most liklie may be referred the Creation of Angels, whereunto I
am the rather led, because they are termed by the holy Ghost, Angels of Light,
^. Cor. 11. 14. and it may be, they had their Being from the Heavenly nature.
But in which of the Six days soever they were Created, sure it is, that before
Man his Creation, they had forsaken their Original, Job. 4. 18. Jude 6.
compared with his time of tempting the Woman.

In the second day, was created the Firmament or superior Region, calling it
Heaven, putting a separation betwixt the superior and inferior waters.

In the third day, ELOHIM first commanded the inferior waters to gather into
appointed places, calling them waters so collected, Seas: and the dry part,
Earth. Secondly, he commands the same Earth to bring forth Herbs and Trees.

In the fourth day, the Lord commanded two great shining Stars to Exist in
the firmament, appointing the Greater (namely, the Sun) for the day: and the
lesser (namely, the Moon) for the Night.

In the fifth day, God commanded diverse Creatures to have their Being out of
the Waters: first, creeping water Creatures, as Eeles, Snakes, etc. Secondly,
he commands Being to Whales and all Fishes: Thirdly, to all feathered
Fowls: blessing all of them to multiplication.

In the f^xt day, he commands the Earth to bring forth every kind of Beast,
pasing or creeping. As I understand the Serpent ( Genes. 3. 1.) in English
Creeping, not to be a Creeper of the Waters, longing to the fifth days work;
but of these Earth-creepers, because there he is called a Beast of the Field:
So, I marvel at some, who have peremptorily affirmed, because ELOHIM there
commands him to go on his belly, that he crept not before As M. Calvin
thereon, might have stayed such resolute heads: so (in a case at least
doubtful) they should have feared, lest they should have rushed on Moses: who
in the fifth day, gives amongst watery Creatures, the Creepers first place: as
in this sixth days work, places the creeping Beast next immediately before Man:
being in the same day, and in the place next before man Created: which done,

(g) He, ELOHIM, does of the dust of the Earth make Man, breathing into him a
reasonable Soul. In this Soul (a spiritual Substance, as is God; but finite
and not being of it self, so is not GOD) in it, ELOHIM stamped his own
likeness, of an holy Unity in Trinity, and of an holy Trinity in Unity. As
the Soul is but one Essence, so there arises three diverse Faculties, or Powers
in that one Substance. First, there is the Mind: Secondly, the Will: Thirdly,
the Power of Doing or working. The Mind conceives and understands things:
the Will, affects the object, accordingly as the mind first conceives of the
thing: and from this mind conceiving, and will affecting, there proceeds a
working power, or a power by which something is done. The Mind so conceiving,
resembling the Father: the Will having his affection begotten of the Minds
Conceit, resembling the Son begotten of the Father: and the Power of Doing,
proceeding both from the Mind and Will, resembling the Holy Ghost, proceeding
from the Father and the Son. And as them three Persons make but one God: so
these three Faculties (for the Sou^e being a single Substance it cannot be
parted) do make but one spiritual Essence, or Soul. But as the Father works
not without his Son; nor the Holy Ghost without the Father and the Son: so
neither does the mind, or will, or working power, effect any thing sundred,
but jointly: yet as we attribute Creation to the Father: Redemption to the
Son: Illumination to the Spirit: So, to the Mind we attribute Understanding,
conceit: to the Will, we attribute well or ill affecting: and to the working
power, we attribute the thing wrought or done. As in that one God, no Person is
before or after another in Time but in Order of some external work to us
wrought: So neither in that one Soul, is the mind before the will in Time,
nor the working power behind them in time ( For the power of working is before
the thing wrought) but only in Order: for there is no sooner a Soul, but
there exist all them three, and without any one of them the Soul cannot be. If
one demand, what is it that Creates all things? I answer, God. What is it
that Redeemeth Man fallen? God. What is it that enlightneth man? God: yet there
are not three, but One God So demand what it is in me that understands? I
answer, a Soul. What is that which wills or affectionateth any thing? the
Soul. What is it, whereby thou art enabled to live, move? I answer, a Soul.
yet are there not three, but one Soul in me, whereby them things are wrought.
Philosophandi quia non institutum, Dixi. But as no Image can almost any whit
attain the pe^fection of that Thing, whereof it is an Image: so neither this
Image of GOD in man, able to attain the excellency of the Highest, who in
every thing is Infinite, Only, and the Cause of other things.

(h) Having Created man, ELOHIM brings all inferior Creatures before him, to
see how he will call them: who in the depth of his understanding mind,
wills and utters such names, as the Lord approved. But every living thing
having his yoke-felowe, man was alone, and therefore imperfect. ELOHIM casting
HIM therefore on sleep, does from his side extract a Rib, whereof he made
Mans-mate: putting Her unto Him, with blessing to Increase.

(i) He gives unto Both but one Name, Genesis 5. 1. contrary to some Cuntries
custom now, where the Wife bears not her Hus-bandes Name) to teach them
that they were but One: He the Root, She the Branch sprung out of his side.

2. Staff.
That (a) Man and (a) Man's in (b) Eden placed were:
To whom God gave Command of all the fruits,
The fruit of (c) One Tree only to forbear,
In pain of death, as holy writ disputes.
Which Precept kept, A sacramental wood
of Life (d) during before their eyes there stood.
(a) He was called Ish, that is, Man: she was called Ishah that is, Man's:
first, because she was derived from Man: secondly, for that she was made for
Man.

(b) They being made of Dust, Genes. 2. 7. God notwithstanding prefers them
before all other Creatures: First, by putting in their Soul an Image of
himself: Secondly, by seating them in the most glorious plot of the Earth,
called Eden or Paradis^: Thirdly, by giving them dominion over other his
Creatures: Fourthly, by commending only unto them Hierogliphiks, or holy
preaching signs, as follows.

(c) One Commandment was laid upon them, that thereby they might profess
subjection to the Creator. The Tree was called, the Tree of knowledge of good
and evil. Gen 2. 17 because it preached sacramentallie to Adam, that he
should do Good in not eating of it: but he should do Evil in eating of it.

(d) This second Tree, sacramentally preached to Ada^, that to them and their
seed, Life should be immortal, if so they kept ELOHIM his Precept.

3. Staff.
But (e) Satan (f) Devil, envying God and Man:
Possessed the Serpent, beautiful and feate:
Who unto Woman subtellie soon came,
And her persuades, on fruit forbid to eat.
(g) She eat and gave to Man: so both did sin:
And cruel (h) Death his kingdom did begin.
(e) Adversary.

(f) Accuser. when this Advers-spirit was created I know not: except in the
first day, together with the Light: But created an Adversary he was not: but
first together with the whole Army of Angels, he was created good, but
sinning against God, God cast him and all that sinned with him down to Hell:
2. Pet, 2. 4. He can yet transform himself into an Angel of Light, in being a
false Spirit in the mouths of men. 2. Cor. 11. 14 15. and King. 21. 22. No
marvel then, if here he could occupy the tongue of the Serpent (the Serpent
then beautiful) and so speak from his Jaws unto Heuah, she as yet not having
like knowledge of the Creatures nature, as had Adam: who before her Creation
had seen and named the Creatures.

(g) As Satan durst not first assail Man: so he hoped that Woman once
perverted, she would easily pervert Man.

(h) Sin brought in Death, for having sinned* Mortality seized on their
nature: so that from the day of their sinning, their nature ever was dying.
Before immortal, but thencefoorth mortal, subject to diseases, agues,
gripings, by the which Nature finally is overthrown.

4. Staff.
Their souls once stripped, of (a) Light and Holiness,
(b) They fly from God. He calls them back again:
And then besides the Soul his dead distres,
He does inflict on both their (c) Bodies pain:
But promises, that (d) Woman seed should bring,
who should destroy Satan his deadly sting.
(a) Thus They lost the Image of God: and in, room of Light, the mind was cove
red with spiritual Darkness: the will possessed with vnholines: from both
which, proceeded the Power of doing Evil. In this perversion therefore of the
Souls Faculties, they carried in them the Image of the Devil.

(b) Their Mind conceiving wrongly of God, the Will (which is as the foot of
the Soul) willed to walk a wrong way. The erroneous mind, begets an unholy
Will, and from them both proceed that Power, whereby they conceived and brought
forth evil: where is now Free Will unto good? This spiritual death of the
Soul (for life to good, was lost) lively preached the desert of eternal
death.

(c) He enjoyneth Man (and all in Man) to labor in honest calling. And to the
end, that there might be occasion of Man's labor, the Earth is cursed: after
which Curse, it brings forth briars, brambles, and other annoying Creatures,
which had no place in the first Creation holy. The sight of these things,
should teach Man much wisdom. Unto Woman he appointed dolor of the womb, in
bringing forth Children. As for the Serpent (Satan's Instrument) he is
enjoined, to go on the Earth with his belly, and to feed of dust between whom
and Mankind, there should ever be enmity. Hereof it comes, that nether Man
can abide the Serpent, nor the Serpent brook Man.

(d) Woman being the first in transgression, is (by ELOHIM his free-favour)
here appointed to bring forth the Saving seed: namely, Jesus, the Christ.
Between this blessed seed, and his members faithful on the one side: and
Satan (the Serpents possessor) and his seed of unfaithful and rebellious people
on the other side: between them (I say) is here fore-decreed a spiritual
Battle. Satan (called the Dragon, Rev. 12. 7. it may be, because he here
possessed that kind of Serpent) he sha^ bruise the heel of Christ and his
mystical body. (far enough from the heart) but the Blessed-seed in the end
breaks the Dragons head, and casts him out of Heaven, into the Earth, as
worthy to be excommunicate to the death. This Seed of the Woman darkly
preached here, is afterward in God his book, more and more clearlie revealed
and taught.

5. Staff.
Promise of Life made through that holy seed,
Adam he calls her (a) Heuah, dame of Life:
Then God to let them have their right and meed,
Our of the (b) Garden sends Man and his wife.
Life and Heaven lost, they lost the Signs withal:
which holy Signs, we Sacraments do call.
(a) Genesis 3. 20. As the Lord of Life was to come of woman's (not o^ Man's) seed:
so he entitleth his wife Heuah, that is, Giving Life. From the Beginning, holy
significatiue names were given, but we neglect the wisdom of God.

(b) As the Lord is the only Institutor of Sacraments: so he has appointed,
that the sacramental sign should be removed from These that have not the Thing
signified by that sign. Adam and Heuah having in themselves (and for their
seed) lost Heaven: they therefore are expulsed the Garden, the sign of Heaven:
having lost Life, they are banished from the sight of the Tree, that signified
Life. Sacramental Signs therefore, are outward visible Creatures preaching
unto Man some inward invisible grace: which inward thing or thing signified, is
as verily to be apprehended by Faith, as is the outward Sign to be
apprehended by the eye, hand, mouth.

6. Staff.
HEVAH after conceived and brought forth (c) Kain,
Then holy (c) Habel, churches figure right:
Who for his goodness, was by brother slain:
In room of whom, God gave her blessed (d) Sheth.
As of Kain came the seed of Serpents brood:
So, of this Sheth came many Persons good.
(cc) whether Kain and Habel were Twyns: Kain first came forth, and afterward
Habel in the same Conception, it is not plain. Yet considering, that Heuah was
to increase and multiply for filling of the Earth, it is not unlike, that in
that her strength, she brought forth more than one at a Birth-time. Kain
being taught Husbandry by his Father, and Habel instructed to keep s^eep, Genesis
4. they brought sacrifices to the Lord. Kain (as it seems) rather as standing
in awe of his Father, but Habel offered with a free heart: which was cause that
the Lord rejected Kain and accepted Habel. Kain seeing this Reiection, he
therefore slaieth Habel. As hereby appeared Satan's Serpentine-seede: so, the
first borne of the Holy-seede, is persecuted to death. This wicked seed in
Kain, argues that Heuah had not conceived till after their fall: and therefore
by consequent, that Adam had not carnally known the woman before their Fall.
For had he, (there being no sin in them to hinder the blessing) she must needs
have conceived an holy seed, and so have brought forth no Murderer. That Habels
sacrifices pleased God, it was because he first professed that manner of
spiritual obedience, not of his own head, but by God his Commandment: which
precept he might well receive of his Father. Secondly, because in that
sacrifice, he did (though darkly) see, that one was to be offered up a slain
sacrifice, for the sins of the People.

(d) In the next Staff.

7 Staff.
To pass by Some, of (a) Sheth came Henoch he,
Who walked with God, till God took him away.
Lamech and Noah, that time Sheths petigre,
Matched with Kains daughters, to their dyre decay.
That sin so greiued God, as plainly he
Foretold to Noah, the world should drowned be.
(a) Habel being slain, God gives to Adam, Sheth in his rome Sheth begot
Enosh: Enosh, Kenan: Kenan, Mahalaleel: Mahalaleel, Iered: Iered begot Henoch,
the 7. from Adam, IVDI, 14. Henoch begot Methushelah: Methushelah, Lamech:
Lamech, Noah: Noah begot Shem, Ch^^, and Iaphe^, elder brother of Shem. Genesis
10. 21. Here Sheths seed was deeply degenerate from Henoch and Sheths
sincerity: for they seeing the da^ghters of Men (viz. of Kains lawles race) to
be snowt-faire, Sheths Petygre marries with them: mixing the holy seed with
the unholy: by reason whereof, Giants and strong Miscreants abounded. This so
vexed the Lord, as he hastily repaireth to Noah, and fore-tels him, (that he
may preach it to others) that after the expirement of 120. years, he would
drown the whole world with water. Commanding him in the mean time, to build
an Arc of Pyne trees, wherein HE and His might then be saved.

8. Staff.
One hundred years, and twenty after then,
The (a) Cataracts were loosd, and Seas burst open:
The rain and waters drowned the wicked men,
And over Earth, had liberty and scope.
But ^re that day, as God had Noah told,
An Ark he built, of Pyne-trees, room'd threfold
(a) Noah preaching and building the Ark that 120. years, the people believed
not the spirit of GOD preaching in Noa^: for the which, as their bodies were
drowned in the ^^ood; so their souls now remain in the Prison of God his
wrath, 1. Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. That water was a figure of Baptism: for as by
that water Noah and his Family (the faithful, for Cham was not then
seene-wicked) were saved from Iehouahs wrath: even so by Baptism, the Faithful
are saved, and the lurking hypocrite for the time fares not the worse. But as
all without the Arc, were utterly destroyed by the same water: even so shall
Baptizing water be but a Sacrament of condemnation unto such as receive it
unworthily: whether they be within the Ark (the visible Church) as was Cham,
or baptized in the Church of the World, or visible worldlings, such as is that
great City. Revel. 17. 18.

9. Staff.
Into this Ark, did Noah and his Wife,
His sons Shem, Cham, Iaphet, (a) enter anon:
With sorts of Creatures all that breathed life,
Preserved in the Ark by God alone.
(b) After twelve Months, the Men their wives and all
Out of the Ark did go, at God his call.
(a) The World was here 1656. years old, and so took his end with water:
Noah having in the Ark of every clean Beast for Sacrifice, and of unclean for
preservation of their kind to the New World, as well as of the clean.

(b) Noah and his Wife, with his three sons and their Wives (even 8. Persons
in the whole) as they went into the Arc at God his command: so they come not
forth until he command. Genesis 8. 16. Coming forth. Noah offers Sacrifice
to God, whose savor was acceptable: and therefore the Lord blesses Noah to
the beginning of the New World: promising, that he would no more smite the
World as he had done with water: and thereof he appointed the Rainbowe to be a
sign sacramental. Here was Noah permitted to eat flesh: but forbidden to
eat of the blood of Beasts, as a sign how much he abhorred the shedding of
Man's blood.

10. Staff.
As Adam gun the former World, so this
By Noah was, begun. Of (a) Cham there came
the Cananites, accusst for works amiss:
Of Iaphet sprung the Gentiles hight by name.
Of blessed Shem, came Heber, Abram eke,
From whom the Israelites their bloud-rowle seek
(a) Noah planting of Vi^es, and drinking the juice of the grapes, he became
drunken: and so lay in the midst of his Tent Naked. Cham seeing it, tells his
two Brethren. They coming backwards toward their Father, do from their
shoulders let fall a covering upon him. Noah awaking, and understanding what
was done, he curses Cham in his son Chanaan, of whom came the cursed
Canaanites but he blesses the God of Shem, and prays that Iaphet at last
may come and dwell in Shems Tent. Of Iaphet came the Gentiles: From Shem
(supposed to be Mel^hi^ sedek. Gen, 14 both of Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, old
and new^ and he was living, till about 77. years after Abram his calling out
of VR in Chaldea) from Shem, I say, the 12. Worthy of the Old World, and borne
before the New world: from Him came Arphaxad; from Arphaxad, Selah: from
Selah, Heber: (of whom the tongue was called Hebrewe,) rom H^ber, Peleg: from
Peleg, Regu: from Regu, Serug: from Serug, Nahor: from Nahor, Terah: from
Terah, Abram, the Grandfather of Israel, of whom came the Israelites.

11. Staff.
In (a) Abrams time, Idolatry did reign:
God therefore (b) called him from Chaldea Land.
Who taking (c) Tent on back, away he came
And (d) followed God, as Child does Nurses hand:
To him God promised great seed. After the same
To (e) Abram, God gave Abraham to name.
(a) Excepting Melchisedek the Priest of the high God, and King of SALEM Called
also IE^VS of Iebust, Genesis 10. 16. but afterward called IERV-SALEM of
IERV-SALEM mystically by Titles change teaching: That the Town was changed to
Sacred use, even to be the figure of God his universal Church: excepting I say
that Melchi-sedek, there is not mention of any that walked uprightly before
JEHOVAH.

(b) The Lord ( Abram then being 75. years old) picked him out of Chaldea, the
Land of Shinar, and Nimrods Babel or Confusion: for there the Schismatiks from
Shem builded: but their own tongue was slit by JEHOVAH, as is coniectured,
into 70. and so were scattered into diverse parts of the Earth.

(c) The Father of the Faithful lived in a Tent, and we should not think but
our state is still moveable: for here is no abiding City.

(d) He followed the Sound of God, as we should follow his Word in all things:
the company of which intelligible Sound, for it is not a Romish Noise, but a
distinct Voice, should draw us after it, as a Loadstone pulls to it Iron.
Together with Abram and Sarai his wife, there goes forth Lot, the Son of
HARAH Abrams brother. This LOT and his Family were with Abram, what time
JEHOVAH ( Genes. 12.) made first promise to Abram, that in his SEED all the
Earth should receive a blessing: for the Seed of the Woman promised, Genesis 3.
was to spring from Abrams seed. But soon after, ( Genesis 13.) there being a
controversy betwixt Abrams Heardmen, and the Heardmen of LOT, about pasture
for their Cattle: Abram (though more Excellent) for peace sake, gives LOT
leave to choose what Soil he first would. LOT chooses the plain of Sodom,
and so departs, pitching his Tent at Sodom gates: But his fleshly choice was
scourged: for in steed of good Abram, he found a beastly carnal People, who
daily vexed his heart, 2. Pet 27. Soon after, there being wars betwixt the
5. Kings of the 5. Cities of the Plain on the one side: and the King of
Babel, and his 3. Neighbor Kings on the other side: This last Party
prevailing, Lot with all he had, was carried away captive. Abram understanding
hereof, he mustered 318. of his own house: pursues and recovereth LOT
again. In Abrams return, M^lchi-sedek King of Shalem and Iehouahs high Priest
did meet him, and offered to him Bread and wine (a notable figure of the Bread
and wine, which JESUS our Priest after Melchi-sedeks order, has offered to us
believers (not to Sodoms People) to which Kingly Priest, Abram tythed or paid
tenths of all he had: wherewithal the Royal Priest blesses him, and the
lesser is blessed of the greater, Genes. 14. Heb. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. And what
Man should be greater than Abram, if not Shem, in whose Tent God was to dwell
til Iaphets (or the Gentiles) return to dwell in that Tent?

LOT by all these Crosses not profiting much, after this deliverance (even by
Abram, whose fellowship he neglected) he purchases place in Sodoms Town: But
Abram returning to his place in the vale of Mamre, the Lord there by vision
confirms the former promise, and promises him a large seed, as also the
Land of Canaan for their possession. Abram believing the Lord, it is imputed to
him for Righteousness. Sarai being barren, she gives her Aegyptian-maide to
him, who knowing her, she brings forth Ismael.

(e) Abram being 99. years old, JEHOVAH appears and smites a Covenant with
him: Abram was to Walk upright before God: The Lord he was to be to Abram, GOD
All-sufficient, at every turn and straight. For printing this Covenant more
deep in the breasts of Abram and Sarah, the Lord calls Abram (in English,
High-father) ABRAHAM (in English, The Father of a great Multitude) and Sarai,
in English, Mistres, he calls SARAH; that is interpreted, Princess. The
lifting up of their Names-meaning by that letter H, teaches, how
Covenant-smiting with God for upright worship, does exalt, not embase Man and
woman. Together with his Covenant, the Lord adioyneth a SEAL, or exhibitiue
Sign; for Abraham and his Male-seede henceforth was to be circumcised. The
cutting of that foreskin of the Male his generatiue part, did preach a being
conceived in sin, and therefore a need of Regeneration or Newe-birth. This
Cut in the flesh, is properly called the Sign of the Covenant. Genes. 17. 11.
but improperly, or Sacramentallie, it is called the Covenant it self, ver. 13

After this, the Sins of Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Admah, Bela, crying to
Heaven, God sends his Angels first, to foresignifie their destruction unto
Abraham (what time, Isaac was again promised, Sarah laughing it to scorn, as
a thing impossible for her to bring forth) and afterward to LOT. The Angels
send LOT and his wife out of the City to Belah thenceforth called Zoar, for
LOT was unwilling to go to the Mountain. His wife looking back is turned into
a Salt pillar. Fire and brimstone from Heaven, devoures all. LOT after that
remooving unto the Mount, his daughters to have seed by their Father, made him
drunk, and so lay with him. Unawares he begets of them Moab, (of whom the
Moabites) and Ben-ammi, of whom came the Ammonites.

12. Staff.
His Wife (a) Sarai, was thenceforth called Sarah:
And (b) Circumcision for holy Sign,
(c) To Abraham's Male-seed, God gave that day
Which was observed by Abraham his Line.
To Abraham was (d) Isaac borne, and than
To Isaac, (e) Iaacob, that holy man.
(a) See for this change, in the former Staff at the letter, (e)

(b) a sign of the Covenant made betwixt Jehovah and Abraham* See for this in
the former Staff, at (e)

(c) Given to the Male-seede, because HE is chief in Generation. Every
Natural Artist knows that. Secondly, Man was not made for the Woman, but the
Woman for Man. Objection. Seeing Baptism supplieth Circumcision, what reason
is there that Females should be baptized, seeing they were not Circumcised.
Answer, Indeed, Baptism is the door or entering Sacrament of the New
Testaments Church, as was that of the Old. In this they have admittance,
First, because they are capable of Water, but so they were not of Circumcision.
Secondly, Paul teaches, Galat 3. 27. 28. That (howsoever there was difference
between Jew and Gentile, Male and Female, concerning the former, yet)
concerning Baptism, Jew and Gentile, Male and Female are all one in Christ
Jesus, whom they apprehend by faith. And herein (as in other things) it
appears that the New Testament is more liberal handed, free hearted, and
more glorious than the former. Concerning the signification, look into the
former Staff, at (e)

(d) Isaac in English, Laughter. So called to put Abraham in mind of his Faith,
when believing that promise, he laughed: Secondly, to admonish Sarah of her
want of faith, when she laughed the promise to scorn. Thirdly, to teach them
both, and all the faithful jointly with them: That there is no happy laughter
or joy, but in the Lords promises. HE, the Son of the Promise, borne, as it
were, only by Grace and besides Nature: teaching all, that the blessing
comes by Grace, not by Nature. This Isaac, was the special fore-type of
Christ Jesus the promised seed, the bringer of Grace to us: as also he was an
excellent figure of the state of every mystical member of Christ. All which,
are not of Egyptian Hagar the bondwoman, (figure of the Law) as was mocking
persecuting Ismael; but of Sarah the freewoman, figure of the Gospel and of
Jerusalem from above, who is free with her Children; Read Galat. 4. 22. to the
end of that Chapter

(e) Iaacob, the younger brother of Esau: of them the Lord said to Rebecca
their mother (even before they were borne) I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau,
Romans 9 13. As God had chosen the one, and Refused the other, so being borne,
Esau run a Reprobate race: hunting, sporting, with neglect of holy Sacrament:
for he sold his interest of Canaan, the Sacrament of Heaven, to his younger
brother, for a mess of Red-pottage: whereof he took his name Edom: As for
Iaacob, he lives simply and truly in holy calling, making high account of that
Sacrament. And this was cause why Rebecca specially loved Iaacob, using
afterward the help of a false finger, for getting the blessing to Iaacob,
preventing malcontent Esau. For which, Esau threatening death, Iaacob was glad
to fly to his Uncle Laban, and there to stay. There he was beguiled with
Pinck-eyed Leah, but marieth with Rachel or Rahel. One and twenty years
after, he returns home, and studieth the appeasment of Esau.

13. Staff.
This Iaacob, God called (a) Israel, because
He wrestling did prevail with Jehovah.
Twelve sons) hight Patriarchs) God draws
From Israel: Whose Progeny always,
And yet, are Israelites termed to this day.
(a) Iaco^ wrestling with an Angel, represen^ting the LORD, wiith whom we
ought to wrestle in Prayer, is thenceforth called Israel, in English,
Prevailing with God Genes. 32. 28. For all the Fore-elect of God, ar Prevailers
with God. God may hoise them up and down for a time, and give them a nip in the
flesh, but when he has cast them down with the Left hand, he will raise them
up with the Right: for that is the hand by which they prevail. HE was called
Iaacob, (not as many have imagined, of the Hebrewe word, that signifies to
Supplant or deceive, but) of a Nowne that signifies an H^^L^: for thereof he
takes his Name. Genesis ^5. 26. Objection: But Esau s^ith, Genesis 27. 36. that he
was well called Jacob, because he had Deceived him. Answer, The holy Ghost
before gave the reason of his Name, from his (...) of Esau by the heel at his
Birth-time, the holy Ghost his construction, must be preferred before the
private interpretation of Esau. Secondly, Esau does there but proudly mock at
Iaacob, wresting his Name to such a significat^on, as he might best play
withal in his peevish vain.

14. Staff.
Their Names were thus: Reuben and Simeon,
Then Levi, Judah, Dan and Naphtali,
Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulon,
Joseph and Benjamin: This (a) Joseph enviously
Was of his Brethren sold to Egypt Land,
Where Joseph was (b) advaunst by God his hand.
(a) Iaacob having by his wife Rahel, first Joseph, then Ben-iamin: for the
residue were borne of Leah, Zilpah, Bilhah: Joseph was of his Father
principally affected, through conceived Hope of future good in him. Iosaph
dreaming that the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars should reverence him, Genesis
37. his Father by that, as by other things, does readily conclude, that
himself and his other Sons should once do homage to Joseph. This causes the
ten first, for Ben-iamin was yet very young, to take Joseph, having him in the
Feilds, to sell him away to certain Merchants, who afterward bringing him into
Egypt, sold him unto Potiphar, Prince of ON, Steward unto Pharaoh. Joseph
thus packed away, his Brethren dipping an upper partie-coloured coat of Joseph's
in blood, they repair unto aged Israel, or Iaacob, and do persuade him, that
some wild Beast had torn Joseph. Old Israel too forgetful of Joseph's
dreams, does give credit to their words, and therefore bursteth into deep
lamentation.

(b) Joseph placed in Potiphar the Eunuch his house, is for his beauty, lusted
after his inordinate eyed Mistres. She, having no blush in her fore-heade,
wooeth Joseph to Sin: but he avoideth her alluring presence. Her lust, for
that cannot be properly called Love, it turned into Hate. She therefore
pulling his Garment from him, accuses him to her Husband, for a wanton
Hebrewe, and an Assailer of the Marriage Bed. He believing her, casts Joseph
into Prison. The Kings Butler and Baker being in the same Prison, they dream
dreams. Joseph thereby tells the Butler, that within three days he should
be delivered and use his former office: but the Baker within three days should
die. After this, Pharaoh dreamed, that 7. lean Kine, eat up 7. fat-ones: that
7. withered ears of corn devoured 7. well liking ones. The King troubled
about these dreams, the Butler then remembered Joseph, and told of him to
Pharaoh. The King sends for him: he interprets the dreams saying, that the
next 7. years should be plentiful, but the 7. after them, should devour all the plenty that went before them. Upon this, the King delivers Joseph, and
puts his Regal Ring on his hand, Iosoph is next to Pharaoh over all Egypt,
and by special Commission gathers much Corue into Storehouses. during the
plentiful times, for the better nourishing of the Body in the 7. penurious
years.

15. Staff.
In time of (a) Dearth, Old (b) Israel and his sonnese
To Egypt came, from Canaan their due:
Good Joseph gladsomlie to Father comes,
And brings him to Pharaoh his vewe.
Who gives to Israel for dwelling place,
The Land (c) Goshen, environed with Gods grace.
(a) Iaacob sending his Sons into Egypt to buy Co^^e; at their second coming
thither, Joseph bewrays himself to his Brethren: sending word back to his
Father by them, that it was Pharaoh his will, and his desire that he would come
up to Egypt.

(b) Israel, having consulted with the Lord, at Beersheba, departs with his
whole Family into Egypt. The number of the Persons that came into Egypt, are
said by Moses, Genes. 46. to be, 70. asking into that Number Joseph and his
two sons, Manaesseh and Ephraim. Blessed Steven in the Acts 7. 14. Numbreth
75. Souls: by which second Number, we are taught to account some, passed by
of Moses. Some writers do borrowe unto this account, the 4. Mothers of the
Patriarchs and the two Sons of Judah, who were dead, before this voyage, in
Canaan: and so make up 75. besides Iaacob himself. A second sort do, as Moses
borrowed three from Joseph's house, for making up 70. so they, borrowe five more
from Joseph's house, unborn at Moses time of account, and these five are Sons
and Nephews, 1. Chron. 7. 14. 20. to Ephraim and Manasse^: by which account,
they well observe, that Joseph sees his Children unto the third Generation,
Genes 50. 23. Both these opinions, if not Judgments, of others learned set
down, In the third place, I will add my Coni^cture. Moses having accounted
the number of 70 he immediately in the next verse. Genes. 46. 26 adds: All the
Souls that came with Iaacob, etc. (besides Iaacobs sons wives) were in the
whole, etc. The Patriarks wives so plainly excepted, why may not Steven borrowe
them to the making up of 75? Question. Moses has no where affirmed, how many
the Wives were THEN living, how then should Steven account them? Answer. Holy
Jude makes mention of Henochs Prophecy, as also of a Strife between Michael
the Arch-Angell and the Devil, about the body of Mose^ neither of which is once
mentioned before in holy writ. Holy Paul (2. Tim. 38) tells Timothy, how
Iannes and Iambres were the Sorcerers that resisted Moses in Egypt: yet
neither Moses nor any Prophet after, makes mention once of the Number of the
Sorcerers, nor of their Names. As they had that, by special Revelation, so,
why may we not think, that Steven at that Time (if not before) had the
knowledge of that Number by like Revelation, specially seeing Then he had a
Miracle wrought in his eyes, in that his be holding of Jesus, Acts. 7. 55.
after an unutterable so^te?

(c) Sheepherds being an abomination to the Egyptians (some think from Exodus
8. 26. because the Egyptians worshipped some such Beasts, as the Israelites
slew for Sacrifice: which is a cold suppose, for that should rather make the
Sacrificers hateful, than Sheepheards abominable: but the holy Ghost,
affirms that Calling to be abhorred of them. Neither a. e we ignorant, that
in every profane Land, some Calling (as now are Soule-Shepherds) is of base
estimate, by reason of which their abhor (and all professed themselves not
only sacrificing Hebrews, but Sheepherds) the King gave them a Cuntry, wherein
alone they might inhabit.

A COMPVTATION OF GENESIS.
The age of ^he World. 130 1 A Dam being aged, 130. years, he begets Sheth.
235 2 Sheth aged 105. years, begets E^osh. 325 3 Enosh at 90. years,
begets Kenan. 395 4 Kenan at 70 years, begets Mahalaleel. 460 5 Mahalaleel
at 65. years begets Iared. 622 6 Iared at 162. years, begets Henoch. 687 7
Henoch the 7. from Adam, (Jude 14.) at 65. years, begets Mathushelah. 874 8
Mathushelah at 187. begets Lamech. 1056 9 Lamech at 182. years, begets Noah.
1536 10 Noah (the 10. from Adam, and the Lord his Tenth out of the first
world) at 480. years of age, is foretold of the flood. After 500. years of
age, he begets Shem (the elder brother of Iaphe^, Genes. 10. 21.) and in his
600. year the flood came. 1656 1658 1 Shem 2. years after the flood (being
then but, 100. years old, Genesis ^1. 10. and therefore begot in Noah's 502.)
begets Arphaxad. 1693 2 Arphaxad at 35 begets Selah. 1723 3 S^lah at 30.
years, begets Heber. 1757 4 Heber (the 7. from Henoch, and from whom. Abram
and his seed took the name of Hebrews) he at 34. years begets Peleg. 1787
5 Peleg (in whose time the Earth was divided) at 30. years begets Regu, or Reu
1819 6 Regu at 32. years begets Serug. 1849 7 Serug at 30. years, begets
Nahor. 1878 8 Nahor at 29 years begets Terah. 2008 9 Terah being 130. years
old, (compare Genesis 11. 32. with Chap. 12. 4) begets Abram. 2083 10 Abram at
75. years, receives the promise. The 10. he was in the beginning of the New
World, as Noah in the end of the Old. 2108 Abram at 100. years of age, has
Isaac. 2168 11 Isaac at 60. years, has Jacob and Esau. 2298 12 Jacob at 130.
goes into Egypt with his 70. souls: Joseph then being aged, 39. 2315 Jacob
being fed 17. years by Joseph dies, being aged, 147. He was the 12. of the
New World: and left behind him 12. Worthies peereles. On his deathbed, he
fortelleth every of them of future events: specially, that the Shiloh Christ
should come out of Judah. 2369 13 Joseph dies in Egypt, being 110. years
old: 54. years after his Father. Before his death he gives charge, that at
their remoouall to the Land of Promise, they should take his bones away with
them. That afterward was done: In the mean time, they embaume his corpse and
chesteth him. And so ends Genesis, containing from Adams Creation, unto
Joseph's death, 2369. years.

Here, or within one Chapter of Exodus falls out the story of Job. for form
Poetical: for Matter passing divine. Job labors to clear himself of
hypocrisy, but not in the best manner: for the extreamitie of his body and
souls anguish, daunteth his reason, and breaks his Patience. His Three Kins
folks charge hypocrisy on his head. The doctrine they deliver, good: but they
fail in their personal application. Their foolishnes should reprove Manies
folly. In the end, Eloquent El^^u thrusts himself in, reprooving both pa^ties
for folly: but for the vpshot, Jehovah himself sits Vmpire; justifying Job
for his servant, and condemning his friends for their false Application. Job
sacrifices for his friends: The Lord is satisfied: Job enriched: and so
ends that divine Story: In every Allegation of Gods Mercies and Judgments
having an eye unto Genesis. But because Job came of K^^urah Abraham his latter
wife, and not of Sarah (Queene-mother of the faithful) I therefore so pass
from him, to Isreal's Seed.

16. Staff.
From Isreal's Household, sprung a mighty crew:
The (a) Egypt King, to keep them under hand,
Their Male-children therefore untowardly slew.
That time was Moses borne in Egypt Land:
Who after forty years, by God was sent,
To help poor Israel, drowned in Lament.
(a) There arose a new king in Egypt (herewithall begins the book of
Exodus) who to keep the Israelites under the yoke, did command the Hebrews
Midwiues ( Ship^ah and Puah) to kill all the sons: but they fearing God,
would not. After this therefore, he charge that every Male-childe should be
cast into the River. At this time, Amram (of the Tribe of Leui) had married
with Iochabed (a daughter of a Levite) by whom a Son was brought forth:
this being about 64. years after Joseph. She makes an Ark of Reed, Slyme
and Pitch: who, laying the Child therein, committed it to the River. His
Sister standing a loofe to see what would become of the Child, lo the daughter
of Pharaoh (for the Egyptian Kings were commonly so called) came to bath at
the River, who espying the Ark took it up and opened it. The Child weeping, she
had compassion on it. His Sister seeing that, she steppeth to the Princess, and
demands if she shall fetch a Nurse unto her.

She assents. His Sister brings the Mother, to whom the Princess commends
it: commanding her to attend it. The Child being grown, she brings him to the
Princess, who calls him Moses, because she drew him out of the water.

Moses being much more grown, he leaves the Court, goes down to his brethren
the Hebrews: who ^^^ing an Egyptian smiting an Hebrewe, he arises and
slaieth him. Afterward seeing two Hebrews strive, he reubked the wrong doer:
The wretch replying, Think thou to kill me as thou did the Egyptian.
Moses hereupon fled (for fear of Pharaoh) into the Land of Midian: who there
was entertained of a Prince, who gave his daughter Zipporah for wi^e to Moses.
Moses after this, keeping sheep by the mount Horeb (called also Sinai) to him
there* the Lord appeared, speaking out of the midst of a burning Bush: giving
him Commission to fetch his people out of Egypt, where mightelie they groned
under the yoke of Bondage: joining in commission with him, his brother Aaron of
more excellent utterance than Moses. The former King dead, Moses and Aaron come
unto the Hebrews and do tell them, that I AM THAT I AM, had sent them for
their deliverance. Moses and Aaron coming unto them: ^oe, all the People were
joined unto the Idols and filthinesses of Egypt ( Ezekiel 20* 5. 6. 7. 8. 9) but
the Lord having a respect unto his own Name, forsook them not, but
strengthened Moses and Aaron unto the work: who boldly (as it were opposing the
sheep-crooke to the Egyptian Scepter) do come unto Pharaoh, telling him, that
JEHOVAH commands him to let his ISRAEL depart the Land. The King proud lie
replieth, who is JEHOVAH? as also, vpbraideth Moses and Aaron with hindering the
Peoples work. Immediately whereupon the Bedlem-King, commands work at the
Peoples hands, and denies them therewithal, necessaries to the work. Here
the People murmu^e against Moses, as being the very Author of their further
slavery.

17. Staff.
He and Aaron, (brethren of Levies race)
(a) great wonders wrought, before King Pharaoh:
Driving his Sorcerers from fore their face.
Yet would the wretch. not let poor Israel go.
At last, therefore the Lord does (b) Moses call,
And tells to him, what after should befall.
(a) Moses being now 80. year old, and Aaron 83. Exodus 7. 7 They wrought
certain Miracles before the king. First Aaron casts forth his Rod, and lo,
it became a Serpent: The Egyptian false Prophets ( Iannes and Iambres) do the
like with their Rods: but Aarons Rod devoured theirs. Here, Pharaoh his heart
was hardened* but for outward Plague, there was not any now inflicted. The next
day after, Pharaoh coming forth to the Riu^r, (like enough to be Nilus) Aaron
there smitet^ the waters, and they were turned into Blood, by reason whereof,
the Fish died. The like did the Sorcerers: Pharaoh therefore departs hard
hearted. This was the first Plague. Afterward, Aaron by the command of Moses
(and Moses had ever hi^ command from JEHOVAH) smit the Rivers with Frogs,
insomuch as they cralled into the Kings houses, and climb into his Chambers.
The Enchanters did so. He was more hardened. The 2. Plague. Next, the Dust of
the Earth was smitten, whereupon followed Lice. Here the Magitians attempted to
do the like, but they could not, whereupon they acknowledge that Aaron wrought
by the Finger of God, (secretly granting, that their own working, was but by
the Finger of the Devil. But the King like a block departs unbelieving. This
was the 3. External Plague. The next day, Aaron caused swarms of Flies to
infest all Egypt, (no such thing fell in Goshen) but upon Pharaohs prayer to
Moses, Moses prayed and they departed: but Pharaohs heart relented not. That
was the 4. Plague. The 5. Plague was a Murrian upon all Egyptian Cattle. The
6. Plag^e, was a Scab upon Man and Beast. The 7. Plague, was the causing of
Thunder, Hail, Lightening* to the destruction of Beasts and Herbs in Egypt:
but still (so soon as the Plague ceased) Pharaoh denied passage to Israel.
After that, Moses streatching his Rod upon Egypt, the East, wind brought in
Grasshoppers, covering all that Land: That the 8. Plague. The 9. Plague, was a
fea^efull palpable Darkness, brought over all Egypt (for Light was then in
Goshen) whereupon Pharaoh his heart grew more obdured.

(b) The Lord having decreed that upon the next Plague, the Plaguy-King, should
not only Give leave, but command them to Depart, he therefore (for an
everlasting Memorial of his Peoples deliverie out of the Land of Bondage)
does call Moses unto him, and enformeth him, how he should teach the People
to perform his will. Note, As this Pestilent King was a li^ely figure of the
Dragon, and his Homed-Kings, enthralling the Church of God; so that Egypt, was
a forcible fore-figure of the False Church, Revel. 11. 8. over the which
Leviathan rules, and with the which, the Israel of God must have no spiritual
Communion: that is, the Faithful must not any way communicate with he^ false
worship and false Spirit, wherewith she is inspired.

18. Staff.
(a) Go take, says HE, a yearling Lamb spotles,
A Male, yea through each of your Family:
Do kill the same with fire do roast the flesh.
The blood on doore-posts smite. Then orderly
With Bread vnleauend, and sour herbs do eat,
The roasted Lamb, the Sacramental meat.
(a) The Lord by this, dot^ lead the People to the blessed seed promised to
Adam, Genes. 3. to Abraham, Genesis 1^ 3. by whom all True Believers should
obtain the Blessing: First the Jew, then the Gentile. This Lamb spotles,
signified the (Lamb slain from the beginning of the World) Christ Jesus
without spot of Sin: whose blood shed and sprinkled upon the doore-cheeks of
our Conscience, does put away the Second Death far from us.

As the Lamb of God for the taking away the sin^ of the World, was Roasted in
the burning fiery Ire of God, for taking away our Sin: so (as the eating of
him is by the Tooth of Faith: for Faithless People are herein Toothles) the
Faithful must not think to enjoy that mystical Lamb unto Life, with out
eating the sour herbs of affliction, a bitter Cup unto the flesh. Neither
must in this spiritual banquet come an^ leavened, sour bread (that is,
Malitiousnes, wickedness, 1. Cor. 5. 8. hereof every man must purge his own
Heart (as his house) as also the Assembly (in pain of death) must take heed
that no open uncircumcised (that is, known wicked) be admitted amongst them:
for such Lea^en will be cause, that their rejoicing shall not be good. 1. Cor.
5. 6. 7.

19. Staff.
That (a) Night an Angel past through Egypt Land:
And where blood sprinkled was, he Passed by:
But otherwhere, he slew with deadly hand,
First borne of Man, and Beast. So that the cry
Causd Pharaoh rise, and (b) give commandment,
That Israelites forwith away be sent.
(a) The Hebrew people did keep the former instituted Feast, omitting no
Ceremony enjoined. The same Night, the destroying Angel passed through
Egypt, and slew a^l the first borne of Man and Beast: but no such thing
befell unto Israel, for which they were ever after to consecrate the first
borne of Man and beast unto the JEHOVAH their Deliverer. Because the Angel in
destroying the Egyptians, did pass over the Hebrews (whose doors were
smitten with the Lambs blood) therefore that Feast ever after, was called the
Passe-ouer: in eating the Lamb, they were said to eat the Passe-ouer, though
indeed they but eat the Sign of the Passe-ouer, or the Memorial of the
Angel his Passing over the Hebrews houses.

(b) An horrible noise being made by the rorings of the uncircumcised, Pharaoh
arises and gives Commandment to Moses and Aaron, that they together with
the People (and all that ever they had) should depart Egypt. The Lord before
this, having made his People gracious in the eyes of the Egyptians, insomuch
as they let the Hebrews (upon former petition, Exodus 11. 23.) enjoy there
Jewels of Silver and Gold: Lo, here the Uncircumcised with one consent hasten
Israel out of Egypt, lest their Tarrying longer, should be the death of All.
Chron. 12.

Thus the Lords people, who had the Egyptians terrible unto them, they now
are to the Egyptians as Pillars of smoke, and as SOLOMON, Cant. 6. 3. says,
terrible as an Army with banners. The Lord put his beauty upon them, Ezech.
16. And lo, they depart with the Jewels of the Heathen: and good reason that
the Gentiles bring their Glory unto Sarahs Jerusalem and freeborn Children.

20. Staff.
Then Moses leads Israel away,
Toward (a) Wilderness, and Canaan their due:
But (b) Pharaoh, his sin yet could not stay,
And therefore arms himself, and does pursue.
But Isreal's God, in midst of Seas did drown,
Proud Pharaoh, and cast his Chariots down.
(a) when Iaacob came into Egypt there were not 80. Persons in al^ but now when
Moses carries them out of Egypt, they are six hundred thousand men, besides
women and Children. They depart out of Egypt, 430. years after the Promise
made to Abraham (Genesis 12. 3.) That in his seed all Nations shall be blessed.
meaning, through Christ that should assume the seed of Abraham, Hebrews, 2.
16. Abraham was foretold, Genesis 15. 13. that his seed should be a stranger and
hardly entreated 400. years. The first hard entreaty of his Seed (I read of)
was Ismael his persecuting of Isaac, (Genes. 21. 9. compared with Gala^. 4.
29.) From which time, until this departure out of Egypt toward the Land of
Rest, I suppose 400. years. From Ismaels Mock, back unto the Promise, 30.
years: From the Promise, back unto Abraham's birth, were 75. years, Genesis 12.
4. From Abraham's birth, back unto the Flood, 352. years. All summed together,
will be found from the Floode unto the departure out of Egypt, 857. years.
The Month of their Deliverance, being otherwise the Seventh, was henceforth
called (by Jehovah his Command, Exodus 12* 2.) the First Month, as deserving
the first place: why then should fantastical Spirits maryell at Our
Celebrating of the First day of the week, (rather than another) seeing in
that day our Savior Rising from death, clearlie delivered us, from a more
palpable darkness than that of Egypt, and from the power of a more in mighty
Adversary than was Pharaoh* especially seeing Paul (a Master builder) enjoined
that day unto the Churches, 1. Cor. 16 1. As also the Head of the building,
himself solemnized it, by 5. special Appearances and Preachings.

(b) Pharaoh pursuing, JEHOVAH, teaches Moses, how the people should pass
through the Red Sea. The Sea divided it self, and stood upon heaps on either
hand. The Israelites pass easily through. Pharaoh with his Chariots, pursues.
The heaps of waters fall down upon him, his people and Chariots, so that they
sunk down under the waves, like a stone. A Judgment due to persecutors of the
True Church. This passing of the Israelites through the Sea, was a figure of
Baptism, by the which we are saved, 1. Cor. 1. 2. A Seal of Salvation to the
Israel of God: that is, to the Faithful: but a seal of Condemnation unto the
Spiritual Egyptians, I mean the unfaithful, whether within or without the
Church visible.

21. Staff.
For which great work, Moses he sings a Song.
And after praising God, the people he,
To (a) Sinajs Mountain does conduct a long.
Where for one year, their Tents down pitched be.
There in the Mount, God did with Moses talk,
And teach him how, the People thence should walk
(a) Called also Horeb, the Mount where Jehovah appeared to Moses, in fiery
Bushe. No marvel if the Lord bad Moses, Exodus 3. 5. put of his shoes, because
of the ground appointed to special holy use: for here JEHOVAH talked after an
vn-vtterable familiarity with Moses, giving to Moses (for the People use) the
Ten Commandment, written in two Columns or Tables of Stone. Together with
them Laws Moral, the Lord gave Laws Ceremonial for spiritual Exercise:
choosing the Tribe of Levi, for Ministers in spiri^uall business. Levi having
three sons, Gershon, Kohah, Merari, Genes. 46. 11. the Families of them
three: they had, each Family his peculiar charge in the spiritual (or as we
call it, Ecclesiastical) service: neither was every of these Families (not
marked of many writers) capable of the Priest-hoode. The Family of Gershom
(whereof was Aaron) was chosen to the most sacred things in that service: The
Family of Kohath in the second place, had their peculiar Charge: for
otherwise Jehovah (Jealous of order in his service) would slay them, Nomb. 4.
15. No marvel then though Corah (of this Tribe, Nomb. 16* 1. was slain,
together with his partakers. The Family of Merari, was chosen to the third and
most inferior Service, Nomb. 4 29. etc. No marvel then if V^zah, 1. Chronic.
6. 29. was slain for touching the Arc, 1. Ch^on. 13. 10. seeing neither of
the two latter Families might Touch it. Neither was HE a mere Private man (as
many have ignorantly taught) but a Leuit. Together with the Laws Moral and
Ceremonial, the Lord gave Judicial Laws, by whose Exercise, the breaches of
the former might be corrected. All these 3. sorts of Laws, were (for their
Outward Face or Le^^^^) peculiar unto Canaan the Land of Promise. DEVT. 4. 5.
12. 13. 14. 27. 28. etc. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 9. 10. 11. etc. In the first
Commandment of the second Table, Children are commanded to Honor Parents;
the Blessing therefore appointed, being: They, the Parents should give them
long life in Canaan, not in the Wilderness, or other places of the World By all
which, as I observe Jehovah his Eye, looking in the gift of all these Laws,
specially to Canaan: so I cannot but mightily marvel at our ignorant frantic
Spirits, that urge Judicial Government, Litterall government, on the New
Testaments Churches, Churches of the Gentiles. To these fanaticall Spirits, the
Reading of Moses (as unto the Jews) is a Covering, 2. Cor. 3. 15. urging
Letter, in steed of Spirit. The Spirit, or inward soul of all them Laws
continue in Christ, but the Letter or external face is done away. This is
called (in comparison of the former) Grace and Truth, JOHN 1. 17. Let R. Bro.
then, and his giddie headed Opinatours, not any longer teach, that our Princes
should Iudaize. Canaan was under that whipping-Schoole-master, not Jerusalem
that is from above.

22. Staff.
The Pattern of the (a) Tabernacle, there
Delivered was: and every holy Law,
By which the Israelites their God should fear:
As of his Ministers, eke stand in awe.
For Tabernacles service, God did take,
(b) Levi his Tribe, and of them Priests did make.
(a) Moses being in the Mo^nt 40. days, and 40. Nights, the Lord here
instructed him concerning the form of the Tabernacle, wherein the Priests and
Levites were to Minister, as also, wherein the People should assemble. The
Tabernacle was distributed into 3. special Rooms. The uttermost, was called
the Court: into it Prince and People came. The inner room was called Holy,
therein the Priests ordinarily, Sacrificed. The innermost room, was called,
Most Holy: therein the High Priest entered to sacrifice but Once a year. Now
for the stuff it should consist of, wherewithal be covered, how fashioned,
where placed, what Instruments should be used in it, etc. allthis was
commanded to Moses, neither might he Add, destract, or Alter any iod thereof:
neither did he, for he was faithful in All his House, Heb. 3. 5.

(b) As the Tribe of Levi, was chosen to service of the Tabernacle, so neither
might they meddle therewith in their unripe years: for boys are unfit for
holy Ministry. At 25. years they entered into the Tabernacle for doing common,
inferior duties, as also to see and behold their Elder Brethren how they
slaughtered the Beasts, how they cut them up and disposed things. And shall
we admit foolish Boys, or Foole-Elders into the Church, there to meddle with
the word, before they have learned Orthoto-mein, To Cut, or Divide, The word
aright.

Secondly, the Levites having spent some 5. years that way, then at 30. they
begun to serve. At 50. years, the time of impotencie, they were not exalted
into higher rooms; for there was no higher for them, but discharged of the
former painful place; for all this, Compare Nombers 4. 47. with Nomb. 8. 24.
25* 26.

The Priests lips were to preserve knowledge, and the People were to seek
the Law at his mouth, Malachi 2. 7. and herewithall, Moses charged Levi, Deuteronomy.
33. 8. 10. 1. The People bringing Beasts to the door of the Tabernacle, that
they might be slaughtered for sin, did thereby profess, the necessity of
the Death of the Promised Seed, for sin: as also, 2. by putting their hand
on the Beasts head, they professed that themselves deserved the same death for
Sin. 3. And in as much as they brought the Beasts to be offered up (not by
their own hand, but by the Priests, they thereby professed, that it was not
in their own power to sacrifice for the least Sin, but that it must be
offered up by him, that was figured out under that Priesthood: namely, by
Christ, who was both the Sacrifice and Sacrificer. 4. By the HighPriest, his
once a year entering into the Holiest place, was more plainly typed forth the
Messiah, who Once should offer up for altogether, Heb. 7. 27. a Sacrifice and
oblation, that neither needed to be offered up daily (as were the former) nor
cannot be offered by any, but by him that is Priest (not according to Levi, on
whom Rome holds her Priesthood* but) according to the order of
Melchisedech: but of Christ himself that is testified, Heb, 7. 17. namely,
that only to HIM, that Everlasting Priesthood was committed: a Priest-hoode
that needs no Successor as did Aarons (because they were ever dying) for this
Priest continues for ever with his One sufficient, perfect Sacrifice, Heb. 7.
22. 23. 24. 25. 26. 27.

That Bread and Wine therefore, left by Christ unto his Church, has been
improperlie called a Sacrifice, seeing they are but Signs of that Sacrifice:
Signs of that Body and Blood. Nor yet, Naked Signs, but Signs exhibitiue:
sealing as verily Christ unto the souls of the Faithful, as they verily
receive into their mouth, the Bread and wine. Their Mouth no more surely
receives the Signs, then their Soul the T^ing signified.

5. By the Peoples washings and Purifyings, they professed what purity was
required of such as bare the Name of IEHOVAHS Israel. 6 By the Priests
Garments, as also other their pure observations: they were taught how Pure,
Spotles, and without Sin, the exspected Priest, Messiah should be. Neither
might such, having fallen from IEHOVAHS service to Idols, minister before the
Alter again: but only (after Repentance) were to be exercised in common
Leviticall duties, Ezech. 44. ^0. 11. 12. 13. Some hereupon have taught, that
in like Sor^e, He that should slide from the true Christian worship, unto the
Idolatrous Christian worship, should ever after that stand incapable of any
ministerial place in Christ's Church. But their ignorance in This, as in Other
things deeply appears, in laboring to make an open Dissimilitude, a
Similitude.

1. Them Levites fell away from a ministerial calling: but some of these
Christians did fall but as Private men.

2. The Levites fell from open truth, to open gross Idolat^^^, even to the
Idols of the Gentiles^ as for these Christians, they fell diverse of them upon a
doubting of the truth^ the^e they fell unto, being likewise Professors of
Christ, (...) for the Name of Christ: whereas the Levites fall was (...)
inexcusable (and more too) as if a Christian should become a Jew, or Turk.

3. The Levites falling, they served before the Idols: so have not many of
these during their fall.

4. The Levits returning by Repentance, were not debarred all Ministerial
service: but they would debar the poor Christians, simply for ever from all
office Ministerial.

5. If it may please them to ponder the Lord his Word better, before they
publish their own Word to the whole world, they shall find (as I observed in
the former Staff) that all sorts of Levits, (though spotles) were not capable
of Priest-hoode, and so, of standing before the Alter: As Gershom and Aaron,
their Family was chosen to the Priests work: so this sort of Levites, could
only be said to be debarred the Alter: as for the other, though they never
fell, yet they might not meddle with that piece of Service. If the Levites of
the Families of Kohath and Merari so fell, they notwithstanding are not debarred
their former place. Only, One sort of Levites Bear that shame, of being
debarred their former height of Calling: and they be such, as in the former
Height, did bear a lively resemblance of Christ. For such as had made so
fearful a Fall, to have been restored or lifted up into that place, that
specially typed out Our spotles Priest JESUS; having been so notably spotted
with open palpable Idolatry, would have been derogatorie unto Christ figured.
If a blemish in one of their bodies made him incapable of Priesthood, then no
marvel, if so grei^^ie a fall, put him from that sacred ^iguring Seat.

Thus, where diverse (whose names I willingly conceal) have thought that that
Deposition was nothing Ceremonial, and therefore with too open sound, did
smite up their drum, and display their Banner, they see the very ground of all
their hope, cashierde, and quasht with a wet Finger, Obiec. Paul would have him
Varebukeable. Answ. So would I have every Minister unrebukable: but if we
shall have no man that at any time of his life has committed gross Sin (for
so you have taught) for to med^le at all with any Church office: Surely, I can
not tell how, Rome, Corinthe, Asia Minor, shall ever come to have
Church Officers. Paul would, and so would I, that every common Professor of
Christ should live unrebukable: much more I wish it in the Teacher of the
People: but to say that a matter of Rebuke, does debar a man simply from al
such office, is as though one should say: Christians ought to live
unrebukable: If therefore any commit matter of Rebuke, he is no more
(notwithstanding Repentance) to be admitted to the place of a Christian: for
(to use your own reason) He must bear his shame: that: is, He must be in a
lower place, than before: but he was in the estate of a Christian before,
therefore now (notwithstanding Repentance) he may not be restored to the state
of a Christian Such an Argument would beseem Noua^us or rather Novatianus, who
is said to deny such for ever a place in their Church, as once had fallen into
sin. Nay, this is worse than that of Novatianus, for he denied the dignity
of Christian to him, that before had fallen in a Christian place: but this
Newe-learning denies office to him, that never fell in office.

Wisely fore-sawe the holy Ghost this soar, and therefore has left a plaster
accordingly in the Gospel, where he propounds unto us Persons Rebukeable,
both before and after their Calling: yet neither it debarred the first from
entry, nor the second from the continuance in their holy Church Function.
Matthew and Paul, notably rebukeable Before; Peter and Barnabas, notably
Rebukeable After their Calling. Matthew a Publicane: Paul an abominable
Bloodsucker. Peter first an Apostate, secondy, together with Barnabas taken
tardye with foul dissembling. And if in any there should of absolute necessity
have been conversation unrebukable, it had been highly necessary in the
Master Build^rs.

If any of absolute necessity, should have been unrebukable as was Christ,
then necessarily such should have been his Hands, for such were they in their
work. Every one will cast their eye back unto the Master workman, and think
themselves happy if they can but attain to be so perfect: why then would
Christ call into office, such as might after fall and scandalize the holy truth;
had it not bin more credit to his cause, that such should first have preached,
as might every way be unrebukable? would not people the sooner have beleved,
when they had seen the Faith of Christ so powerful in the Apostle, as he
never once fell after the preaching thereof? Surely, surely, Brethren, as it
would have gone hard with a man that should come to his Deaths-bed
unrepentant: if Christ had not left one President of granting Remission of
Sin at the last hour: so, had we not sufficient Presidents, of Jesus his
Calling men To, and continuing men IN the Church-office, (ey a more excellent
office than any of us can bear) it would go hard with the poor Church. Except
Angels came from Heaven, Itrow she would never be furnished with men. As the
Priests were called to figure Christ spotles, even as the spotles Lamb figured
his Sacrifice: so there was required in them Persons, all outward show of
Purity. David was a special figure of Christ the Warrior: Solomon, of Christ
the Churches Spouse: but they and their seed might enjoy that Regal room,
notwithstanding they had blemishes in their Bodies, and though they wear
unwashed Garments, etc. But for the Levites of Aarons Family, one blemish would
put them by: and herein they fully represented our Sacrifice and Sacrificer
spotles; without which, there had been no Redemption for sin. If
Church Officers now shadow Christ his Priesthood, as did the former, ^hen
there were some likelihood of this: namely, That Persous reprooueable for
passed fact, were ever afterward (notwithstanding Repentance) utterly
incapable of entering into, and still retaining any Ecclesiastical function.
But I trow, none are so gross as to affirm, that the New Church, or New
Testaments Church her Ministry, does so fore-type, fore-figure, or shadow the
Priest everlasting, even Jesus, ordained by oath, a Priest forever after the
Order of Melchi-sedech: which if, I see not why any should any longer, retain
such an Argument of Angellike ministry.

23. Staff.
The (a) Tabernacle built, and al things done,
They forewards set, toward old Canaan:
(b) But by the way, they into mischiefs run,
For which the Lord destroyed every man,
Even all (saving Caleb and Joshua)
Who out of Egypt, undertook the way.
(a) For beginning and perfecting the glorious work of the Tabernacle the Lord
gave singular guiftes unto Bezaleel of Iudahs Tribe, and to A^oliah of the
Tribe of Dan. No common guiftes are required in the builders and rearers up of
Churches: for of the Church universal or Catholic was the Tabernacle a type
or figure: yet but, of a Church in the Wilderness; as also in Canaan under the
warfare of the Church: for only peaceable Solomon must build the glorious
house of JEHOVAH: Secondly, the Tabernacle being joined together and reared up,
great enoylings and consecrations were required and performed, that so JEHOVAH
might dwell in it continually, Exodus 40.

Here ends EXODUS, or the Book of Going out, that is, out of Egypt.

The next Book LEVITI (US, is spent in rehearsal of the Service of the Levites.

The Book of Nombers, spends it self in Numbering the Remoovals, and pitchings
of Israel his Tents: Secondly, in Numbering the People, and diverse worthy Events
in the Wilderness.

The Book of Deuteronomie, (or second rehersall of the Law) makes a Repeat of
the things fallen out since the Peoples coming out of Egypt: containing
summarilie what before was delivered in Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers.

(b) The Israelites ever and anon tempted Jehovah in the Wilderness; for the
which, the Lord kept them for 40. years in the Wilderness leading the people
(for he went before them in a Cloud on the Day, and in a Pillar of Fire on
the Night) not by the way that Iaacob and his sons traveled in the Famine,
but round about, in and out, till he had by wars consumed all that went out
of Egypt, excepting CALEB and Ioshuah. This was the fruit of abusing their
Leaders, and doubting of the Lord his providence.

Balak (King of Moab: and Moab and Ammon came of LOT his drunken Incest,
committed after his departure from Abram his Uncle, and after the destruction
of Sodom, Gomorrha, Zeboim, Admah the Cities of the Plain) hired the covetous
Prophet Balaam to accurse Israel: but the Beast could tell the King, that no
Sorcerie could cease on Iaacob: yet wicked Iaacobs seed could accurse
themselves by running into many Abominations, to the kindling of IEHOVAHS
wrath. They overcame Sichon King of Amorites, Og, the king of Basa^, and the
Basan Bulls: but notwithstanding that and far much more than that, they were
ever forgetting God their Deliverer, for the which as I have said, Jehovah
destroyed them.

Aaron dies by the way, and Moses having called the twelve Tribes of Israel
before him, he blesses them: After the which, he passes from Moab plain, and
mounteth the Mount Nebo: from whence overpeering Jordan, he beholds the land
of Promise, Canaan, from whence their Fore-father Iaacob came in time of deep
Dearth. Having seen all (JEHOVAH showing him al) he quietly gives up the
Ghost, being 120. years old. But Michael the Arch-Angell, after strift with
Satan, Jude 9. buried his body, where never man could find it. Deuteronomy. 34. 6. And
here ends MOSES his 5. Books.

The 4. latter Books contain 183. years, unto them ad the 2369 years of
Genesis, and the whole will be 2552. years. And so much here is the Worlds
age.

24. Staff.
The Seed of them, during the 40. years,
Borne in the Wilderness, they only came,
With other two (as in Gods writ appears)
Them God did bring into the Land of Fame.
(a) For Ioshuah, (good Moses being dead)
By Gods appointment does the people lead.
(a) Moses before his death having imposed hands on Ioshuah as the Lord had
commanded, lo Ioshuah was full of the Spirit of Wisdom; succeeding Moses in
Captainship to Israel. And so begins the Book of Ioshuah.

Ioshuah sending Spies to Jericho (the first City beyond Jorden) they come to
Harlotrie Hostess Rahab, for lodging. She perceiving they were Israelites (for
Israel was become famous abroad) she lodged them with holy Care, believing
verelv that her City and all the Land should be given into the hand of Israel:
and therefore beggeth and obtains grant of Life for her self and her Fathers
house.

Officers of Jericho (having observed Spies in the Town) come and search for
the Israelites, but Rahab having hid them in the top of the house under bundles
of Hemp, denies her Ghuests. The Inquisitors departed, she (dwelling upon the
City walls) lets them down through a window by a coard, and so they retire
to Ioshuah.

Ioshuah understanding from JEHOVAH, that it was time to set over Jordan, he
appoints the Priests to bear the Arc of the Covenant (in which Arc the
book of Covenent was put) until they came to the brinke of the River. They
coming thither, and setting foot in the water, The waters parted as did the
Red Sea. The Priests standing within Jorden, all the People pass over. Twelve
Men in the mean time (of every Tribe one) taking up (at Ioshuahs command) a
stone in Jorden, which afterward in their Camping place, they pitched down
for a Memorial. The Priests no sooner set foot on the Land, beyond Jordan, but
lo, the waters roll together again: for what rest is in this floodie world,
longer than the Priest of Priests sets foot on the Seas^

The Israelites Royal Arrival once reported, Oh how the Uncircumcised grow
faint-hearted! Their Arrival being in the first Month, they (as was commanded
on the 14. day of that Month, (having first circumcised all the Males, borne
for that 40. years in the Wilderness, in the place called Gilgal) they do
celebrate the Passover feast: and the next day after, do eat of the Corn of
Canaan: whereupon, the Manna (a kind of food, that for the 40. years fell
with the morning dew, like to Coriander seed) it ceased. Extraordinary
provision shall accompany the Woman in the Wilderness: but she must not exspect
so much in the Land of Rest. They incompasse Jericho six days together, seven
Priests blowing on 7. Rammes-hornes, every day once: but the 7. day, they
circuit the City 7. times, the Priests sounding: and at the seventh time
sounding, the Army shoutes, upon which, the walls of Jericho fall down flat.
They sack the City (Saving Rahabs house) Ioshuah giving in charge that no man
take any execrable stuff of Jericho. Achan filtcheth a Babylonish garment,
200. shekels of silver and a wedge of Gold, whereby he brought Gods Judgment
on Israel. The execrable These found out, He, his sons, daughters, oxen,
asses, yea All that he had, were stoned and burnt to Ashes in the Valley of
Achor: and reason too, for Gold Silver, etc. first dedicate unto false worship,
is only consecrated by being dedicated to Gods Tabernacle. The man that
filtcheth that for his private use, brings Judgment upon him. Let such as
have filtched false Church-liuings, mark this.

Some others (my Brethren) have deemd it simply unlawful, that the ministry
of the New Testament (yea: some, that none of the faithful) should at any
hand make use of such stuff: saying, It is execrable. Indeed it is so,
regarding his former use, but if now it be by the holy Church dedicate to the
Saints use, it is no more execrable, Josh. 6. 24. and this way the Harlots
wages is made holy, Isa. 23. 23. 24. Let my Brethren considder of this, and not
so easily condemn the true use of God his Creatures, because of former
profanation: for all the Creatures of God are consecrated unto us, by the Word
and Prayer. 1. Tim. 4. 4. 5. and herein the Gospel is more liberal then was
the Law.

25. Staff.
(a) He having brought, them into promised Land,
And (b) seated every Tribe in proper lot:
(c) Good Ioshuah dies. Then, as we understand,
The Israelites right soon had God forgot:
For which, he many times did give them up,
To drink the draught, of Enemies their cup.
(a) This Ioshuah is called Heb. 4. 8. Jesus, because He (not the Law man
Moses) brought Israel into Canaan, the first Rest; a figure of the second Rest,
into which our Jesus (not of Ephraim, as he was, but) of Judah shall bring us,
if so we will study to enter into that rest. Without studying and striving it
will not be, for the Gate is straight, and the way narrow, that leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it. Mat. 7. 14.

(b) Ioshuah having seated the Tribes in their several Lots, as God had
appointed, (only Levies Tribe had no such Lot, for the Lord was his special
portion, and the other Brethren were to pay unto them Tenths) Reuben, Gad, and
the half Tribe of Manass^h, Then return unto their Lot, which fell out on the
other side Jordan. They (as we must) sought no Rest to themselves, till they
see Rest for the Body of Israel.

(c) Ioshuah ready to set foot in the Grave, calls before him the Elders of
the People: rehearsing before them, the wonderful mercies of God received, for
the which, they were all nearly tied unto JEHOVAH: But in the end he
concludes, howsoever others were resolved, yet He together with his Household,
would serve the Lord. Soon after he died, being 110. years old, having ruled
17. years: and about 50. years after their coming from Egypt. So ends the
book of Ioshuah: the World then aged, 2570. years.

Here begins the Book of IVDGES.

Ioshuah dead, the People consult with God, for the succession in Government.
The Lord appoints the Tribe of Judah. Of Judah, Othoniel was chosen Judge,
who oversawe them for 40. years.

To him succeeds Ehud of Ben-iamins Tribe, who was not (I think) lame, but
left handed, ( Judge. 3. 15. compared with Verse 21.) and therefore exercised
that hand as most ready to draw his dagger forth. He slew Eglon, Isreal's
Oppressor for 18. years. From Othoniels death, to the end of his Iudge-ship
are, 80. years.

Here Shamgar slew 600. Philistims with an Oxe-goade and so helped Israel.
But after Ehud his death, Israel forgets God their deliverer: for which
JEHOVAH gives them into the hand of Iabin a Cananitish King: whose chief
Captain was Sisera a Gentile. He had 900. Chariots of Iron, and twenty years
he vexed Israel.

But Israel crying unto JEHOVAH, he raised up in Israel, the woman Deborah, an
excellent Prophetess: who stirs up Barak (of Naphtali) to take 1000. men of
Naphtali and Zebulon, for rescuing Israel out of the hands of Sisera, Iabins
Captain. The Prophetess goes up with Barak, and they join with Siseraes
hudge Army by the waters of Megiddo. Siseraes Army is discomfited: himself
finding a pair of feet better, than two pair of hands. Coming weary into
Iaels Tent, he sleeping, she knocks a nail into his Temples, and and so
brought Barak pursuing, to the spectacle. So had Israel much rest for 40.
years: not for 40 years after this Triumph, but accompting 40. years from Ehud,
unto Gideon, next Israelitish Judge.

After Deborahs victory, the Lord (because of Sin, gave Israel into the
hands of Midian; for whose deliverance, Gedeon of Manasseh, (called also
Ierub-baal) was stirred up, who Judged his People, 40. years.

To him succeeds Abimilech (Ierubbaals young son) having first murdered his
brethren: and he reigned 3. years.

After him Tola, of the Tribe of Issachar, helped his people 23. years.

Next Iair of Manasseh; for 22. years.

Then Iephte Spurius of Manasseh, for 6. years.

After him, arose Ibsan of Bethlehem-Iudah, and Judged 7. years.

To him succeeded Elon of Zabulons Tribe, he had 40. sons, and thirty
Nephews, that rode on 70. Asse-coltes. He judged 10. years.

Then next, Abdon of Ephraim for 8 years.

In his nect followed Sampson of kicking Dans Tribe: He for 20 years was a
strong plaguer of the uncircumcised Philistims, slaying more in his Death than
in his Life. A Nazarite he was, and a figure of our Nazaret Anointed, who by
his death on the Cros^e, overcame Death, and destroyed all power infernal, to
the Faithful.

After Sampson, arose Eli, of the Tribe of Levi, and of the Family of Ithamar
the 4. Son of Aaron, for Aaron had Nadab and Abihu slain of God in the
Wilderness, for offering with strange fire; as also he had Eleazar and Ithamar
for sonns.

This Eli became (as Priest, so) Judge to his people, for 40. years. And here
(examining the time of Judges durance) the Book of Judges will end: within
whose times, falls the Story of Ruth, the Moabitish Gentile, married to Boaz,
great Grandfather to David. The Moabites came from LOT. his incestuous son
Moab.

1 Othoniel reigned 4. years. 2 Ehud his end of Iudgship after Othoniel, 80.
years. 3 From thence to Gedeon, 40. years. 4 Gedeon, 40. years. 5 Abimelech.
3. years. 6 Tol^, 23. years. 7 Iair, 22. years. 8 Iephte, 6. years. 9
Ibsan, 7. years. 10 Elon 10. years. 11 Sampson, 20. y. 12 Eli, 40. years.
The years of the 12. Israelitish Judges in one sum, are 339. years.

Object. But holy Paul preaching at Antioch, and making rehearsal of the sacred
Story, he there says, that the Lord gave unto Israel Judges, about 450. years,
Act. 13. 20. so that by the former number, (339.) Paul should over-compt one
hundred and eleven years.

Ans. Many (and not unlearned) have either here affirmed the text corrupted:
or else they have not begun the number of Judges from Ioshuahs last but they
have run back beyond Ioshuah, beyond Moses, beyond Iaacob, even to Isaac.
But if they mark Paul there, they shall easily see, that he brings in the
account of Judges, from the time that Israel had full possession of their Lots.
In a word, to resolve the doubt: Paul has an eye not only to these 12. Judges
sprung out of Israel, but also to the uncircumcised Rulers that oppressed them,
and into whose hands, the Lord gave them, because of their sins: for who
knows not that if the Lord gave his people into the hands of the
Vncircumcsed, (and so it is often said, in the book of Judges) then it was God
that se^ the Rulers over them: Let us number the years of the Oppressors.

1 Chusan, 8. years. 2 Eglon, 18. years. 3 Sisera, 20. years. 4 Midian, 7.
years. 5 Ammon 18. years. 6 Philistims 40. years.
These half 12. (being Oppressors) do so make 111. years.

Which one hundred eleven, put unto three hundred, thirty, nine, does give up
holy Paul's number of 450. Neither are these 111. years falling Alone, or
successively to the Judges, but Together or intermixtly with them: And
therefore that 339. years are in mixture or confusion 450 years, mystically
reproouing the peoples' confused manners, Let us now number from Isreal's Exit
from Egypt hitherto.

The whole, 396.
Moses governed 40. years. Ioshuah, 17. years. The Iudgships orderly time
339. years.
Now follow the Books of SAMVEL.

Eli, last Judge of that Number, being now Priest in Israel, unto him (and for
the service of the Lord) Hannah (the wife of Elkanah) brought her young son
Samuel: to which Samuel, the mighty God appeared, declaring to him, the
destruction of Eli, and his house, because he stayed not his sons Hophni and
Phineas from profaning the holy things. Wars being then with the Philistims,
Israel went out, and caused the Ark of Gods Covenant, to be fetched from Shiloh
into the Host. But the Philistims caught away the Arc (which afterward they
sent back again) and slew the flaunting Priests, Hophni and Phineas. News
hereof coming to Eli, sitting without on a stool, he in a pieuish qualme
fell down and broke his Neck* being 98. years old. Phineas wife (big with
child) hearing all this, she suddenly brought forth, calling the Child,
Ichabod, that is, No Glory, and so dyed.

Thus the Lord was as good as his word sent before to Eli, by the man of God,
Chap. 2. They that honor JEHOVAH, them will JEHOVAH honor: but if they will
kick against God, and dishonor him, by their unrepentant Prophanations,
JEHOVAH will assuredly dishonor them: by taking their Glory from them in the
sight of all men.

As they have lived not glorifying God, so they shall dye without glory to
themselves. Let Rulers chiefly learn this Lesson.

26. Staff.
But when they cryde, to God, he (a) Judges sent,
Who did avenge, them on their Enemy.
(b) At last with Judges, they grow discontent:
And for King Heathenlike, they rudely cry.
God gives to them, then Saul of Benjamin:
Whom, after God rejected for his sin.
(a) As he stirred up by times, 6. sort of Oppressors, so he mercifully
raised up twelve of their own people to exercise power over them: besides
Shamgar, that slew the 600. Philistims with his Goade.

(b) Eli dead, Samuel Judged Israel passing righteouslie. He waxing old, his
sons Joel and Abiah governed, whose inequall ways observed, the People
loathed Iudgship, and desired to have a King after the fashion of the Gentiles
about them. The Lord hearing their murmuring, does appoint Samuel to annoint
Saul (of Beniamins Tribe) a tall fellow to the Kingship. Saul seeking his
Fathers Asses, he found a Kingdom: for coming to enquire of Samuel concerning
his Asses, (as fools run to Witches) Samuel annointeth him, after the which,
the Spirit (not of Sanctification, but) of Government and Majesty came upon
him. This Saul afterward neglecting his charge, concerning the slaughter of
Amaleks Cattle, and Agag the King, the Lord therefore takes from him the
former Spirit, and put in him a frantic Spirit: commanding Samuel to annoint
David, the youngest son of Ishai of Bethlehem-Iudah, (the Town of Boaz and
Ruth) upon whom came the former Maiesticall Spirit. After this, Saul cease
not to persecute David (which persecution was cause of penning most of the Book
of Psalms) but David, (though he had him at vantage) would not hurt him. In
the end, consulting with a Witch at En^or (for before hating Samuel (and Samuel
now was dead) he tunneth to the Devil to speak with Samuel) Saul, the next
day after was slain (together with his Sons) in his wars with the
Philistims, running himself desperately on his swords point.

Thus the wretched King run from sin to sin, till sin slew him. From a
lesser sin, he runs to a greater, and from the greater unto the greatest,
till he meet with his match: that is, with a sin that overmatcht him and
brought him under foot. Let Kings beware of sparing any cursed Agag, or any fat
Idol Religion (for the belly is Agags God) lest the Lord leave them to (...)
sins race, the best end whereof is but shame and confusion of face. Seeing we
are all called to be Kings unto God. Lee us spare neither fat sins, nor lean
sins, sins less or more gainefull and pleasurable, but let us kill them
all: for as the bleating of the Cattle, bewraied Saul's halting, so will the
crying of one sin unmortified, bewray our hollow hearts, and provoke the
holy one to Judgment.

The time of Saul's Reign, and of Samuel his Iudgship together, making 40.
years.

27. Staff.
(a) Then Samuel did David King anoint,
Who was of Judah (b) gracious, good and true.
(c) Then Solomon his Son, he does appoint,
Him to succeed: as book of Kings does show,
This Solomon for (d) Tabernacles Rite,
Did build a Glorious Temple, Gods delight.
(a) Se for this into the Annotation next before.

(b) As David succeeded Saul, so he reigned in all goodness (excepting the
slaughter of Vriah, and the defiling of his wife, Bathsheba) marrying at length
with Bathsheba, by whom (the adulterous Child dead) he had Solomon; the figure
of Jesus, the peaceable Spouse of his church; even as his Father David was the
special type of JESUS, the slaughterer of his Churches ^oes.

And here begins the Books of KINGS.

(c) David in his old age, caused Zadok the Priest, Nathan the Prophet (he that
reproved David for his Adultery) with his valiant men, to carry his Son
Solomon down on his Mule to Gihon, and there (the Priest annoynting him with
oil taken out of the Tabernacle) to proclaim him King: who did so, crying,
God save King SOLOMON. After that, David having exhorted his son to fear the
Lord, As also, informing him of IEHOVAHS will concerning the Temple, he dyed:
having reigned seven years in Hebron (where he was the second time
anointed) and 33. years in Jerusalem, where he was the third time vncted.

(d) In stead of the Tabernacle formed in the wilderness, Solomon by the Lord
his appointment, builds a Temple, divided into the 1. Court, 2. Holy, and 3.
Most Holy, as was the Tabernacle. The Stone was hewn and first made even, and
afterward were conjoined together, for the rearing up of walls: so that it is
said, There was not heard the noise of an hammer in setting of it up. 1. King.
6. 7. This signified, that the Temple spiritual of our Jesus, greater than
Solomon, namely, the Church of the New Testament, should consist of spiritual
stones, namely, Men and weomen, who first should be hewed and made smooth, as
John Baptist smoothed the way to Christ, by the preaching of Prophets: and
having once the visible spiritual knobs hewn off, then they should conioyne
and knit together into one communion. This was cause that John Baptist would
not baptize any, but such as first Confessed Sin, giving hope of Amendment.
And this was it that holy Peter respected, when he said, And ye as lively
stones be made a spiritual house. 1. PETER 2. 5.

Secondly, that hammers, or forcing means, are not for joining People together
in holy Communion and Union spiritual, for no Iron sword can beget Faith,
but: that Princes swords and hard means are appointed for the smoothing of
them, and cutting off their knobs and wicked manners, that so they may be
fitted sooner for Christ.

This Army is to appear willingly in holy beauty, at the time appointed.
Faith is free or voluntary, not forced by human power.

Thirdly, that Rattling noise of Accusations, Reprehensions, is not fit
teaching within Christ his spiritual Temple, the Church. John is to charge
(...) for Generation of V^pers that are without: as (...) these that are once
entered into the Lords house and ^nrolled by Baptism in his Book, to them
appertain sweeter words, than Solomon spoke in the hearing of his servants:
and why? All ^^thin, are hoped to be Christ's, and Saints by Calling.

Object. The Prophets cried often bitterly out of their own People within that
visible Church.

Ans. Confound not the two Testaments, in their Ministry, Laws, People. If
their Maiestrate would cut the wicked from the City of God, so it was: but if
he would not, neither Priests nor People could do withal. As for the New
Church, she has power (be the Magistrate never so negligent) as to keep
defiled ones from entering the Lords City, Revel. 21. 12. 27. (for Christ his
Church here, is Jerusalem from above, Galatians 4. 26* etc.) so it has power
to preserve purity within. If therefore any wickedness arise within (there must
not be knocking of hammers) our Savior has commanded a Rule whereby to
walk. Math. 18. 15. 16 17. namely, to use all peaceable brotherly speeches and
behavior, for drawing the Trespasser to repentance. If he Repent, he is won,
and there an end. But if he Repent not, then he is to be put out of Communion,
as an Heathen out of the Temple nor eat and drunk withal of us willingly, no
more than the Jews would with Publicans. Such honor is to all his Saints,
Psalm. 109. 9. This is called a deliverie up to Satan, 1. Cor. 5. and not for
ever, but until the party Repent, and his obstinate flesh be humbled. In the
mean time, if by any means we have to deal with him, we are commanded to
admonish him as a brother, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 15. For if he have not proceeded so
far, as directly to reject Jesus (for the K^rim and black cu^se is due to such
a one, 1. Cor. 16, 22.) we are ever to hope him a brother (not utterly dead,
but) in a trance, who happily once may be recovered, by chyrting the cheek
and use of strong waters. But as a man in a foming sound, is not fit for our
Table, etc so neither a Brother in the hands of the hellish club-fi^^ed
Surgeon, till he be come to his pristine estate.

Let therefore Invectivers against Brethren, and foolish Excommunicators, here
Smite their thigh, and sav, What have I done* See 2. part, Staff 13.

In this Temple, were two Pillars the one called Iach^n (or stab^litie) the
other called, Boas, or, In strength. To these two, our Savior casts his eye,
when he says, Him that overcomm^t^, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my
God, etc. Revel. 3. 1^.

Every thing in this Temple, was Glorious, figuring the glorious estate of a
Christian: Proportionable and (...), figuring the p^oportion and order of
Christ's Church: Precious, signifying the high valewe of a Christian: and
nothing there was, that is not for our ^rudition.

Solomon having finished the work he dedicates it by Pr^^er to JEHOVAH. The
Lord gives unto him wisdom beyond all measure of other men. But ^est he
should think he stood of himself, the Lord for a season leaves him to
himself, who by means of strange women fell to gross Idolatry, not only
marrying with Pharaohs daughter (a figure of the Gentile Church) but also
concubining Ma^y. At last the Lord (^ho has promised to David his Father,
that, If SOLOMON sinned, h^e would chastise him with the Rod of Men, but his
mercy shul^ not depart away from him as (...) did from SAVL; He gives to
Salom^n grace to Repent, and not only that, but he appoints him to be the
holy Ghosts Scribe, for three Canonical books. In the first Book (entitled
Proverb^) he sets down positive Laws for initiating all People of all ages,
sexes, callings: notably inveying against the Idolatrous Church, under the
person of the strange woman. Bitten Child, fire dreades: he spoke of experience.

In the second Book, (entitled, Ecclesiastes, or Preacher) he takes his Puple
into an higher seat, and there letting him see the things under the Sun,
secretly compared with things above the Sun, he concludes all below to be
Vanity.

In the third Book, (entitled Song of Songs, or Canticles) he superelateth, or
carries his Disciple above the Sun to let him see the mystical Union of
Christ and his Church, together with their Louesignes and spiritual Amou^s. To
this purpose, his former fleshly love, and Loue-tricks was deeply
sanctified: and had he not that way bin overshoes, he had been nothing so fit
to discover the overtrance of the Spirit. Oh the wisdom and mercy of God. To
these that are called according to his purpose, all things work to the best,
Romans 8. 28. yea, Sin and All. And he that knows not this, knows nothing
yet as he should know.

Having finished these three Books (three degrees of Ascension from Sin: as
was Peter's triple con^ession of Love, for his threefolde denial) he
afterward dies, having reigned overall Jerusalem 40. years; leaving his
Son Rehob^^m to Reign after him.

28. Staff.
In his (a) sons days, for wickedness and sin,
God rent the Tribes, from Solomon his blood.
Kingdom of Judah, here did first begin,
To which the Tribe, of Ben-iamin fast stood.
The ten Tribes King, (as holy Scriptures tell)
Was after this, termed King of Israel.
(a) Reh^bo^m his Son, forsaking the counsel of the Aged, and cleaving to the
desperate advise of young start vps; (who willed that his little Finger should
be sorer upon the People, than was his Fathers ^oynes) Ten of the Tribes do
Schism from Rehobo^m despitefully: who take unto them I eroboam the Son of
Nebat, and creat him their King. From this time the King of the ten Tribes, was
called, King of ISRAEL. The other two Tribes that stood to Rehoboam (lawefull,
though wicked King) they hencesorth were called Jews, and their King, King of
IVDAH: together with which Judah, Benjamin stood, on whose hills (as on
shoulders, Deu^. 33. 1^.) the Temple of JEHOVAH stood. Thus the Son of the
Right hand. set his shoulders to the Lion of Judah, for supporting Church and
Churchwoorship. Worthy was Ben-iamin to stand on the Righthand of Jesus our
Lion of Judah.

29. Staff.
These ten Tribes Israelites, (a) falling from God,
They fell into the hands of Assurs King:
Who led them far away. (a righteous rod)
As for the two Tribes Jews, from them did spring,
Some holy Kings: But ever and among,
They grieved God, and did his Servants wrong.
(a) They Schisming or rendering themselves from David's house, Iero^^^^ to keep
them from sacrificing at Jerusalem, (neither was it lawful any where else) he
reareth up an Idol in D^^ and another in B^t^el, appointing Tinker-like
fellows for sacrificing Priests. By this means, as they had Schized from the
true Church, so now likewise from the true worship to a false. Neit^er after
this did the Kings of Israel better, of whom therefore still the holy Ghost
says, He followed Jeroboam ^^e son of Nebat, who caused Israel to sin.
This Supreme head of Idolatry sprung out of Ep^raim, and begun his Reign
with R^hoboam of Judah.

The age of the Old and New-World here, was 3030. years. Of the Newe-worl^,
2344 From the Promise. 1917. From Egypt, 516. From former Iudgeship hitherto,
120. And from the Temples structure, 36. years.

Here we must begin a double account, because of this double Regiment, which
after that Schism or Rent, was never united or made One.

IVDAH.
1 Rehoboam reigns over Judah and Ben-iamin, 17. years.

2 Abiam, called also Abi^ah, R^hoboam his son he succeeded and reigned 3.
years: wicked he was, as was his Father: but for Dauid^ sake, GOD gave unto him
a Light, (that is, a Son) to Reign after him. He begun his Reign in the 18.
year of Jeroboam King of Israel.

3 Asa his Son, succeeded, better than Father or Grandfather. He begun his
reign in the 20. of Jeroboam. He took the Sodomits out of the Land,
destroyed Idols: deposed his Idolatrous grandmother M^acha: in a word, many
worthy things did he, and the rather at the word of the Lord coming unto him
by Azariah, the Son of Obed. Having wars with Z^rah of E^hiopia, he cried
unto God thus: It is nothing with thee to help with many or few, therefore
help us oh Lord our God, for we rest on thee and in thy name are we come
against this multitude: Oh Lord, thou art our GOD, Let not Man prevail against
thee. So JEHOVAH smot the Ethiopians, and amazed that People: so that good Asa
and his Army prevailed, and took a great booty.

This King smot an excellent Covenant with the Lord: with whom, joined not
only his people of Judah and Benjamin, but also diverse strangers out of
Ephraim, Manasseh, and Simeon, Israelites. At which time, was offered up unto
JEHOVAH, much of the Ethiopians spoil. Having reigned 41. years, he dyed of
the gowt.

4 Iosaphat his son succeeds: beginning in his Fathers last years. A good man
for Church reformation. In his time Eliiah (or E^^as) prophecieth in I^rael:
and after him, prophesied there Eliseu^ (or El^sha) his servant: upon whom (
Eliiah rapt up in a fiery chariot) the Spirit is doubled: he working twice so
many miracles as did Eliiah. Iosaphat being in affinity with A^ab of Israel,
he accompanies Ahab to battle against Ramot^, Notwithstanding the Prophet
Michaiah had before told him and Ahab, the issue: but coming into the Field,
he was glad to fly with shame. Goodmen must look for no good, by joining
with Idolaters. And yet the Princes of o^r time a^e not afraid to run, ride*
sail by Seas, in the defense of blind Idolaters. Some have paid for it, let
others harms make them beware. He reigned 25. years, and died.

5 Ioram his Son, (called also IEHORAM) Reigned together with his Father,
from his Fathers 17 years, and so continued 4. years after his Father He is
said to reign 8. years, which time necessarily is counted from his Fathers 22.
what time he begun his more free Reign, that 22. being the 5. of Ioram of
Israel. Because this Fool married with Ahabs daughter, therefore, father
Iehosophat is once called king of Israel. He became a notable Idolatrer. Unto
him comes a Letter from Eliiah (were it writ before his being wrapped up, or
miraculously after, I know not) wherein was red his destiny: namely, That his
Gutts through horrible pain should fall out of his belly And so (2. years
after) they did; and so he died.

6 Achaziah (his youngest son) finished the Fathers last year, and was slain.

7 Athaliah his Mother succeeded (she was Ahabs Daughter, and Grandmother to
Ioash) she kills all the Kings seed she can catch. But Iehoiada^ his wife,
steals away Ioash (Achaziah, or O^hoziah. his youngest son) and keeps him
and his nurse, 6. years in a Chamber. In the 7. year, Iehoiadah the Priest
(having published abroad the life of the Child, he brings him before the
Captains and People: and in the Temple annoynteth Ioash.

8. Ioas^ (called also Iehoash) annoined King. at that instant, Athaliah the
traiterous Queen, comes in, cry^ng: Treason, Treason: but her self was the
Trayteresse, and so she found it: for she was haled out and slain, having
usurped 6 years. During Iehoiadah his life, Ioash walked vpright^ie: but the
good Priest dead, the Nobles of Judah com up, and with flattering reverence,
first causes a neglect of GOD his House: and then pulls in their Groves,
Idols and false worship. God stirs up Prophets to reprove that, but they
stop the ear. Then the Spirit of JEHOVAH coming upon Zechariah (the Son of
Iehoiadah) he thus protested before the People: Thus says God, Why Transgress
you the Commandments of JEHOVAH? Surely, ye shall not prosper, because ye have
forsaken the Lord he has also forsaken you. 2. C^ron. 24.

The frantic Idolaters hearing this, do stone him in the Court of IEHOVAHS
house: even between the Temple and the Alter. Mat. 23. 35 By the time that
year was out, JEHOVAH stirred up the Aramites against Judah: who came a small
number, but conquered, spoiled, slaughtered as they would: leaving Ioash
behind them in great misery. The Ara^^t^s departed, the Lord stirs up
Shimrah an Am^onite, and Ie^ozabad a Moabite, who slew the King on his bed He
began his Reign at 7. years, and Reigned 40. years.

And here I would gladly know of S^bas^ian Caestalio and his ignorant
followers, what leads them to affirm, That Solomon his blood ended in
Achaziah (or Ochaziah) the son of Iehosapha^? what should make them write
that Ioash was of Judah, the son of Ios^ph, the son of Jonah, the son of
Elia^im, the son of Melcha, the son of Me^na, the son of Matha^a, the
son of Nathan, King Solomon his brother? To pass by a Sea of error, which
this ignorance brings into the Genealogy of JESUS, let the Reader search the
Scripturs, 2. King. 11. 2. 3 and 2. Chron. 22. 10. 11. 12. and the next Chapter
wholly: and he shall see clearly (as at Noonday) that Ioash was Achaziah his
son, as we have written. Nay read 1. Chron. 3. 10. 11. and there it is thus
written: And Salomons son was Re^oboam, whose son was Abiah, his Son was
Asa, his son Iehos^phat, his son Ioram, his son Achaziah, his son
Ioash, etc. what can be more plain. If Castalio and his Opinators knew not
how to reconcile Matthew and Luke their Genea^ogies, (whereof in his place)
they should rather have acknowledged their ignorance, then seem more skilful
by broaching abominable error. But men that would not seem ignorant of any
point, do commonly stumble (in that height of pride) even in clearest points.

9 Amaziah (Ioash his Son) succeeded: being aged, 25. yea^e: He reigned 29.
years, accounted from his Fathers 38. year, that being the second year of
Ioash, King of Israel, and he then his fathers Vice Roy. He slew these that
slew his Father: but having an eye unto Moses his Law, he would not kill the
children for their Fathers fact. He warred with Ioash (or Iehoash) King of
Israel, but came to the worse. In Jerusalem, they working treason, he fled to
Iachish. They send after him, and there slay him. But he was buried with his
Fathers at Jerusalem in the City of David. As Jeroboam of Israel ( Iehoash his
Son) begun his reign in this man's 15, years. So, this man ends his Life and
Reign in the 15. year of Jeroboam his Reign.

10. The States of Judah, in the next place do Reign 11. years: even until
Oz^as his Reign, who begun his Regiment (2. Chro. 26. 1 compare with 2.
King. 15. 1.) in the 27. of Jeroboam of Israel his Reign: which must needs be
11. whole years after Amaziah his Father. IVDAHS states occupy that. Now Joel
begins to prophecy.

11 Ozias, or Vzziah, called also. Azariah, the son of Amaziah, he
succeeds the States regiment, being aged 16 years: beginning his reign in
the 27. year of Isreal's Jeroboam He reigns 52. years. This King had a zeal
beyond knowledge, which led him to burn incense, upon the Alter of Incense:
which thing only appertained to the Priest. Azariah the Priest, accompanied
with 80. valiant Sacrificers, withstoode and reproved him. The King is thereat
wroath. The Lord as wroth at him, he smites his impudent fore-heade with open
Lepro^^e. Then was he compelled to go out and because of that disease, he
dwelled in an house apart, until his death. In this man's time Is^iah, (or
Esaias) begun to Prophecy. He is called the Evangelical Prophet, because he
foretold of Christ, and the state of the new Church so pla^nly, as if he had
seen Christ and the ne^^ Testamentes Church, with the bodily eye. He
plainly ^ore-sawe the general obedience of Israel to Christian faith, after
the fullness of the Gentiles were come in, Chap. 59. 20. 21. So P^u^
understands that, R^m. 11. 26. Secondly, he plainly fore-sawe, that Isreal's
obedience unto Christian Lore, should be unspeakable glorious, and their
spiritual Light to be more than had been the Gentiles, Cap. 60. That Paul
insinuates, Romans 11. 12. and blessed John has in the Spirit pointed
plainly out their Churches ^lo^ie. Revel 21. Thirdly, I saiah foresawe, that
the Israelites obedience, should bring life unto the Gentiles dead (the
Primitive Churches have all died) 60. 3 4. 5. etc. This Paul con^esseth, Romans
11. 15. And holy John acknowledges. Revel. 21 24. and 22. 2. This, men will not
now see. If they would they should be humbled in their blindness, which shall
reign (though question be upon question) till Israel be called.

12 Iotham his Son, begnn to reign in the 2. year of Pekah of Israel,
(which was his Fathers last year) and he reigned in Ierus^l ^ 16. years. He
built in the Lords house; in the Cities wall: in the Mountains and forres^.
He prevailed against the Ammo^^es, and became mighty, because he directed
his way before Jehovah his God. Now beguane Micah to pro^ phecie against
Jerusalem and Samaria.

13 Ahaz (or Achaz) his Son, succeeded: beginning to reign in the 17. year of
Pekah of Israel, and he reigned 16. year, as did his Father. In his days,
came up Rezin, King of Aram, whose head City was Dam^scus: and Pekah the
Son of R^maliah, king of Israel, whose head City was Samaria, and he of
that City head, Isa. 7. These two smoking* Firebrandes ^eare Ahaz. Isaiah
from the Lord, laboreth to comfort him, but the hypocritical Beast believes
not, when he would be thought to believe much. Maugre his heart, Isaiah gives a
sign, namely, the birth of Jesus Christ on a Virgin, whereof he was vnwo
orthie. Pekah slew in one day, six score thousand of Judah. Zickri a mighty
man of Ephraim, slaieth Maasetah the Kings son, and Azrikam the Steward of
his house; and Elka^ah the second after the King. The Edomites do plague him:
the Philistims invade him: Tiglah Pilneeser of Ashur troubles him. All are of
his jack, but he will not forsake his grosle Id^latry. Now Isa^ah and his
children were signs to Judah and pointed at of the Idolaters, Isai 8. 18. So
is Christ and his members. Heb. 2. 13.

14 Hezechiah his Son, (a worthy ^eformer) begun to Reign in the 3. year of
Hoshea of Israel: which was the last year of his Father. In his 4 year, being
then aged 29) Salman^sar, comes against Israel and captiveth Hoshea and his
People. And in the 14 year of this King, Sanach-rib of Ashur, comes against
IVDAH. His chie^e Captain was Rabshakeh, a notable Rayler. Isai. 36. The Lord
comfor^eth Hezechiah by his Prophet Isaiah. Rabshakeh (hearing of Wars at
home) raises siege after all his scolding: but by the Angel of JEHOVAH, in one
night were slain, one hundred, fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians.
After that, Salmane sar in his Idol Temple at home, was slain by his two
sons, Adrammalech and Sharezer. He dead, Esarhaddon his son Reigned in his
stead.

Hezechiah sick, Isaiah comes unto him, and (after the Kings humiliation
before JEHOVAH,) he gives to him a Sign of Life for 15. years: for the
shadow of the Dial hereupon went backward ten degrees in the Dial. Berodach
Beladan (Babels King) understanding of the Miracle, he sent to Hezechiah
presents. He lets the Strangers see al his Treasure, furniture, etc.
whereat the Lord is angry; and therefore sends Isaiah to tell him, that his
Seed should be carried away captive to Babel. Having reigned 29 years, he died.

15 Manasses (or Manasseh) his son succeeded at the age of 12. years, and he
reigned 55. years. He beginning with as deep Idolatry, as had Ahaz his
Grandfather, God stirs up. Assurs King, ( Esar-haddon) who fetters my
Youth, and carries him Prisoner to Babel. He humbling himself in his Chains
(happy Chains that humble a man) the Lord is merciful unto him. Assure
sending him^ home, where in better manner he finished his days In his time,
Habakkuk prophecieth.

16 Amon his Son succeeds, for two years His servants slew him, for which
the People slew them, and enthronized his son Josiah.

17 Josiah (or Josias) next reigns. Eight years old at his Coronation, and
he ruled 31. years in Jerusalem. At 12. years of age, he wrought a great
Reformation: performing upon Bethels Alter, that which the Prophet had
fore-tolde 300. years before. In his 18. year he kept a most Royal
Passover. Jeremiah in his Reign begun to Prophecy: so did Zephaniah. The
Lords Trumpet now sounded nothing, but Judah must to Babel Prisoner for 70.
years. False Prophets sound a false peace, and therefore shame came upon
them. Huldah the Prophetess tells Josiah, that because his heart melted at
the reading of Moses Original he should be taken away ere Iudahs fearful
fall. Going into Battle against Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, he was slain at
Megiddo.

18 Iehoahaz, or Ioachaz, called also IONN and Shall^m, a younger son of
Josiah, he succeeded at the Peoples appointment. He Reigned but three Months:
for then Phara^h Necho put him in bonds, and carried him into Egypt.

19 Eliakim (called also Iehoiakim and Iakim) elder brother to Iehoahaz by 2.
years, Him did Pharaoh Necho make next King. Now Iudahs obedience was like
rotten Figs.

From the Schism of the Ten Tribes, from the Two (whereupon arose, King of
Judah, King of Israel) unto this Eliaki^ his 3. year are 370. years. The
World aged, 3400.

ISRAEL.
1 Jeroboam, King of Israel, (or ten Tribes) streatching out his hand against
the Prophet that denounced Judgment against the Alter in Bethel, that hand of
his withered. He beseeches the prayer of the Prophet: who prays unto God,
whereupon the hand was healed. At this time the Prophet plainly said that, A
Child should be borne unto the house of David, Josiah by name, who upon that
Alter should sacrifice the Idol Priests. This was spoken 300. vea^s, before
Josiah was borne. Jeroboam dies an Head Idolater, having reigned 22. years.

2 Nadab his Son, was half King in his Fathers two last years: for he begun
his Reign in the 2. year of Asa king of Judah.

3 B^asa killed N^da^, and reigned over Israel 24. years. He consumes
Ieroboams house. His reign begins in Asa, his 2. year.

4. Elah his son, was Viceroy in Baasa his 2. latter yeates. for he begun
his reign in the 26 year of Asa.

5 Zimri slew his M. Elah. Against Zimri, arises Omri. Zimri bu^nes himself
in the Kings house, together with the house. Omri makes pla gye Statutes.
Against him arises Tibni, but Omri prevailed. He reigns (the Rivals time
joined to his) 12. years.

6 Ahab (an evil slip of Omri) follows: beginning his Reign in Asa, his 38.
year. He married with uncircumcised Iesabel, Daughter to the Zidonian King:
He bad, She worse: the Devil put them together. In his time, Eliiah the
Prophet was famous. He reproved Ahab for reaving Naboth of his Life and
Vineyarde: telling him plainly, that his House should come to naught, and that
painted I^sabel was destinat for Dogs-meat, and so it fel^out: for Iehu
afterward caused her to be cast down from a lo^t. They that do humble
themselves shall be lift up, but the proud God resists, and will cast down.
He reigned 22. years.

7 Ach^ziah his Son, begun to Reign in I^hos^phat his 17 year. He Reigned
two year, which fell out in his Father Ahabs 20. and 21. year.

8 IORAM his brother, began to Reign in his Father Ahabs 21. and 22. years of
his Reign: which was in the 18. and 19. of Iosaphat of IVDAH, and in the
second year of IORAM I^hosopha^ his Son, then half King with Iehosophat his
Father. This man took away the Image of Baal, which his Father made: but yet
stood an Ido ater. With this fellow Iehos^phat of Judah did go to war with
Moab: for the King of Moab, having become tributarie to Ahab, he now ( Ahab
dead) rebelled. Now El^sha, (or El^seus) the Prophet is famous: and therefore,
before their going up, with him ^he Kings consulted: who assures them of
victory. Having reigned 12. years Ioram died.

9 Iehu is anointed King. He slays Iezabel and all Ahabs house: for
Nabaoths blood, cried for blood, as did Habels. He makes Baals Priests
believe that he would sacrifice before the Idol. All the Priests gather for
that supposed sacrifice. They being once in BAALS house, he show them all.
Notwithstanding, (for this was but a starting Zeal) he afterward fell to
palpable Idolatry: and all Isr^^l became so notably wicked, as JEHOVAH loathed
Israel: in so much, as Hazael of Aram in Syria smot them in all the coasts of
Israel. Iehu having reigned 28 years, he dyed,

10 Ioachaz (or Iehoachaz) his son succeeded: beginning his reign in the 23.
year of Ioas^ of Judah. He, following the ways of Jeroboam, the Son of Nebat,
caused Israel to sin: for which, the Lord gave them into the hands of Hazael
King of Aram, and into the hands of Ben^adab King Hazael his son. He
reigned 17. years, and dyed:

11 Iehoash (or Ioash) Son of Ieh^^haz (or Ioachaz) begins Government in the
15. of his father, that being the 37. of Amaziah of Judah. He reigned 16.
years. Being provoked by Amaziah, he went against him, took him captiu^, and
then went to Jerusalem, making much spoil. In this man's time, holy Elisha
(after many miracles wroght) dies.

12 Jeroboam, his Son succeeded. He begun his reign in his Fathers last year,
that being the 15. of Amaziah of Judah. He Reigned 41. years. In his time,
the Prophet Jonah was sent by the Lord to Niniuie, the Metrapolitane City of
Ass^ria) there to proclaim Judgment against the City. He imagining small
credit by such a Sermon, does by Sea fly another way. The Lord by a Tempest
^ursues him. The Mar^^ne^s cast out Jonah. A Whale receives him; who after 3.
days, casts Jonah upon Land. So was the Earth the third day to deliver up
Jesus, Mat. 12. 40. Neither Earth nor Sea can hide or drown that true Ligh^,
which God has appointed to be declared to a People. After Jonah his being cast
upon the shore, the Lord renueth his Mandat: he goes to Niniuie, and
proclaims destruction after 40. days. They at the first hearing, believed
that: they therefor genera^ly humble them selves and for that time are spared.

This King restored the coast of Israel, from the entry of Hamath, unto the
Sea of the wilderness according to the word of the Lord by JONAH the Son of
Am^^^ai, the Prophet, which was of Gat^-Hepher But this Ieroba^m followed the
steps of the first Jeroboam. In his time, begun likewise Amos and Hosheah to
Prophecy.

13 Isreal's Kingdom, thencefoo^th unstayed for 22 years full: even until
Zach^rie. Now Hosh^ah plainly tells Isra^l, that she was not IEHOVAHS wife.
Here was like Priest, like People.

14 Z^chariah, Ieroboa^^ his Son, beg^n to Reign in the 38. year of Azariah,
King of Judah, 2 King. 15. 8. which was fulli^ 22. years after his Fathers
death. A wicked man was he, and therefore slain by S^allum the son of
I^besh, and that in the Peoples sight. He reigned but 6. Months.

15 Sha^lum having slain Zechariah, begun to reign in the 39. year of A^^ria^
of I^dah. Against him rises M^n^he^ the son of Gadi, who slew Shallum in
Samaria. So that he reigned but a Month.

16 Menahem immediately upon Shallums death, beginne^h his regiment, and he
reigned 10. years. But unto him, the City T^rzah (in Israel) wou^d not open
her gates. He therefore smot it, and ripped up all their women with child. Now God
stirred up Pull, the Assyrian King, against Israel, who pulled 1000. Talents of
Silver from Menahem, which Menahem pulled from Israel.

17 Pekachiah his son, begun to reign in the 50. year of Azariah of Judah. He
reigned two years: and was slain by his Captain Pekah, in Samaria.

18 Pekah the Son of Remaliah, begun to reign fully in the last year of
Azariah of Judah. He reigned in Samaria (Metrapolitane of Israel) 20. years,
In his time, T^glah Pileser king of Ashur came up, and took diverse Cities, and
carrved the People away to Ashur. Hoshe^, the son of Elah slays Pekah.

19 The States of Israel now govern for 9. years, though under Tiglath
P^^eeser, who had before time captived them.

20 Hoshea (called also Osee) begins his reign in the 12. year of Ahaz of
Judah: and a bad man he was. Against him Jehovah sende^^ Sabnanesar King of
Ashur, who took Hoshea prisoner, and after 3. years besieging Samaria (which
was the 9. year of Hoshea his reign) he took it and carried Israel away to
Ashur and there seated them; since which time, Israel h^th not been heard off.
Obadiah well prophesied: roundly taking up Edom-Esau, for laughing at his
brothers Captivity. The King of Ashur having carried Is^ rael away, he
p^^ceth in their Rooms (in SAMARIA her Cities) a Colonie of his own
uncircumcised People. JEHOVAH sends Lions amongst them, devouring. They
signify that unto their king, saying further: That they not knowing how to
worship the God of Isreal's Land, that Cuntries God therefore so plagued them.
The King sends one of Isreal's Priests back; who dwelling in Bethel, did teach
the People. Some part of IEHOVAHS worship they received, and unto that part,
they ad their foreign Idol, homebred worship.

Salmanesar, their king dying, his son Esar-Haddon, brought more of his Rascals
to Samaria, and them parts, Ezra. 4. 2. Enemies unto the good work of God they
were ever. For that, as also for their Linsy-wolsie worship, the Jews would
have no meddling with them, Ioh, 4. 9. The Jews would be followed of all haters
of Idolatry.

But here we leave Israel under the heavy Lash of JEHOVAH Captines in unknown
parts of the World: a People unknown, howsoever supposed Ezra, (or Esdras)
in that second Book, Chap. 13. Verse, 39. begins a strange tale of them.

About this time, Nahum prophesied Niniuies fall.

30. Staff.
Their Sin vpheapt, God sends them away,
To Babylon in (a) three Captivities.
For (b) seaventie years, they bide in Chaldea.
Then (c) against Babel, (d) Mede-Persy does arise:
And conquering Chaldeahs drunken Roy,
(e) Cyrus sends back Iudeah home with joy.
(a) Nebuchad. netzar, comes against Ierusaelem, in Iehoiakim, (or Eliakim)
his 3. full years, ( Dan. 1. 1. 2.) Then go to Babel, Iehoiakim, Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, Azariah, together with others of the blood Royal. Iudab^
King becoming an homager to Babylon is returned home^ This was Nebuchadne^zar
his first year, Ierem. 25. 1. and a time of Glory to Babel, who now as a Queen
sits above Egypt, Assure and all Cuntries about. Three years Iehoiakim
serves Babels King, but the next he revolted. Then Nebuthadne^zars Host, the
second time comes against Jerusalem. Iehoia^im is taken, and afterward cast
out unburied as an Ass, because like an Ass he had cut in pieces I^REMIAHS
Prophecies. So he had from Aegypts King, his time of making him King, reigned
11. years.

20 Iehoiachin (called also Iechonias and Choniah; son to Iehoiakim is next
King: being 8. years old at his Fathers Coronation (so understand HE, 2. Chron
36. 9. compared with 2. Kings 24. 8.) He reigned three Months and ten days
in Jerusalem.

Against him comes Nebuchadne^zars Host, (it being the 8. year of Babels
Monarch) and carries the lewd Boy and many more with him to Babylon. Now
went Mordechai and Ezechiel into Babels bondage, but their spirit was not
bound. This was the second carrying forth Captive unto Chaldeahs Monarch.

21 Mattaniah, (called also Zedechiah) his Uncle, or Fathers brother properly;
called his Son, because he succeeds his Cousin, as a Son succeeds the
Father: called also his Brother, according to the vulgar speech of the Jews,
who call any of their blood, Brethren: this Tz^dechias succeeds at the
appointment of Nebuchadne^zar, and reigns 11. years. Then the fourth time
comes up Nebuchadne^zars Host against Jerusalem. They sack the City and
Temple: burn and raze down all: shed much blood: but Ierusalems Mourners (as
Jeremy, Barcuk Abdemelech, the merciful Morian) were freed from the sword: and
that Ezechiel had foreseen, Chap. 9. Tzedechias flying, the Chaldean Army
overtakes him. They bring him to Ri^lah, in the Land of Hamath, where Babels
King condemned him slew his Sons, and put o^ his eyes: bringing him blind
to Babell, and thus he never saw it.

(b) In these 70. years reigned, first Nebuchad^etzar: then Euil-merodach his
Son, who set Ieho^achin out of Prison in the 37. year of his Captivity, and
exalted him above all the Kings that were about his Monarchical Throne in
Babel. And here I shut up the two Books of Kings, and the two Books of
Chronicles: Ieremiahs hystoricall part: as also his Thren^, Elegies, or
Lamentations, who were dolefullie sung of him after the third deportation.

Unto Euil-merodach, succeeded Beshazzar his Son, called also the Son of
Nebuchadnetzar, a term given commonly to successors, though far remote. This
Beast making a great belc^ing Feast to his Nobles, JEHOVAH sends a palm of a
hand, writing his destiny upon the wall before his eyes. The drunkard yet
trembled for fear, and shu^tered in every joint: and the rather, because none
of his flattering Prophets could read it. Daniel being sent for (for in his
Grandfathers days, great doubts and difficulties had been expounded by
Daniel) he reads the Canonical writ, and tells the King, that it
signified, how JEHOVAH had accounted his time, and weighed him in the
Balance, had found him too light, and therefore an end was come to him and
his Kingdom. The same Night, Cyrus of Persia, and Darius the Mede) having
turned aside the stream of Babels Euphrates) do rush into the City, and so
cause the drunken Bacchus-frocs to drink of the Lords Cup. Here were the 70.
years finished: an end of the Chaldean Monarch, resembled by the golden Head,
Dan. 2. 38. the indirect cause that Nebuchadnetzar reared up the golden Image,
as a memorial of His being the First of that Head: Unto which Image, the 3.
young Nobles not bowing, they therefore were cast into the fiery furnace, but
JEHOVAH delivered and exalted them. That pride^caused Nebuchadnetzar (the Great
Tree, Dan. 4.) to be hackt down: and to be sent to live as a Bedlem amongst
Beasts, till he had learned to Rule better over men. Euil-merodach doing good
unto Iudahs People, it seems he went therefore to his grave in peace. But
Belshazzar being puffed up (as was his great Father) he therefore finisheth the
Golden head, and Winged Lion, Dan. 7. 4. and Ezech. 17.

(c) Babels destruction prophesied of by Isai. 21. 2. where Elam (that is, the
Persians, who sprung from Elam, Shems son, Genes. 10. 21.) and Media,
(derived from Madai Iaphets son, Genes. 10. 2.) these two are commanded to
besiege Babel and smite it.

(d) The Medes and Persians (issued from good Iaphe^ and Shem) do as two sworn
brethren, join hand in hand for destroying Babel, the Captiver of Shem and
Hebers People: The Mockers of Hebers Songs, have now their Children dashed
against the stones, Psalm. 137. It is equal, that they who now mock spiritual
Song, shall be le^t hereafter to sing a Black Sanctus.

(e) The Kings of the East, having sacked the City, and put many of the
Uncircumcised to the sword, Cyrus (being eger of wars abroad) constituteth
his Uncle Darius King, and as Monarch of Pers^^: giving before his departure
Commandment for building the Lords house at Jerusalem. This I saiah foresawe
(plainly using the Name of Cyrus, Chap. 45. 1) and soreprophecied of, long
before Cyrus was borne. The poor Jews obtaining this sudden delivery, they
stood, as it were, questioning with themselves: Are we deliuer^d, or do we
dream of deliverance. Psalm. 126. 1.

When the fulness of time, concerning Iehouahs secret Decree is come, then
Devil, Uncircumcised, and all shall further the Lords work: some of them for
vainc glories sake; some because their Conscience is secretly convicted; some
for one ^inister occasion, some for another. Only let the Lords Israel in
patience, mean time, possess their souls, always believing, that the Lord
sits at the Helm, and therefore the ship steared aright toward the Haven:
howsoever by reason of cross winds, the Lord sometimes for winning the Wind,
does run the Bark awklie. Fresh water soldiers, think such Sea-crossing
strange, and besides rule: but the better and experienced Pilot knows what he
does The greater Cross, the greater Comfort in the end. And there an end for
that.

31. Staff.
Cyrus (a) returns them with full liberty,
To build Gods house: But Enemies arise,
That for a while, do stay That and the City.
Then Nehemi, unto his People hies.
Then Temple and the Cities Walls were reard,
(b) Maugre the hearts of them, before they feared.
a) In Cyrus his first year (for the 70. were finished) the King having caused
his People, to furnish them with necessaries, they return with sheaues in
their bosom, that went forth by weeping Cross.

And here begins EZRA.

In the First Return Zerub-babel, ( Contrary (...) Confusion) is the Peoples
Captain. Coming to Jerusalem, they lay the foundation, but from the 3. year
of Cyrus his Commandment, it was hindered. After that falls out Ahashuerosh
his Decree, for Massacring Jews, but Hester, through her Uncle Mordechai his
stirring up, turned the Judgment upon Haman and his house ( Read here HESTERS
story) and Mordechai is exalted.

Darius Ar^axast, the third King of Persian Monarch, he, Ezra. 6. sensibly
feeling Iehouahs hand against his people, because the Jews were stayed from
the holy work, He in his second year renueth Cyrus his Predecessors
Commandment. Now begins Haggai to reprove his People, for having so great
mind to the building of their own houses, in the mean time neglecting the
Lords House. Together with him the Lord stirred up Zachariah for the work. In
the 6. year of Artaxast, or Artahshasht, the substantial parts of the Temple
were finished. The next year after, Ezra and his holy Host make the Second
Return. In the 20. year of the King ( Nehcm. 2. 1. And here must begin
Nehemiahs Story) Nehemiah Tirshatha, or Butler, comes to Jerusalem, and
reareth up the Cities walls: and now were the Temples appurtenances finished,
which was 46. years from the Foundation laid, John, 2. 20. and a Iubile of
years, that is, seven seavens, or 49. years: whereof Gab^^el certified Daniel,
Dan. 9. 25. But Daniel mourns for the hinderance, Chap. 10. which was in
Cyrus 3 year.

(b) Assurs People, (Read of them, in Hoshea last Isreal's King) they starting
from Samaria, and the Cities thereabout, did all they could to hinder it: but
it could not be stopped, beyond Gabriels seven seavens of years. The Lords
prefixed time, shall stop the Devil and all his black band: What ^eedes Israel
fear:

32. Staff.
Under Mede Perse, for (a) Nehemiahs time,
Judea lived. Then (b) Alexander Great,
Winnes Persian Crown, and Reigns a little time.
(c) Four Kingdoms do arise out of his Seat.
But (d) two of them above the other clyme,
And cruelly whip Judah for the time.
(a) It seems, that as Nehemiah might see the end of the Persian Monarch: so
likewise should Ezra see their whole Monarch, head and foot. Nehem. 12. 22.
26. for Darius Persa, is the last King, which Canonical writ records. And
the Jewish Hystoriographers do wri^e, that Iadduah, (Nehem. 12. 22.) and
Sanballat, Nehem. 4 1. were in Alexander Magnus his time. Of Iadduah (Father of
Onias) they write, that he met Alexander in his Pontificalibz, before whom
the King reverenced. Of Sanballa^ they write, that he presented Manasseh an
Apostaticall Priest (that had married with him) to Alexander, who built for his
use a kind of Temple: To whom al such Priests resorted, as (for marrying with
the Uncircumcised) were driven from the Temples Alter at Jerusalem. Manasses
his Temple built; (as Joseph Ben-Matthias records) on Mount Garizin, an hill.
against Samaria, higher than the residue. Well has One therefore concluded,
that the Persian Monarch may not be streatched above 130. years, except we
will give unto Ezra an incredible age.

(b) Alexander, the Brazen Belly (Dan. 2. 39.) the Leopard, Dan. 7. 6. the
Western Goat, Dan. 8. 5. Alexander resembled in them Three, he comes
skipping from Grecia, and pusheth the Ram of Persia, Dan. 8. 6. destroys
the Persian Bear, Dan. 8. 5. and succeeds the Two silvered Arms of the
Medes and Persians. Paras so cast down, Iavan (for of him, Genes. 10. 2. the
Grecians came) put on the Monarchs Diadem: Him Iaddua (Ierusalems high Priest)
accompanied with the Citizens in white, does meet: for which Alexander
granted them great liberties. He reigned 6. years Monarch, and then in his
prime of strength, having conquered the Eastern world, he suddenly dies, and
his house is quickly after rotten.

(c) Out of that Rotten Head, springs 4 Horns or Kingdoms, allotted to 4.
Captains. To Cassander, was allotted Macedonia: to Antigonus, Asia-Minor:
Syria, to Seleucus Nicator: and Egypt to Ptolemi Lagi. Dan. 8. 8. and Chap. 11.
4.

(d) The Kings of the North and South, so called Dan. 11. because their
Kingdoms so stood coasted from Judea, they root out the other Two Corrivals,
and mary together. Dan. 11. 6. These Two Powers conjoined, are lively resembled
by the Images Two Iron Legs, Dan. 2. 33.

As all have consented, that the first 3. mettles of Gold, Silver, Brass, did
represent the Monarchs of Golden Chaldea, silverie Persi^, brazen Grecia: so
usually, they have understood the Iron Legs to import the Roman Monarch. The
Jews opening the ear willingly to that, do cast this bone back to
Christians. The Iron legs are the Roman Monarch: but the Roman Monarch is
not yet abolished: Therefore Christ is not yet come: because Christ the Stone
from above coming, shall at his coming abolish the fourth Monarch, as well as
the former Three, Dan. 2. 34. 45. Nay they go on Triumphing thus: Oh foolish
Christians, the Two Legs must denote Two King domes, under whose feet we must
be trampled, till Messiah come: and as your selves grant the Romish kingdom
to be One, so we believe the Turkish kingdom to be the Other Iron Leg.

Hereunto, over weakly, me thinks, there has been returned this Answer. The
Stone Christ has rushed upon R^mes Monarch, in so much, as by that power of
Christ, it still diminishes some and some, and will be abolished quite at his
second coming. The lewe calls this an Abolishment in Conceit, not Real:
and for any thing I can smell, it is too-too improper.

First, an improper sense, is unnecessary, where a proper is at hand.

Secondly, between the Two Legs, and that One Government of the Romans,
there is not proportion or likeness. That, the Jews well observe, though they
evil apply them two. As by the Two Arms were meant, not O^e, but Two
Kingdoms, namely, Madai and Paras, so by rule of likeness, Two Kingdoms, but
both One against Judea, must here be meant. That proportionablie holds, in
giving the two Legs unto Egypt and Syria: which two Kingdoms, as two Legs
did spring out of the Brazen Belly and Loins, Iavan or Grecia.

Thirdly, the Stone was to fall on the Images Toes. That IT did not, regarding
the Romans, for It rather rushed on that Monarchs Head, or prime of
Government over Judea, but that it did, on the Toes of Syri-Egypt: for Herod,
Matthewe 2. 1. of Anti-pater an Idumean, as he was appointed to govern by
Romes Caesar, so was he by Aegypts Antoni and Cleopatra then in Syria (she
sprung of Syri-Egypts seed: such commixture Daniel foretold 2. 43. and 11. 6)
confirmed to that Regiment over Judea. The blessed Stone so tumbled on
Gog-Magogs Toe. See the 1. Staff of the new Testament following.

Fourthly, the vision was for confirmation of the Jews faith and patience,
until Messiah came to case them: and not so, for Time after Messiah: the like
falling out in all Daniels following visions.

Fifthly, we shall see, that this Image is: first, for the Whole, then for the
Parts, in the sequences expoun ded. For the whole, That vision ( Dan. 7.) of
the 4. Beasts is clear. The three Beasts expounding the three first Mettles:
as for the fourth Beast (wherein lies the doubt) it is set out by notable
Periphrases, but not said (as were the former) to be like this or that Beast:
for being so changeable in government, even now 12. reigning, even now 4. even
now two: al Terrible and Tramplers of Judea under foot; it cannot at any hand
be properly affirmed of Rome but wonderful plainly and properly of that
disordered Iron kingdom that came out of Iavans brazen belly. And of this
kingdom, do the Jewish Antiquitaries understand it: teaching the^ewithall,
that Antiochus Epiphanes was that little horn that uttered great blasphemy.
Let us not hinder them in coming forwards to Jesus Messiah.

For the Parts of the Images-vision: First, Daniel has a vision, Chap. 8. of
a Ram and a Goat. This overthrowing That: that is, Mede-Perse or Paras
overthrown by Alexander, the brazen Belly and Goat saltant. Secondly, in the
eleventh Chapter, Daniel is told by the Angel of each excellent particular that
concerns the plain pointing out of Mede-Perse, Grecia, and the braunched
Horns or Governments issuing ont of Alexanders Monarch: every latter vision
more open than the former, and a plain expositor of the first

33. Staff.
These (a) Two hight thus, Egypt and Syria:
The Iron legs, whereof good Daniel writes:
From Syri rose The (b) Horn blaspheming ay
Which doste the Jews, and holy worship spites.
But after (c) Seventie seavens of years, from Hy,
A (d) Sacred stone puts all these Kingdoms by.
a The two kingdoms springing out of Greciaes Monarche: whereof sufficient lie
is said in the annotation upon the former Staff.

(b) Of Ten Syria-stampers, vpstarts, an Antiochus, more base than any before
him. He would needs be called Epiphanes that is, Famous: but many then called
him Epimanes, that is, Furious: and Furious he was against the pleasant Land
Judea. His blasphemies and abrogation of holy things, thou may see, Dan. 7.
8. etc. and Chap. 8. 9. etc. This Beast stayed not afflicting Egypt, as Egypt
pinching at him: but Judea being in the middle, it always paid for their
losses. The nerer they came to Christ, the greater was their Cross. Of some
his abominable Actions, the Apocriphal Machabees makes true mention. This
Beggar got on Horseback rid a mad gallop, till the Lord cast him down to
his dounghill beginning: Stinking in his death more fowlie than a dunghill.
This blasphemous Home was a special type or figure of the New Testaments
Antichrist, or Man of Sin, or Son of Perdition, whom God shall destroy by
the breath of his mouth: committing his whole tyrannous body to the devouring
fire, Apoc. 19. 20. even as was not only this special Horn, but his whole
Kingdom, Dan. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. This blasphemous horn arises out of one of
the four Beasts, that Daniel saw come out of the Sea: as for the New
Testaments son of Perdition, he springs out of a Beast, that likewise came
out of the Sea: a Beast containing all Daniels Beasts. Revel. 13. 1. 2. And it
may be, that our Antichrist was not a Perfect Body, till he had eat up the
former Beast: as one Serpent eating another, does thereby grow to a Monster.
Pray for spiritual eyes, for this Beast has brewed a spiritual wine,
wherewithal all Nations have been made drunk, as drunk as Beggars,
Wil-worshippers. He that will not with John, Rev. 17. go into the Wilderness,
and that in the Spirit, he shall not know what the Mystery means: neither
is he worthy. Whether Malachi prophesied in the end of the Persian Monarch, or
what time under this Iron Government, I know not but plain it is, that all
things were out of order in his time: as also, that he was the last Canonical
Prophet of the Old Testament.

(c) Daniel was told by Gabriel, Dan 9 24. 25. 26. That 70. seavens of years
were cut out for his People, for the Holy City, and for consuming wickedness,
abolishing Sin, for making reconciliation for iniquity, to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness, and to show Christ the Holy of Holies, etc. Then
does Gabriel devide the number of 70. into three parts: into 7. Seauens, then
into 62. Sevens, then into one Seven.

Unto the first, namely 7. times seven years, which is a Iubile of 49.
years, he appoints the building of Ierusalems walls, and the finishing of
the whole Temples work, which Nebuchadne^zar had burnt and rased down. Isaiah,
44 28. The time of which building, was A troublous Time, Daniel, 9. 25.

The 62. seavens, or 434. years, aster Ierusalems building finished, reach
unto the last week or 7. years, wherein Messiah shall be slain.

The last week or 7. years, breed much question. Some translate Daniel thus:
In the Midst of the Week, he shall cease oblation. Others translate it thus:
In the Half of the Week, he shall cease oblation. The word importing Half,
some understand it of the first half: Some of the latter half of the 7.
years. These that understand it of the first half, do teach, that Jesus his
Baptism begun the first year of the Seven, and that his death ended that
half: and so they leave the other half of the Seven unto the New Testaments
Revelation, where it is said, that the two witnesses prophesied 3. years and
an half, Revel. 11. and the Woman is said to be so long in the Wilderness,
Revel. 12. Neither is this (for many mysteries that seem to arise from hence)
to be rejected as a thing grossie absurd. These that understand it of the
latter half, do fully finish Daniels latter 7. in Messiah his death:
affirming that the New Testaments 42. Months: Time, two Times, and half a
time: 1260, days, or Three years and an half, teaching (I say) that these
times have but allusion to Messiah his preaching and suffering time, and not
any mystical overplus of Gabriels latter Seven. Between these two, I am
unworthy to judge, neither dare I yet peremptorily say, That it is.

But if his Baptism begun not that Sabbath of years, or last Seven: but if
his Baptism begin the latter half, and in the middle of that Prophetical
week, then (though his death gave the deathblowe to sacrifice corporeal) I
must needs think that not his death, but his Resurrection Brought in
Righteousness everlasting.

Object. His death finished Gabriels 70. seavens, therefore within the same
time, was Righteousness everlasting brought in, seeing This, as well as the
Other, is joined together, Dan. 9. 24.

Answ. In the Verse 21. together with Sacrifice ceasing is joined The Temple
and Cities desolation, by the Roman Army abominable, which fell out 40.
years after Jesus his oblation: therefore, neither hinders it, that
Perpetual Righveousnes be brought in by Messiah, after the death of Messiah.
Secondly, though He dyed for our Sin, yet he rose again for our
Justification: Romans 4. 25. His Resurrection brought in our Righteousness
perpetual.

Thirdly, if his Baptismes solemnization by the Father and the Spirit, answered
not to the dedication of the material Temple, Ezra. 6. 15. 16. Then did the
Resurrection of his incorruptible Temple, his body cast down by as malicious
Persons as Nebuchadnetzars Host, resemble the rearing up of the vanishing
Temple: for that material Temple, figured the spiritual Temple Jesus, who is
both the Temple, the Sacrificer, and the Sacrifice: whose day of Resurrection
became our Sabbath day, our seventh day of Rest by allusion to the Jewish
Restday: but is indeed the first day of the Week, and the Lord's Day, seeing
the New Adam was to begin where the Old left off.

(d) The Stone cut from the Mountain without Man's hand, Dan. 2. is both of
Jew and Gentile understood of the Saving Christ. That I say Saving, it is
because the Jews understand Christ or Messiah, Dan. 9. 26. not to be the
saving Christ, but some Earthly King anointed: for Christ and Messiah in
English is Anointed: And so understanding that place of some Mere-man
anointed, that should soon after be slain, they put away that Prophecy. So
became Christ a stone of offense to them, howsoever to the believer he is the
precious Stone of the Corner. Further see hereof, Staff 32. at (d.)

From Iudahs first transport to Babel, unto Cyrus his Commandment given to
build the City and Temple, are 70. years.

After the Commandment going forth to the finishing of the Temple and Cities
walls, are 49. years. In precise account of whole years, from the first
transportation to Babel, until the reaedification of the City, are 119.
years: but according to common account may well be termed 120. years. the time
of Noah's preaching.

From the Temples full finishment, until Messiahs former work, making his
death the perimplishment of Gabriels last 7. are 62. Sevens and one Seven of
years, that is in one sum, are fully 441. years. Now take away the full
years of Jesus his age namely, 33. years (and so long reigned David his Figure
in Jerusalem) and from the Jewish material Temple, the Figure reared, unto
Jesus thereby figured, will be about 408. years.

Back from Christ to the promise made to Abraham, 1844. years.

Back from Christ to the Flood, 2271. years.

The age of the World at Jesus his birth, about 3928. years.

FINIS.
THE SECOND PART OF THE BIBLES BRIEF, DRAWN FIRST into English Poesy, and then
illustrated by apt Annotations: together with some other necessary
Appendices. By HENOCH CLAPHAM.

PRINTED BY Robert Walde-graue, Printer to the Kings Majesty. 1596.

Cum Priuilegio Regio.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, AND one of her Majesty's chief Commissioners in
causes Ecclesiastical, M. RICHARD TOP-CLYF Esquier, all true happiness in
Christ Jesus.
Having (Right vvoor shipfull) received such a Christian help at your hand, as
lately I did, in having you so ready, to stir up her Honorable Counsel (if
not also her Majesty's own Person) to commiserate my dungeon Estate: whereby,
as by an * Ebedmelech, Ier. 38.
I obtained (in all good Conscience) happy deliverance. I could not but
therefore (openly before all the World) broch from my breist a Symbol of
gratitude. That I have done, in this my bold offer, of the Gospels breviarie,
in which blessed writ, is health convaied to all that worship God in Spirit
and Truth: not in an Idol and Falsehood. The worthiness of the subject, may
shadow my imperfect pen; and your Worships amiable construction, shall give
vital power to my over-saples sentences. And so (beseeching the Alsufficient,
to remember your daily zeal, for her Majesty and the Commonweals good) I
end,

The Lords unworthy, HENOCH CLAPHAM.

THE SECOND PART of the Bibles Brief.
1. Staff.
IDVMEAN (a) Herod, King in Judea,
What time he raignd, our Iaacobs (b) star appears:
(c) Jesus is borne, (d) Immanuel (e) Messiah,
(f) Shiloh (g) the Seed of Woman, in (h) full years.
A (i) Virgin brings him forth: even (k) Marie who
Betrothed was to Joseph (l) all should know.
(a) Herod (the Son of Antipater) having corrupted Antony of Egypt with Money
(Flavii Iosephi, lib. 14. Antiquit Cap. 22.) was by Antony and his flaunting
Cleopatra (cap. 23.) appointed to Rule as Tetrarch over Judea. After that (cap.
26.) Herod coming to Rome, he there (having Anthony of the one hand, and Caesar
Augustus on the other hand) he was solemnlie led into the Capitol, where their
spiritual rites were performed, and the Senats decree proclaimed: and in this
first day of Herod's Coronation, the New King was banqueted by Antonius. Much
ado had Herod after, or he could be settled in Judea: but adversa^ies taken
away, and he showing himself liberal in a great famine, as also remitting the
third part of Tribute, and building the mines of the Temple, (during which
building, it is written, That it never rayned) together with Remission of the
4. part of the Tribute, after that, he woone the Peoples hearts, and so
occupied the Tetrarchs place, or fourth part of Government. All this does
Flavius Iosep^us write, a man borne immediately upon Herod's end: and one that
carefully (as a Jew zealous) drew holy Antiquities, and opposed to the
Atheists of his time.

(b) So Balaam termed him, Nomb. 24. 17. what time Balaak sent for him to
curse Iaacobs people. Zacharias the Priest ( John Baptist his Father) having an
eye unto Balaams Prophecy, he ( Luke 1. 76. 77. 78. 79.) calls his son
John, the Prepa^er of the way before this Day Star, who was to give Light,
both to Jew and Gentile.

(c) It signifies a Savior, Mat. 1. 21. neither is there salvation to be had,
in any other Name. Act. 4. 12.

(d) In English, God with us. This Name Isaiah fore-tolde to unbelieving Ahaz,
Isai. 7. 14. what time the Beast would not believe, that God would be with him
against his adversaries: and this Name the Angel remembers to good Joseph,
Man. 1. 20. etc. what time he imagined, God had not been with Marie, and
therefore had resolved, secretly to divorce himself from her.

(e) In English, Anointed. So is Christ. he was anointed to be the Churches
King, Priest, and Prophet. To be called Christian, is to be called Anointed:
the term therefore agrees to none that are not Anointed with the holy
Spirit, as was He. This Jesus, received the Spirit beyond Measure, John 3.
34. that so he might communicate of his abundance, to his believing Members.
These that have been truly engrassed into the Vine Christ, John 15. do live
by the sap of his Spirit, and therefore cannot but bring forth good fruit,
and that In due season. Psalm. 1. 3. If a man be incorporated by Faith into this
Annoynted-one, he must (ey, he will) show forth his faith by works. Iam. 2.
18. Let us therefore remember, why we are baptized Christians, or
Annoynted-ones.

(f) This Name, Iaacob, in his last Testament, uses to his Son Judah, of whom
Jesus was to come. Genesis 49. 10. In English, Sent. He was sent of the Father to
give sight and health, and He sent the Blind to Siloams poole for sight. John
9. 7. This was the Sent-one, To whom the Diadem appertained, that before was
overturned, overturned, overturned. Ezekiel. 21 27. His Kingdom is spiritual,
figured out under the former, and such is his Diadem and Scepter: but a
kingdom everlasting and unable to be shaken. Heb. 12. 28. Few Christians have
yet learned this.

(g) The Woman's Seed, Genesis 3. 15. was to break the Serpents head. Here the
Father has sent his Son to assume the seed, not of Angels, but of Abraham.
Heb. 2. 16. Here is Abrams seed come, promised, Genesis 12. in whom all Nations
should be blessed. The holy Ghost overshadowing Woman, she conceived this holy
one. The Anabaptists must know, that if JEHOVAH in the beginning, Genesis 1 did
with a Word make something of Nothing, and that Good: then much more easy it
was, to make Something of Something and that good, though the first something
were evil: for easier it is to draw a good Substance from an evil, than to draw
a good substance out of Nothing. Though the Woman's seed in it self, was as her
self, polluted; yet the holy Ghost, by his ineffable sanctifying power
overcovering her, and she conceiving by him, we matuell not, though the Babe
conceived, were sin-les.

Secondly, he must not pass through her, as wind through a Pype: but of
absolute necessity, take our Nature and flesh unto him, if so we be saved. It
was our flesh that had sinned, and brought in Death everlasting for Sin: If
our flesh therefore escape this death eternal, it must first by rule of
Justice, make satisfaction for sin. This it did, He assuming our flesh,
sanctifying our flesh, justifying our flesh, and by strong hand (Maugre
hellish power) carrying our flesh into the highest heavens, seating it on the
right hand of Glory. This he had not done for us, if so he had assumed some
quintessence or new found flesh, brought I know not from whence, taken either
from no Creature, or else from some other Creature than Man.

(h) When the fulness of time was expired, God sent his Son made of a Woman.
Gal. 4. 4.

(i) That Isaiah foresawe, Cap. 7. 14.

(k) Though a Virgin, yet betrothed to Joseph of I^dahs Tribe: by virtue of
which betrothment absolute, she was true wife to Joseph: For Absolute, (not
Conditional) betrothment of a lawful couple, is marriage before God: and the
same betrothment made known to others by themselves, makes it strict marriage
toward Man. That was cause, that under the Law, the Man that lay with a
betrothed Virgin, did dye the death, as having known another man's wife; but
being vnbetrothed, he was not to have any corporal punishment inflicted upon
him, (so he forced not the Virgin) Deuteronomy. 22. 23. 28. compare with Exodus 22. 16.
That Marie and Joseph stood Married-mates appears, first by their living
together, Luke 2. 16. 22. Secondly, by their own accompting themselves Father
and Mother ^o Jesus, He by reason of the Marriage ordinance, She by Nature,
Luke 2. 48. Thirdly, by the Peoples accompting Jesus, Joseph's son. Luke 3.
23. Fourthly, by Jesus his subjection to them both, as Father and Mother, Luke,
2. 51. Lastiy, by the holy Ghost his Testimony, who rehearsing the Story; does
still call them his Father and Mother. Mat. 1. 9. Luke 2. 41.

(l) Al should know this Contract of Joseph with Marie, because it was
foreprophecied, not only that a Virgin (which she was, though a wife, Mat. 1.
25.) should bring forth the blessed seed: but also, that he should spring out
of Judah, and out of David's line. This Mathewe and Luke plainly record, but
many will be ignorant. Mathewe records his Genealogy from Solomon David's
first Son, until the deportation to Babel for the 70. years Captivity:
then Mathewe crosses over to Nathan (the other Son of David) his progeny;
because Salomons raze ended in Iehoiachin or Chonias carried to Babel: who
(after his deliverie by Euil-merodach) did declare Shealtiel or Salathiel (of
Nathans house) his heir: for himself died without seed; Jeremiah 22. 28. 29.
30. Justly therefore is Castalio blamed before in the 29. Staff, for finishing
Solomon in Ahaziab. This draught by Mathewe is called the Legal descent,
whereby Jesus was borne hevre lawful to the Crown. As for Luke, he descends
not, but ascends from Jesus (not to David by Solomon, but) by Nathan to
David, and that uprightly by the Natural Line (wherein was no breach through
want of issue) and that is called, the Natural Ascent. The diversity of Names
must not trouble thee, considdering thou finds that common in the old
Testament, especially at the beginning, in, and after Iudahs Captivity. Nor
yet at the tearming of Nephews, Sons, or Brethren, whereof I have spoken,
Staff 30. For thy easier conceiving of Matthewe and Luke take this Table,
where I have placed both the Evangelists descending to Jesus.

DAVID
Mathewe thus descends in his Gospel, Chap. 1.
The Legal descent for JOSEPH.
Solomon. Rehoboam. Abia. Asa. Iehosophat. Ioram. Ahaziah, See how he was of
Solomon, 29. Staff of the Old Testament, in Iudahs (8)
Ioash, Amaziah, not worthy Memory. Ozias. Iotham. Ahaz. Ezechias. Manasses.
Am^n. Josias. Iakim. Here was Choniah pulled off as a Signet, Ier. 22. 24.
Iech^nias seedles, adopteth Salathiel. Pedaiah, Zorobabel.

L^ke thus ascends in his Gospel, Chap. 3.
The Natural descent for MARI^.
Nathan. Ma^^a^ha Mainan. Melea. Eliakim. Ionan. Joseph. Judah. Simeon. Levi.
Matthat. Iorim. Eliezer. Iose. Er. Elmodam Cosam. Addi. Melchi. Neri.
Zedechias omited; because Iechoniah did live after him a King, being restored
to honor at Babel, See the first Staff 30. at (b)




ZOROBABEL.
MATTHEVVE thus descends.
Abiud. Eliakim. Azor. Zadok. Akim. Eliud. Eleazar. Matthan. Jacob. Joseph.
LIKE thus ascends.
Rhesa. Ioanna. Judah. Joseph. Semei. Mattathias. Maath. Nagge. Esli. Naum.
Amo^. Mattathias. Joseph. Ianna. Melchi. Levi. Matthat. Eli. Marie.
Now was Zorobabel, (the Sons son of Salathiel, 1. Chron. 3. 19.) made
Iehovahs Signet. Haggai, 2 24.

Matthewe and Luke both account from Zorobabel, as they did from David: but
Matthew for observing Generations by 14. omitteth diverse, contenting himself
with the chiefest. Mathewe, he regards the Genealogy of Joseph, Jesus his
Father by Ordinance, not by Nature: and Luke he draws the Petygre of Marie,
the Real mother of Jesus according to the flesh: both of David, and so
consequently of Judah.




Blessed JESUS, was every way Heir unto the Crown. The Sophies of Persia knew
that, Mat. 2. 2. Nathaniel confessed that, John 1. 49. Pilate gave him absolute
Title of Iudahs King, superscribed in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: neither had
he power to qualify That, though the Jews wished him. John, 19. 19. 20. 21.
22. The People knew That, that would have made him King, John 14. 16. neither
could the bloody wretches, allege any one betwixt him and the Crown, but
Romes Caesar. John, 19. 12. 15. He that knows not, that Christ must needs be
of David, is more blind than was Bartimens, Mark. 10. 47. Neither can any be
ignorant of his being David's Son, except they will repugne his own testimony
( Mat. 17. 25. 26. 27.) where he proves himself free from tribute paying: as
also many more Scriptures, that openly proclaim him David's Son, and so
consequently, Heir Legal and Natural to Iudahs Crown. But as the blessed
Word, John 1. assumed our flesh, for the new creating our flesh, even to the
end that we might become Spiritual, for the discerning of spiritual things:
so neither was his Kingdom and Scepter to be of this world, carnal and
outward, as was the figure in David: but spiritual, inward and heavenly; and
thereof it comes, that the New Testaments Church State is ^o often called,
The Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 11. 1^, and 13. and Jerusalem from above, Galat.
4. Revel. 21.

This doctrine (if it would be learned) the learners would not keep Christ
under Moses, nor his new body under old Israel, as though the second should
in nothing excel the former. I must never leave urging this point, till the
skales fall from Saul's eyes.

2. Staff.
An (a) Angel does preach this to (b) shepherds: who
Do leave their flocks, and wend to (c) Bethlehem.
Look how the Angel said, they find it so.
Babe in a (d) Cratch, did there appear to them.
With it, (e) Marie and Joseph. Shepherds then
Give praise to God, and back return again.
(a) As an Angel from Heaven, did preach the conception of Jesus to Joseph and
Marie, so an Angel from Heaven does preach his birth here to the Sheepherds.
Accordingly the holy Ghost gives the title of Angel, to the New Testaments
Ministry, where he calls them Angels, that is in English, Sent-ones, or
Ambassadors, or Messengers, sent by God to preach Jesus anointed to his
People. The woorthines of the Title, must fear men from running before the
Lord bid: and the Lord never in mercy says, Go: but first he furnishes them
with holy gifts, fit for the Embassage. If any come unto us without their
spiritual furniture, we may boldly conclude, that God has not sent them in
Mercy, but in Judgment: as though he should have said unto them, Go in a
vengeance: and so indeed he bid Balaam go to Balak.

(b) Christ was not published to lazy idle Nobles and Churles of the World;
nor yet to the presumpteous Priest, or glavering Prophet, but to well exercised
shepherds feeding their flocks. As his kingdom was not world-like, so neither
we^e world-like men to be acquainted with that first.

(c) Bethleem was the native Town of David, the figure, and of our David
figured.

(d) Joseph and Marie being unable, as it seems, to hyre a seemly place in
the Inn, they were glad to use a back-house for their lodging, and there was
the King of Kings borne. As the place of his Nativitie was simple, so the
bed-stead wherein he couched his sacred corpse, was but a Beasts cratch. Our
Earthly vanishing Kings would take this in dudgeon, and the meanest of us are
usually more renowned in our birth: yet like rude Horses and Mules void of
understanding, we are impatient.

(e) With the blessed Babe I^SVS, they find no greater concourse of People,
than Joseph his suppo^ed Father, and Marie his Real mother according to the
flesh: homely solemnizing of Rex Regum: but worldly Bethlehem was not further
from Christ, then when Christ was borne in their little Town. The nearer the
Church, commonly the further from God. And indeed, the Suns light nothing
avails a blind man in his blindness. If God first give eyesight to the soul
(that is, Light unto the Mind) man may disceme spiritual things. Otherwise,
King Herod, Master Priest, and Sir Scribe, shall discern Christ, or the
habitation of Christ, no more than a Mole.

3. Staff.
(a) Twice twenty days Ore past, the Babe is brought
Into the Temple: There good (b) Simeon
Did meet with him, who chief was in his thought.
So (c) Anna did behold good Mary's Son.
That done, they home, and live there quietly:
But (d) Marie ponders all right seriously.
(a) The Wife delivered, was to be unclean for a Sabbath of days, but the 8.
day (which was a figure of our Lord his day, the day after the seventh, and
yet the first of our new creations week) the Male-childe was to be
circumcised. Thirty three days (besides the first 7.) she was to rest in
unclean estate (and thirty three years after Christ his birth, it was before
we were purified from sin) and then she was to be cleansed by the Law,
bringing unto the Temple a Lamb, or a pair of young Pigeons or Turtles.

(b) Simeon having a Revelation, that he should not see Death ere he had
seeene the Messiah (Luke, 2.) he therefore confidently awaiteth the corporeal
sight of Jesus. Jesus at last he meets, in the Arms of his Mother within the
Temple. He takes him into his Arms, and therewithal before God, he
protests his willingness to leave corporeal life: prophesying therewithal,
that Jesus should be the Gentiles Light, and the Jews Glory.

(c) Anna, of Asers Tribe, Luke, 2. 36. who had lived 7 years with an Husband,
and had been 84. years Widowesse, she haunting continually the Temple, found
Jesus there at the same time as did Simeon; whom she boldly confessed and
professed to all such as looked for Redemption in Jerusalem.

(d) Marie, she lays all these extraordinary accidents to her heart, and
thereby gathers more and more, that the miraculous fruit of her womb, was
appointed to some great inaudible work.

4. Staff.
After from (a) East, do (a) Sophies make repair:
They by (b) a star, came to the house aright,
Who find the Babe, and Marie (c) only there:
To (d) Gentiles sure, an heavenly blessed sight.
(e) Myrrh, Frankensence, and Gold they offer than,
And so depart, each one an happy man.
(aa) The Romanistes have preched unto the simple People, that these wisemen
were 3. Kings of Colin. That they should be 3. the Scriptures teach not, much
less 12. as some have written: for the number is indefinite. That they should
be Kings, is not very likely; seeing they passing seldom, gave themselves
unto Star-gazing. That they should be of Colin, is apparently false: for the
holy Ghost testifies, Mat. 2. that they were Magies of the East, whereas Colin
was west from Judea. Persia was Eastern from the Holy Land, and that people
were notable Astrologers or Star-gazers, therefore only probable to me, that
these Magitians must be Persians. At the word Magitian thou must not stumble,
seeing it was then a word used in the good part, rather than in the ill: as
also a long time after. These M^goi, I have called Sophoi, both titles
importing Wise.

(b) These Star-gazers, have their ouercurious speculation sanctified unto
them, for drawing them unto Christ. Many by indirect means are brought unto
Jesus: not by reason of any promise of blessing promised by God unto men
following curious arts: but by virtue of God his antecedent Election, who
therefore regards the constancy of his own Decree, not of man's Deserving.

(c) The Sheepheards found with the blessed Babe, Joseph and Marie: but these
Sophies find with the Babe Jesus, only Marie.

Quest. Where was Joseph?

Answ. It may be, he was playing the Carpenter abroad for all their three
livings, but sure it is, he was not idly plodding the streets, much less
tippling in the Tavern with our idle swingers. Neither is it unlike, that Jesus
himself till 30. years age, was much employed in that Carpentrie work,
considering the holy Ghost testifies of him, that He was subject to his
(supposed) Father and (Real) Mother. Noah played the Carpenter, 120. years,
building for the preservation of his Families bodies, and can we think that
Joseph and JESUS the well nourtered youth, would neglect the body?

He that provideth not (in some honest Calling) for the sustentation of his
Family, is worse than an Inidel: Nay that which more is, He denies the Faith
of Jesus, (1. Tim. 5. 8.) for the Christian Faith teaches not a man to be
idle and negliegent, although indeed it command a man not to be Careful about
there things, Mat. 6. 25. etc. Labor in thy Christian calling, but without
Care: for laboring in a consecrated Calling, why should thou be careful,
seeing Goldlines has promise of bodily necessaries: neither will the Lord
with-holde any thing that Goodis from these that Walk prightly, Psalm. 84. 11.

(d) The Jews had first sight of Jesus: the Gentiles enioved the second sight:
a plain sign that the Gentiles ( Iaphe^s house) should now step into Shems
Tent: that the partition was to be broken down, and that Jesus would be
Sheepherd to both sorts of sheep.

(e) They having offered Gold unto the King of the world (preaching thereby,
homage and fealty unto David's Lord, and yet David's son) as also having
offered Frankencense (in sign he was the perfumer of our prayers) as also
Myrrh (fittest for his bu^iall, a sign that his death was our life) happy
men they depart.

Herod under pretense to woorship Jesus, thinking to worrye Jesus, had
commanded the Magies to return and relate unto him where the Jews King was
borne: but God having otherwise admonished them, they prefer IEHOVAHS will
before Herod's wish.

5. Staff.
The Dragons (a) Horn, pursues to smite the Child:
But (b) God forewarne^, and they to Egypt fly.
(c) Herod once dead, they Three that stood exild
Return, but go down into Galilie.
(d) At twelve years end, Jesus he does dispute,
In Temples, Court, which caused mickle brute.
(a) The Dragon the Devil ( Rev. 12.) is introduced with his Horns, for
dossing (ey destroying) this Manchilde Jesus. The first Horn that studied
Jesus his destruction, was the Idumean Herod: and that he did, because he heard
by the former Sophies, that there was a king borne unto the Jews.

(b) The Lord having a care of our Lord, as he first warned the Magies not to
return to Herod, so he forewarneth Joseph and Marie of Herod's hollow heart,
whereupon they fly into Egypt Into Egypt went Abra^am the Father of the
Faithful, by reason of a Famine: thither was Joseph pushed by his Brethren,
to whom Father and Fathers house was glad to repair for succor: and thither
now went Mary's Joseph, and a greater than Joseph. A Horn of Hell pusheth our
Lord thither, and but Horns of the Devil are all that bloodily pursue Jesus
in his members. They gone into Egypt, Herod slaughtereth all Male-children,
under two years old, hoping amongst them, the Undefiled Man-child should
have been murdered. The Massacre was so abominable, as dead Rahel, the first
Joseph's Mother, could not but, after a sort, lament the destruction of her
Children. Of a certain Ancient it is written, that Herod should slaughter his
own young Sons, lest of them, Judah should have had a King; whereupon Augustus
then should say, I had rather be one of Herod's Hogs, than Sons: for his
Hogs he fats, but his Sons he sleas.

(c) The Beast dead, Joseph and Marie with Jesus are called by God out of
Egypt, even as Israel before was called from thence by Moses IEHOVAHS mouth.
But they hearing, that his Son Archelaus did succeed (like Cock, commonly
like Chicken) they turned aside to Nazare^ in the parts of Gali^e: whereupon
he took the name of Nazarite: and besides that, he was to us a more Pure and
Powerful Nazarite, than was Samson his figure.

(d) Joseph and Marie (what time Jesus was aged 12. years) they do come, as
yearly they ever had, to keep the Passe-ouer at Jerusalem. The Feast finished,
Joseph and Marie set homewards with their Kins-folks and acquaintance: but
after a days journey, they missing their son Jesus, they return with
sorrowful hearts to Jerusalem: who after three days, do find him amidst the
Doctors in the Temple, disputing. His Mother saying unto him; Son, Why have
thou dealt thus with us? Behold thy Father and I have sought-thee with heavy
hearts: to her he returned this answer: How is it that you sought me, knew ye
not that I must go about my Fathers business? But they understood not the word
that he spoke unto them. Then he went down with them, and came to Nazaret,
and was subject to them: and his Mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature (for indeed they two should grow
together) and in favor with God and men.

6. Staff.
(a) Bout 30. years, he comes to Iordans side,
Whereas (b) John Baptist does baptize our Lord.
Jesus the Christ, then from that blessed tide,
Gathers (c) Disciples by his blessed word.
Twelve of them, he (d) Apostles nominates,
And (e) Seauentie more, his will abroad relates.
(a) See Luke 3. 23.

(b) John Baptist (the so^ of Zachariah the Priest, Luke, 1.) allied by his
Mothers side to blessed Marie, (for though the other Tribes might not marry one
with another, for avoiding confusion of Lotted inheritance: yet might Levi (who
had no such inhe^itance, and therefore not like possibility of confusion)
marry with other Tribes. This John begun to preach The Baptism of Repentance
for the remission of Sins, in the 15. year of Tiberius, Romes Caesar, Pon^^us
Pilate being then Governor in Judea: but afterward beheaded by Herod for
reproving his unlawful marriage. This John (having the Spirit of Elias)
prepared the People unto Jesus, by hewing squaring, and smothing their hearts,
lest otherwise Jesus should have smit the Earth with cursing.

Unto this John came Jesus to be baptized. John refusing as being fitter to be
baptized by Jesus: our Savior tells him it must be so, for fulfilling of
righteousness. John baptizeth him in Jordan (through which Jesus or Joshua
safely led Israel) at what time the holy Ghost manifested himself under the
bodily shape of a Dove, lighting upon Jesus: together withal, a voice passed
from Heaven: saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased. Here
was the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, concurring in this Baptismes
solemnization. The Son presents himself for fulfilling Righteousness. The
Holy Ghost shows Jesus to be simple and innocent as a Dove: the Father
proclaims him, first his Beloved Son: Secondly, In whom he rested well
pleased. Thus was the Dore-sacrament of the new Testament graced by ELOHIM,
that Three-one.

Quest. Why should Jesus be baptized with water, seeing he was sinles, and that
Sacramental water teaches the baptized, first that sin is put away by the
blood of Jesus: secondly, that the baptized is to die to sin, and to rise
unto a new life.

Answ. Circumcision signified the like, yet was he circumcised, as he is here
baptized. Yet I easily grant, nay, I do boldly affirm, that he was neither
circumcised nor baptized for the two forme^ ends: and yet of absolute
necessity, he was both to be circumcised and baptized, and that for this
cause: As Circumcision and baptism were enjoined man because of sin (seals
of sins forgiveness by bloodshed, even by the blood of the Lamb slain
from the beginning of the world) so, how should them Sacraments of the Old
and New Testament have been holy and lively to the receivers, if so the holy
Lamb and Lord of life had not in our nature so sanctified them? He for giving
Life unto both them, did therefore undergo both in his body. Thereby,
Circumcision was made Heauens-doore unto the old Church Zion; and thereby was
Baptism made Heauens-entrye unto the New Church, Jerusalem from above. So the
Sacrament was not only given, to Preach Life to the first Adam: but also, To
be made Life by the second Adam: even as was the whole Law, not only given to
the old Man* but also to be performed without blot by the new Man, from
Heaven heavenly. Despisers and neglecters of this Seal, have yet no assurance
of life in Jesus. Let them mark that.

(c) He gathers no New Communion, before himself had undergone the New
Communions Sacrament: for Baptism was the door into the new Testaments Church.

(d) Having gathered Scholars (or Disciples) he calls 12. of them Apostles,
(or, Special Sentones) and alotteth them to preach before him, but not as yet
to the Gentiles: The Names of the 12. were thus: Simon Peter, and Andrewe his
brother: James and John, who were Zebedeus Sons: then Philip and Bartholmewe:
Thomas and Mathewe the Publicane: James, son of Alph^us, and Lebbeus
Thaddeus: Simon the Cananite, and Judas Is^ario^. These twelve Apostles, do
make answer to the twelve Patriarchs of Israel.

(e) These 70. were sent forth with as large and like Commission as were the
Apostles: Mark that. Secondly, these 70. answered to Moses seaventie,
prophesying Ancients, Nombers, 11. 24. etc.

Here is Wisdom, but who marks it?

7. Staff.
Great (a) wonders, he did work in every place:
But (b) Dragon still pursues him to the end.
He institutes, A (c) Supper full of (d) grace:
Which to his (e) Church, for ay he did commend.
That done, he wends to pray in (f) Oliuet
(g) Iscariot thithe^ his foes did fet.
(a) He converted water into Wine, and who but Jesus can turn our bred and
water of affliction into a continual Feast? He gave sight to the borne blind
body: and who but he, can give holy light to the borne blind mind? He cured
Leprosy, and many other corporeal diseases, incurable by natural means: and
who but he can cure our souls maladies, whose cure consists only in
metaphysicall (or supernatural) means? To the dead and stinking dead, he gave
corporeal life: and who but he, can give spiritual life to these that are
dead, and stinking dead in their sins? He cast out devils possessing
bodies: and who but Jesus can cast out the Devils that possess men's souls?

(b) ELOHIM, foretold Adam and Heuah, that there should be enmity betwixt the
Serpent and Woman's promised seed: as this JESUS was the Head of that holy
seed, so the Devil cease not to stir up his Serpentine seed, to pursue
this blessed Seed unto the death: but all in vain, until the time came,
wherein he himself was minded to lay down his body.

(c) The time of his oblation, being within one day, he calls the 12.
together, and sitting down on a low bed, for so the Jews did eat* having
first preached unto them the necessity of his departure, he first eats with
them the Paschall Lamb: then afterward he institutes the New Testaments
supper, consisting in Sacramental Bread and Wine: having finished the old
Supper, he institutes a new.

Qu^st. Was Judas Iscariot present in both these Suppers?

Answ. In the first he was. Neither might any soule-maime debar any
Circumcised from the old Supper: nor yet any Soul-soare unseen in the
baptized, debar from the new Supper. Seen and known pollutions in the
bodies of the Circumcised, would debar them the holy Congregation and Supper:
so, only seen and known sin unrepented, can debar such the new Testaments
Assembly and their holy Supper.

To the question therefore I answer thus: Many learned and worthy deep
reverence, have written, that Judas was present: but yet I see something that
keeps me from so thinking. But first let it be granted, that Judas was there a
Communicant, what then? you will (it may be) with others conclude, Then may
wicked ones be admitted to the Lords Supper; I answer, it prooveth not, that
Known wicked may be admitted: for Judas was not an open wicked one, but a
secret wicked one, and therefore under God his Judgment, that knows the heart,
and not under man's censure, who knows not the heart.

Object. The man Christ knew him for a Traitor, and yet would not debar him.

First, the Man Christ knew him not already a Traitor, for as yet he had not
betrayed Jesus: and Man must censure Actions, or things that be Patent, not
Latent.

Secondly, Christ as he was man knew not that he had such a trayterly thought
in his heart, no more then as he was the son of man he knew the latter day:
for every mean wit knows, that Thoughts of men, and personal Future
Actions, were communicated unto his Man-hoode by the Godhead, or his divine
nature. If Judas then had been present, he was to Man there, considered as
man, an hypocrite or unseen Traitor: and therefore nothing makes, for
admission of unrepentant known wicked, to the Lords Table.

But as before I said, I rather think he was not there, for this cause:
Blessed John in his 13. Chap. 30. Verse, says: As soon as he (namely, IVDAS)
had received the soppe, he went immediately out. Now, the Soppe was no part of
this New Supper, but appertaining to the old Testaments Supper: if therefore
Iscariot went out from them, Immediately upon the receipt of the Soppe, (and so
says John) then went he out to go unto the high Priests, before the
Institution of the New Supper: and this let the godly hearted consider.

(d) As the Paschal Lamb, preached unto them their deliverance in and out of
Egypt, the Land of Boundage, whereof I spoke in his place: so this Bread and
wine, sacramentallie preaches our deliverance from the power of Sin and
Satan, by the Body broken, and the Blood shed of JESUS upon the Cross. And as
the Sacramental Lamb was called by JESUS, the Passe-over, Luke 22. 11. though
it was but the Sign of the Angels passing-over Isreal's houses, so he calls
this Sacramental Bread, and Wine his Body and blood, though in deed but a
Sign of his body and blood; the memorial of whose death, we therein are to
celebrate until his last coming.

That Circumcision was called the Covenant, though but a sign of the Covenant:
that the Paschal Lamb was called the Passe-over, though it was but a sign of
the Pass over: that Baptism is called our sanctification and cleansing,
Ephesians. 5. 26. though it be but a sign of our sanctification: that the Bread
and wine in that Sacramental Supper, are called the body and blood of Jesus,
though they be but the Signs of his body and blood: it is, as to teach us that
they are signs, so that they are not naked or bare signs: but Signs
exhibitiue, offering and giving to the faithful Person, as well the thing
signified, as the outward sign and signifier. No marvel then, if they be
Sacraments of Grace and divine favor.

(e) As all that entered the Church, entered by Baptism: so all that once we^e
within the Church, being able to discern the Lords body were to be fed in this
Supper: and that in remembrance that Christ Jesus dyed for them.

(f) Mount Olivet, had between it and Jerusalem, the Valley of Iehosophat. His
ascending the Mount to pray, must teach us to ascend in our spirits when we
pray: for Prayer is a conversing with the God of Heaven, seated^aboue all our
Earthly thoughts.

(g) Iscariot, upon the receipt of the Soppe, going forth, he went to the high
Priests for betraying of Jesus. They let him have a band of armed men, who
with Lantern light, go to seek the Lord of Light: the natural light an
i^strument of betraying the supernatural light of the Church. The greatest
men, not always the wisest men: nor yet the multitude always walking in the
ways of life, as now here.

8. Staff.
They come with (a) Clubs, his word does throw the^ down.
Before (b) high Priests, sweet lesus he is brought:
Before (c) Pilate, then chiefest in the Town,
Where (d) rascal rout, His death and ending sought:
In fine, he was condemned to the (e) Tree,
Where twixt (f) two thieves, he (g) died right patiently.
(a) They come to take him with Clubs and glaues, that never used to resist
with weapons. Thus now a days they hale his members, as though they had to
deal with swash-bucklers, when alas, they have learned and taught not to smite
with the sword, lest they should in Justice perish with the sword.

(b) Though there should by the Law, have been only One High Priest at one
time, yet now so corrupt they were, as there were two high Priests: the one
having purchased his rome by Simonie, Simon Magus his ointment.

(c) This Pilate, as Josephus Ben-Matthias writes, Lib. 2. de Bello IVD. Cap.
8. was sent from Rome to Jerusalem, by Tiberius Caesar: who on a night, gets
convayd into Jerusalem, Cesars Images: by reason whereof, a great tumult within
three days, arose. For the Jews held it utterly unlawful to place any such
Image in the City To the Citizens other people without repair to the house
Cesarea, where Pilate lodged. They request that the Images might be had away.
He denies. They continue immovable 5. days and so many nights. After,
Pilate commanding his Soldiers to prepare their swords for slaughtering them
Jews, the Jews willingly hold down their necks, as willing to lose life, ere
they admitted them profane Images. Pilate wondering thereat, without more ado,
pack the Images out of the City. Flavius Josephus, remembers this, but will
not once remember Jesus and his People. He writing against Appion, the
Mock-Iewe, does say, that for envy: others in their antiquities would not
remember the Jews, and their glorious Acts: so of him (I may say) that such a
Mock-Christ, disdaineth to remember Jesus and his most worthy Acts, though
living within and after Jesus his time. Yet farefall, Josephus Ben-gorion, for
he not only remembers JESUS for a Man: but afterward by Correction adds:
If it be lawful to call him a Man: affirming withal, That his People put that
JESUS to death, not understanding the Prophets: as also, That his Disciples
greatly grew and multiplied.

Before this Pilate was Jesus brought; Pilate indeed (after examination) being
much unwilling to condemn JESUS: but loving the praise of men more than the
praise that is of God, he finally condemned him.

(d) The rascal rout, coveting rather that Barrabas the Murderer should have
life: yea, they cried, out, Let his blood be upon us and our Children. That
his blood fell notably upon them, has been apparent notably in this, That
the Lord has made them slaves to all Nations, and their Name odious to every
People.

(e) The death on the Cross or Tree, was the most notable, infamous, and cursed
manner of death was then. Necessary it was, that not only he should die the
death, but most shameful death: that so death and shame might be consecrated
to his suffering Members.

(f) Both these Thieves blaspheming Jesus at first, Mat. 27. 44. soon after,
one of them has his heart and tongue converted, Luke 23 40. His unfeigned
repentance he testified, first in reproving his fellows continued blasphemy:
Secondly, in acknowledging God his hand just against them both, because of
former ill: Thirdly, by defending the cause of Jesus for Innocent: when neither
his Mother, nor any of his Disciples durst speak.

That his Repentance was lively, and sprung of Faith, appears first, by his
believing that Jesus was the King of Heaven: Secondly, by the gift of holv
prayer, bursting then from his believing heart, in these words, Lord remember
me, when thou come in thy Kingdom: to whom Jesus replied. This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise. Mark that the second Adam breaks open the door
into Paradise, from whence old Adam caused us to be barred.

Betwixt these two Thieves (the one a sheep, the other a Goat, a figure of the
latter Judgment) Jesus our brazen Serpent was lift up. The murmuring Israelites
being stinged in the Wildemes, there was (at the Lords command) a brazen
Serpent set up, on which, who so looked, they were cured. That figured our
Jesus, on whom, no person by the eye of faith can look, but lo, they are
cured of Satan and sins sting: let the repentant Thief witness that who
entered Paradise heavenly the sixth day, as Old Adam the same day (and like
enough the same hour) was driven out of the Earthly.

In Matthewe 10. we are willed to be as Serpents: that is, to be like them in
something, not in every thing. Though we be wise as Serpents, yet let us be
without sting, as was Jesus and the Serpent his figure. Nay let us labor to
heal others that are stinged: and not sting and bite others, lest we be bitten
and consumed of others.

(g) After many mocks, revilings (the adversaries giving him bitterness to
drink) he gave up the ghost, saying: It is finished. And here was the
perimplishment of Daniels half week of years: for now the Veil of the Temple
rent in two, so that the common people might step out of the Temples Cour^
into the Holy-place, and be their own Priests, in offering up a rent heart:
for now Jesus (our high Priest) entered into the Most holy of the Heavens,
there to make continual intercession for us.

At the renting of the Temples Veil, the Jews might have learned, that then
there was an end of Levies ministry, the Priest according to Melchisedeks
order, having made a new and living way unto the Father through the veil of
his flesh: a way for every man, that comes unto the Father by him: for not in
the Name (or power) of any other than Jesus, is Salvation to be accomplished:
for through Jesus (even as we are members knit unto him) we are made, not
only Kings over Satan, sin, death; but also Priests, for lifting up pure
hands, (without wrath and doubting) in all places wheresoever. Much of the
Epistle unto the Hebrews is spent in persuading this: neither yet know they
Christ rightly, that know not this.

9. Staff.
He dead, (a) they seal, the stone upon his Tomb,
But (b) Third day, he arises powerfullie.
Good (c) Magdalen, early to grave does come:
Anon, Jesus speaks to her cheerefullie.
(d) Ten times he did appear in 40. days,
Then calls the Twelve, and thus to them he says.
(a) Joseph of Aramathea, having of Pilate obtained Jesus his body, and
Nicodemus having brought one hundredth pound weight of Myrrh and Aloes, they
take the body, wrap it in lynnen with the odours, and bury him in a new
Sepulcher within a Garden, neete to his suffering place. He so buried, the high
Priests and Pharisees come to Pilate, who by common agreement appointed
certain Soldiers to watch the Tomb until the third day, lest his Disciples
should steal him away, and so it should be bruted that Jesus rose the Third
day as he had promised. Therewithal they sealed the Cover-stone, as Darius
sealed Daniel in the Lions den.

(b) The third day (which was the first day of the week, he rose from the
dead. The 6. day of the week (Heathen-like called Friday) he departed this
mortal life, and so entered into Paradise above, forefigured by Paradise below:
even as Adam on the 6. day, through sin begun this mortal life, and
therewithal was expulsed the Low Paradise, the first figure of Heavens
bliss. The 7. day, (Pagan-wise caled Satur-day) the first Adam rested out of
Paradise, but our second Adam rested in Paradise: for as his spirit rested in
his Fathers hands, so his body in the Earth did feel no corruption. Act. 2.
31. This thwarts our disputers about Descension into Hell.

Having so finished Moses week, Jesus arises on the next day after the 7.
which day, as hereto fore in some respect I called the 8. day: so, in simple
propriety, it is the First day of the week, profanely called Sun-day. As our
Lord rose this day, so ( Revel. 1.) it is called therefore the Lords day. As
Jesus rose from the power of death, Moses his Law having done what it could, so
(like a Samson of Samsons) he caries that Cities gates away on his shoulders,
and up he mounteth for our Justification. No marvel then, if his Rising-day be
our Rest-day, and that day we celebrate in meditating of our second Creation
and Resurrection, even as the first Sabbath was appointed to be spent (had
Adam stood) in meditating the first Creation: and Adam falling, then appointed
to further meditation: as first of Creation; secondly of the Fall; thirdly, of
Restoration in the promised Seed.

Moses from the beginning of Creation, to the end of Deuteronomte, and then
from Ioshuah to the end of the Old Testament, he and all the Canonical
writers use to entitle the days only thus: the First, Second, Third, Fourth,
Fifth, Sixth, Seventh Day. Throughout the New Testament the days have no
other names: but we will not be so precise, as to speak like Moses, to speak
like Christ, to speak as the words of God. Nay, if a man so term the days,
he shall be called Puritan, Heretic. How will our Im-puritanes be pleased?
if so we call them, Sun-day, Moone-day, etc. Hearken to Venerable Bede: His
nomina a Planetis Gentilitas indidit, etc. To these 7. days, Gentilisme did
attribute the Planets names, believing that they had their Spirit, of the
Sun* the body, of the Moon: the blood, of Mars: wit and tongue of Mercuri:
of Jove, tempetance: of Venus, lust: of Saturn, slownes.

Let men now, either tip their tongue with the holy Ghosts terms, or at
least not be offended with such, as disdain to fashion themselves to the
Gentiles.

(c) As Marie had much forgiven, so shee-loved much. Her love partly appeared,
in this her early repair to the Sepulcher. Before her coming, an Angel from
Heaven had rolled the sealed stone aside, Jesus was risen, and the hired
watchmen were gone to the Rulers; who bribed the Soldiers, to the end they
should say, that Jesus his Disciples had in the night stole away the body. She
coming to the Sepulcher (as did Salome and another Marie) the Angel informs
them of his Resurrection, commanding them to return, and tell the same to
Peter and the other disciples. They departed, Jesus first appears to Marie
Magdalene, (Mark, 16. 9. Ioh. 20. 14. etc.) with whom he familiarly talks.
A shame to men, that women should love Jesus more earnestly.

Secondly, he appeared also to the other Marie, and to Salome, called also
Ioanna, Luke, 10. as they were going to tell the disciples of the Angels words,
Mat. 28. 9. 10.

Thirdly, he appeared to Peter or Cephas, 1. Cor. 15. 5. That this must be on
the same day, may appear by the Angels command before. And that it is not like
to fall out, betwixt the two next appearances, the length of time here, and the
shortness of time there, makes it most probable.

Fourthly, he appeared to Cleopas, and the other Disciple, as they were going
to Emmaus, 60. Furlongs from Jerusalem, Luke 24. 13. etc.

Fifthly, he appeared to the Eleven (the greater number bearing name of the
whole) at night being assembled to holy exercise, Luke 24. who brething on
them, said: Recciue the holy Ghost: Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them: and whose sins soever ye retain, they are retained. At this time,
Thomas Didymus was wanting. No blessing got by absence from holy Assembly.
Thus our Lord spent the whole day in Apparitions and Doctrine. No marvel then,
if the eleven gathered together the eight day after, or next Lords day.

Sixthly, he appeared the 8. day after, unto the Eleven. Didimus was then
present, and therefore he schooleth him. And this was the second time of his
appearance unto the Apostles convened.

Seventhly, he was seen of more than 500. brethren at once, 1. Cor. 15. 6.

Eighthly, he was seen of James alone. 1. Cor. 15. 7.

Ninthly, he was seen of diverse his Apostles at the Sea of Tyberias, John.
21. 1. etc. and this appearance, Verse 14. is called the third appearance: that
is, the third time of his appearing to his Apostes convened. At this time
JESUS urged Peter unto a three-folde Confession, answering to his three-sold
denial.

Tenthly he appeared unto his Disciples, what time he led them into Bethani^
where he sinallie blessed them to the well executing their Commission. Their
Commission was this. Secing all power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth, Go
therefore and teach al Nations, Baptizing them into the Name of the Father* and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. To whom God has said, Go forth, teach,
convert, gather people into One, To them necessarily he much more says,
Baptize: for Paul comparing This with the Former, he in that respect affirms,
that he was not sent to baptize; meaning that Baptizing was no charge in
comparison of the former. Deeply simple are many in our days, that make
baptizing the greater.

10. Staff.
Stay in (a) Jerusalem, till from above
You be baptized with the holy spirit:
A (b) cloud then suddenly did him remove,
And up convay him from their carnal sight.
They straight unto Salem convaid them then,
Where they abode, with other faithful men.
(a) As the Apostles were appointed, to preach to, and baptize of al Nations, so
it was absolutely necessary that they should be furnished (as with other
graces, so) with ability to speak and understand the tongues of all Nations.
For this cause they were to stay at Jerusalem, til they had received power from
above. Men may have a general calling to some work, and yet (by reason of
particular indigencie or lack) be unfit (for some time) to set upon some part
of that work. This notably overthwarteth rash heads, who by virtue of their
general calling, will at any time aggresse any particular.

(b) His 40. days being finished, every day, answering to a year of Moses in
the Wilderness, he was taken up in a cloud to the highest Heavens: where he
sits at the right hand of Majesty, till his father have made all his Foes
his footstool.

So ends the 4. Evangelists, Matthewe, Mark, Luke and John.

Though Ma^thewe and John were Apostles, yet are they also called Evangelists:
because (as well as the other two they penned the History of JESUS, which is not
the whole Evangell, but as the Head and Heart of the Evangel. Evangel (a greek
word, and in that Tongue, the holy Ghost penned the New Testament) it is in
English, Glad Tidings. This Glad Message of Salvation, we call also in English,
Gospel, drawn from the Saxons word, Godspel. Magitians have their Spel, which
on nights they set for preserving their moueables, (that may be called,
Devil-spel) but this Spel of JESUS, is of such virtue, as it being truly
apprehend by faith, it causes moueables and vnmoueables, Heaven and Earth,
yea, All to be ours. This falls not out by wearing the written Gospel about
the neck, as do Romish Idolatrers, but (as I have said) by beleving it, and
resting thereon, as on the Cornerstone of our spiritual building. If
Magitians by their Credulity, or light belief, have Satan to work with their
spell, how much more shall JEHOVAH work with a Solid Substan^all Faith?

Now follovveth the Book of the Apostles Acts.
11. Staff.
In (a) Judas room, they choosed (b) Matthias:
And at the Feast of Pentecost, again
The Church in one that time (c) collected was,
What time from heaven, God did his spirit rain
In (d) fiery tongues: so that the 12. from thence,
In diverse tongues their mening might comme^ce.
(a) Judas having betrayed his Master (as before) he watched what would become of
Jesus. When he saw that Jesus was condemned and must die, then the wretch
yrking at his former fact, came and brought his 30. pieces of Silver to the
Rulers, and having cast it down, he went and hanged himself. The
circumstances cause me to think, that when he sold his Master, he hoped that
Jesus would have convaied himself from them (as sometimes he did from the
midst of his Foes) and so by that means, he should have had the money, Jesus
no harm, and the Rulers have bin mocked. Thus Judas as a Iugler, played at
Fast and Loose, till he had fastened his Master to the Cross, and his own neck
to the Halter. That he should sin against Christ of mere malice, and so
commit the grand sin against the holy Ghost. I see not.

(b) The Apostles setting forth Barsabas and Mitthia, (two that had conversed
with Christ from the time of John's Baptism, unto the Ascension of Jesus) they
thus prayed: Thou Lord, which know the hearts of all men, show whether of
these two thou have chosen, that he may take the room of this Ministration
and Apostle-ship, from which Judas ha^h gone astray, to go to his own place.
Prayer thus finished, they give forth Lottes, and the office-Lot fell on
Matthias: he therefore from thence-forth was by common consent counted with the
Eleven Apostles.

Quest. Is it at all hands unlawful now to use the Lotte?

Answ. No, the Lot remains in holy use for avoiding contention, Prove 18. 18.
As it was ordained to prevent and take away strife: so, so long as Contention
rests in the World, so long the Lot stands in use. Contention either
arises in Civil or Ecclesiastical causes. If Civil things cannot be agreed
upon otherwise, than the Lot (even as an oath) is to put an end to that
business. In an Ecclesiastical cause, the like occasion calls for the like
use of sacred Lot as here.

Object. The Lot here was in steed of Jesus his voice from heaven, because
man might not choose an Apostle: therefore, where man may make the choice, we
are not to trouble God with the Lot.

Reply. I grant both Antecedent and consequent. But there may be (and I have
seen) diverse persons presented by the Church to some office Ecclesiasticall^
all worthy men, yet not all presented necessary then for office to that
Church. Again, two may be presented fit men for Pastors; a great part of the
Church rather affects This, another great part, affects rather That, what in
this case is fittest to be done? Some will say, incline to the greater voice:
but I answer (and experience has found it) that is not safest: Secondly, I see
no such warraut for that, as is now here for using sacred Lotte. The Lot being
a divine ordinance, it has a promise of good effect: namely, of continuing and
begetting peace: for every man then must needs say, The Lord has thus
disposed. Prove. 16. 33.

Prophaners of Lottes, find a contrary effect: namely, a kindling of
Conten^ion and fury, not before begun. Let Dicers and such vain people
mark that.

(c) Awayting the extraordinary coming of the holy Ghost.

(d) First, for preparing of reverence, a heavenly wind fills the whole
house where they had convened: then come tongues of fire and sits upon them,
wherewithal they were al filled with the holy Ghost, speaking other languages,
as the spirit ministered utterance. Tongues are given, First, for the pulling
down of spiritual Babel: Secondly, for building up the mystical Jerusalem.
He that occupies his tongue in furthering the false Church, and hindering the
True, had better have no tongue in his head: such a tongue is set on fire from
Hell, not from Heaven.

Now were Jews from all Cuntries come unto Jerusalem, where Melchi-sedeck had
Reigned. No doubt, they had kept a true account of Gabriel^ 70 sevens of
years, and therefore at this time might the rather hearken what news of
Messia at Zion, from whence the Law was to go. These Jews strangers, hearing
the Apostles speaking the tongs of such cuntries as where they had been
dispersed, some of them stood amazed there at, others mocked.

12. Staff.
In (a) Salem they drew faithful into (a) One:
(b) Steven then was caught, and stoned unto death.
Young (c) Saul converted was to Paul anon:
Who thence inspired was with holy (d) breath.
To (e) Iaphets People he was destinate,
The God of Shem his Gospel to relate.
(aa) A true visible and christian Church was first planted in Melchi-sedeks
Salem, and from Salem and Zion, was the Law to go forth unto the Gentiles.
Salem, is in English, Peace, Hebr. 7. 2. As the figure of the New Testaments
Church was called Peace, so it was, because all true peace is within the true
visible Church of Jesus: Peace dwells in her Palaces. Nether may contention
be suffered within this Church: for the Church of God has no such Custom.
Neither may Confusion stand in this Church; For God is not of Confusion, but of
Peace. These spiritual stones are all first hewn and squared (whereof I spoke
in his figure) and so are to convene or gather into One.

The visible Church then I define to be, A company of People ^athered out of
the World) or from amongst worldlings) by the Ministry of the word, unto the
obedience of Christ their Head. They being first one with worldlings, God
stirs up Prophets, (whereof in the next Staff) who by the power of the
word, as by an hammer, breaks their rude hearts (for any thing Man
fore-knowes) whereupon they willingly add themselves to the Faithful,
gathering, as Eagles, together for feeding on Jesus crucified. These so
gathered, they are to do al their things in Love, exhorting one another,
ministering one to another things necessary, no one eating the bread of
Idleness; but so laboring, as they may not only sustain themselves, but also
be able to, minister unto others.

Look how the Spirit excels the Letter, look how Christ his Scepter,
excels Iudahs Scepte^* Look how far the Thing figured excels his
Figure: look how more perfect the Substance is than the Shadow^; by so much
does the New Testaments Church, exceed that old Church of Zion. This not
observed, it causes such as have not scene a true established Church to
confound the Faces, Beauty, Persons, Order, of them two: as though Christ were
not more excellent than Moses in these things. Moses is a covering to such.

(b) Steven, (a glorious Deacon of Ierusalems Church) being taken of the
Adversaries, he was by the frantic Bedlems stoned to death. Hereupon, the poor
Church was scattered, the disciples flying here and there. Some of the
Brethren (amongst whom was Philip, called before to be a Deacon) do come unto
Samaria, and there convert and baptize many. The Apostles, who yet were at
Jerusalem) hea^ing that Samaria had received the gospel, they send unto them
Peter and John.

(c) The yonker Saul, consented to the death of Steven, and much blood abroad
he shed. But going down unto Damascus, there to torment the Christians, JESUS
from Heaven cried, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? There withal Sir
Pursevant, and the grand Commissioner was smitten down blind. The Lord
enformes of his will. To Damas^u s he was led: unto whom, Ananias by Gods
Commandment came, gave him his sight, and so was Paul baptized a new man.

(d) Before he breathed out threatenings against the Church, now he breathed
sweet promises in the Church* Before he was a zealous Pharise, but now a
zealous Christian.

Quest. What was a Pharisie?

Answ. The Pharisie was a passing precise Jew, of what Tribe soever. The Saxons
interpret Pharisie, Sundorhalgan, that is, One that severs himself for
Holiness, and indeed such they were.

Besides this strict Mosaicall sect, the Scriptures remember another sect
called Saduces. These held there was no Angel, Spirit, Resurrection.

A third sect, the Jewish writers remember, called Esseni, whereof were two
sorts. The one sort, never married: the second sort did, but by their sparing
fellowship carnal, they testified thereby, that they married only for
preserving of chaste minds. Both these sorts of Ess^ni, notwithstanding loved
each other, wheresoever they were scattered in Towns and Cities, they ever
prepared to entertain to harbor any of their sect. Had the one never seen the
other, yet the strange brother was nothing less bold to enter the house.
Reioycinglie they would suffer any death at the hands of the Romans, as it
were therein triumphing over the Uncircumcised. In a word, of all the Jews
then, these were most honest sober, religious, charitable.

(e) Noah plainly prophesied, that Iaphe^ (that is, the Gentiles come of
Iaphe^) should at last dwell in Shems Tent, that is, become Inhabitants of Salem
from above, (that is, of the New Testaments Church) and so it fell out: yea,
what time the Prodigal young son came into the holy Tent, the elder brother
(namely, the Jew generally) disdained to come in: as neither willing to come
in himself, nor yet contented that his long wandering brother should feed on
Jesus. To these Gentiles was Paul chiefly appointed Apostle. If Rome would have
a Vicar for Christ, me thinks they do wrong (they being of the Gentiles) to
give the Vicarship from Paul to Peter.

13. Staff.
With Paul, was joined (a) Barnabas by (a) Voice,
(As former twelve, so) They do Churches plant.
Elders and Deacons (after Churches (c) Choice)
They do (c) Ordain, as every one will grant,
Each keeps his room, and (d) watches in his place:
The Apostles so commend them to Gods grace
(aa) Paul (after his general alotment to the Apostleship) stayed in
An^iochia, (Act. 13) where the Disciples first were entitled Christians or
Anointed Ones. In that Church (amongst other Prophets) was Barnabas. The holy
Spirit bid the Church set him and Paul apart for the work. After Fasting and
Prayer they did so.

(b) In planting of Churches, they had specially regard to the establishing
Ministers in and to every Church* for the government and service of the same.
The Church Officers were of two sorts: First, Elders or Governors; the second,
Deacons or Servi^ours. To this all accord.

But the Question now is: Were there more so^tes of Elders than one? more
sorts of Deacons than one? Secondly, wherein were these Elders, and these
Deacons exercised.

For the Deacons, all almost easily grant, that there were two sorts of
Deacons, or Church-Servi^ours: the first of men, Acts. 6. 3. etc. 1. Timoth. 3.
8. the second of women, 1* Timo^h. 5. 9. etc. Romans 16. 1. That the first had
the charge of gathering the benevolence of the Saints (specially every first
day of the week, 1 Cor. 16. 1) as also, that they especially had the looking
to the Loue-Feasts, Act. 6. Jude. 12. almost all have granted. That the second
attended the sick and impotent, who can deny? Corrupt ages and Antiquities
could not wipe that out of men's writings.

For the Elders, there is all the question. The Lord-Bishops party, chiefly
pleads for Elders only exercised in Doctrine and Exhortation, (then they
forget the dumb Ministry) and yet, (which suffices for my Argument) the
most of that side, who have been learned, have easily granted, that in the
Primitive or Apostolic Churches, there were, First, Teaching Elders: Secondly,
Elders assisting the former in Government: but now (say they) such governing
Elders are not necessary, considering we have in their rooms, Civil
Magistrates.

Hereabouts, many have written great Volums, and multitudes know, that I have
written not a little, let it then here suffice, that the Pattern Churches had
In them and To them, two sorts of Elders or Overseers: the former sort was
specially (though not only) exercised in Doctrine and Exhor^ation, Rom 7. 8.
called Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4 11. The second sort, specially (though
not only) exercised in Government, Romans 12. 8. 1. Timoth. 5. 17. Both these
sorts Paul speaks to. Act. 20. except one will think that Ephesus Church
had many Pastors in it. Our Savior his letters to Asia Minor Churches ( Revel.
2. and 3.) saying ever to the Angel of the Church, and never to the Angels,
seems to cut that off: but specially, a particular Church being called a
Flock, it properly cannot admit more than One Shepherd, and so in English is
Pastor. This second sort of Elders, is (together with the first sort)
necessarily understood under the term Bishop. 1. Tim. 3. 1. etc. the Greek
word in plain English, (as no Scholar can deny) being Overseer, for both the
one and the other Oversee, Heb. 13. 17.

Object. But every such Bishop or Overseer, has required in him that he be Apt
to Teach.

Answ. I have pondered what every side has writ, (specially, I laid every
such thing before my heart, during my last imprisonment, when I still looked but
for hasty death, and I then resolved to dye in that which is my present
resolution. I dare not say, that these Governing Elders the Apostles planted,
were unapt to teach. Jeremiah (31.) and Heb. 8 11. does so plainly teach, that
Great and little in the New Testaments Church, shall so abound with knowledge,
as I dare not say, that the Governing Elders should be unapt to teach,
considering, they are Heads in the Church, and must be able to judge betwixt
Plea and plea, cause and cause: which neither they can do, except they be able
to teach the truth in such cases. That they ought to be apt to ^each, I
believe: but that there is (of absolute necessity) required in them so large
gifts for knowledge and utterance, as in the Pastor, I dare not say.

(cc) The Election belongs to the Church, or assembly of Faithful gathered
into one: This Election, the great Apostles of Jesus, durst not assume to
themselves, so much as for the smaller Office, Act. 6. 3. 5. The Ordination (by
imposition of hands sacramental) the Church left unto the Apostles then
present, to whom for that succeeds Elders, or the chief of the Church.

(d) This watching is not only the duty of such, as are called to special
place of Over sight, but also, a du^ie committed to every member, of that
mystical body, Heb. 3 12. 13. This watching is, in casting (not a curious
eve, but) an eye of love, (as first to our own ways, so after) to the
footesteps of our fellow members: that if there be any slip or halting, we
may help that member, in making more right steps. And this is done, by
brotherly proceeding, according to our Householders Rule. M^tth. 18 15. 16. 17.

The Rule is this, if the fact be private, admonish that fellow member
privatlie as thou may win him, not loose him: If he hear thee, that is, If
^ee repent, Luke 17. 3. there is an end. If he repent not, thou art to take One
or Two with thee (no delight should be in publishing a brothers sin, no, not
within the Church) these are to witness thy manner of dealing with him, as also
his carriage toward thee. If he now repent, an end: if not, thou must bring
it before the Church, not publish it in Gath, or amongst the Uncircumcised, I
mean, to these that are not of the Church, for that is not only the way to
destroy the cred^te of a brother, but also to make vile the holy profession: If
he hear not the Church, or mystical body, whereof he is a member, and
whereof Christ is Head, account him as an Heathen: that is, bar him the
spiritual Temple, and account of him, as of a Publicane, that is, do not eat
or drink with him, as the Jews would not with Publicanes.

This course of proceeding (even to the very casting out) is only to this end,
to win the straying member, and to bring home the wandering sheep.

Quest. If the Sinner deny the private sin to me, or if not to me dealing
alone; vet he does before my witnesses deny his sin, what am I now to do?
must I there stay, lest I trouble the Church with that whereof I have no witness,
or must I go on.

Answ. If the sin be pregnant and plain, (as Theft, Adultery, Mu^ther, etc.)
whereof he cannot possibly be forgetful, nor thou mistaken, thou must go on by
the rule without stop, till he stop his sin. The denial of the sin, makes
the man so much more monstrous, and unto thee he should remain deep poisoning
Leaven: to others, an Hypocrite, but to thee an open wicked one.

Object. But if (I proceeding) he should likewise confidently deny the sin
before the Church, and the sin should rest vnconvicted, then I should be
censured for a slaunderer.

Answ. If the danger of such issue, should hinder thee from proceeding, then
likewise the fear of such issue, should ever keep thee from admonishing any
One, so much as in private: for thou admonishing privatlie, he might likewise
impudently deny it: or he might reply thus, Though I have done this sin, yet
I will deny it to all men: and except thou will ask me forgiveness for thus
reproouing me, I will publish abroad that thou have falsely accused me of Sin:
then thou (unable to prove it by witness) shall be forced either to ^y, saying:
I never reproved him of such Sin: or else thou shall be censured for a
slanderer. Because therefore such issue may fa^l out at first, as well as by
proceeding, it therefore is apparent, that there is no stoppage with the
unrepentant. Secondly, it cannot fall out, that such Sin shall not be
discovered (walking by Rule) in the midst of the Congregation, Prove. 26. 26.
when a case (under the Law) could not through witnes-want be found out in the
gates of the City, then were they to come before the Lord and the Priest, and
there in the Temple it should be discovered, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. Now that Temple
was a figure not only of the whole Catholic, but also of every particular
Church: the Priest a figure of Jesus anointed, to whom the Father
communicates al knowledge, and by whom we receive the knowledge of all
necessaries: but in such a plunge, the knowledge of the wicked is necessary:
therefore by Christ, we are to exspect the Revelation thereof. That Christ will
not be inferior to Moses his Priesthood for Vrim and Thummim, is evident
enough, if but only in this promise: Where two or three are gathered together
in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Mat. 18. 20. I therefore conclude,
that Christ the head, will not have his own holy body so mocked, nor the
Hider of his sin so to prosper, ( Prove. 28.) and that because of the honor
of his own name. If Faith in Gods promise, Care of his glory, Love of keeping
the Church pure, do lead us in this action, the Lord neither can nor will fail
in disclosing the Guilty.

Object. But some Sin is in it own nature public, as Incest, Adultery,
Murder, etc and therefore not to be satisfied for by private Repentance.

Ans. If a woman within the Church bring forth a Child besides the order of
continency, her sin is indeed publik, and therefore the unclean man and woman
both (if both be within the Church) must satisfy by public Repentance.

Object. In Deuteronomie 13. 6. etc. If the secret friend, should secretly
entice unto Idolatry, that friend (notwithstanding the sin was secreet) was
not to be concealed: therefore some secreet sins are not at all to be
concealed.

Answ. You might rather conclude, Therefore some secret sin was once not to
be concealed. Moses must end where Christ begins. Moses enjoined That then:
Christ eniovneth This now.

Object. Such gross sins cannot be satisfied for by public Repentance, for
the death of their bodies is due.

Answ. Though the body deserve death, yet public Repentance satisfies the
Church. The Incestuous person being humbled in his flesh, that is, in the
unregenerate part: the Church of Co^inth* was by Paul's Commandment, enjoined,
first, to forgive him: Secondly, to comfort him: Thirdly, to confirm their
love toward him. Consider herewithall the Apostles words. Galat 6. 1.
Brethren* if a man be fallen by occasion into any fault, ye which are
spiritual, he speaks not to carnal men, restore such one with the spirit of
meeknes, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

Object. These Apos^olicall Churches had no Magistrates that bare the corpo^eal
sword: but we have Kings in our Churches: therefore the former is no president
for us.

Answ. The former is a president, where the corporeal sword is not drawn out
That I have already said, is therefore sufficient for my present Argument,
who delivers but the Rule, whereby the Apostolical Churches watched one over
another. The Constitution being changed, and the Case altered, more heaps of
Objections do arise, than is meet for less than a great volume. For many
people, I know no readier way for them to come out of the Laborinth or Maze,
wherein they have winded themselves, than by returning back step by step, till
they come to the door again.

14. Staff.
For Jesus sake, (a) great toil Paul underwent,
For planting faith, where he soever staid.
At last to (b) seven Hild Rome good Paul was sent
There for (c) two years, an harvest good he made,
Within (d) fifth year as human writings say,
The Lion, Nero did the Apostle slay.
(a) His multitud of sufferings, see 2. Cor. 11. 23. etc.

(b) So the holy Ghost describes Rome, Revel* 17 9. and so much their Mantuae
Prophet affirms of Rome, as also others their own Hystoriographers. The
names of the 7. Hills are thus termed, Palatine, Capitoline, Aventine,
Exquiline, Celius, Viminal, Quirinal. To this City, after he had preached to
and froe above 30. years, good Paul was sent Prisoner: he having indeed
appealed to Caesar: and Cruel Nero then was Caesar and Emperor.

(c) Coming to Rome, PAVL was suffered to dwell by himself with a Soldier
that kept him. Two full years he remained in an house, which for himself he
had hired, receiving all that came unto him, preaching the kingdom of God, and
teaching these things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness of
speech, and without let.

And here ends the Book of the Apostles Acts.

(d) He is said to die under Nero: That being the 36. year of Paul's
Conversion; and thus it is reckoned.

JESUS died in the 19. of Tiberias.

Paul converted in the 20. year, Tiberias reigning 23. years. To him
succeeded Caligula, who reigned 4. years. To Caligula, succeeded Claudius, (in
whose second James was slain by Herod, Acts. 12.) who reigned 14. year. To
him succeeded Nero, in whose 14. it is said, Paul was beheaded, that being the
70. year from Jesus his Nativitie.

The Epistles that Paul writ unto the Churches, are either such as he writ
before his imprisonment at Rome, or after.

The Epistles he writ before, are: The Epistle to the Romans, written from
Corinth.

The two Epist^es to the Corinthes, written from Philippe: as also, a third
Epistle, (which indeed was the first) written to the Corinths, (1. Cor. 5. 9.)
which we have not.

The two Epistles to the Thessalonians, written from Athens.

The first Epistle to Timothy the Evangelist, written from Laodicea.

The Epistle to Titus, written from Nicopolis: part of which subscription is
demed forged: and yet may well enough be granted.

The Epistles he writ after he became Prisoner at Rome, are these: The Epistle
To the Galatians. To the Ephesians. To the Philippians. To the Colossians. To
Philemon. Second to Timothy, though a strange Title be given to Timothy in
the subscription, and that of latter time. But if the Title of an Archbishop,
or Chief Over-seer be granted, considering he was an Evangelist, it makes
nothing for Romish Lord-Bishops.


As all these Epistles tend to the advancing and confirmation of the christian
faith: so, for this time, I will propound some special heads of Doctrine,
wherein one Epistle is more copious than another, or at least, first in order
according to the usual places of the Epistles.

In the Epistle to the Romans, I observe: First, the Apostles concluding all
(Jew and Gentile) under sin, taking away all merit by works: therewithal
delineating or plainly picturing forth the difference betwixt the Carnal and
Spiritual person. Secondly, I observe his plain proving of Isreal's general
calling and obedience to the Christian Faith, what time the Fulness of the
Gentiles be come in. Hereof see, 1. part, at Iuda^s Ozias. Thirdly, the
doctrine of obedience to Princes and Magistrates, not so much for fear of the
sword, as for conscience sake. Fourthly, I note the doctrine he delivers for
supporting the weak brethren.

In the first Epistle to the Corinths, I observe specially; First, the Method
of truly preaching Christ. Secondly, the danger by having any communion with an
open leavened, or unrepentant brother: together with the carriage due toward
such. Thirdly, I note the power is given to the Saints for judging their own
causes civil. Fourthly, the Apostle puts an end to questions touching
single life, touching such married Couples, as whereof one was an unbeliever;
touching the duty of such as were called to the Christian faith, in such or
such Vocation. Fifthly, I note his doctrine concerning the use of meats
sacrificed first to Idols. Sixty, the true use of spiritual guiftes.
Seaventhly, the absolute necessity of Love (or Charity) in a Christian.
Eighthly, the description of the School of Prophecy. Chap. 14.

Unto this holy exercise of Prophecy, he stirs up every particular man
(for women T^ere may not speak) as to labor after every spiritual gift, so
specially after Prophecy. Every man that has a public profiting gift, in
this exercise it is to be used, but every thing in order.

The brother that is able only, or specially, to teach in a strange tongue,
he in this holy Congregation is to speak, providing that there be another to
interpret his speech to the Auditorie: This notably overthwa^teth such as will
not hear a brother Prophet, though he speak no strange language.

They that Prophecy, that is, which divide the word and apply it to the soul
( Verse 24. 25.) are at the most to be but three, (for one season of Assembly)
every one orderly teaching after another: the Judgment of whose doctrine and
discreet Application, appertains in the first place to the other Prophets.
The principal of this holy School, I believe to be the Doctor, even as is the
Pastor over other peculiar exercises.

Five peculiar Graces or Gifts are in this School, to be used for
aedification. 1. The gift of a Psalm. 2. of Doctrine 3. of Tongues. 4. of
Revelation. 5. of Interpretation, All (saving that of Revelation) is granted
generally: yet simply neither can all Revelation be debarred: for at sometime
may be revealed (and that unto the meanest member) that the whole Congregation
has in former time been carried away into some error. If any one such thing
(or any special point not revealed to the former speaking Prophet) be unto
another revealed ( Verse. 30.) he is orderly to be heard.

But because that of a Psalm is easily granted of all, I would gladly
demand, What is it for a man there to have a Psalm* Here a number lay their
hand on their mouth, or else they foolishlie answer, It is the singing of some
Psalm in the Bible: or else, It is to pen a Psalm, and afterward to sing it.
Alas, alas* no: neither the one nor the other. The Apostle commends to the
Church Spiritual gifts, peculiar gifts of the Spirit of Jesus, not fearing
in the first place to prefix the gift of a Psalm, as no common gift, but at
least as uneasy to be attained as that of Doctrine, of Tongues,
Interpretation, etc. Howsoever other Churches, yet Corinth (the Apostle
testifies) was destitute of no gift, Chap. 1. 7. No marvel then, if this
gift be rather commended to use amongst them. As only to pen a Sermon, and
then to read it, cannot properly be called the Gift of Preaching or
Prophesying: so neither can the singing of a penned Psalm, be truly called,
The gift of a Psalm: I therefore conclude; even as Doctrine and Exhortation,
is by the immediate instinct of the Spirit, so is this Psalm uttered or soong.

Quest. Who ever heard of any man, that could so sing the praises of God and
his wonderful works* that could deliver his holy meaning in Number and Measure.

Answ. I praise God for it, I have heard of the gift, and heard the brother
that has been so exercised in the midst of a Christian Congregation. And lest
he should sing but something he had co^d by heart, the brethren thus tried him.
First, (...) two brethren had taught from two several Scriptures, (only fore^
known to the speakers themselves) he was appointed to ground his Psalm, upon
that doctrine they first had delivered. He did so presently, enlarging the
doctrine and use thereof: and that without unseemly pawse. Secondly (which was
the next time of Prophecy) he was placed in the face of the holy Assembly,
and unto him was read a certain Text (agreed upon by the Church, but at that
instant) and thereupon, without more ado, he uttered a Psalm. After that, he
was again Proved, and so of the Brethren Approved. I my self was an eat and
eye-witnes of all this. So much of the 8. Observation.

Nynthly, Paul confuteth the deniers of the bodies resurrection (as for the
supporting of the weak, I observed it to the Romans) And lastly, he
commands laying aside somewhat for the helping of the poor, appointing
thereto the Lords day, or first day of the week.

In his second to the Corinths, I mark specially, 1. His care of having the
Humbled sinner comforted. 2. His care to have one Church to contribute to
another necessities. 3. His care of suppressing the insolent contemners of his
letters and reprehensions.

In his Epistle to the Galatians, specially I note, 1. The curse of all false
Doctrine and Gospels, although published by an Angel from heaven. 2. That Moses
yoke of bondage, is not to be joined with Jesus his Gospel: the former
longing to the sons of Hagar the bondwoman, for whipping them unto Christ: the
latter longing to the sons of Sarah, the Freewoman, whose Children are of a
new City, even of Jerusalem from above.

In his Epistle to the Ephesians, First, I behold Election to be before (not
only our b^rth, but also before) the foundation of the World: and that Election
to be in Christ Jesus only: which Election before time, makes it self known
to us in time, by the sanctification of the holy Spirit. 2. I cast mine eye to
the immediate end of Christ his Ascension, which, as touching his Church, was
this: vz. To fill all things, by giving gifts unto men: the end of them gifts
being twofold: First, for converting People, and bringing them into holy
constitution: Secondly, for edifying or building them more and more up in their
newe-byrth, after they be once constituted in orderly communion. Unto this
twofold end, he appoints two sorts of Teachers: First, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, for the planting Churches: Secondly, Pastors and
Teachers to the Churches once planted: whereof see more in the next Staff but
two following, in number the 17.

Thirdly, in this Epistle, I observe his care of enforming Husbands and wives,
Parents and children, Masters and servants, in their mutual duties.

In his Epistle to the Philippians, specially I pick out: First, that it is a
matter of reioycement, that Christ be preached, though some preach of envy,
and with affections impure. 2. That Bands or imprisonement makes the Gospel
more glorious. 3 That the imprisoned Saints (specially Ministers of the word,
and more specially Kopiontes they that have traveled Churches planting, and
delivering Canonical ordinances, are to be provided for of their Churches.

In his Epistle to the Colossians, (besides former mentioned doctrines) I note,
that such Religion as is not in the writings of the Prophets and Apostles
Seen, but rather forbidden in the new Testaments Canon, (as, worshipping of
Angels, Touch not, taste not, handle not, etc.) is but a Will Worship, carrying
only a show of wisdom, and herein my Brethren fail, that would tie men to
such Legal observances.

In his first to the Thessalonians, specially I take heed: First, to the
Thessalonians, true hearing and receiving the Apostles words; who heard and
received that word, not as the word of men, but as the word of God. 2. That to
mourn much for the Saints departed, is Gentile-like. 3. That Jesus his
coming to Judgment, will be very sudden, and therefore needful, that the
Saints be watchful.

In his second to the Thessalonians, only I now observe: That there was a
general Apostacy from the Christian faith, plainly foretold. Which Departure
should fall out by reason The Man of Sin, the Antik^imenos, or Layer of a
contrary Foundation, should arise in the Church (through Churches not
watching,) and so cause the Churches for to undergo his Spiritual Badge. Which
Beast (notwithstanding) in time should be destroyed, by the bright powerful
appearance of the Gospel: he in the mean time prevailing only over such, as
had not received the love of the truth, and therefore justly given over to
believe lies, that so they may be damned.

In his 1 Epistle to Timothy, I specially take up: First, Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, Thankesgiuings are to be made for all sorts of People.
Secondly, how Church-Overseers, and Seruitours are to be qualified. Thirdly,
that the Church^ministers at home (that is, in their own Assembly) is to be
provided for. He that provideth for his Ox, and withholds necessaries from
him that watches over his soul, is no better than an Ox, and unworthy the
Gospel: yet Teachers must measure the weak, and loose bodily right, if thereby
they have hope to win unto Christ. Fourthly, that one manner of Rebuke
appertains not to all the Saints: nor yet to receive an Accusation against
an Elder so easily, as against others.

In his 2* to Timothy, First, an encouragement for Timothy against al
adversity. 2. A plain prognosticating of our covetous sals Prophets, who sell
themselves and their people to the devil for money.

In his Epistle to Titus, I only pick out the end of the Evangelist Titus his
abode in the little Island Cre^^, viz. to plant Churches, and in every Church her
Elders. In his Epistle to Philemon, the Apostle sends Onesimus back to his
Master Philemon, who before had run away from his Master, therewithal robbing
Philemon of somewhat. The fellow coming to Paul at Rome (by some secreet
draught of the Spirit) Paul there begets him to the faith, and so returning him
with this Epistle, he laboreth to qualify good Philemon. Thus ends Paul his
Epistles.

Now follovveth a little to be spoken of the Epistles following. The Epistles
are these.
The Author to the Hebrews. James his Epistle. Peter his two Epistles. John
his three Epistles. Jude his Epistle.


Who was the Holy Ghost his Penman of that to the Hebrews: the Spirit of God
has concealed, and therefore flat pride for any man to say, It was Paul's, It
was Marks, etc. The chiefest point the holy Ghost there laboreth for, is: the
removal of Moses, whose Letter was unto the Hebrews as a Veil, hindering
them from seeing unto the end of the things abolished by Jesus anointed our
King, Priest and Prophet 2. He denounces fearful Judgment against such as
fell from Christian communion and fellowship. 3. He stirs them up to
Hospitality, specially for receiving of Strangers.

James his Epistle must needs be written before any of Paul's, consideritg he
died, Acts 12. Besides my observes in the former Epistles, I note specially in
him: First, that Prayer must be offered up without wavering. 2. That the Word
must not onl^ be heard, but also done. 3. That the Christian Faith is not to be
held in respect of Persons; be they many, be they few; be they noble, be they
ignoble; seem they learned, seem they unlearned. 4. That a Person with
gold-fingers is not therefore to be seated vpmost at our Table. 5. That Faith
without Works, is but the Devils faith. 6. That Elders ar to visit the sick;
and if the sick have some sin troubling their conscience, they are with love
to take notice thereof, and fervently therefore call upon God by Prayer, for
that sins remission. These ^lders must not want the spirit of Prayer. They
must therein be driven from reading on a book. ^. That it is a most blessed
work to convert a siner.

In Peter's first Epistle I note: First, that a Christian must beware he suffer
as a Righteous, not as an unrighteous doer. 2. That the Church Elders are to
feed their flock without constraint, not carrying themselves like Lords over
God his heritage.

In his second Epistle, specially I excerpe: First, that true Believers are
made partakers of the Nature divine. 2. That open Atheists (mocking at the
dissolution of all things b^ fire from Heaven) shall arise in the last days.
3. That Paul's Epistles contain some things hard to be understood, which the
unlearned should pervert.

In John his first Epistle: First, that many Antichrists were gone out in his
time. 2. That such as are once borne of God, no more do sin: that is,
lets not sin Rule (howsoever Dwell) in their mortal members. 3. That the
One God, is distinguished into the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost. 4.
That there is a certain sin not to be prayed for.

In his second Epistle: I note, that to him (that brings doctrine contrary to
godliness) we are not to say so much as God speed, much less receive him to
house.

In his third Epistle: First, that it is worthy praise, to entertain brethren,
and assist them in their voyages. 2. That it is no new thing to be cumbred
with prattling busy bodies, who will neither further Christ's work themselves,
nor willingly suffer such as would.

In Jude his Epistle, over and besides I observe: First, that the wicked are
but as menstruous cloths in our Feasts of Love. 2. Lastly, that the man Jesus
our Savior is God, and he only able to keep us from falling away, as also to
present us faultlesse before the Father.

Now follows a little to be said of the Book^ of Revelation.

Blessed John (beloved of Jesus) being banished into the I Will Patmos, and that
by all probability by Domitianus (who succeeded Nero) There, on the Lords day,
John was deeply ravished in the Spirit, during which time, blessed Jesus
commends unto him the state of his Church until the last. First, he
enioyneth John to write unto the 7. Churches of Asia the less. Secondly* to
set down in writing such visions and their adjuncts, as might continue for the
Faithfuls use for ever. And indeed, this Book so pictureth out the False
Churches, (whether Idolatrous Christian, or Mahumetane) as I cannot marvel,
though Satan has almost driven this Book out of use. The old Church Zion,
had her golden prophecies for future events: and this was left to the New
Testaments Church, as a Loue-letter of Jesus, whereby she should discern
Times, Persons, Things. But mark this, that the Jew is never brought in
within this book, as an Adversary. Their number is sealed, Cap. 7. The same
number of Them stands on Mount Zion with the Lamb, Chap. 14. And the Gentiles
are glad to repair unto them for being healed, Chap. 21. and 22. This brie^^ie
for the present.

That which now follows, has his grounds from the former Canonical
writings: Al^ falling out within the compass of time contained in the book of
Revelation or Apocalypse: for the time of that Book reaches to the second
coming of Jesus.

15. Staff.
The Apostles have for help (a) Evangelists.
And so the Churches by them planted be,
The Apostles dead, there rises (b) hellish mysts,
Which with the Light, at no hand could agree:
Sun darks, Stars fall, The Moon does change her hue,
Heaven rolls away, as They before did show.
(a) Evangelists in English is, Publishers of glad Tidings. In the large sense
any bringer of glad news may be so called: but in this special and peculiar
sense, these are properly Evangelistes, that were called by the Apostles to
assist them in the planting of Churches. Such were Mark, Luke, Timothy, Titus.

(b) Inventions of men, fetched out of their bot^omlesse brain (first broched
into their brain by Satan of the lowest Hells) these arose in the Churches,
and so darkened the Sun of Righteousness. Hereupon the Angels of the churches fell
out of the heavenly places, who before were as Stars in Christ his right
hand. The Churches who before took their word (which was their Lantern and
light) from the mouth of Jesus, even as the Moon takes her light from the
Sun, they quickly changed their hue: whereupon the Heavenly Face of the
Churches passed away, even as the material heavens at last shall scrole^like
vanish. Paul charged his Churches to be watchful of their ways: and blessed
John he specially admonishes the Churches of Asia-Minor. But al of them
neglecting their spiritual watch, what are become of them? what is become of
the golden Roman People? what is become of Co^^nth, of Galatin, Philippi,
Colossus, Thessalonia? what are become of John's 7. Churches? They vanished like
a scrowle, their visibilitie or face unable to be found.

The 7. Churches of Asia (together with their fellows) had Mahumet quickly
seated in their chair. The 7. Churches ( Rev. 1.) were seven golden
Candlesticks, and their Ministers 7. Stars in Jesus his right hand: if these
be Apostate (as all know they be) what warrant had Rome never to fall away.
These 7. were in Christ's right hand, and yet Apostate; such a privileged place
(in so open speech) Rome never had: or if she had been an 8. star in his
hand, vet lo, the Sun lost his Light; the Son has turned his hand vpside
dow^e.

Paul writing unto Rome, he says, To the Saints at Rome, not To the Church of
Rome: to other people he says, To the Church, or Churches, by which form of
speech, it is to be thought, that there was not at the writing of that Epistle,
any established Church at Rome. Object. He says, ( Chap. vlt.) Salute the
Church in their house, Verse. 5. Ans. By the Church (or Congregation faithful)
of that house, he cannot mean a Church established, (for then all the residue
of the Saints saluted, should seem to be so many Churches as there were diverse
households, or else that they stood apart from the Church) but thereby he must
necessarily mean the Faithful Assembly of that house. Every Established
Church, is a company of Faithful convened: but every company of Faithful
congregated, is not an established Church. They two are not Convertibles.
Neither is it any thing like, that there should then in Rome be an established
Church. First, considering that Great City, (Revel. 17. 18.) was head for
Idolatry. Secondly, had bloody Nero King, called by Paul, the Lions mouth, 2.
Tim. 4. 17. therein (I doubt not) alluding to the Lions Monarch of Babel, (Dan.
7. 4.) the mouth of the 4. mettelled Image, whereof elsewhere I have spoken.

How hatd it was long after, for any to profess Christ in Rome (much more to
have an established Church) their own Records declare. Nay, seeing All
forsook Paul what time he was first examined before the Emperor Nero: (2.
Timoth. 4. 16.) I would demand of such, where was Peter then? did he then
apostate from Paul, or was he Non-resident? Indeed the Romanists say, he was
then gone into some other Cuntrie, notwithstanding his Apostolical Sea was at
Rome. As such an answer is but absurd, so neither (if Peter had been there,
and had an established Church) could it well be deemed, that both the common
persons of that Church, as also every their Ministers should forsake Paul.
Besides, Peter should have shown himself no true Pastor by such
Non-residencie, as also have been guilty of that Peoples fall. How truly
then they have taught, that Peter first established the Faith of Christ in
Rome, as also should for 25. years be Romes Bishop: let the wise hearted
conjecture by the former Circumstances. Much more let them consider, what
feeble footing they have for Standing always in visible obedience to the true
Faith.

16. Staff.
(a) First order gone, and Doors not being kept,
By (b) Baptism, heaps of profane do rush.
With them at length, a (c) Ministry in crept,
That with the Horn, Gods ordinance did push.
So Antichrist is stepped up to the Throne,
Who by his (d) Laws would govern every one.
(a) The churches by little and little growing secure and idle in their
spiritual watch, they give up all their power unto the Elders: the Elders
afterward they leave all to the Pastor: The se^erall Church^pastors in one
City, they finally give up their keys to so me one, and he was called
Metrapolitane: The Metrapolitanes finally gave up their power to some one in a
Diocese, and he afterward was called the Diocesian Bishop. The Diocesian
Bishops, they afterward surrender the keys to some One in a Province: then
was he called the Provincial Bishop. The Provincial Bishop after that,
betakes the keys to some one in a kingdom: and he was called, Primate. The
Primates of sundry Kingdoms, do after appoint the Churches power to four,
which four stood for whole Christendom; and they were called Patriarchs, not
unlike the four Angels, Revel. 7. 1.

The Patriarchs (to make up the vpshot) they appoint One to be Christ's Vicar
over All: and Him they called a Pope. Thus the mystery of iniquity wrought
till it came to the height, and that by little and little: by little and little
accordingly that Body shall come down.

(b) The utter laying wast of Christ's Vineyard, was the receiving tag and tag
into the Lords Temple. The strict ways of Christianity lost, then it became
as plausible a Religion as gross Idolatry. All the Uncircumcised, high and
low, rich and poor, come into the Temple. As the Man of Sin was mounted up
into the highest place, so al his retinue come in to attend on their King
Abaddon, as bad a one as could be. The Temples door was open to all: I mean,
Baptism was free for all comers. The Spring and Fountain that before was
shut and sealed up, ( Cant. 4. 12.) now it was broken up, and every one
filtcheth away the water.

Object. Judah in the Apostacy, and Israel in the ^ime of Schism and
Apostacy did Circumcise.

Answ. They did that they had no warrant for. After Abram believed, then was
Circumcision given to him and his Seed, or any stranger to whom he became a
nurishing Father, not before. 2. The Apostle calls it, The Seal of
Righteousness by faith. When therefore they were fallen from the Faith of
Abraham, they had nothing to do to touch the Seal. Till they joined themselves
to the true Faith, such Circumcision was but a mere blanke, as wax without a
stamp.

Object. God has promised to be the God of a Believers seed, unto the
thousand Generation, Exodus 20. 6.

Answ. Add that which follows: Of them that love me and keep my
Commandments. A Parents faith makes the Child capable of Baptism, as the
former of Circumcision: but if the Child and his Children afterward do
Apostate from holy Faith, (in stead Of keeping the Commandments which his
Parents or Forefathers kept) then such are so far from having God to be
their merciful Father, as he is to them a Jealous Judge, and to all that
follows them in the steps of unrighteousness. 2. If the Child should be
baptized, who had some Auncestor a true Christian within a thousand
Generations, then the Baptizers had need of all his Peoples Genealogies from
Noah or Abraham. 3. Such simple Obiectors must learn, that by such a
conclusion, all the whole world should be baptized: for there is none in the
world, that are not much within a thousand Generations of Noah.

(c) How the great horned ministry crept in, is said above at (a) Here only
we are to remember, the slavish horned Ministry, who are Jack at
Commandment to the former. They be Cardinals, Suffraganes, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Priors, Abbots, Officials, Doctors, Proctors, Parsons, Vicars,
Chanons, Pety-Chanons, Quier-men, Exorcistes, Curats, Friars, Monks, and many
more than I can account unto thee. If thou will know this confused Chaos, thou
must seek to some Popish Catalogue: for I (in this my labor) have only the
Bible before me.

(d) Hell being broken loose, and this ministry planted, in the next place
Synod upon Synod, convocation upon convocation for establishing of such
laws, as who should resist, to them it should not be permitted to buy or sell
in their Commonwealth: and who in these days are able to war with the Beast?
He that with John will not go forth in the spirit, and that into the Wilderness,
shall not behold this Harlot, whose stinking skirts do cover the faces of the
worlds multitude: and so drunken they are with her Cup of Customs, Literal
preaching, Praying, etc. as a man had as good speak to drunken Nabal, as to
them. The Adders have laid the one ear to the Earth, and have stopped the
other ^are with their tail; hear the holy Charmer they are not minded: nay,
with their fingers in their ^ares they will run upon Stephen: Let us
therefore Beware of Men.

17. Staff.
But (a) Prophets God he stirs up sometime,
To call the People from such woorship foul.
The Beast he charge such with deadly crime,
And (b) killes the man, that pulles away a soul.
Right much ado shall Persons have to live,
To whom the Beast does not his (c) Symbol give.
(a) The spiritual Heaven vanished like as a scrowle: the Mystical iniquity
having got the vpperhand: the burning Lamps (Revel. 4) that stood before the
Throne of GOD, being thus put out; and black Lamps (or false counterfeit
Guiftes) being foysted in their room, as fittest to stand before the Black
Throne of the Beast moun^ed: It follows, (except Christ will loose all) that
some be called and culled out of Sodom and Egypt, spiritually so called,
Revel. 11. 8.

For the calling of the Lords Israel out of this spiritual Egypt, from under
the spiritual bondage of Leviathan; our good God stirs up Prophets: nay,
Christ Jesus ascended the highest heavens, leading ( aptivitie Prisoner with
him, partly for this very end, vz. to send Prophets for gathering and planting
Churches in these confused times, as did the Apostles and Evangelists of yore;
which Prophets are neither Apostles, nor Evangelists, nor Pastors nor Doctors
in their own proper and peculiar sense, but a Ministry distinguished from
them. Ephesians 4. 11.

That Prophet (distinguished there from the residue) I hold of absolute
necessity, to be meant properly of such as God stirs up (not to foretell
of things, like Agabus, but) to gather People unto the Faith, and to constitute
Churches.

First, all the learned have granted, that God has in these last times,
stirred up diverse to pull down Babel and to build again the walls of
Jerusalem. Such M. Calvin in some sense calls Apostles, and M. Beza nombreth
with Evangelists. The doctrine therefore stands good by the Consent of
learned, as also by Experience of the work wrought.

Secondly, the title Prophet (seeing they are not properly Apostles, who had
their Calling immediately from Christ: nor Evangelists, who had their Calling
immediately from the Apostles: nor Pastors nor Doctors, who have their
Nomination and Ordination immediately from a People already a true visible
Church) seeing (I say) they are not properly such, but plainly distinguished
from such (and other preaching ministeries besides these 5. there be not in the
New Testament) it necessarily therefore follows, that such Worke-men are
properly Prophets.

Thirdly, the place of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. proves all this plainly. Christ
(says the Apostle) ascended, To what end? To fill all things: How? By giving
gifts unto men: What gifts? the gifts fitting Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors, Doctors. To what end gave he such Ministers? for two ends:
First, For gathering together the Saints: Secondly, For the Ministerial work,
even for the edification of Christ's body, once gathered. How long has he
appointed Ministers, First, for Gathering People into a body: Secondly, for
Ministering unto a Body so gathered, or built up. He has given such Ministry,
Till we all meet together (in the unity of Faith and Knowledge of the Son
of God) unto a perfect man, etc. But yet we are not all So me^: therefore still
endures the Gift of Christ for gathering the Saints. Which gift
(considering Apostles and Evangelists ceased) does only rest upon the head of
this Prophet. Let not the greatness of any man's guiftes or fame, bring prejudice
unto this so open truth. He that holds not chiefly to this place (for
upholding the Doctrine against Romanistes) forsakes the surest string of his
Bow.

(b) Men forewarned are half armed. Jesus his Loue-Letter foretold this,
Revel. 11. 7. and 13. 7. In Patience therefore let us possess our souls

(c) See Revel. 13. 16. 17. But a fearful plague must Gods Angel, or Prophet
sent of God, denounce against such branded People. Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. The
fearefulnes of which torment might fear them from all obedience to the Beast:
but if they will serve the Devil in his Rulers, the Devil that setts them on
work, shall pay them their black wages.

18. Staff.
The Gentiles once, got to the height of sin,
And fullness of the (a) Saved come to Light,
The (b) Elder Brother ( Jew) shall straight com in
And mourn for that he had no sooner sight.
Their coming in, shall be the Gentiles Light:
Nor till that time, will Sun again be bright.
(a) When the Gentiles, as a woman big bellied, has brought forth the F^lnesse
of her spiritual womb, then shall all Israel be saved. Romans 11. 25. 26. Hereof
read in 1. part, at Iudahs king Ozia^, there the 11.

(b) I allude unto the Parable, Luke, 16. 11. etc. By the Elder son, I
understand the Jew; by the younger son, the Gentile: the Gentiles sprung
specially of Iaphet, the Jews of Shem, and both of them sons to Noah: who as
a Giant refreshed with wine, rose from the wine: giving Shem the Privilege in
the first place, but plainly telling Iaphet that he should in time obtain
Shems Privilege.

When the Prodigal Gentile was received home to eat of the fat Bullock, and
well liking Sacrifice Jesus, the Jew stubbornly stood without the spiritual
Tent, refusing to come in^^y, they have refused hitherto to come into the
spiritual banquet, and to communicate with us. But the Fullness of the
Gentiles once accomplished, then shall Israel be called to the Faith of Christ
Jesus: who perceiving that Messiah was slain before by them; they shall wayle
Family by Family, with a great Lamentation, Zech. 12. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.
Upon which humiliation, a Fountain shall be opened to David's house, for sin
and uncleanness. Chap. 13. 1. etc. Their Fall brought a blessing to the
Gentiles, but their Rising shall bring much glory to such, as will walk in
their light Romans 11. 12. 15.

This their Rising, the Apostles were not ignorant of, who (the last time that
ever they asked a question of Jesus) did demand, If so he would at that time
Restore the Kingdom to Israel, ACT. 1. I well know that some (otherwise godly
and learned) have blamed the Apostles there, for exspecting a worldly Kingdom:
but ( Tantorum pace) I dare not think that the Apostles are blame-worthie:
nay, I deem them praise-worthie, who had so special care for their own
peoples good.

First, If they dreamed that Israel should have restored to them a Kingdom not
only spiritual, such a dream cannot be infringed: nay, read the Prophets
attentively, and they insinuate a Kingdom not only spiritual.

Secondly, they saying Will thou at this time Restore the Kingdom to, Israel,
what answer does Jesus return? does he reprove them? No: what says he? Thus
he answers, It is not for you to know the times or seasons, which the father
has put in his own power. He is so far from denying the Kingdom they
dreamed of, as he does plainly grant it. He grants it by answering only to the
Time, wherein they exspected such Restoration: as though he should say, You
are greedy of understanding, WHEN the Kingdom I shall be restored: the Time
thereof is in the Fathers hand, neither is it necessary for you to know: look
you to your own present business, etc. This I take to be open and plain enough:
specially, if we remember that in the next place before, He had taught them
the things that concerned his kingdom, immediately whereupon, they demand
only the Time of Isreal's Restoration, and only he answers to the Time, as
granting their meaning of the Kingdom. If they had now erred in Judgment, I
cannot think, but he would not have ascended before he had reformed it:
considering the holy Ghost afterward was not sent down, so much to teach
them any New thing, as to bring unto their remembrance The things he had
before taught.

First, God dwelled in Shems Tent, even in the midst of Isreal's People, and
such Gentiles were blessed, as had recourse unto them.

Secondly, God has inhabited amidst the Gentiles, and such Jews have been
happy as have had recourse to them.

Thirdly, God will again dwell amidst the Jews; and blessed shall such Gentiles
be, as gather themselves unto them. Thus the Lord concludes both under Sin,
that on both he may have mercy: and that neither may swell in any thing of
their own; he has shut up all in unbelief, that so he may have mercy upon
all: The first shall be last, and the last shall be first. Oh the deepnes of
the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
Judgments, and his ways past finding out.

19. Staff.
Jews called once, and all the number ron,
Rushing from Heaven, shall (a) fire on the world.
The (b) Good (living) in Clouds shall meet the Son:
But wicked rowt, shall in the fire be whorld.
Then (c) Judgment comes, and there an end of all.
To God for grace, it rests that we (d) call.
(a) After the Mystical Body of Jesus, (consisting of Jew and Gentile) shall
be accomplished, down shall fire fall on the World. Profane Prophets tell of
Atlas, his sustaining the Earth on his shoulders: but sure I am, that the
Elected Jew, and Elected Gentile, are the Pillars of the whole world. So soon
as these Elected are removed, so soon the world falls and perishes.

(b) The Faithful that then shall be living, (1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.) shall in a
moment be changed, (1. Cor. ^5. 51. 52.) and together with the Faithful before
deceased, shall be lifted up on high to meet Jesus in the Clouds. Thus the
Faithful shall be ^ree from the power of that devouring fire, what time the
Infidels and false counterfeit Christians, shall frye in the flame: that fire
being the gate unto the ever-burning fire of Hell.

(c) JESUS (the Judge) mounting his pure white Throne, encompassed with
Thousands of glorious Angels, before him shall come all the Kindreds of the
Earth, and every Soul joined unto his Body, must abide by his Judgment.
First, he will separate his Sheep from stinking Goats, (the cloak of
Hypocrisy now comes off) and having culled his Elect from the Reprobate, he
shall bid the Chosen of his Father, Enter into the kingdom prepared for them
whereupon, they shall mount upon his glorious T^rone, and sit down with JESUS
their Head. R^vel. 3. 21.

Christ having seated in unspeakable glory his Mystical Body, he then turns
to the Goats on his left hand, bidding them, Depart accursed into everlaesting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Matthew. 25. 41. This voice as it
passes from Christ the Head, so shall it be subscribed unto, by the voice of
his Mystical members: and therefore Paul plainly affirms, that The Saints
shall Judge the World and the Angels, 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3. Let the Devil and his
Angels, ey, all his Coapa^tners praunce it here while they may: let them here
abuse the Faithful, (Saints by calling) by robbing them, smiting them,
murdering them, yet withal let them know, that after they have had Their Day,
JESUS and his members shall have Their Day, what time the Devil and his Goatish
Corporation shall from their mouths receive Judgment, irrevocable Judgment, by
being adjudged to Hell-fyre for ever.

All this considered, how had we need to be sober and watchful in Prayer;
that so, when others shall cry like fools, Cover us oh Hills and Mountains,
we may then boldly lift up our heads in the Testimony of a good Conscience,
knowing that, that day shall be the day of our Redemption, the day of our full
deliverance from all evil.

After this glorious day, all Creatures (under degree of reason, Romans 8. 21.
22.) do after a sort groan, because then they shall be freed from their
present corruption, which seized upon them through our sin. How much more
should we groan and hunger after this Great day of the Lord, what time all
tea^es shall be wiped from our eyes: Nay, if we have the first fruits of the
Spirit ( Romans 8. 23.) we will and do sigh after this Day.

Oh my God, thou knows (even Thou knows) that my Soul leapeth for Joy at the
recordating that Day. Oh sweet Jesus, thou knows that I am in some
comfortable measure (sweet Lord, increase that mesure) willing, yea, desirous
to be conformed and made like unto thee by sufferings, and that because of the
glory laid up for thy members, which in that day shall be revealed. Oh sweet
Comforter, thou Holy Spirit, Spirit of Illumination and Sanctification, thou
testifies unto my Spiri^e (Romans 8. 16.) that in Christ Jesus, and by virtue of
his once sufficient suffering, I am reconciled unto the Father: and thou sweet
Spirit opens my mouth with boldness to Call, yea, cry upon God as upon a
merciful Father, ( Galat. 4. 6.) and that with full assurance of obtaining
every thing is necessary for Soul and Body. Merciful Father, so behold me
continually in thy Son (my Savior) Christ Jesus, as through him continually,
I may receive an ever-flowing Fountain of Light and Holiness, until I be made
perfect in my all sufficient Head Christ Jesus. And hereunto (sweet Father)
make me continually to be watchful, because I am uncertain at what hour
thou will come, unto Judgment universal or particular. And hereunto (Oh my
God) stir up all thy Elect, (Jew and Gentile) namely, to be sober and
watching in Prayer, that so, come thou at the first, second, or third hour, we
all may be found well employed in our several sanctified Callings, Amen: for
the glory of thy own great Name, So be it. Come quickly, sweet Jesus, Amen.

(d) Because we have no promise of obtaining any good thing at IEHOVAHS hand,
without calling upon his Name, by true, lively, and effectual Prayer,
therefore I have afterward set apart a directorie unto Prayer: by whose
Introduction and Form, all Novices in faith may be the easier allured to so
holy an exercise: an exercise neglected of this brutish Idolatrous age, wherein
either People use it not at all; or else (by the suggestion of a false Spirit)
they in the room thereof do substitute a false kind of Invocation,
consisting in Vain Repetitions and ignorant Babbling, thinking (like
Idolatrers) that their corporeal speeches shall merit. Leaving that small
Tractate to his peculiar place, I here (through the assistance of my good God)
do put an end to the Synopsis of holy Hystory. What is (in an^ competent sort)
beseeming the worthiness of the Subject, for that give thou praise unto him,
that gives knowledge from above liberally, without dashing the Receiver in
the teeth. What any way is vnbeseming the Argument, that shall be mine own, and
yet, by Gods grace, no sooner of me seen then disclaimed as an alyane and
bastardly fruit. And so beseeching my good God to pardon all my wants, and to
give to the Reader holy Judgment, I here end.

PSALM. 119. 130. The Entrance into thy words ( oh Lord) shows Light, giving
understanding to the simple.
FINIS.
The whole of that which has been taught may be resolved thus.
All the Doctrine of the Bible divides it self, into the doctrine of
Generation. Degeneration Regeneration


The doctrine of Generation does divide it self into the Creation Of Creaturs
besides Man Of Man himself.


The doctrine of Degeneration or mis-creation, divides it self into 1. The
fall of a most excellent Creature before Man. 2. The fall of Man, together with
inferior Creatures.


The doctrine of Regeneration, or Recreation, divides it self into 1. The
Restoration of Man. 2. The Restoration of inferior Creatures.


The work of Creation, craving the Father to Do it.

The work of Mis-creation, craving the Son to Recover it.

The work of Recreation, craving the Spirit to Confirm it.

Thus that One God, distinguished into Father Son holy Ghost
In One work is after a threfold sort occupied: but man does not mark this.

To the Tri-vne God be all Glory.
A PREFACE TO Prayer, by way of Dialogue.
Qu. Have you penned the subsequent Form of prayer, to the end that any other
should think they had well prayed, in having read or said the same over?

Ans. No: Saying over words is no more Praying, than reading over words is
Preaching. As the Gift of Preaching is an immediate utterance of the Lord his
will conceived in the heart by the spirit of Jesus: so is the Gift of Prayer
an immediate utterance ( Vocal or Mental) of things presently conceived in the
heart, by the Spirit of Jesus. For this cause does Paul tell the Galatians 4.
6. that whom God adopteth in Christ, to them he^ gives the sprit of Christ:
even to this end, that he may stir up the Heart of the adopted to cry, Abba,
Father: that is, To call vehemently upon God, as upon a merciful Father, not a
Tyrant or Judge. And because none can truly pray, that have not this Spirit,
as also, because no Requests ( Vocal or Mental) is true Prayer, that is not
conceived and suggested by the spirit of God, therefore Paul, Romans 8. 26.
plainly (putting himself in the number) ^aith, We know not how to Pray as
we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us: that is, The Spirit
of Iesvvs puts into the mouth of our spirit what to pray. To prescribe
therefore and enjoyne Setvvordes, is to strip the Spirit of his office, and the
way to quench our Spirit.

Object. Every one has not knowledge to pray, therefore set forms do help
such.

Ans. True: and so do the written set Scriptures help such: but yet it
follows not, that that is prayer it self: The help to Prayer and Preaching,
is not our Prayer and preaching it self: the first is a Cause, the second the
Effect: no Cause and his Effect are the same: every halfe-pennie Sophister
knows that. Secondly, where you say, Every one has not knowledge to pray,
thereto I answer: every one that is adopted (as before) has the spirit of
Jesus: every one that has that spirit, has a speaking (not a dumb) spirit,
a spirit of knowledge and holy Light.

Object. But every one (who is to be hoped to have Gods spirit) cannot utter
words orderly as were to be wished.

Ans. That is besides the Question: the Question is this: Can every one of God
his children (meaning of aged Persons) pray rightly? I have said, they can.
Now, for praying so orderly as were to be wished, I grant, that young ones in
Christ Jesus cannot pray so fully and methodically, as these that have spent
some years in Christ his School. Children cannot speak as do Elder persons:
yet Children (as well as Elder persons) can cry unto the Parents upon the feling
of some Want: even so can the youngest Babe in Christ. That, the blessed
Apostle teaches, ( Romans 8. 15.) when he says, that the Adopted do cry: as
also ( Verse, 26. 27.) when he affirms, that the Spirit teaches us to pray
with groans unutterable, the meaning of which groans is well known to God:
for he is not ignorant of the meaning of his own spirit. And most gross
headed are such, as think that any words please God, but what he himself
first breathes into our hearts by his spirit: for he only accepts the fruits
of his own spirit, the fruits of his Sons spirit: which first fruits are
the sanctifier of our whole lump. Otherwise to think is flat Idolatry, and
deroga^orie to the spirit of our only Sacrificer JESUS.

Quest. Do you then simply condemn all such as use the words of our Savior,
as they are set down?

Ans. No: S. Peter (1. 4. 11.) says, If any man speak, let him speak as the
words of God. Better words than our Savior, than the Apostles, than the
Prophets have used, we cannot use: nay, we must learn to speak as they
before us have spoken, as in other speech, so specially in Prayer, which is, An
holy speech with God. Whosoever shall use all or any of our Saviors words
according to knowledge, and that by the instinct of God his spirit, which
Spirit teaches the soul, what is most fit and necessary for the time, to him
I say, Go in peace. But if any for customs sake, and of a foolish
superstitious affection to the words, shall use them, or any other form of
speech in the Scriptures, of such I say, They are no better than Idolaters,
Magi^al inchautaters, neither know they what prayer means. Two sorts of
People offend against our Savior his form of Prayer: the one sort are such,
as through a Romish custom do value all their other prayers dead and
unprofitable, if so they do not annex it: the other sort are such, as think it
utterly unlawful (because the same is repeated) for to use them words for
Prayer. If our Savior ( Mark 14. 39.) did at his second time of praying, use
the same words he had before used, then why should the same in any Faithful
their use, be offensive to us? But as our Savior there using the same words did
it, because his case was one and the same unchanged, so let us learn then, to
use the same words, when our case is the same: otherwise, we shall make holy
Words, but profane Idols.

Concluding therefore, that Prayer is a povvring out of our soules-feeling
according to the present motion of God his spirit: as also, that Neither old
words nor new words are acceptable to God, otherwise then they are sent up
to God the Father, in the name of Jesus, and that by the immediate work of
the spirit: I now come unto our Savior his Exemplar of Prayer, ( Math. 6.)
consisting 1. of a Preface, in these words: O our Father which art in Heaven.
2. of a Supplication in these words: Hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come,
thy vvil be done in Earth as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our detters: And lead us not
into tentation, but deliver us from evil. 3. It consists of a Reason, why
Prayer is offered up only to God, in these words: For thine is the kingdom,
and the power, and the glory, for ever. 4. Of Faiths Signet or Seal in this
word, Amen, or So it is.

The first part of the Preface. O our Father,
OH, dull heart, untoward Soul, why art thou so lumpish and so heavy? trust
in God thy deliverer: cast out, yea breath strongly out, what God his spirit
has conceived in thee, o my heart.

Sweet Father, when thou by thy powerful word had created all Creatures for
Man his use, then thou created Man and Woman to use them. Man thou did make
of the earth, woman thou took from Man's side, by drawing from thence a Rib,
whereof thou builded Her, that she unto him might be an Helper. And so (having
put thy Image in them) thou placed them in Eden, yea, in the garden of Eden,
the beauty of the whole earth, unto them thou gave two Commandments: the
first, That they should dress the garden: the second, That they should not
eat of the tree entitled, The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and so they
should live, whereof thou gave them an other Tree, sacramentally called, The
tree of Life: but if they disobeyed, then in the Day of such disobedience,
They should die. But thy commandments were soon broken: for Satan (adversary
to thy glory and Man's welfare) did even in the same day possess the Dragon
(the subtillest beast of the field) and speaking with the Beasts mouth, Woman
neglected her Calling, and with an idle ear stood harkening unto the Serpents
voice, by whose subteltie, she was soon drawn to break the other
commandment; and then by Her was man also carried into Transgression. Sin so
seazing on their Bodies substance, the body became Corruptible, and Corruption
effected the period of death. Sin seazing (not on the Substance, but) on the
Faculties or powers of the Soul, thereby it came to pass, that their souls
were Powerful in the ways of perpetual death, but unable to all Good.

Sweet Father, as their Creation was the Creation of the Matter whereof all
Mankind is come; so, this fearful Fall was not only to them Two, but to Me
and all Mankind: considering we were then enclosed in ` their loins. A
fountain of gall, can send forth no sweet waters: nor could we be borne Holy,
that were conceived in Sin. As is the Root, even such are the branches, nay,
our Actual sins do testify, that that Original sin was convayed unto us in
our Nature: by reason whereof, I and All Mankind have been justly under thy
Curse. Oh that we should fall from thee our Creator, from thee our Father,
that of base earth did make us glorious creatures stamping in our souls thy
Image, whereof justly we were deprived: carrying upon us (in stead thereof)
the Black unholy Image of Satan.

But thou Our sweet Father, did thou utterly leave Mankind to be damned with
Satan? Oh, no. Thou soughtest up our fore-parents ( Adam and Heuah) and
Catechized them: freely, promising unto them, that of woman's Seed one should
come, by whom the seed of man and woman should overcome Satan. When the
fullness of time was expired, thou accordingly did send thy Son made of a
woman, who in our Nature triumphed over Sin, Death, Hell, Satan, and so
finaly sits at the right hand of Majesty, making continual intercession
for all such of Mankind, as do come unto thee (oh Father) by him: in and by
whom, Salvation only is come unto Jew and Gentile.

Thus, when of a Father, we had justly made thee our Foe, it pleased thee,
sweet Father, to appoint a Mediator betwixt thee and us, that so by him, thou
and we might be reconciled and made one. Oh Mercy of mercies, oh thou
fountain of mercy, how are we bound unto thee our Father, our Father by
Creation, our Father by Redemption: in Mercy, twice a Father: but we in
Obedience, not once worthy the name of Children. But so it has pleased thee,
to call out a company of Mankind (and amongst them Me, most unworthy) to
whom it has pleased thee to Seal thy Love unto their hearts by thy Spirit,
thy sanctifying Spirit.

This testimony of thy Spirit unto our Spirits, causes us to open our mouths
boldly unto thee, as children to a father, not doubting but thou will give to
us whatsoever is good and necessary for body and soul.

Earthly Fathers (though wicked) will commonly give good things unto their
Children, how much more thou,

The second part of the Preface. Which art in Heaven.
Who art in Heaven, and therefore art Heavenly in thy Gifts, and excellent in
all thy works: Who also, as thou art in Heaven, (as a King in his royal
Throne) so have thou all power in Heaven and Earth to serve at a beck. Many
Earthly Fathers, though they be vvilling, yet are they unable to help their
Children: but thou art as Able, as vvilling, and therefore Can and will cause
all things (even sin and al) to turn unto the best of such, as are called
according to thy purpose, to be to thee Sons and Daughters adopted. I believe
Lord, Lord help my unbelief: increase my faith, and teach me truly how to
pray: yea, let all thy Sons and Daughters, see thy Fatherly face, thy
Heavenly face, and that thou neither Can nor vvil forsake such as do trust in
thy power, and are contented to lay themselves down under the sheilter of thy
wings.

The first Petition of the supplication Hallowed be thy Name.
MErciful father; thy Name is mighty and excellent amongst the very Heathen,
but who do Sanctify thy Name? The Heavens and firmament, yea, all the visible
creatures do make known thy name of Power, thy name of wisdom, thy name
Eternal, thy names Provident, Bountiful, etc. Every Barbarian (oh Father) by
the little Light of Nature left in the soul vndestroied, is brought to
acknowledge that there is a God, who is the Cause of al Causes, and gives
Being unto al cretures: but do they herewithall Hallow thy name, so graven in
the fore-heades of all Creatures visible? Alas, no: All this sight sanctifies
neither eye, heart, nor hand: thy Law is only a perfect teacher, giving holy
light to the spiritual blind, and thy word is that Truth, wherewith man is
first made holy, that so he may Hallowe thy Name, thy Nam^ plainly written
upon the former creatures, but more plainly characterized within thy holy
Church, and that in the word and Sacraments. Therein (oh Lord) thou have
evidently to Ear and Eye, propounded Jesus crucified, Jesus the only
Redeemer, the only Mediator, in and by whose blood, thou rests satisfied for all
these, that come unto thee in his Name.

Oh merciful Father, how largely have we Vn-hallowed thy Name, both in the
common Cretures, in the word, and in the Sacraments: we have looked upon the
Heavens, the Earth, Sun, Moon, Stars, Trees, Grass, Flowers, Beasts,
Birds, Fishes: but have we therein spirituallie discerned thy Power,
wisdom, providence, kindness? Nay, we have clothed and fed our bodies with
diverse of thy wonderful works, but have we there withal hallowed thy Name
in the same? yea, we have meddled with thy Word and Sacraments, but with what
blind eyes, and dull hearts? Oh Lord, shame and confusion belongs unto us, not
only for not Hallowing thy Name, but also, for Vn-hallowing and profaning of
thy Creatures, Word, Sacraments, and so consequently unsanctified thy Name in
the same. Oh Lord, by our rude behavior, we have labored to obscure thy Name,
to bury it in darkness, by not discerning, and orderly hallowing it. Yea, that
which more is, we have often remembered thy Name, but then we have taken it in
vain, then we have vnjustlie sworn by the same, etc. as though we had
conspired with Satan, either to bury thy Name in oblivion, or else, by
speaking of it to pollute it, and make it contemptible.

Sweet Father, in Christ Jesus, we by the motion of thine own Spirit, do
therefore beg of thee the Grace, whereby we may be fitted hereafter to hallowe
thy Name, to sanctify thy Name, in beholding the common Creatures, in hearing
thy word, in receiving thy Sacraments. To which end Lord,

The second Petition. Let thy Kingdom come.
LEt thy kingdom come, even the Spiritual government of thy Son and our
Savior Jesus, oh let it Come and be seated in the hearts of thy People.
Hitherto Satan has had too great power over our body, insomuch as our tongues,
hands, feet, ears, eyes, have done service unto Satan, by being subject to
Sin. Our souls (oh Lord) in the faculties and powers thereof, have been
largely serviceable to Sin. We have Minded earthly things: our Memories have
been receptacles of vanity: our Affections have been eger after things cursed
by the Law: insomuch, as in our whole man, Satan (prince of darkness) has had a
Kingdom, and occupied an hellish unholy Kingdom.

Sweet Father, loose the bands of Satan, destroy his power by thy spirit: and
so let thy Kingdom (that consists in Righteousness and Holiness) oh let it
Come; and as a stronger man, let thy Spirit cast out the Tyranny of Sin,
that howsoever it dwell, yet it may never reign in our mortal members. Sweet
Father, thou have begun a good work in us, and shall Satan overturne it?
shall Sin supplant it? Alas, alas, except thou uphold us, we shall deceive
our own souls: Satan, the World, and our Flesh are at league: therefore, as
thou have hitherto caused us to put our trust in thee, so continue thou our
Governor, and cause us to stoup unto the sugered motions of thine own spirit

And for the better building up of our inward man, and the repairing of thine
own Image in us, mercifully give unto us faithful Ministers of thy word: that
so we may receive the blessing of Illumination, and Sanctification, that
accompanies thine own ordinance. And for making room to thine own
Ordinance, vouchsafe to remove from all thy People, such as have run out,
without thy bidding. Remove hyrelings, dumb dogs, and all such cursed plants as
thy right hand never planted: that so an open way being made for thine own
Servants, the Scepter of Jesus may be lifted up in the midst of thy People:
that they seeing the Banner of thy Son displaied, they may bring their sons
and daughters from far, and so give up their names to live Subjects in the
kingdom of thy son Christ.

And inasmuch as thou have commanded Kings, Queens, Magistrates, to be
Nource-fathers and Nource-mothers unto thy Church, Lord we humbly entreat
thee, not only to give such unto us, and others thy poor people, but also, do
thou put the remembrance of that duty in their heads: that they may not dare
(like lewd Nources) to mingle with thy Wine and Milk, their own liquor and
leaven, but that they may count it their Glory, (as Elders) to cast their
Crowns down before thy Throne spiritual, whereupon thou sittes in the
midst of thy Church. Let them know, that thou have appointed the^ to lick up
the dust before the feet of thy Church, yea, to remove the smallest lets to
godliness, so far (let them know) they ought to be from casting their own
inventions, (as stumbling blocks) before the feet of thy people. These of them
that will be brought to honor thee, do thou honor them: but if with horn
and side, they will dedicate themselves to push thy Sons Spowsesse, then
merciful Father, do cut their horns shorter, and break off their power: that
so they may learn, how the kingdom that serves not thee shall perish. And
because, merciful Father, this spiritual kingdom of thine in us will here
never be perfected: we therefore entreat thee to hasten the coming of thy Son,
(our blessed Savior) unto that final doom: that so having gathered his
kingdom of Jew and Gentile into one, he may deliver up the same into thine
hand; and so thou may be al in all. In the mean time (oh Lord) let thy
spirit so guide and lead us in thy truth, as by us

The third Petition. Thy will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
THy will may be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven, by the blessed Angels. Oh
Lord, They could keep their place, but Satan and we would needs forsake our
place. They therefore have continued happy doers of thy will, where Satan and
Mankind have sought their own will: Satan therefore for ever allotted unto the
burning pit, whither likewise whole Mankind had packed, had not thy Son stepped
in and made atonement for me and al such as apprehe^d him by a lively Faith:
which is the Gift, even the flower that buddeth out of our adoption.

Considering all the benefits we have received from thee, oh Lord, why should
not we in the Earth do thy will, as well as do the blessed Angels in Heaven?
They were created once, so were we: yea, we have been created twice, so were
not they: by so much the more are we bound to do thy will, even thy will by
forsaking our own will: yet this will of ours, we are most pressed to prefer
before thy will. Oh false heart, crooked heart, will thou never be duly subject
unto that pure and only holy will of thy Creator, of thy Redemer.

As the Angels do in the heavenly places continually behold thy face, o
Father, so have thou called us in the Earth, to live before thee as in Heaven:
and therefore have thou called us out of the world, out of the kingdom of
darkness, and that to be Citizens with thy Saints in the Earth: who, howsoever
they are in the world, yet are not of the world: howsoever they walk their
pilgrimage in the Earth, yet their conversation is in Heaven, their
conversation is heavenly. As thou adds unto thy Sons Church, such souls as
are appointed to be saved, so (o merciful Father) it is not sufficient for us
to be in thy Church, except thou lead us doing thy will in the Church. It is
not sufficient that we be Citizens of thy spiritual Jerusalem, except we live
according to the Cities Laws and ordinances. Thou having (Lord) given us to
know this, give us power likewise to do it: even to do thy Will as diligently,
faithfully, earnestly as do the heavenly spirits, whom thou have appointed
to minister unto the heirs of Salvation: whom thou have appointed for to
watch over the Church, and over every the faithful. Give unto thy Ministers
grace, to do thy Will in preaching thy blessed Will in season and out of season:
not measuring what man would hear, but what thou have commanded them to speak.
Give unto thy people such Pastors, as may powerfully Exhort; such Teachers as
may truly deliver the Doctrine of faith: such Elders, as may diligently
Govern: such Deacons, as may faithfully Distribute the contribution of the
Saints: such Widows, as may with Merciful Affections attend the sick and
impotent: that so the Ministers of thy Church, performing dutifully thy will,
the Communion of thy People (as it is called the Kingdom of heaven, so) it may
be beautiful as Heaven.

Unto Princes, Magistrates, People, give grace of subjection to thy will, that
all of them seeking thy glory, not their own will, it so may come to pass,
that thy will may be preferred by All, in every their several callings: that
Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, so studying the doing of thy will,
there may be an heavenly concent and harmony of obedience toward thee in the
Earth, as is unto thee by all the blessed spirits in Heaven.

And inasmuch as (oh merciful Father) after we have prayed for the glorifying
of thy great Name, in the establishing of thy Kingdom and doing thy Will: in
as much as after that we are enjoined to pray for the things which necessarily
and immediately concern our selves, we humbly entreat thee to

The fourth Petition. Give unto us this day our Daily Bread.
Give unto us our daily Bread. Bread (oh Lord) is more than we deserve, why
should we then be discontented with bread? Nay (as this years affliction
testifies to our face) we have heretofore so profaned our bodily nuriture, as
fully we have merited an whole deprivation of Bread, much more of other
Creatures. Our intemperat devouring thy creatures in food and clothing: our
shutting heart and hand, in not administering to the needy: our hungring more
for Bodily than Spiritual givings: all of them put together, how have they
deserved that thou should deny every of thy creatures to our bodies: but
thou that sought us up, what time we fled from thee: thou that gave thine own
Son to be made sin for us, what time we had sold our selves to sin; how
much more with Christ shall thou give unto us al things necessary the body; and
the rather, seeing through and by him thou have made us heirs together with
him.

As he therefore has offered up a sufficient Sacrifice for us, and thou
thereby rests satisfied with us, so we therefore are bold (in the testimony of
thy Spirit) to desire that unto us thou would give Our Bread. In thy hand it is
to bless and to curse, with thy fatherly hand, therefore reach forth to us,
that which through him is Ours: and that is Ours, which any way may tend unto
our unfeigned good.

And because we (through the corruption of nature) are not every day a like fit
rightly to use thy Creatures, we humbly entreat thee, to give unto us that
portion of Bread, (and other things necessary as bred) which thou thinks
necessary for That Day. Food, raiment, health, liberty, worldly credit, etc.
As thou perceiues us fit or unfit to use them, even so administer the same unto
us. Give us not poverty, nor riches, feed us with external things convenient
for us: left we being full do deny thee; or lest we being poor should reach
forth our hand unto iniquity. Having much or little, do thou (sweet Father) so
sanctify our hearts, as ever it may be seen, that thy hand reaches forth
and blesses these temporaries unto us.

The fifth Petition. And forgive us our Debts, for we also forgive our Debtors.
OH Lord, we have unhallowed thy Name; we have resisted the Kingdom of thy
Son, we have not done Thy holy will; we have taken Bread and other
temporaries without begging them at thy hands; by reason whereof, we are
deeply run into thy Debt: yea, so deeply are we become indebted, as we are
never able to satisfy for all our Trespasses, much more unable to pay the
uttermost farthing. How then shall we have our Debt-score wyped out?

Sweet Father, thou have promised (that at what time soever a sinner does
repent him from the bottom of his heart) thou will wype all his trespasses out
of thy remembrance. Give unto us therefore humbled souls, repentant hearts,
bleeding hearts, that so every our iniquities may be crossed out of thy book,
and blotted forth of thy remembrance.

This Remission, and blotting out, oh Lord, it cannot fall out by any virtue in
our selves, but by virtue of that humiliation of Jesus, who by thee was broken
for our sins, and by whose stripes we Only are healed: yet (oh Father) in as
much as for whom thy Son was so broken, unto them thou likewise gives contrite
and broken spirits, by virtue of which contrition, (as by a seal) they ever
rest assured of thy free favor in Christ Jesus toward them, we therefore
humbly beg a continuance of Contrition, and all other the comfortable fruits
of thy Sons spirit; by virtue whereof, we may (in all hurlie-burlies of the
world) be possessed with Peace, even with that peace whose bottom no Creature
can sound, and yet the peace wherewith thou possesses thy childrens souls.

With more boldness we cry, Forgive us our debts for we (oh Father) do also
forgive our debtors. If we had not forgiven to others their trespasses,
whereby they became indebted to us, then (oh Lord) how durst we open our
mouths and beg forgiveness of sins, whereby we have been indebted to thee? No
(oh Lord) the merciless shall find Judgment without mercy.

Because we carry merciful hearts toward our brethren, do we therefore
merit mercy at thy hands? No; when we have done the best we can, even yet we
are unprofitable servants. Is this mercy in us a Sign, that thou have been
and still will be merciful unto us? oh yes: such pouring forth of our
Soulesloue unto others, it is because thou first have shed forth thy Vial of
mercy in our souls. Truly merciful we should never be, had not thou given
the Cause thereof, by being first merciful to us. Finding therefore in our
souls that holy Effect of thy spirit, Lord we are bold to open our lips,
and to exspect faithfully the continual Remission of sins past, present, and
to come, whether committed against thee or our Neighbor, in thought, word, and
work.

As (because of our incessant sinning) we therefore do incessantly crave the
remission of our sins, so we add,

The sixth Petition. And lead us not into temptation, but loose us from Evil.
AND lead us not, (sweet Father) into temptation, but do thou still loose us
from Evil. Many are the Temptations and trials wherewithal (necessarily for
manifesting thy wisdom and power, as also, Man's foolishnes and weakness) thou
art to exercise upon us in this life: but (deer Father) howsoever we have
deserved, not only to be Led into Tentation, but also to be Left to our own
selves, in the time of such tentation, yet for the Glory of thy Sons name, by
the which we are called upon, do thou mercifully Loose us from the power of the
tentation. Howsoever we are ^^mpted, yet give us an happy ^ssue out of our
temptations: let us not (with the Reprobate) fall finally into evil.

Satan, the world, our flesh, (oh Lord) they are ever laboring to hurry us to
hell: as strong w^le ^^^rs, they continually lay battery unto our spiritual
walls; Satan and the World without us, our own deceivable Flesh within us:
Enemies without, Enemies within, therefore never able to hold out, except thou
(by thy spirit) do lead us, do deliver us, do loose us and set our hearts at
liberty, that so we may run the way of thy Commandments.

This our Prayer we offer up only to thee.

The first part of the Reason. For thine is the Kingdom.
FOr thine is the ki^^ dome, whether (...) regard the Kingdom of the World,
or the kingdom of the true Church. In, and over the world, thou reigns as a
King, brydling Devils and men, commanding all creatures to ^^os^^hy host, to
whom the very ^^mb creatures are forced to be subject: so that nothing which
has Being in Heaven or Earth, but unto thee the Kingly Creator and Preserver,
it stands a subject, even to thy regiment and order, decreed upon (before all
worlds) in the high Parliament house of Heaven. But in thy Church, thy Throne
of Government is exalted, and upon it thou sittes gloriously encompassed, with
the shining Lamps of thy Spirit, whereby thy subjects are directed. This our
prayer we offer up only to thee, because thine is

The second part of the Reason. The Power.
THE Power: even al Power in heaven and in earth. Only thou art able to give
Power unto us for Hallowing thy Name: only thou art able to plant the Kingdom
of holiness and righteousness: only thou art able to give us Power of Doing thy
vvil: only thou art able to give Bread, and to give power unto Bread and other
temporaries, for nourishing the body: only thou art able of thine absolute
Power to Forgive our sins: only thou art able to Lead us safely through
tentations, and to deliver us from Evil: only thou art our King, and we
subjects professed to thy Kingdom; for whose use thou have and ever will
manifest thy Power.

This our prayer, we offer up only to thee, because, as thine is Kingdom, so
also is Power

The third part of the reason. And Glory.
AND Glory. We offer not up our Prayers unto Angels, Saints, or any other
Creatures, because that were to glorify the Creatures, with that glory which
only is due to the Creator: but as it is only in thee to bless and to curse,
to give or hold back, to save by much or little, etc. so only do we glorify
thy Name, by commending unto thee (our merciful Father) our souls condition.

The fourth part of the Reason. For ever.
NEither is Kingdom, Power, and Glory thine for a Day, Month, year, but for
Age after age, even For ever and ever. Creatures have sparkles of thy kingdom,
sparkels of thy power and glory; and therefore, all their kingdom, power and
glory limited; yea, all of it has an end; and it shall be drawn back to thy
self, specially what time thy Son shall deliver up the kingdom into thine
hands, and thou shall be Al in All. To thee therefore be al kingdom, power and
glory for ever.

The Seal of Faith. Amen.
SO it is: even so it is, maugre devils and men. Thy Seal remains sure: for
thine own knows thee, and thou art known and believed of them, Amen.

BEcause Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songues, have much affinity with
Prayer, therefore I have thought it not amiss, in the next place to add two
such Sonets: always remembered, that nothing I have or ever shall write, be
joined in use with the Canonical Scriptures in the public service of my God.
Such joining of our patcheries (for no better name I will give them, in
comparison of the holy Canon) I call nothing but a saucy Joining our Posts, by
IEHOVAHS Posts. Ezekiel. 43. 8.

A Souls Lamentation.
DVll Soul, dull soul, affections hard as Steel,
Untoward Soul for praising of thy God:
His works and gifts how can thou see and feel^
And still in way of forlorn persons plod?
Awake my Soul, go tune thy Instrument,
And sing thou out thy heavy h^a^^s Lament.
Thy Mind in ADAM rightly understood,
But ADAMS Fall has thee with darkness clad:
Thy will in ADAM first Affected good,
And Power to do right things (oh) then thou had.
But Mind perverted, Will affected wrong.
Then only Power to ill, to man did long.
Hereby it comes, thy mind is Dull to right,
Thy will Affecte^h: things displeasing God:
Hereby it comes thou Do with all thy might,
Lewd things, full M^riting IEHOVAHS Rod.
Nothing is right that in thy Natures pent
Then tune thy passions, and sing forth Lam^n^.
Lament with me, who feel Sins fyer-brand,
And strain your souls till tears descend amain:
I see Sin does surmount the Ocean sand,
I see Sin does our purest actions stain:
Do all I can, I see all is too ill,
Oh faithles Mind, oh foul untoward Will.
I muse says one, that any damnd should be,
Since God his handiwork is all Mankind:
But more I muse (when I this sin do see)
That any one Salvation should find:
All having fallen, why should not all there lie,
And as they merit damned be and dye.
Oh mercy endless of our highest Lord,
Th^^ sent his Son for ransoming all such,
As who with Faith do mix the written word:
And with his Cross do finally not grutch!
But ingrate Heart, that have that mercy sealed,
And yet more thankfulness have not reveald.
Base heart, more base than Diapasons string,
That sounds below, as savouring naught but clay:
Once rowse thy self, and higher notes do sing,
With free affects do sing Hallelu-iah.
But (oh alas) Sin still in place does throng.
Accursed sin it thwarts me in my Song.
Thy Christ has loved thee and suited thee;
Yet (oh my Soul) how have thou grieved his Sprit^
Alas, alas, long has he woed me,
But in his ways I have had small delight.
How many gifts unto me has he sent,
But retchles I. Oh sing (my Soul) Lament.
With trickling tears, let cheeks bedewed be,
And prostrate fall on Earth thou earthly lump:
What goodness in thy nature do thou see?
Oh wretched man and stupid senceles stump.
A mass of clay, how dare it rush on ill?
Untoward Soul, blind Mind, and crooked will.
Fears thou not him, that is Consuming fire?
Fears thou not him, that ponders every sprite?
Fears thou not him, who will account require?
With ill dare thou his goodness daily quite;
Rent Heart, tear Soul, do all thy powers strain,
So solace shall ensue thy present pain.
This Life is but a vale of misery,
This Life is but a pilgrimage of pain:
Even now a Flower, cut down then by and by,
No certain place, till corpse in Earth remain.
Pack hence foul Pride, and love of earthly toys:
What is it that dead Caesar now enioyes?
Untuned heart, tune thy affections right,
And sing thy sin with he avie warbling note,
Witness thereto, call every Day and Night:
Nor cease thou to put off old ADAMS Coat.
No sooner see a tatter of thy Sin,
But dreary-wise thine Elegic begin.
Thine Elegy begin with dewed cheek,
And draw a base Larg note beseeming it,
For sins Remission from above, do seek:
For souls discharge employ thou all thy wit.
And till (thou soul) in highest heavens be pent,
Do not leave off (poor Soul) to sing Lamen^.
A Souls solace.
YE Children which do serve the Lord,
Your joyful hearts with me afford,
For high extolling JEHOVAH.
From out the Hels, he us redeemd,
what time his love we naught esteemd,
The Dragon so did loose his pray.
Sing forth (my heart) his worthy praise,
To whom thy strength is due always.
For Sin has got his bleeding wound.
Though Sin be vexing thee among,
By Christ his cross yet art thou strong:
His cross has Sin and Satan bound.
Exult my Soul, sing forth his love,
Thy Flesh in Christ is got above:
Thy flesh in highest hevens does reign.
Thy flesh, Jesus has glorifide,
On God his right hand It does bide,
Let Satan rage and roar amain.
Out of the Heavens Satan is thrown,
Lift he his head, Christ knocks him down,
Christ in thy Nature does this deed.
Old Adam lost our natures strength:
New Adam it redeemd at length,
Even Christ who sanctified our seed.
Oh thou my soul, and all within,
Praise thou thy God that pardons sin,
Praise him that seals to thee all good.
Cast forth thy Gauntlet against hels door
Thou in thy God strength more and more:
Satan is conqucred by Christ's blood.
Powers below, Powers above,
Can never alter God his Love,
Rejoice all Faithful then with me.
Tune heart strings for this harm on^e,
Sing forth cause of Souls melody:
No other cause of loye I see.
If worldly man joy in his pelf,
For love of which, he damnes himself:
How should we joy in heavenly wealth?
Their substance dureth but a while.
The thief can easlie them begyle:
But substance ours, is free from stelth.
The Lion strong of Iudahs blood,
He is Lord Keeper of our good,
He is our Treasurer only he.
Let wicked ones feel smart of scant,
The thing is Good, we cannot want:
Therefore Children rejoice with me.
When fire shall all this World consume,
And Air shall filled be with fume:
Rapt up shall be the faithful sort.
When wicked flesh and bones shall fry,
We shall be changed by and by,
And so unto our Christ resort.
From glorious throne he shall us clear,
When Satanas shall roar for fear,
And damned be with wicked men,
Ye little ones, therefore rejoice,
And with me utter forth your voice,
Saying, To God be praise, Amen.
EPHESIANS. 5. 18 And be not drunk with Wine, wherein is excess, but be filled
with the spirit.
19 Speaking unto your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing and making melody to the Lood in your hearts.

The Epilogue.
THVS (beloved young ones, whom God make full aged in Christ Jesus) I have for
your uses, suddenly scribled up this Breviarie of the Bible. If any shall
hereby emulate, and so put forth a better work it shall not grieve but glad
me: who desires not only to do good my self, but also to occasionate your
good by others. What herein is further to be wisned, that (if God give me once
again to aggresse the Argument) I may live with more leisure to absolve. In
the mean time, use the little thou have, not so much for prattling, (which is
this ages present profession) as for practicing the faith, and thou (in being
faithful in thy little) shall in time be made the owner of much. As many of you
as hold the faith of JESUS in incorruption, vouchsafe to remember me in your
prayers, and the Lord be with your spirits for ever, Amen.

Scholasticis.
QVod hic nimis raptim scripsi, no Animosioribus, sed Neophytorum animulis
conscripsi. Haec a^tem si vos (Scholastici) oculis Lynceis percussuri, Quid? Ne
Aristarchica virgula, hoc vel illud vos temere notetis. Oblatr ant citius
multa, qui nesciunt plurima: nec quis, quam qui Polyphemo coecior, magis
futilis et audax. O tempus, o mores! tempus quidem Graculo garrulius, loquax vt
Echo: insipidum autem, ac omnibus praeeuntibus saeculis insulsius. In ista
Bibliorum Synopsi, multa necessario prius inter se sunt conferenda: postea
quidem, intention ^criori dijudicanda. Error si quis ^vaserit (ac ego quis qui
non errem?) non vt ille tegendus ad fidei canonicae obliterationem, sed per
Charitatis normam mature detegendus velim. Fidei analogian si per totum
foeliciter servaui (quod quidem a Deo Patre saepius ipse petij) hoc est quod
volui and opto. Legatis, imo vero perleg atis, sed semper Spiritus sanctus
vobis ad^it, quo vo^ secundum Theologiae gnomon, dijudicetis. Amen.

Possumus multi calomos vetare Possumus pauci calamis praeire, Possumus nulli
maculis carere, dixit HENOCHVS CLAPHAMVS Anglus, testis Jesus.

ERRATA.
Page 13. Line 17. for has, read had. page 14. l. 20. for future, read future.
page 18. l. 30. for ^ect Elo^^^ read fect. Elohim, page ^9. l. 11. for rom,
read from^ page 40. l. 6 for Egyptians (some, read Egyptians, some page 49. l.
24. for Chron. read Exodus page 511 l. 28. for 1. Cor. 1. 2. read 1. Cor. 10. 1.
2. page 55. l. 14 Orthotomein, read Ortho-tomein, page 61. l. 14. for Aholiah,
read Aholiab, page 69. l. 16. for 4. read 40. page 73. l. 36 for making, read
make, page 77. l. 2. for Ke^^m, read Kerem, pa. 91. l. 27. 8. 9. 30. 3^. for
Cb^di^h well prophesied: roundly taking up Ed^m-^sau for la^ghing at his
brothers captivitie^ Read, Obad^^h might now well prophecy, roundly taking up
Edom Esau for laughing at his brothers Captivity. But transport these words to
page 96. line 29. placing them betwixe Mattaniah and ( b). Page 95. l. 8. for
against, read against, and l. 12. for years, read year page 120 l. 28. for
first Staff 30. read first part, Staff 30. page ^59. lin. 22. for Prove. 28.
read Prove. 28. 13.


