AN ABSTRACT OF FAITH:

Grounded on Moses, and applied to the Common Creed; plainly and briefly.

By Henoch Clapham, in the beginning of his third years bands.

Heb. 11. 6. He that comes unto God, must believe that God is, and that he is
a rewarder of them that seek him. Mark. 9. 23. All things are possible to him
that believes. Bernard. Lib. 5. de Considerat. Fides ambiguum non habet: aut
si habet, Fidem non est, sed opinio. Faith admits no doubt: for if it do, then
it is not Faith, but opinion.

Printed 1606.

TO THE THRICE-Excellent, HENRY, Prince of Wales, etc.
PArdon sweet Prince, pardon my bold present;
The Hope we have your Excellency shall
Prove to our Church, a matchless Instrument,
For Gospels good, and Superstitions fall:
That, and some Grace, vouchsafed to my bands,
Emboldens me, to give this to your hands.
Some scandalized have my Christian Faith,
That so hood-winked Maiestrates may be:
Though skils not much, what Papal-mynor says
Yet duty mine, to cause hood-wink't to see:
This may reprove such foreheads as be flinted,
my faith b'ing such, as Scotland sometimes printed.
Yea, Privileged by our King. An. 1595. and 96.
England's state have licensed the same,
The selfsame faith sparsed throuhgout my books
Which here I properly An Abstract name,
And unto Moses for the trial looks:
The method has my prisond-sense for mensure,
But read sweet Prince, and then give out your sensure.
Your Graces poor Orator, Henoch Clapham.

AN ABSTRACT OF FAITH. etc.
TO the end, that no soul in Court or Country be perverted touching the truth
of my Faith, by the unconscionable reports of some incorrigible Seorsi^
ducentes.
Seducers, I offer here to Prince and People, a sum of my Faith; with
evident proof from Moses, for the grounds thereof. And thus (with Ancient
Believers) I begin.

SECTION. 1.
I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.
Belief is manifold, according to the thing believed, be it true or false: for
false belief, it is compared to a man dreaming of Gold, but being awaked, he
finds a lie in his right hand. As for true belief, it ouer-reacheth Fancy
and Opinion, and is a persuasion settled upon Truth; as when one beleiueth
rightly on God, and the things of and from God: And so, Belief or Faith
generally considered, is a true assent to that which is, be it a thing of
Promise or Narration. For much have they erred, that teach, how all Faith
respects a promise. Heb. 11. 3
Through Faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word of God, as
Moses declares in the first of Genesis; which is a thing of Narration, not of
Promise, seeing the world had his existence before man, and therefore could not
be promised to man.

Touching Faith apprehending a Promise, it is twofold, according to the nature
of the Promise, and that is Eternal or Temporary; as it apprehends things
of eternal abiding nature, or things that be but momen taine. 2. Cor. 4. 18.
This latter being of things visible, such as Moses describes in the six
days creation: The other, of things invisible and spiritual, such as in the
sacramental Tree of life, was taught to Adam in Genesis 2.

When I say, I believe in God, (for every soul must believe for it self) it
is, as if in more words I should say, I rest and build upon God in all my
thoughts, words, and deeds. The Latin therefore is not, Credo in Deo, but in
Deum, I believe upon God. Which God, Moses delivers unto us in his first
speech, when he says, God created the heavens and the earth in the beginning.
The Oneness of his Essence he teaches in the word Bara He created; that is,
He the one God: and in the Noune Aelohim, of plural Number, signifiyng
Mighties, he insinuates the Trinity of Persons; as if the words should run
thus: He, the Mighties, did create. Which Trinity was not obscurely
represented in the three Angels repayring to Abraham, the father of true
Believers: and in the clearest Scriptures they be termed Math. 28. 1. John. 5.
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: or, Father, Word, and Spirit. Which Moses
delivers evidently enough (if scales hung not upon our eyes) when he
teaches, that one God to create heavens and earth, by his Word, and the
Spirits motion upon the face of the creature. With curious Scholastique points,
touching the sacred Trinity in unity, Moses deals not to open view, neither
does this ancient Creed of the Christian Church. The first Churches were
satisfied with that measure of Fayths-confession, which our times will not
admit: So wrathful and uncharitable be our times, learned of the man of Sin.
The first most notorious Schism in the Church, did grow from the curious
search, which curious spirits did make after the bottomless depth of this
unity in Trinity; thereby adding to the Creed: But, the secret things (says
Moses in Deuteronomy. 29. 29.) belong to the Lord; and to the Lord I leave the secrets
of the Godhead; as the ancient Church of God has done before me.

Touching this one God, it is to be believed, first, that he is a Father:
Secondly, an Almighty Father. His Fatherhood is twofold: First, as he has
Created man; secondly, as he has Purchased man after his backsliding from the
excellency of his Creation: Both these, Moses does remember in Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
when as he says, Is he not thy Father that has purchased thee? He has made
thee, 2. Chro. 3. 17.
and proportioned thee. These two Fatherhoods are to be Pillars to every Temple
of the Holy Ghost, as Jachin, signifies Stablished: and Boaz, in strength.
Jachin and Boaz were Pillars to the material Temple.

The Almightinesse of God, is taught of Moses in the very term Aelohim, as
before: and unto Abraham, he is called El-shadaj, Almightie-sufficient; because
no soul ought to doubt (as not of his goodwill, seeing he is a Father; so
neither) of his Might and s^fficiencie, for bringing to pass, whatsoever he
wills in heaven or in earth; specially for mankinds good. Whence it
necessarily follows, that no part of my Faith is to be fastened upon Angel or
Man, or any other Creature, be he as big as Behemoth, Job. 40.
or as scaly as Leuiathan: seeing the greatest might and strength of the
creature, is not so much as a Mite to a Mountain; as also but borrowed of the
Creator, to be drawn back (as breath is out of the nosethrils) even at his
pleasure.

Hebr. 11. 28, 29.
Moses by Faith in this willing Almighty-sufficiencie, did ordain the Pas-ouer
and effusion of blood, least he that destroyed the first borne in Aegipt,
should touch them of the Church, Exodus, 12. And his people by this Faith,
passed through the Red sea, as by dry-land; which when the Aegiptians assaied
to do, they were drowned. Exodus 14. Nor do I believe, that our late passage
through the Red sea of human blood, (mixed in conceit) with Fire and
Gunpowder, did befall us by other means, then by such Faith truly fastened upon
God the Father his willing Alsufficiencie. In the lack whereof, our Romish
Aegiptians (deuisors of fast and loose for advantage) did perish; About 200.
years they have bin shut up from deceiving people as before: and 800. years
more ensuing this present, they must more and more be bridled. My ground is S.
John's Revelation.
and more and more must perish, although by their own hand and own inventions.

In the belief of this, I heretofore opposed in more then an ordinary manner,
howsoever I have been diversely smitten for it, (the Lord lay it not to their
charge) and the same I am still, howsoever I expect for that the more hard
entreatie, where Amalekes may, prevail. But he that began that Faith, augment
it in me, and I ear long, shall see the salvation of our God. God has laid
the Axe now to the root of that Tree; I hope our high right honorable senate
of Parliament, will take the present occasion of cutting it down.

Touching the Creation of Heaven and Earth, Moses has spoken plainly in the
first and second of Genesis. But there he has briefly touched the Visible
Creature, Spheres, and Stars above; and the Earth, with her Seas and
continents below: But afterward he reuealeth the Invisible creature,)
invisible in the own proper nature, because Spirits) namely, the Angels,
appointed of God for ministering spirits unto the good of the heirs of
salvation, as also for the execution of corrections and punishments upon the
transgressors: So that, for the good of the obedient, the visible and invisible
creature is appointed: The Angels to pitch their Tabernacles of defense round
about them; and as Job 5. 23 etc.
Eliphaz notes from the times of Genesis, the stones and beasts of the field
etc. to be at league with them.

Lord increase my Faith unto obedience.

Section. 2.
And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord: which was conceived by the holy
Ghost, borne of the virgin Mary: suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified,
dead and buried. He descended into Hell. The third day he rose again from the
dead; he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God: from
whence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.
AS the first part of Belief touched God the Father; so, the second touches
his Son, the Word; by who^ he made all things. Which Son is termed Jesus;
that is, Savior: and Christ or Messiah; which signifies Anointed; because he
was of God the Father, anointed to be the Savior of Adam and his chosen-seed,
which in Adam had sinned (through the means of Satan, an Apostate Angel) and
so could not be saved, but by him that could abace himself as low, as Adam and
the seed of his loins, had sinned hie: seeing Contraries must cure Contraries.
Mankind had sinned highly, in that being but earth, he labored proudly to be a
God. The cure then must be wrought by God on high, humbling himself (in the
behoof of man) so low as the earth. The Son of God did this: first, by
assuming or taking upon him the very nature of man, body and soul. Secondly,
by undergoing the smart of our sins, and dying in our nature for us. Thirdly,
in rising again from under the decreed death. Fourthly, in ascending up to the
Father, carrying our sins captive: And fifthly, by showing himself the Judge.
As the latter Scriptures (being but commentaries upon Moses) do plainly show
all this; so Moses taught this as truly, though not so openly.

1 That the Son of God should assume our nature for such purpose, Moses does
intimate in Genesis 3. 15. when he says, That the woman's seed should break the
Serpents head. And of him the Apostle Galat. 4* 4.
Paul expounds it: As it is said, The woman's seed (not man's, because man's
hand should not cut this Stone from the Monntaine) it should triumph over the
Serpent of Hell, Dan. 2.
which then had acted the Serpentine beast of the field: So, the Woman's seed,
being only passive, could not do that otherwise, then it should receive life
from some active power: which if not Man's, then needs it must be of God; seeing
Angels could not undergo the weight of that burden: the Fathers infinite
justice being so to be satisfied in mankindes nature, which had so offended.
Neither is such conception strange in Moses, when as Sarah (Arch-mother of
believers) does by virtue of the Lords promise, conceive and bring forth
Isaac, after it ceased with her to be after the manner of women.

2. 3. Neither any nature, but that which is infinite (namely God) could so
live and die for satisfaction, and raise up our assumed nature for our
justification. All which, Moses has prophetically delivered Heb. 11. 19.
in the parable of Isaac, Genesis 22. There Abraham (hy-father, a figure of our
Hy-father in heaven) has his only Son Isaac (one with our nature, a seed
according to Promise) him he has allotted unto death. The Son obayes. The
first day Isaac dies in Abraham's resolution, (and the will is accepted for the
deed) but after a sort, he received him again from death unto life, and that
on the third day. And his return home again, was as an Ascension from the
earth, unto glory.

4 And as Isaac so returned in a parable from death to life; so, he became the
Son of his right hand, when Ismael stood on the left: and that Foe, was made
his footstool.

5 Which Isaac showed himself in time, a Judge of spiritual quick and dead,
when he gave a perfect judgment (according to the decree of Abram, Malachi. 1.
2. 3.
Hie-father of heaven) in separating between Esau and Iaakob, Romans 9. 23.
this being chosen, and the other forsaken, though both of one bed and
natural generation. Through all Moses, the doctrine of the promised seed
shines, though encompassed with clouds of Ceremonies; the full revelation
whereof awayted the fullness of time, Heb. 11. 40.
God providing that better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect.

The Article touching the second person in the Godhead, thus cleared, some
will ask me, Where in Moses do ye find, that Christ should Descend into Hell
(the place of the damned) there to triumph in his soul? I answer, I find it
not in Moses, neither in Doctrine nor Shadow, for any thing I could ever
observe. That dying, he should descend to Sheol (as the Creed in Hebrew
speaks; or to Hades, as the Greek speaks; or to Inferos, as the Latin
speaks) I find in Moses, seeing he (as all the slain Sacrifices, his
shadows intended) was to go the way of all flesh. In which sense, Jaakob says
thus in Genesis 37. 35. Cabalistically one might say, that the letters in Aeredh,
(that is, Aleph, Resh, and Daleth) in Hebrew numeration 205* they might import
the time of his seed being in Egypt, being much thereabouts so many years.
From the word Reau descend vee* in Genesis 42. 2. Ben-^orion acco^plisheth 210.
years.
Aeredh el-Beni abel Sheo^ah, I will go down to my Son moorning to Sheol;
that is, the place of all flesh: arguing the full estate of the dead, called
also, Being gathered to the Fathers. What he should do in the place of the
damned triumphing in his soul, more then in his body (seeing our triumph is in
both) I know not: Nor have the 4. Evangelists, laying down a plain and open
Narration of Jesus, once spoken it. For the speech of Jonahs and Christ's being
3. days in the Whales belly and earth, that argues his bodies captivity, like
as that of Jonas: it being an estate of Humiliation, rather then of Triumph. To
me, that argument seems sound;

Whither Christ repaired,
he went to bring comfort:
But to the Hell of the damned
he could bring no comfort:
Therefore to the Hell of the damned
he repaired not.
If any approve not my Judgment, more then I do his, I desire him
notwithstanding, to be at peace with me, as I with him: Non omnia vidimus
omnes: Every dissent must not breed a rent. Christ bare our infirmities; and
Charity will make us willing to bear one another infirmity, fulfilling so
the law of Christ. But such is the misery of our days, as every dissent in
judgment (though but about circumstances) begets a Schism, to the pursuing
of one another to the loss of life. Heavenly Father, for thy Sons sake,
plant more love amongst us.

Section 3.
I believe in the Holy Ghost.
WIth the ancient Church, Credo in spiritum sanctum, I believe upon the
Holy Ghost. And because affiance is to be settled upon him, as upon the Father,
upon the Son, therefore the Holy Ghost, God; even One with the Father and the
Son, howsoever proceeding from the Father and the Son; as the Son had his
begetting of the Father; but both of an unutterable manner: for what can we
resemble to the highest?

The Eastern and Greek Church, stands severed in this point from us of the
West: but therefore to be anathematized (of which Anathema hereafter) it
seems unto me, to proceed from zeal beyond measure: seeing in the Primative
Church, some were ignorant, Act. 19. 1. 2.
If so there were an Holy Ghost: and yet were held Disciples, and Beleiuers.

As in the external work to us ward, the Father is said to Create, rather
then to Redeem or Sanctify: and the Son rather to Redeem, then to Create
or Sanctify: so the Holy Ghost to Sanctify, rather then to Create or Redeem.
And for that it is the work of the Father and Son by the Holy Ghost, to
hallow the Creature, namely (mankind elected) therefore Moses introduces Habel
severed from Kain in the holy work of Oblation. Habel was begotten by the same
Adam, and brought forth by the same Heuah; but did the work of Faith, which
Kain did not. And why? because he was not only acted by this Holy spirit (for
so the wicked often be) but for that he had received the same Spirit, as an
earnest penny of Adoption (as all of Math. 20. compared with Chap, 21. 33.
the kingdom of Grace in this life do, at what hour soever they obey their
calling,) which Spirit, as he is holy, so, he sanctified his thought, word,
and work, whereby he is said to please God. And no marvel, seeing the Father
cannot but like the fruits of his own Spirit: even as upon his Suruay of the
six days work, 1. John. 2. 20. 27.
he saw and approved all to be good, and very good.

The operation of this Spirit for mollifiyng the hard heart of man, is
resembled by the Leuiticall Ointment. His virtue of sweetning the soul, and of
making our Prayers redolent and sauorie in the nosethrils of our heavenly
Father, is typed out in the Legal Perfume; the counterfayting and false
application whereof is adjudged to death. So dangerous a thing is it, for any
hypocritically to counterfaite holiness, where the power is lacking: or to
misapply the things of the Spirit, to the profanation thereof, Exodus 31. etc.

Moses terms him Ruach, John. 3. 8.
Wind; not only for filling all things, but also for his free brea^hing
Graces when and where he will; for the beginning and perfecting of our
Regeneration or newbirth. The Father of Heaven, for his Sons sake, vou^hsafe
to power on our (...), plenteously of his Spirit, for the glory of his own
name. Amen.

1 So far touching Faith in God the Father. Son. and Holy Ghost.
2 Now follows what is to be believed touching his Church. 1 First, in
respect of her self once in the whole; Catholiqu^ then in the parts; Communion.
2 Secondly, touching her benefits. 1 First, in respect of this life; and
that is Remission of sins. 2 Secondly, after this life, 1 the Resurrection of
the flesh, 2 Eternal life.



Section 4.
The holy catholic church.
IT is not said, I believe in Ecclesiam Sanctam, in or upon the Church (for
that were to make her the Rock of our salvation, and equal with God) no more
then it can be said afterward, I believe in the remission of sins* etc. Nor
can Credo Ecclesiam catholicam, be truly turned, I believe the Catholic
Church, (for then every Grammarian knows, it should be Ecclesiae catholicae:)
But as in the three last clauses, the verb Esse, to be.
Esse, is understood (as, Credo Remissionem peccatorum Esse: I believe
Remission of sins to be, Resurrection of the flesh to be, Eternal life to
be) so, the words are plainly to be resolved thus; I believe that there is
an Holy Catholic Church, a Comunion of Saints, Forgiveness of sins, etc.
All which clears, that the penners of this Creed, were far from teaching
man to build his Conscience upon men; no, not upon the holy Catholic Church.

It will be objected, that of Israel it is said in Exodus 14. 31. Vajaami^u
baib^uah v^emosheh gnabhao, and they believed in Jehouah, and in Moses his
servant. I answer; First, Learned men (both on Christ's and Antichrists side)
do turn it, Crediderunt Domino and Moseh, They believed the Lord and Moses;
not pressing the letter Beth which often imports, in. Secondly, it may well
be said, that they believed in Moses, respecting the Word of the Lord, which
Moses brought immediately from the Lords mouth to their ears; and yet be far
enough from settling Faith upon Moses, who afterward was found in unbelief
about the Rock in Exodus 17. Even as S. Peter soon after his holy confession,
was found in like state touching Christ, the Math. 7. 24. 25. 1. Cor. 10. 4.
Rock of our Salvation.

It will be again objected, that the Church being Conuened in the name of
Christ, is to be believed so well as Moses. I answer, it is true: for Moses was
not believed otherwise then he brought the Lords warrant; so neither is the
Church. And because the Congregation or Church can, and sometimes will err
through ignorance, therefore the Lord by Moses in Leuit. 4. 13. etc. does
appoint a peculiar Oblation for the whole Congregation of Israel so sinning.
Let God then be true, and every man a liar.

The Church of Israel was National, and in Exodus 19. called of the Lord an
Holy Nation: he having called and culled them from out all people unto
himself; and so were a figure of the Church which Christ at his first coming
into the world, would gain to himself, out of all Revel. 7. 9.
Nations, Tongues, and Kindreds, for woorshipping before his Throne. And herein
was Japhet returned to Shems Tabernacle, as Noah foretold. And the Prodigal
Gentile repaired so to his Elder brothers inheritance (namely, that of the
Jew) as our Savior intimates in a Parable. The Jew (respecting the general)
stands without, murmuring at the Gentiles acception. Heavenly Father,
persuade him to come in, that so thy Two people, may become One, for furthering
thy glory.

This Catholic Church then, is the whole body of people, wheresoever
Catholic a greek word: in English, Universal: and therefore not to be tied
to Rome, or any one place, city, or nation.
Catholiquely. (that is, universally spread upon the whole face of the earth)
gathered from ludahs tribe unto Shiloh himself, as Jaak^b foretold in Genes.
49. 10. when he said, A Tribe shall not leave ludah, nor Lawgiuer from between
his feet, till Shiloh come; then the people shall be gathered unto Him: that is,
to Christ. And whereas some urge from the Epithet Holy, that by holy Catholic
Church, is meant only that part of the Church which is invisible, known only
unto God, each member whereof is Holy indeed, I take it to be an error. First,
for that the ancient Writers, (who best understood their own term,
Catholic) do understand it of the visible Believers wheresoever; as may be
seen, specially in their form of provoking Heretics. Secondly, the term
Holy given unto it, does no more prove, that therefore every soul in the
Catholic Church is indeed Holy, then the same term proves all therefore
in Isreal's people to be Holy indeed, when as they be called, an holy Nation:
For who in the Scriptures shall not perceive, that Israel (howsoever Called to
be Saints) proved still in fact and Faith (for the most part) very profane
and Idolatrous? And that is in deed a Son of perdition mounted in the Temple:
a body of Tares ouergrowing the Wheat-field: Which not observed of many, it
has been cause of much error in disputation, about the visibilitie of the
Church. Even as it follows not, because Jeroboam is a living man, therefore
every member in him is living, or has life in it: for his hand, and some other
parts, may be dead and senseless.

Then will some further object, It follows, that as the National Church of
Israel, and the Provincial Church of the Jews, had one visible Hie-priest
over the whole; so, the Catholic Christian Church is to have one visible
Pastor over it. I answer, it follows not: First, for that One may better
rule over a Province or Nation, then over the whole world. Secondly, for that
God commanded that people to repair three times a year to that One place,
where that Hie-priest was to continue with the Ark of God: but no such
commandment to us. Nay, God has taken away that One place, because in every
place he will be worshipped. Our Melchi-esedek in repect of his Divinity, is
every where; therefore to be sacrificed too every where: and his Mandood is in
the Heavens; therefore Sur sum corda, thither lift we up our hearts.

As Christ is the only head of this Church, and this Church is the whole
Corporation of Believers, of all Nations, Kindreds, and Tongues, standing
before his Throne: so, the life of this Church is his Spirit; and the Spirit
she receives Galat 3. 2. 5. 8.
by the preaching of Faith. Moses teaches this evidently enough, in not only
introducing the Lord himself preaching the doctrine of Faith to Adam and Heuah
in Paradise, and to other Patriarchs after; but also, in his giving to ancient
Mother Zion, the whole Tribe of Leuj, for discharging Ministerial duties for
information of Faith: besides that in desperate times, he stirred up Prophets
of what Tribe soever (without all Priestly form of Ordination) for informing
Priest and people. All which (taking away Cerimoniall circumstaunces) the Lord
does to this catholic Church, for trayning her through the worlds
Wilderness, unto the allotted Land of Promise, heavenly Canaan.

In the mean time, as the Church of Israel had her Captiuities, under the
which was an exercise of her patience; and for gayning of liberty, might use
no bodyly resistance: even so, the Church of Christians has her Captiuities,
which exact at her hands much more patience. But as Jsrael delivered by the
Lords ministry out of Aegipt, had an Amalek to war withal, through all
generations, to the putting of his remembrance from under heaven. Exodus 16. 8.
etc. And being freed from Babylon, had enemies beyond the River; for
resistaunce of whom, they held a Sword in the one hand, while they did the
work of the Lord with the other: So, the Christian Church upon her
deliueraunces, has her enemies with whom she must skirmish, and against whom
she must hold the swords point, while her people may buyld up themselves an
holy Temple, Nehe. 4. 17. with 1. Cor. 6. 19.
to the mighty God of Jaakob.

Section. 5.
Communion of Saints.
THe Church before, being considered in the Catholic, or general, or whole,
in these words (Communion of Saints by calling, 1. Cor. 1. 2. though some
amongst them were grossly Heretical, many Schismatic and not a few
Prophaine; even as in the Church of the Jews, some persecuted the Prophets,
and Christ himself, thinking they did God good service. Math. 21. 33.
Saints) or Holy-ones, it is to be considered in the parts, that is, in her
several Societies and Corporations: even as, from the Corporation of any whole
City, we descend to the consideration of particular Corporations or Companies,
included within the Cities universal.

The Communion or Fellowship of Saints by calling, is to be considered as
established, or vnestablished. Vnestablished, as when some Believers are
gathered together in City or Family; but destitute of such spiritual
functions, as tend to absolute order. And so, two or three gathered together in
Christ's name, have him in the midst of them.

An Estabished Church, is a competent company of Believers, I say not,
Gathered: for then no one should be a member that were not at the same season
present.
gathering together in Christ's name, having and enjoying such Ecclesiastique
functions, as be necessarily required for more orderly and sufficient
administration of Word and Sacraments and Discipline: Unto which end, the
Apostle Paul is registered to have gone too and fro, establishing the Churches.

The Ecclesiastique functions appertayning to such orderly established
Churches, are of two sorts, Bishops and Deacons; as for Deaconistes, they are
rather to be served, then to serve. Bishop, is a term corruptly derived from
the Greek word Episcopus, 2. Tim 3.
which signifies an Ouer-seer, namely, of souls. In him is required Aptnes to
teach, which includes Knowledge and Vtteraunce: as also, the spirit of
Government for his sufficient ruling of that Corporation. Elsewhere he is
called a Pastor, in English a Shepherd or Feeder; for that he is called to
feed and guide that Flock of Christ's pasture. In other places, these Bishops
or Pastors, are termed Elders, in respect of the many years they were
ordinarily possessed with, before they attained such orderly place of
oversight. To have one or more of these in one particular Church, is not of
Substance but of Circumstaunce: and therefore to be carried, as edifying
Circumstances require: But with this Prouiso: that where more then one be, there
one for order and comlynesse sake, be called before the rest, to ouersee; upon
whom the burden of Doctrine and Government may rest; as it did in the Churches
of Revel. 2. and 3.
Asia, written too by S. John, where one under the terms Angel (or Ambassador)
is charged principally, with the Churches occasions.

As for the term Doctor (in English Teacher) if it be considered apart from
the Pastor, it can employ no other then him that is special attendant unto the
School of 1. Cor. 14.
Prophecy: that is the School of Christian learning, wherein people are
trained up for supplying the Churches necessity.

The term Deacon is derived from the Greeks, and is in English Minister or
Seruitour: First, for the service he was to do to the Church: Secondly,
toward the Ouer-seer, or Overseers. To the first, in cases of helping the
poor. To the second, in assisting by his spiritual guiftes, as necessity
shall call for it. For the performance of all which duties, it is required that
they be full of the Holy Ghost, Act. 63. and 1. Tim. 3.
and of Wisdom, having the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience; such as
can rule their own Househouldes well. etc.

The conclusion then of all this, is; that for the well and orderly government
and preservation of every particular established Communion of Saints, there be
some of best qualificatio^ set apart so to attend on the said duties; whilst
the common people on the other hand, do attend the duties of their common
callings. This being all, and easy to be learned and observed (if people were
not bent to contend about Words and Terms, rather then Things) what is there
in it, which Moses taught not Israel long since? In the place of Pastors,
Israel had Priests, all their lips bound to preserve Knowledge, and equally
attending the Alter: howsoever one Priest principal, as the Angel of the
congregation. In stead of our Deacons, they had Levites under the Priests, and
for the businesses of the congregation. The Books of Exodus Leuit. Numb. and
Deuteronomie, do largely declare this. So Ceremony and Circumstance is
changed; but the substance and equity abide still.

The Word which they are to teach, 1 Word.
is the pure Word of God, which was so perfect in Moses, as it was a curse to
him, that should detract from it, or add unto it; as reason euinceth, when man
shall alter Gods Word. Deuteronomy 12. 32. All inventions of men herein, be but as the
strange Fire of Nadab and Abihu: or as the Leaven of the Pharisees, which
poisoned the hearers.

The Sacraments in common to be administered, 2 Sacraments.
are Baptism, and the Lords Supper. Baptism in Moses, was represented by
Ceremonial washinges and Purifications, intending the Lambs blood whereby we
are cleansed. The Supper was represented in the Paschall Supper, and other
Ceremonial eatings; intending the body and blood of Christ Jesus, (the Lamb
that takes away the sins of the world,) whereby the Church is nourished by
Faith, in unity. So far is it from being to be ministered, (as Antichrist
does) for binding people in and to Rebellion, and bloodshed.

The Discipline to be administered, 3 Discipline. Marks of an orderly
established Church.
is, either brotherly Admonishments and Rebukes, according to the nature of the
sin, (be it private or public) or a Separating of the Sinner for his not
repenting. All these, Moses teaches, when first he says in Leuit. 19. 17.
Thou shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer not sin upon him: with
other places the like. And secondly, when under ceremonial Uncleannesses
(representing Sin) some were separated more, and some less. But in cases of
Blasphemy, general Apostacy, and hy-handed Rebellions, the Priest was to
leave him unto the Magistrates sword: like as, for the Sin against the
Holy Ghost (of the same Nature) the soul is to be left to the Judge of Heaven
with an 2. Cor 16. 22.
Anathema maran-atha, seeing they openly declare themselves to have Apostated
from loving Christ Jesus. A sin, which the Hebrews are taught to consist,
Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3. 4. compare^ with Chap 10. 25. etc.
first, in a Free-departure from the grounds of true Religion, once held with
comfort: Then secondly, in a voluntary Schism from Fellowship or Spiritual
communion with such believers. The first is a voluntary reiection of Faith:
The second, a willing reiectio^ of Charity. In which Desertions, they must be
held for not Lovers of Christ Jesus; and therefore fully Anathematized or
accursed to usward, and left to the Lords coming, intended in the word In
Chaldi^ form, Marae is, The Lord: and Atha, he comes: N. is interposed for
sound sake.
Maran-atha (in English, The Lord comes) namely, with Fire to render
vengeance. Such is the Anathema, too ignorantly shot out of the bosom of many
Counsels; as if they delighted to cloth themselves ipso facto, with
Execrations and curings.

The duty of the whole Communion of Saints, is first, to 1. Cor. 16. 13.
14. Heb. 3. 12. 13
watch over one another in Love: Secondly, to administer of the store which God
has given them, to the relief of the needy; specially, on the 1. Cor. 16. 1.
2.
first day of the week (namely, the Lords day) that so their actions of
worship toward God, may be mixed with Charity toward their neighbor. All
the Law and the Prophets do teach that.

The whole Communion so united, is a little City compact in it self, seated on
a Rock, beauteous and invincible. Distraction in Faith and Manners, is called
1. Cor. 11. 18. 19.
Schisma, Schism; in plain English, a Rending a sunder. The making choice of
some opinion in Doctrine, whereto a soul unreasonably tyeth it self, to the
violating of Faythes foundation, that is called Haeresie. With this, our
Churches be canker-fretted, to the harming of Faith: and with the former, they
be generally torn a sunder, to the violation of Faith and Charity. The Lord
purge our Churches of these evils, though as with violence of Hellebore, is a
violent purger: but rightly applied, is wonderfully effectual.
Hellebore.

Section 6.
Remission of Sins.
NOw follows the Belief, that every true Christian has: First, touching
Remission of sins, a benefit in this life afforded to every penitent
beleiuer: Secondly, two benefits after this life; the Resurrection of the
flesh, and Eternal life.

Remission of Sins, brings necessarily with it; First, that every Christian
is a Sinner: Secondly, the means whereby such forgiveness of sins be had:
Thirdly, the effect which such Remission has in the heart of every true
beleiuer.

1 That we are Sinners (that is) Not doers of the Law: 1. John. 3. 4.
(for, Amartia is Anomia, Sin is a not-doing of the Law, whether it be by
Omyssion or Transgression) it falls out two ways: one, by Original sin,
derived (Ex traduce) from our first Parents, Adam and Heuah: for out of such a
bitter Fountain, we can draw no sweet water. Besides, we are Sinners
Actually, that is, by our own immediate act; we having subscribed to the law
of sin in our members, both by thought, word, and work: One of these Actions
(much more both) are sufficient for our arraignement and condemnation.

2 The Means whereby we are freed of both these Criminations, are only the
sufferinges of the Just for the unjust; and that is, the sufferings of Christ
Jesus for us: seeing he alone is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world, we by his blood (and by no other) have our garments and
conversation made white. Our sins in the Law being resembled copiouslie, by
sundry pollutions; and his cleansing of us by his blood, being resembled by the
Heb. 9. 21. etc.
blood of Animals sprinkling the Tabernacle and Alter, there being without
blood no Remission. Which cannot otherwise be understood by the penners of this
Creed; seeing no Angel or Man is in this Belief introduced for a Savior in
whole or in part: but the Son of God solely, who became Jesus the Savior,
and the Christ or Annoynted-one to this purpose.

The Manqueller in the Law (Number. 32. 22.) that was set free upon the death of
the Hie-priest, did plainly figure out the deliverance of a penitent sinner,
by the death of our Hie-priest, Jesus.

3 The Effecte^ which such Remission works in our hearts, is, Love unfeigned;
whereby we are ready to forgive to our brethren the sins whereby they have
transgressed against us, even as God has freely forgiven us. Our sins
toward God being compared to Talents; and our brethrens toward us, being
assimilated to Pence: Which Forgiveness at Gods hand, as it is daily, and often
in a day; so, we are thereby invited to do the like toward our neighbor. To
God we are to pray for their Remission, though them selves do it not: and we
are in Gods name to pronounce it unto them, so often as they shall turn back
and say, It repents me.

Hereupon it is, that Moses introduces Joseph's brethren, saying, Forgive now
the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin: Whereto Joseph replied; Fear
not, for am I not under God? as if he should say, Fear not my laying of your
sin unto your charge; for as I am subject unto God, so, I as freely forgive
you, as he has forgiven to me my trespasses. Genes. 50. 17. etc. Nor did the
Law of Sin-offrings urge less. Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven,
Psalm. 32. 1. 2.
and whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not
iniquity. Lord for thy Sons sake, forgive us our sins.

Section. 7.
Resurrection of the Flesh.
THe Church being considered (as before) with the main benefit she reapeth at
Gods hand in this life, which is, Remission of sins; now follow two benefits
after this life. The first is, Resurrection of the body: and the second is,
Life eternal ensuing.

The Resurrection of the body, is that, which the Sadducies denied, as
Familistes amongst us. And how does our Savior prove it? From these words of
Moses in Exodus 3. 6. where the Lord says, I am the God of thy Father, the God
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jaakob. From whence he thus
concludes, Math. 22. 32
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living: as if he had said in more
words, neither Abraham, nor Isaac, nor Jaakob, was only soul, but also body:
and therefore the Lord saying, he is their God, it must necessarily follow,
that he was the God both of body and soul. Which neither could be, except the
body lived to him in the assurance of Resurrection, for being united to the
soul in endless glory. This stopped the mouths of them Sadducies; and I pray
God also the consideration thereof, may stop the mouths of our
Semi-atheistes, denyers of the bodies resurrection, flowted of natural
Philosophers in Athens, but prescisely taught of the Apostle; and that with a
difference of Glory in the resurrection, as there is a difference of glory
between the Sun, Moon, and Stars. As for the Compare Math. 20. 1. with
Chap. 21. 33.
Parable of the Workmen called into the Vineyard at the sixth, ninth, and
eleauenth hour, and each receiving a penny, that medleth nothing in propriety
with the kingdom of Glory, but with the kingdom of Grace in this life; where
the last, (namely, the Gentile) so well as Israel the first, receives the
earnest-penny of salvation, which is the spirit of Adoption, the spirit of our
Mediator Jesus, a sufficient recompense to the first and last: by the virtue
of which Romans 8. 11.
spirit, our bodies are raised up unto Glory.

As for the Rising of the misbeleiuer, it is but a rising to fall: for as God
will be none of their God; so, to the Devil and his Angels they be referred:
and this is the final Curse pronounced against the Laws transgressers,
throughout all Moses.

Section. 8.
Life Everlasting.
THe first benefit to the Church after this life, was noted to be the
Resurrection of the flesh. The second and last is, Eternal life both of body
and soul.

Some (like crafty smooth-faced Sadducies) have denied, that Moses any where
teaches such Eternal life. But I pray such Doctors to tell me, why the Lords
speech to Moses, which before proved the bodies R^surrection, does not also as
necessarily prove Eternal life? If Jehouah be the God of Abraham, and
therefore whole Abraham must needs live; which cannot be, if the body should
not rise: then his being the God of Abraham, proves Everlasting life to
appertain unto whole Abraham; seeing Jehouah lives everlastingly, the God of
Abraham. And I would further know of the covetous Sadducie, why is not Eternal
life fitly, necessarily, and plainly taught of Moses in Genes. 5. when as it
is said, that God translated Henoch from this world to himself? And when Moses
in Exodus 32. 32. does in his Zeal for Israel, say thus to the Lord, I pray
thee, raze me out of thy Book, which thou have written? What Book speaks
he off, saving of the Book of life, that contains the names only of such as
(through the Lord of life, Jesus) are sealed up unto Eternal life?

If he reply, these places and many more do teach necessarily Eternal life,
but his meaning was, that the phrase of Eternal life, was not used of Moses.

Thereto I answer: so, the Sadducie may deny all the artificial terms of
Divinity, which the Prophets, Apostles, and all have introduced in the wisdom
of Gods spirit. And so he may carpe at all Religion, and at every man's writing;
contending about Terms, till he have forgotten the thing and matter it self.

This Eternal life is, a full fruition of God all glorious, 1. John. 3. 2.
seeing him as he is, and enjoying that sight for evermore. When Satan said,
Ye shall be as Aelohim, (Genesis 3.) he spoke as did Caiphas, a truth against his
purpose and understanding. For God, that called Light out of Darkness, has
out of Death fetched Life: yea, such a Life, as whereby every of the Saved,
shall be as God, though not God, by God his being so all in all.

Unto this Eternal life, is opposite eternal Death. This provided for the
Devil and his Angels, and all misbeleiuers: as the former provided for true
Beleiuers, united to their Head Christ. The Devil and his, are thrust out of
the Creed; because thrust out from the presence of Gods glory. Let them all,
that would partake in that Glory, labor their assurance thereof, by a true
working Faith. I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Amen.

Such has been, and such is my Faith,
Whatse're the close Seducer says:
The sundry Books I erst have writ,
To all the world will witness it.
Erubescas nonne Satana?
Epilogue to the Christian Reader.
Our Savior having to do with the Sadducies, who admitted no other Scripture
for Canonical, saving the writings of Moses; he by Moses answers them, as
being sufficient for proouing any Article of Faith, which had in after times
been taught by the Prophets, Himself, or his Apostles; seeing Himself came
but to fulfill the Law (which caused Isaiah to bid his Hearers, Go to the Law)
as the Apostles were interpretours of Law and Prophets. Nor for other purpose
was it, that our Savior said thus to the Jews, Had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me; John. 5. 46. 47.
for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings, How shall ye
believe my words? The matters of Salvation were perfect in Moses, howsoever
there was more light in the expositions of the Prophets, and most light in the
labors of the Apostles. Whereupon I conclude, that nothing is to be held for
an Article of Religion, as essential unto Salvation, which cannot be made good
out of Moses. Which one lesson, if it had been well learned, it had prevented
the manifold Schisms which a number run into; partly, about Quiddities
touching the Godhead; partly, about External form of Church discipline; and
partly, about Ceremonies of order and comlynes: by such means violating the
Faith, breaking the bonds of peace and love; wrathfully eger about
circumstaunces (every Sect in their humor) till substance of Faith, and the
grounds of Charity be neglected; tything (with the Pharisees) Mynts, and
Anise, at the best, neglecting mean times (Barutera tou nomou) the waightier
things of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy, and Fidelity: while thus one does
bite another; one is consumed of another: Manasses eating up Ephraim, and
Ephraim Manasses; Galat. 5. 5. Isa. 9. 20. 21.
and both against Judah. The Lord redress it, and give us grace to do all
things in love. Amen.

PRay for me Friends, pray for my constancy,
That in true Faith, Clapham may live and die.
So shall his life and death be for thy good,
While some stick up unto the knees in Mudde,
Feeding on earth, digging with Mo^es to hell:
God do increase our Faith and Love. Farewell.
Pergite.
To the fainting Friend.
Thou weary art of doing good,
Though I the same to loss of Blood.
Reward is joined with Constancy,
When Judgment whips Apostasy.
Memor esto vnde excideris and Resipisce.
To the Enemy.
Do wring and wrest, do rail and rend,
Yet I will bless unto the end.
Domine, ne statuas Ei hoc peccatum.
FINIS.
The Printer.
The Auther being a far off, some faults may have passed me: I pray you
impute them to mere ignorance.


