The Trial of Bastardie: THAT PART OF THE second part of Policy, or manner of
Government of the Realm of England: so termed, Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical.

Annexed at the end of this Treatise, touching the prohibition of marriage, a
Table of the Leuitical, English, and Positive Canon Catalogues, their
concordance and difference.

BY WILLIAM CLERK.

John Chrisost.

Nemo vere inde, aut obscurus, aut clarus est. IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA
NULLA.


LONDON, Printed by Adam Jslip. 1594.

To the right worshipful Robert Redmayn, doctor of law, Judge Delegate and
Commissarie (for the vacancie of the Sea) within the City and dioces of
Norwich, increase of worship, with all health and happiness.
THe singular good affection (right worshipful) I have reaped at your hands,
deserves more at mine, than a bare imitation of learning: Nevertheless for
the love you bear me, I have adventured (and the rather) to present these
labors, whatsoever they may seem unto you, to signify as well the continuance
of my studies, wherein you have encouraged me, as to manifest that desire I
should have, to show my self as vvilling to be thankful for a benefit
received, as any reason would I should be. Besides the argument it self
considered, our modern natures, and mine own imperfection together, might
justly move no less. When therefore I considered (first) that you favor the
Author, next, so well appointed to defend the work (the regalitie, laws, and
customs of this land untouched) I reasoned thus, Duo vincula fortiora, and so
it became an oblation unto you, which accepted, you receive it from him, whose
heart gives it freely, and vvithall, that duty and affection, that your
former favors have merited: and so I rest your Worships in equal duty and
affection.

W. C.

The Preface.
WHen he had handled (that honorable knight, Sir Thomas Smith) in his Repub.
Anglorum, amongst other things, the general consent and authority, as well of
the Prince and nobility, as the commons of this land together; that is to say,
the Parliament, i. the whole head and body of this Realm, as also the
authority of the Prince apart, and had descended to the point, viz. How he
does, this head, distribute his authority and power to the rest of the
members, for the government and commonwealth of the politic body of the
same, and (in the prosecution of that) had discussed as well at large the manner
and form of the trials or judgments that be absolute, here, and definitive by
Parliament, Battle, and the great Assise: the method he observed, and the
argument that he handled therein, brought him (at the last) and his style, to
the court which is spiritual, or ecclesiastical here in England: so termed in
the books of law, the Court Christian, or Curia Christianitatis.

This has equally (with the other) it force, power, authority, rule, and
jurisdiction. Briefly it is descended from the same stock: namely, the
imperial crown of this land. But this nevertheless, though parcel of the
same government or policy, he has passed over, only with a bare mention.

Neither is it any marvel: for being (when he wrote that work) in the midst
of so weighty affairs, ambassador in the court of France: it rather seems,
than contrary, his business, there, prevented him: how could he otherwise, or
at the least be judged so, by any probability, being (as he was) of that
authority in his own profession, viz. Doctor of the civil law, have pictured
(as he did) that course so lively, where least he was experienced, and omitted
the other?

The Archbishops (he says) and Bishops have a certain peculiar jurisdiction
in testaments, legations, tithes, mortuaries, marriages, adultery,
fornication, orders, religion, etc. These (he says be ordered in their
courts, after the fashion and manner of the law civil, or rather common by
citation, libel, contestationem litis, examination of witnesses privily, by
exceptions, replications apart, and in writing, allegations, matters by
sentences given in writing, appellations from one to another, as well a
grauamine, as a sententia definitiua.

Their names he adds and titles of Procurators, advocates, assessors,
ordinaries, commissaries, etc. far from the manner (as he says, and as it is
indeed) of our order in the common law of England, that part of the policy or
government of the land that he handled at large, and this is all the light he
has left of the spiritual course, the other.

I have therefore adventured (gentle reader) to imitate that worthy learned man
in his secular trials there, in this spiritual cognizance, The trial of
Bastardie here.

Nevertheless, because it arises, the question of Natiuities in the secular
courts, but incede^tly: and the Ordinaries jurisdiction (by consequence) not
ordinary in that trial, but delegata (as it follows more at large in this
treatise:) it must, this part of that second part of government, be always
understood, as the jurisdiction to the Ordinary is demandata from the prince,
and not otherwise. I have therefore composed it, and not (I hope) unaptly,
atreatise of it self: and that because the jurisdiction in this trial is
diverse from the rest. This is therefore presented unto thee here: the rest
thou shall have, if God permit, in the tractat of the Ordinary.

In the mean time (if it please thee to accept it) this thou shall have
withal, viz. How the laws, how the canons, have and do either of them esteem
of Bastardy diversely: and how they have and do, the laws and canons, make their
computations (in degrees of consanguinitie) diversely.

This computation (verily) in degrees in this kind, inconsideratly, that is to
say, without regard of the laws, and canons, how they repute the same, begat in
former ages no small error in Genealogies, the laws of Matrimony, the holy
Fathers numeration, and ancient Computation of the Church.

Of such an effect as this, that infringed so long ago the prohibibition of
marriage, commended also unto thee here in every kind, where both the tree, and
forbidden fruit is pictured, Estimandum est, or rather to be feared it is, of
such conjunctions had, a base kind of people, ignoble, and licentious to be
begotten, apt to provoke in time, even the rest to naughtiness also, and make
them become in fine, nor manly in war, nor stable in faith, nor honored of
men, nor beloved of God.

But let no man be here too severe a judge: for virtue sometimes springs from
lawless knowledge, and vice again from lawful: neither let me flatter nor
offend: the one is no defense of sin, nor the other impeachment of lawful
matrimony: for neither does the adulterous child that is virtuous, nor shake
off, nor shadow his adulterous parents crime, nor the legitimat that is
vicious, dishonor the undefiled bed. And to this effect it is written, Sicut
boni filij adulterorum, nulla est defensio sic mali filij coniugatorum, nullum
est crimen nuptiarum.

Let him therefore never fear to sincke, that has this rest to bear him,
namely, virtue: for though his parents be the worst, their vileness shall not
blemish him at all, if virtue bears him up: for if themselves (if conuerts
afterward) their former life destroys not, much more their offspring decked
with his proper virtue shines, and shall not be eclipsed with the oprobrious
lives of his parents; and why? Non est eius culpa qui nascitur, It is answered
thus, it is not his default that is borne, Hierom. in Epist. cont. Ruph^ did.
56. c. nasci.
but his that does beget him, the seed it self is not reputed evil: for
nature receiving her own, she bestows it, she frames it next a body, the
serving members ensue, Et inter illas sacri ventris angustias, dei manus semper
operatur: Hence is the flesh, will thou condemn it now? look at the fleshly
means: Non peccat terra quae confouet, non semen quod in sulcis iacitur, non
humor, vel calor, quibus temperata frumenta in germen pullulant, sed
(verbigratia) fur and latro: Temper thy judgment therefore in this behalf,
Quia non in seminibus, sed in voluntate nascentis, causa vitiorum est, atque
virtutum. And if a law were made, that such might inherit, the virtuous I mean
in the one, before the vicious other, why should not that law be just? the
other I call not unjust, but yet it is but temporal, and within the liberty
of Princes, justly to be altered by the times, though justly they cannot stand
in one common wealth together: for that that is in present being bridles now
the parent to be father of Legitimation, and the other should bridle (if it
were) the son to furnish himself with virtues, least happily his father
should have begotten a better son abroad, than all the world can find at home.

I would be loath in moving a charitable judgment in the son, to seem to
give hope to the father, or liberty to offend, Godforbid. The happiest
offsprings they be, and nearer unto hope (let all mentake me so) that be borne
De legitima parentum coniunctione, approbata perleges, whereof more at large in
this treatise: for leaving the adulterous bed: or knowledge had without
solemnised marriage, which also we have touched in the same, that knowledge had
(in marriage) in consanguinitie and affinity, have been, is, and will be in all
christian ages to come, reputed for no less, for sundry reasons. And first
because that naturally a man does owe a certain honor, reverence, and fear
to his parents, and therefore unto others of his kin, which come very nigh
of the same, in so much that in old time (as Valerius Maximus shows) it was
not lawful for the son, to bath in one place with his father, least he should
see him naked.

Secondly, such persons must needs be conversant, and in company together:
if nature therefore abhorred not knowledge in such, they should have too much
opportunity to licentious living, whose neerenesse remooueth all suspicion
from the world. And behold the heathen Philosopher here. Where Arist lib. 2.
polit.
(says he) a man does love his kinswoman by nature, if there should be put to
this the love of bodily meddling, there should be too much heat and feruentnesse
of love, and too great provocation to fleshly lust, which is contrary to the
chastity of marriage.

Thirdly, such marriages shall hinder that mutual love and friendship, that is
both profitable and honest to human society, for when a man does take a wife
that is a stranger to him, all the kindred of his wife be knit unto him by a
certain league of friendship and love, as if they were his own: this has
nature ordained already in blood. Hence proceeded the prohibitio^ of the
Canons, That men and women, to whom love and concord was thought both
profitable and honest, should be knit together by sundry degrees of kindred, and
not that one should have many in one, sed singulae spargere^tur in singulos, the
Canons term them necessitudines, which they would have dispersed. In the
treatise of the determinations of the most famous and most excellent
universities etc. fourth Chap. after the author (whosoever he was) had cited,
touching such unlawful marriages, the doctors of the church of Christ, that
were of greatest authority, fame, and renown, he descended to others, which,
though not of so great authority, yet their judgments for their credit,
learning and gravity, was received worthily, amongst whom he affirmed (to this
effect) of an Archbishop in this land, viz. being asked by what reason the
forbidding we should not marry in co^sanguinitie nor affinity, had so great
strength and power in the church? answered. The laws and Canons of the church,
be full of this commandment, and there be many decrees of the old fathers
also, that we should not marry with any of our blood, etc. and as for the
cause and reason of this commandment, albeit I might say that the simple and
plain reason is, to obey the power and authority of them to whom Christ said,
It is not you your self that speaks, but the spirit of your father which
speaks in you, etc. yet for all that, by the consideration and marking also
of holy scripture, I am wont to think thus with my self, amongst the old and
ancient people of the Jews, it was not lawful for any person to marry with any
out of his tribe: and when I doubted and sought a reason why so, the daughters
of Zelophehad, came to my remembrance, etc. But in this case Moses gave an
answer to their carnalities, That they should not marry out of their tribe:
but the goodness and perfection of us that be Christian folk, is not on this
fashion, for seeing our heritage is God, of whom it is spoken, God is love and
charity, as the Jews used a law agreeable to their heritage, so we ought to
maintain a law for ours, which is the law of love and charity.

There is light and darkness, good and evil, there be lawful and expedient,
lawful not expedient, nor lawful, nor expedient marriages; these be seen in
diverse families, in outward degrees, in nigh kindred: with this, I commend to
the reader the admonition of the English church, that is, to consider in
contracts of matrimony, what is lawful, what honest, what expedient.

Gregor. Nazian. de bono Coniugij.
COniugium radix and fulcrum nobile vitae,
Coniugium praestat, si sis sine robore vires:
Sic sumus inter nos, auresque, manusque, pedesque,
Mutua sic duros emollit cura labores,
Mutua sic gemina dulcedine gaudia crescunt,
Quin desiderium, concesso limite, claudit
Coniugium, custosque aeternum obsignat amores:
Vt sunt carne simul iuncti, sic mente cohaerent,
Inter seque pijs miscent incendia Flammis.
Et quia praesidij est, rerumque hic mayor egestas,
Foemina virque deo, maiori pectore fidunt.
A Table of the contents of this Book.
CHAP. I. OF possessions and natiuities, their cognizance and trial. fol. 1
CHAP. II. The canonical and secular computations in consanguinitie, their
confusion. The sequel. The Lateran synod. The answer of the Prelates, to the
kings writ of Bastardie. Their instance. The conclusion of he nobles at Merton.
fol. 7 CHAP. III. The transmission or writ of certificat to the Ordinary. The
Statutarie antecedents to the same. fol. 24 CHAP. IIII. The Ordinary. His
office, and order in proceeding. fol. 31 CHAP. V. Of matrimony, and legitimate
issue. fol. 39 CHAP. VI. Of consanguinitie or blood: The figure and declaration
thereof. fol. 51 CHAP. VII. Of affinity or alliance by marriage: The figure
and declaration thereof. fol. 58 CHAP. VIII. Of the prohibition Leuiticall.
fol. 67 CHAP. IX. Of the prohibition Canonical. fol. 71 CHAP. X. Of the
succession of the statutes in marriage: and their force at this day. fol. 77
Faults escaped in the printing.
Page 15. line, 26. for that is descended, read, from whom is descended. Page
41. line, 17. for excess, read access. Page 48. line, 24. in the note, for
Patrimonium, read Matrimonium. Page 21. line 3. in the note, for A2. 28. read
an. 25. cap. 19.

The Trial of Bastardie.
CHAP. I.
Of possessions and Natiuities, their cognizance and trial.

THe issue of the defiled bed, before we come to handle it, either in it self
or the contrary, least happily the readers should (some of them) look for
another issue here, than I know they be likely to find, I mean a relation of
pleadings in possessions, after the common laws: I advertise them before hand,
howsoever this may seem to fit the argument, Haec non iudicantur in Ecclesia,
The church has no cognizance of them.

The possession of Radulphus and Agatha his mother, left them by Radulphus the
father and grandfather to Agatha and her son, when he went to Jerusalem,
impeached afterward by F. great uncle to Radulphus the son, in that he
objected, this Agatha was begotten by Radulphus her father, of Au^line the wife
of Alan, in the time of Alex. 3. manifests as much in the Canons. Cap. causam
quae. Qui sil. sunt legit.
For when the incide^t question of her nativity arose before the secular
Judges, it came in the end to the audience of Alexander, who in his commission
in that cause of the Jurisdiction of the church, to the BB. of London and
Worcester, (having touched the possessory Judgment of the king) countermaunded
immediately again his former rescript in these words, viz. Causam quae inter
R. and F. super eo quod matter dicti R. dicitur non fuisse de legitimo
matrimonio nata agitari dinoscitur, vobis commisimus terminandam: veru^ quod
literis nostris inseri fecimus, v^praefato R. possessionem omnium quorum
possessor extitit, quando Auus suus proficiscendi Hierosolimam iter arripuit,
ante principalis causae ingressum faceretis restitui, si eade^ possessione
fuisset per violentiam spolitatus. Nos attendentes quod ad Regem pertinet, non
ad ecclesiam, de talibus possessionibus iudicare, ne videamur iuri regis
Anglorum detrahere, qui ipsarum iudicium ad se assorit pertinere, f. v.
mandamus, quatenus regi possessionum iudicium relinque^tes, de causa
principali, videlicet vtrum matter predicti R. de ligitimo sit matrimonio nata,
before cognoscatis, and causam huiusmodi terminetis. etc. that is to say, The
cause or question notoriously known to be moved between R. and F. touching
that, that the mother of the said R. is affirmed not to be borne in lawful
matrimony, we have committed to you to be determined; howbeit, where we caused
to be inserted in the same our letters, that you should see the possession of
all things restored to the aforesaid R. that he possessed when his grandfather
took his journey to Jerusalem, before your entrance to the principal
business, (if violently first he he had been spoiled of the same) weighing that
the Cognizance of such possessions appertains not to the church, but to the
king, and least we should seem to derogate from the right of the king of
England, who claims they pertain to himself, we require you (leaving the
possessorie judgment to the king) that you take absolute knowledge of the
principal cause: that is to say, whether the forenamed R. his mother be borne
in lawful matrimony, and determine the same.

The politic body of this land considered as it is compacted of all sorts
and degrees of people, divided only in terms, and by names of spirituality,
and temporaltie: having authority, the one part, commonly called the English
Church, to declare, interpret, and show any cause, question, or doubt of the
Law divine, or spiritual learning, and to administer such offices and duties
as to their rooms spiritual does appertain: the other, the lay or temporal
Judges, for trial of property of lands, secular contentions, as also the
conservation of the people of this Realm in quiet and peace, and how they
do, both their auctorities and jurisdictions conioyne together in the due
administration of justice, the one to help the other, appointed so, ordained
and instituted to that purpose and end, that the kings and queens of the same
(according to their plenarie power from God) might be furnished of themselves
to render justice and final determination to all subjects, and in all causes,
as they have and do at this day hold (of God) to themself, and by their
sword, their people and crown: acknowledging no superior on earth, without
restraint or provocation, to any pope, prince, or potentate in the world, 24.
H. 8. cap. 12. in prohem. ad idem de repub. Anglo.
may give a light to that we have said of the spiritual and secular powers
before.

For howsoever they may seem to be distinguished in themselves, they be but
one body, having but one only head, the royal and kingly majesty of this
land, where the Aristocraticall gouernmentes and Democraticall, have been
evermore strange unto us: for divided in times past into many and sundry kings,
reigning each absolutely in his country, not under the subjection of other, till
by fighting, the vanquished always falling to the augmentation of the
vanquisher, it grew at the last into one Monarchy, never did any take
inuestiture at the Emperors hand of Rome, or any other superior foreign
prince or Potentate, but held (as I said before) and as they have, do, and
will hold of none but of God, their people and crown.

Hence it is taken for an Empire in the world: whereof (as did Vlpian de publico
romanorum iure) I may as boldly write viz. Huius sacrosanctae, and Augustae
ciuitatis status, in sacris, and sacerdotibus, and magistratibus consistit:
that is to say, The state of this imperial commonwealth, consists in holy
things, and in priests, and magistrates: for so we repute no less the
magistrate tha^ the priesthood, to be ordained of God; as the apostle Romans 13.
teaches, and whereof Duarenus dilateth thus, viz. Sunt cnim magistratus and
sacerdotium velut vnius corporis, id est ecclesiae, duo membra precipua: quorum
alterum alterius auxilio eget. Verily they are (says De sacris ecclesiae
minist. ac benefic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Duarenus) the magistracy and priesthood, as it were of one body, that is to
say, two principal members of the Church; having need the one of the others
assistance. And in another place, Nam etsi religionis and sacrorum procuratio
omnibus alijs rebus nobis antiquior esse debeat, tamen imperio magistratus ad
tranquilitatem inter homines tuendam est opus, sine qua; ne religio quidem
cousislere potest: Itaque Iustinianus noster maxima dei inter homines dona esse
ait, Nouel. 6.
sacerdotium, and imperium, quorum vnum diuinarum rerum administratio, alterum
humanarum gubernatio moderatioquesit: non enim (vt apud hebreos quondam atque
Romanos ijdem and reges erant and pontifices) Eusebius. lib. 1. Hist. Eccles. c.
5. c. cleros. 21. Did.
ita in Christiana repub. idem homo vtranque personam sustinet, and vtrumque
munus exequitur; sed duae sunt functiones, diuersae, quarum vnaqueque plurimum
operis habet ac difficultatis: communis tamen est vtrinsque finis, and scopus:
nempe religionis, and mandatorum diuinorum, in otto and pace conseruatio. Hinc
Iustinianus noster de consensu and concordia rerum diuinarum and humanarum,
sacerdotij, and imperij loquens, simphoniae verbo vtitur: that is to say, The
charge of religion, and of sacred things, though it ought to be (in antiquity
unto us) preferred before all things else, the power notwithstanding of the
magistrate is needful for the preservation of peace amongst men; without the
which religion verily cannot consist: Justinian therefore affirms Priesthood
and the Magistracy, the chiefest gifts of God amongst men, in that the one is
the administration of divine things; the government the other, and moderation
of things humane: for not (as in times past the same were kings and bishops
with the Hebrews and Romans) so in a Christian commonwealth now, the same
man bears and executes the person and office of them both; It is and was of
ancient time due to the imperial crown of this realm to have the sovereignty
and rule over all manner persons borne within the same whether ecclesiastical
or lay: but the kings and queens, neither have, do, nor will challenge
authority and power of ministry of divine offices in the church. Jniunct. an
1. Eliz. tit. Admonition.
but they are two diverse functions, requiring either of them great labor and
difficulty. The end and scope notwithstanding of either, common to both; the
conservation namely of religion, and divine commandementes, in quiet and peace.
Justinian hereupon treating of the concordance, and agreement of divine and
humane things, Priesthood, and the Magistracy, uses the word symphonia, as
much as concent or harmony in music.

But to the state of the cause, after the Latins, the issue in the common law,
in the canon and civil laws, the incident question, Bastardie, whose trial
our argument is, and whether we will hasten our style: the incident question I
call it, for it is not sprung where it rises in the secular court tanquam
emergens in iudicio, (such as be said in the laws we mentioned last) to have
originem nouam post iudicium incohatum, respicientes processum; but incidently,
respecting only merita negotij principalis, and not the processus at all.

Here (affirmed that reverend doctor Sir Thomas Smith, De repub. Anglo. lib. 2.
cap. 12.
speaking of the issue generally) is the place where the strife and debate
remains, as a water held in a dark and close vessel issues out, is
avoided, and emptied, and no where else: and that stroke (says he) well
stricken, is the departing of all the controversies.

These we may leave to whom they be more familiar in their terms, than they
can, or at the least is necessary (touching this trial) they should be made
interpreted, to the common capacity of the rest. Hence issues out our
purpose: that is to say, the incident question (effected) of the nativity,
before the secular Judges, in secular causes of possession; the kings or
queens writ ensues to this effect as follows Infra. ca. 3.
to the Ordinary, and there his Jurisdiction begins.

CHAP. II.
The Canonical and secular Computations (in consanguinitie) their confusion.
The sequel. The Lateran synod. The answer of the Prelates to the kings writ
of Bastardie. Their Instance. The conclusion of the Nobles at Merton.

IN the Roman Civil and Canon supputatio^ of degrees, there insueth now a
difference to be handled in them: that is to say, a descent, or discord, or
that which is more, a prejudice, and a violence too, to the Laws, to the
Canons, and either so to other: howbeit not in themselves, but their
application and practice: like a well tuned Instrument unskillfully handled.
Hence endured the secular laws of this land an injury (in their possessorie
Judgments) by the Canons, as also did in former time the Canons, by the
secular sort, till king Henry the third reformed (in the end) the one, the
other, the Lateran synod; whereof we shall treat severally in their places, but
first of the violence to the Canons.

For declaration of this, (by the way) Computatio^ must first be considered of
(in degrees of consanguinitie or blood) and how it is distinguished by
Canonical and Legal: the computation canonical is declared in the chapter of
consanguinitie hereafter, the legal or secular computation we have briefly
related here, and that for two causes, the one (having occasion to speak of the
prejudice to the canons) it is derived from it, the other it shall explane the
Canonical computation the better, therefore it is pictured here, according to
the secular emperor Justinian his laws, to the end (I say) that compared with
the figure ensuing of consanguinity it may ad the greater light unto it, and
either consequently unto other.

These Legal and Canonical computations, I know not how it came to pass, but
that I may use the words of the Canon, Quidam Legum and Canonum imperiti,
certain as well Legists as Decretalists, ignorant both of the laws and
Canons, confounded them; what violence grew by this to the Canons ensues, for
when it had taken root, this negligent or malicious error, (for so we may
conjecture) they could not be so ignorant all of them, from whom it sprang,
Cenealogiae terminu^ Nuptialia iura, numerationem sanctoru^ patrum, and
antiquam Ecclesiae co^putationem: peruersa quadam calliditate disturbare
nituntur. It disturbed, or they disturbed with it (this error) by their
perverse subtility, the bonds and scope of Genealogy, the laws of matrimony,
the holy fathers numeration, and ancient co^putation of the church: and
besides their strange, profane, and erroneous co^putation, which they grounded
upon the secular laws, they determined their Genealogy in the sixth legal
degree, affirming there the Legal computation determined. But what Justinian
defined, and unto what degree, (his secular computation) I leave to
Iustinianistes to define, only to answer this error, his words be these,
Hactenus ostendisse sufficiat, quemadmodum gradus cognationis numer entur:
namque ex his, palam est intelligere, quemadmodum vlteriores gradus numerentur:
generata quippe persona, gradum adijcit. When Justinian had extended ascending,
descending, and collaterally his numeration, and specified to the sixth Legal
degree; this may suffice (says he) touching the computation of degrees in
kindred: for by this it is easy to number the rest that be further off;
forasmuch as a person begotten, begets a degree, etc. This touching their
error in determining the Legal computation only.

For their confusion, I mean of both computations in one: were the infection
thereof, as far forgone in marriages with us, as it was confuted then in the
Lateran counsel, we should not, I suppose (after the phrase of the scripture)
come so near to the shame of our kindred as now we do: but hereof more, and
more fitly hereafter.

To their period again, their series in their Genealogy was legal: their
computation legal, to the sixth degree: but their termination, there, neither
legal, nor Canonical: What then? Computatis namque gradibus, etc. aut finitur
consanguinitas in Sexto gradu, etc. The Canon asks this question, viz.
(Computation therefore had) does it determine or not determine consanguinitie in
the sixth degree? inferring thus: Si autem finitur, fallaces erunt leges quibus
isti vtuntur, qui in decimo gradu sibi succedere consanguineos inbent: quod si
non funitur consanguinitas in huiusmodi sexto gradu, falsidici erunt isti qui
vltra illum sextum gradum nolunt computare consanguinitatem: igitur aut leges
erunt falsae, aut isti qui sic finiunt generationem: sed vi verdicae leges, and
veraces sunt Canones, dicamus id quod veritas habet, scilicet quod non
terminatur consanguinitas in huiusmodi sexto gradu, etc: that is to say, Verily
if it determines so, they be deceiuable laws which they use, that command
succession in blood in the tenth degree: but if it determines not
co^sanguinitie in the sixth degree, they shall be false sayers, that refuse (in
consanguinitie) to make their computation beyond the said sixth dedegree: to
conclude, the laws must needs be false, or they that so determine generation.
But as the laws be right, and the canons true, so let us persist in that, that
truth it self possesses, namely (touching consanguinitie in the 6 degree) in
not determining there.

Their numeration remains now to be spoken of, their Series, their order,
and (touching the same) the censure of the Lateran synod. Neither would I be
taken to impeach their numeration, but the disguised habit they gave it. For it
sorteth, and so it is approved with the secular laws i. the law of their
nation so called the Roman civil law, as also (after the reverend authous Mr.
Bracton, and Mr. Plowden: for so they have applied it either of them in their
works) of ours.

Touching the secular computation what may be said for further information
therein, we refer to that demonstration ensuing to the eye, according to
Horace: Certior aure arbiter est oculus, that is to say, Of the two i. the eye,
and the ear, the eye is the certainer judge. Hinc agrimensores, and the view
de ventre inspiciendo were and be in use in the civil law, as also (as occasion
is ministered) exercised in this land: thus we leave them (the secular
computations) to that relation that ensues of the Lateran synod, viz.

Ad sedem apostolicam (for so the canon relates the same) perlata est question
nouitar exorta de gradibus consanguinitatis, quam quidam legum and canonum
imperiti excitantes, eosdem propinquitatis gradus contra sacros canones, and
ecclesiasticum morem numerare nituntur: nouo and inandito errore affirmantes,
quod germani fatres, vel sorores, inter se, sint in secunda generatione: filij
eorum and filiae in quarta, nepotes eorum vel neptes in sexto, talique more
progeniem computantes, in huiusmodi sexto gradu eam termina^tes, etc. Nos vero
(Deo annuente) hanc questionem discutere curauimus: in synodo habita in
lateranensi consistorio, conuocatis ad hoc opus episcopis and clericis atque
iudicibus diuersarum prouinciarum: Denique diu ventilatis legibus, and sacris
canonibus, distinct inuenimus: ob aliam atque aliam causam: alteram legum
fieri, alteram canonum computationem. In legibus siquidem ob nihil aliud ipsae
graduum mentio facta est, nisi vt hereditas vel successio ab vna ad alteram
personam (inter consanguinios) deferatur. In canonibus vero ab hoc progenies
computatur, vt apt monstretur vsque ad quotam generationem a consanguineorum
nuptijs sit abstinendum. Ibi prescribitur vt hereditas propinquis more legitimo
conferatur: hic vero vt rite and canonice inter fideles nuptiae celebrentur. In
legibus aistincte non numerantur gradus, nisi vsque ad sextam: in canonibus
autem vsque ad septimam distinguitur generationem. Hac ergo de causa, quia
hereditates nequeunt deferri: nisi de vna ad alteram personam, idcirco curauit
secularis imperator in singulis personis singulos perficere gradus: quia vero
nuptiae sine duabus non valent fieri personis, ideo sacri canones duas in vno
gradu constituere personas, etc. that is to say, A newfound question is
proposed to th'apostolique Sea of the degrees of consanguinitie, the which
certain moving, unskillful in the laws and canons, contrary to the sacred
canons, have striuen to confound them: in a strange and new error affirming,
that German brothers and sisters are between themselves in the second
generation, their sons and daughters in the fourth, their nephews and neeces
in the sixth, and making their computation of their progeny so in the said
sixth degree they determine it, etc. Now we in a synod holden in the Lateran
consistory, assembled thereunto, the Bishops, Clergy, and Judges of diverse
provinces, have had care to discuss this question: and after long examination
had (in the end) of the laws and canons, we found it out distinctly, at the
last, one computation (for this and that reason) to be had of the laws, an
other of the Canons: for mention verily is made in the laws of degrees, to no
other end but that succession or inheritance should descend (in consanguines)
from one to another: but in the canons for this; that it may manifestly be
showed to what degree in kindred, marriages should be abstained from; it is
prescribed there, that inheritance should lawfully be conferred to the next;
here, that marriages be rightly amongst christians, and Canonically celebrated:
degrees in the laws, are not in names and terms distinguished, beyond the
sixth degree; in the Canons to the seventh generation: for this consideration
therefore in persons, that successions cannot pass but from one to another,
the secular emperor provided to appoint in singular persons, singular degrees:
but that marriages consist not but of two, the sacred Canons have therefore in
one degree ordained two.

M. Beza reproves this numeratio^ of the Canons, because the Canons number (as
he says) by the De repud. page 25.
persons, and not their generations; and therefore affirms, that Multo
planius and rectius loquuntur, qui generationes, non personas enumera^das
dicunt. They speak (says M. Beza) more plainly false, and more truly, that
affirm the generations, and not the persons to be numbered, and his reason is,
Cum generatio efficiat gradum, that is, Because the generation makes the
degree. De repud. page 26.
Indeed there were certain Canonists, before the Lateran sinod, and Legists
too, that numbered so, whose ignorance was condemned there, but never since but
in earthly successions, and so they number still, that is to say, the degrees
by the persons, to confer their inheritance to the next; but by the
generations, the Canons number the degrees in marriage causes, that we come not
too near to the kindred of our slesh: wherein they vary not from M. Beza at
all, but only in the equilaterall lines, where he makes two brethren two
generations, and their children four, and so in the residue where their
generatio^s be, and so he affirms the^ to be eiusdem, even of the same Page
26.
speciei and seriei, by the order and course of nature, and therefore do the
Canons make the^ the same generations, and the same degrees, and so his words
many seem to import no less where he says, Natura enim ipsa ostendit tot
opportere gradus, quot sunt generationes, that is to say, Even nature her self
does show, there ought to be so many degrees, as there be generatio^s:
nevertheless we must count the^ so, (says he) as we respect Ordinem
numerandi, and make them so by the order and course of numbering, two
generatio^s: the which he holds in all the laterals, to be holden without
exception, as may appear by that treatise: that is to say, so many persons so
many degrees; the Canons hold the same in the ascending and descending lines,
Vna dempta: the use of this rule is explaned, in the chapter of consanguinitie
hereafter: this M. Beza reproves also, viz. the rule of Vna dempta, and yet
he Page 15
confesses it has nothing in it, that is differing from the truth, for so he
writes, Et si nihil statuit a veritate alienum, tamen non recte concepta est,
that is to say, Though it orders nothing that is differing from the truth,
yet it is not conceived aright: but let it suffice it be true and holds where
the Canons use it, that is in the ascending and descending lines, upright and
downeright straight, they bend it not to the laterals, for it will not hold
with the rule of generation there, where the persons do spread themselves, or
nature rather spreads the persons on either side. Here is their difference in
the equilaterals only where M. Beza gives liberty to marry within the
prohibition of the Canons, but his prohibition is the same with the Canons in
the the rest, so far as the Canon prohibition reaches, except in the persons
that be not collateral or vice-parents and children the one to the other: and
the same their rules with his of the collateral or vice-parent, and of the
honesty of nature, only his prohibition goes beyond the prohibition of the
Canons, in the laterals that be not equal, wherein so much the nearer he draws
the^ to the law of nature, as he carries them further off from the kindred of
their flesh, this is seen in that example, viz.

PETRVS MARTINUS JOHANNES STEPHANVS MARCUS.


BERTA ROBERTUS ALBERTVS Gaius Martin
TITUS MARIA







For he prohibiteth Martin to marry with Marie, (his grandfathers neeces
nephues niece) because he may not marry with Bertaes daughter, that is, with
his sisters daughter: and this he confirms by the rule of the honesty of
nature, which is this, Cu^ naturae honestate pugnat, vt cuius siliam ducere non
potes, neptim possis, that is to say, It is against the honesty of nature that
thou should marry with his or her niece, whose daughter thou can not
marry: this for his prohibition. But for his liberty, touching that we have
said before, let us suppose Albertus has an equilaterall son unto Titius,
viz a brother that is descended, a second Martin, this Martin shall marry with
this Marie his grandfathers niece, and yet his father is Mary's first colateral
parent, that is to say, her fathers brother, notwithstanding both the rule of
collateral parent, and the rule of the honesty of nature, which should seem
as well to hold in the one as the other, for Martin may not marry with his
grandfathers daughter, that is, his aunt, by the express leuitical
prohibition; why shall he then marry with his niece, whose daughter he may not
marry by the former rule? I will not determine between so reverend a divine
and the canon laws, only I have written this, that such as have or shall
hereafter have the reading of that treatise, may enter into consultation with
themselves amongst themselves, why the elder Martin in this example should not
marry with his graund-fathers neeces nephews niece, and the younger Martin
should marry with his graund-fathers niece? only I may cite S. Ambrose, who
affirmed plainly they might not Ambr. lib. 8. Epist. 66.
marry by the law of God: but Mr. Beza answers that S. Ambrose affirmed
this memoria lapsus, as much to say, as forgetting himself. To this I may cite
another that writes thus, Quia vero Beza, hanc iuris canonici computationem
ridet and improbat ideo sciendum and obseruandum Ioachim. a Beust in
admonitione de grad page 230.
est quod in consistorijs harum terrarum (non obstante consideratione Bezae)
computatio iuris canonici obseruetur, and secundum eam pronuncietur: i. Where
(says he) Mr. Beza derideth and reprooueth the computation of the canon law,
it is therefore to be noted and observed, that in the consistories of these
provinces of ours, the computation of the canon law must be observed,
notwithstanding the consideration of Beza, and be pronounced after it.

And so the computation of the laws of our land, spiritual or lay, must be
observed, and be pronounced after them in these provinces of ours,
notwithstanding the consideration of any.

And this computation is natural: whereof more at large in the chapter of
consanguinitie hereafter. Thy ius primogeniti, thy fathers inheritance, take
it by the legal figure, it is lawful for thee, and number unto that, by that
computation there, viz. Father, Son, 1. 2. and so in order in the residue.
But seek not a wife by that computation, in the other that insueth; namely the
canonical figure, specially in the midst of the tree, thou have no portion
there: thou shall not come near it, but touch it not in any wise: it is the
kindred of thy flesh, yea, thy fathers blood, which forced, he that cast out
Adam from the garden of Eden, and set the cherubins there, and the blade of a
sword, to keep the way of the tree of life, Genesis chap. 3.
has said, That blood shall be upon thee: and though thou tarriest (i. Thou
die not the death) because the Leuit. chap. 20
judicial is gone, yet the morrall law abides, which thou transgressest, and
never dwell long in that seed, and thy fathers inheritance together: for
the Lord has set a sword, to keep the way thereof, from that posterity.

It comes thus to pass that two legal degrees do make but one canonical:
brothers (for example) reckoned after the secular laws in the second degree in
legal succession; after the canons be numbered in the first, in causes of
matrimony: their children (there) in the fourth, here in the second: (there)
their nephews in the sixth, here in the third, and so descending still in the
collateral lines (for otherwise they differ not) the 8 and 10 by the laws, the
4 and 5 by the canons, and so of the residue.

These computations mentioned here before, not regarded in their several
natures, wrought the confusion (...)

prosecute the example particularly.

The Laws we have said of the Church and this Realm of England, be diverse in
their estimation of Bastardie: that is, they repute it diversely. The canons
distinguish here, Legitimation ensues (by the canons) a subsequent marriage, in
certain cases they dispense: the laws distinguish not, they respect not
marriages that ensue, they dispense not: nevertheless they disable not (the
laws of the land) the legitimation by the canons in orders and priesthood: Adea
vero quae pertinent ad regnum (after Mr. Bracton) De acquirend. rerum dom. cap.
29
Non sunt legitimi nec heredes iudicantur, propter consuctudinem regni, quae se
habet in contrarium: that is to say, Touching the secular judgments of this
Realm, they be not legitimat nor judged to be heirs, for the contrary
observed custom in this land. The Archdeacon (for example) of York Cap.
innotuit. De elect.
unlawfully first elected to that dignity in the church of Worcester, touched
in his nativity, many things induced (especially concurring) his despensation
in the Canons, viz. Literarum scientia, morum honestas, vitae virtus; fama
personae, concors capitulielectio, petitio populi, assensus principis,
suffraganeorum suffragia, humilis denotio confite^tis, that is to say, His
knowledge in learning, his honsty in manners, the virtue of his life, the report
of his person, his agreeable choice of the chapter, the peoples request, the
prince his assent, the suffagranes voices, his own humility, which freely
chose and humbly to acknowledge rather his defect, than he would Laesa
ccnsci^tia, i. assume the pastoral office with a wounded conscience. To
conclude, such be the laws and judgments of the church, their allowance
such, and disallowance (by the laws of the land) as shall be their practice
and exercise spiritual or Lay. H. 8. Aa. 28. cap.


To end in a word this general and obscure transmission to the ordinary, note
by the way, what a subtle fallation ensued, viz. a certificate to the secular
court, neither true nor false: for so, and verum rescribatur, and falsum, i.
The ordinary may certify both right and wrong in diverse respects, for he
may certify Mulier, that is to say him, a legitimate, and rightly too, to
orders and dignities: but of the land, Bastardus, that is, To inheritance a
bastard. This for the prejudice to the laws.

Touching now the king, the prelates, his objection, their answer, their
instance, and the nobles their conclusion at Merton, Crastino sancti vinccntij,
i. The morrow after the feast of S. Vincent (there) the Archbishop of
Canturbury, his suffagranes, and greatest part of the earls and barrons of
this land assembled to the Corronation of the king, and queen Alianour his
wife, treating of the common wealth of the same, touching many articles that
concerned both the king and the queen, to the which they were summoned al,
this objection (termed in the statutes, The kings writ of Bastardy) amongst
oath matters was handled, viz. Whether one being borne before matrimony, may
inherit in like manner as he that is borne after matrimony. All the Bishops
answered unto this, That they would not nor could not answer unto it, because
it was directly against the common order of the church, and all the Bishops
instaunted the lords that they would consent that all such as were borne before
matrimony should be legitimat, as well as they that be borne within matrimony,
as to the succession of inheritance, for as much as the church accepts such
for legitimate: and all the earls and Barons with one voice answered, That
they would not change the laws of the realm, which hitherto has been used
and approved.

Postea vero die Iouis proxime post festum sancti Dionisij, that is to say, The
thursday next ensuing the feast of Dionisius, the same year, the king in his
court holden at Merton, and namely before the most reverend fathers the
archbishops of Canterbury and York, the Bishop of Chichester, lord Chancellor
then, the BB. of Duresme, Ely, Norwich, London, Bath, Excester, Carleil,
Hereford, Rochester, and many other honorable personages, provided when
Bastardy should thenceforth be objected, in the kings secular court against
any for such a cause (that is to say, Thou art a Bastard, and therefore,
Because thou were born before thy father and mother their marriage solemnised)
there should be sent Loquela (as much to say, as that transmission we have
mentioned) to the ordinary, to this effect, and in this form of words viz.
That Inquisition be made whether such or such were born before spousals or
matrimony, or not: and that the ordinary should certify again, the king in
the same for me of words, without ambiguitie.

The use of this figure and ready understanding.
THe use hereof is practiced daily in inheritances, whose right descends
Quasi ponderosum quid THE LEGAL FIGVRE^
The signification of the com passes and characters of this Figure.
g Great uncles great uncles uncle. The son (...). h his, her, son daughter.
8 i his, her, nephew niece. 9 k his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. 10 l
his, her, nephew neeces nephew niece. 11 m his, her, nephews nephews neeces
neeces son daught. 12 f Great uncles great uncle. The same aunt. 6 g his, her,
son daughter. 7 h his, her, nephew niece. 8 i his, her, nephews neeces son
daughter. 9 k his, her, nephews neeces nephew niece. 10 l his, her, nephews
nephews neeces neeces son daught. 11 e Great uncles uncle. The same aunt. iij.
5 f his, her, son daughter. iij. 6 g his, her, nephew niece. iij. 7 h his,
her, nephews neeces son daughter. iij. 8 i his, her, nephews neeces nephew
niece. 9 k his, her, nephews nephews neeces neeces son daught. 10 l Great
uncle. The same aunt. iij. 4 e his, her, son daughter. iij. 5 f his, her,
nephew niece. iij. 6 g his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. iiij. 7 h his,
her, nephews neeces nephew niece. 8 i his, her nephews nephews neeces neeces
son daught. 9 c Uncle. Aunt. ij. 3 d his, her, son daughter. ij. 4 e his,
her, nephew niece. iij. 5 f his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. iiij. 6 g
his, her, nephews neeces nephew niece. 7 h his, her, nephews nephews neeces
neeces son daught. 8 b Brother. Sister. j. 2 c his, her, son daughter. ij. 3
d his, her, nephew niece. iij. 4 e his, her, nephews neeces son daughter.
iij. 5 f his, her, nephews neeces nephews niece. 6 g his, her, nephews nephews
neeces neeces son daught. 7


eadens deorsum, recta linea vel transuersali; never ascending again the way
that it came, except it be a latere, propter defectum haeredum inferius
prouenientium: that is to say, Inheritance descends (like a weighty or
po^derous thing, that falls downwards) in a right, or collateral line,
never ascending the way it came again, but laterally or sideward, for want of
desce^ding heirs. It is thus to be understood, is that person in this figure,
whose distance in degree is demanded from every other peson in the same,
upwards, downward, or collaterally, on the fathers or the mothers side; this is
made manifest in the 6. chap. of this treatise, together with the order of
numbering the degrees in either computation. Now for the signification of the
compasses, (in this figure) and letters expressed in the same, as well great as
small, this is expressed on the side of this figure, thus: viz. by the great
letters, and the small that be lincked unto them: for example, capital F. has
six little letters lincked unto it, there is written over F. (the stock) what
term it has in consanguinitie, after the laws, and what degree unto whose
ascending stock he is; there is also written under every other little letter
that is linked unto F. the term and degree it has likewise unto, whose
Collateralls they be: the same of every capital letter, and of their
generations. This may suffice for the ascendents and collaterals; the
descendents be declared in the figure.

CHAP. III.
The Transmission or writ of certificat to the Ordinarie-The Statutarie
antecedents to the same.

REx venerabili in christo W. eadem gratia Lincoln. episcopo salutem. Sciatis
quod cum A. in curia nostra, coram nobis vel coram Just. nostris peteret versus
B. tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa, idem B. venit in eadem curia,
coram etc. et obiecit eidem A. quod nullum ius habuit in terra illa eo quod
Bastardus est, quia natus antequam talis pater ipsius A. desponsauit matrem
ipsius A. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod conuocatis coram vobis conuocandis, rei
veritatem inde diligenter inquiratis. viz. Vtrum praedictus A. natus suit
antequam praedictus talis desponsauit talem matrem ipsius A. vel post, and
inquisitionem quam inde seceris scire sacias nobis vel iusticiarijs nostris
talibus, per literas vestras patentes test, etc. The cause of this objection
in this writ of Bastardie is Prioritie of the nativity to the spousels that
ensued: the words therefore be (here) after Mr. Bracton omitted, that be
inserted in the other that ensue, viz. Et quoniam huiusmodi inquisitio pertinet
ad forum ecclesiasticum. For example, Rex talt cpiscopo salutem Sciatis quod
cum A. peteret versus B. tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa vt
iu^sumu and idem. B. venerit in eadem curia and diceret quod fuit in seysina in
eadem terra sicut de illa quaeh hereditarie descendit de quodam G. patresuo
cuius here is ipse est vt dicit, idem A. obiecit cidem B. in cadem curia nostra
quod nihil iuris potuit habere in terra illa petita quia Bastardus est, and
natus de adultera, asserens se esse filium legitimum ipsius. G. heredem, and
quoniam huiusmodi cognitio ad forum pertinet ecclesiasticum vobis mandamus quod
(conuocatis conuocandis) etc. vt supra: the reason of difference is this,
Transmission (there) is arbetrarie, necessary here: for (says Mr. Bracton)
Nihil pertinct ad iudicem ecclesiasticum cognoscere de prioritate and
posterioritate natiuitatis eius cui opponitur Bastardia, cum sponsalia vel
matrimonium hinc inde concessa sunt: that is to say, The spiritual judge has
no cognition (where spousals or matrimony be confessed on either part) of
prioritie or posterioritie of his nativity, to whom Bastardie is objected:
with whom accords the tres-reuerend Judge, sir Robert Brook, affirming it
has been tried by the country: where he distinguishes between general and
special Bastardie. The other Transmission, or rather in the other case, is
necessary, because (says Mr. Bracton) Non pertinet ad iudicem secularem
discussio, vtrum sit ibi matrimonium vel non, The deciding of matrimony, or
not, appertains not to the secular Judge.

To the common understanding of all, briefly, the writs we have mentioned
immediately here before proceeded the one of them from this objection, viz.
Birth or nativity before marriage solemnized: the other from this, viz. Issue
of a colorable wife, an adulteress, a wife de facto, and not de iure, to him
that is lawfully wedded to another, or happily to none: in our vulgar speech, and
after the plainest fashion, a whore: more ciuilly after custom and common
curtisie, a concubine, a leman, or such as was the woman of Samaria, i. A wife
without a husband.

But we must not (by the way) confound or seem to make all one the whore, the
adulteress, and the concubine, so termed in the canons, scortum, maecha,
amica, or concubina; they be verily distinguished (there) 36. Q. 1. I. ex
illa. Aliud est fornicatio: aliud stuprum: aliud a dulteriu^: aliud incestus:
aliud raptus.
Per aliud, and aliud, by one, and another, that is to say, The whore is one,
the adulteress another, the leman another, whose misliuinges and
misconstruction of my words together, may term them happily whores all three:
but note their difference, that is to say, The whore, her common request makes
her a votoresse of single life, for she will not wed. The adulteress, of
adulterium, as much to say, as ad alterius thorum, her propriety is her
husbands, but her property her own: Now, the concubine is holden at the will
of her lord. They be also distinguished by their offsprings, Manseres, Nothos,
and Spurios. Hence sprang these verses in Latin: Manscribus scortum, sed
moecha nothis dedit ortum,
Vt seges a spica, sic spurius est ab amica.


These Latin verses from the gloss I have rudely englished thus, viz.

The whore does manscr Bastard bring,
The nothos baseth' adulteress wife:
As from the care the corn does spring,
The leman is base spurius life.
AThird transmission ensues to the court christian to this effect, viz. Rex
tali episcopo salutem. sciatis quod cum A. in curia nostra coram, etc. peteret
versus B. tantam terram cum pertinentijs in tali villa vt ius suum, idem B.
venit in eadem curia and dixit quod predictus A. nihil iuris clamare poterit in
terra illa quia Bastardus est, eo quod C. pater suus cuius heredem se facit
nunquam de sponsauit matrem suam, and quoniam huiusmodi cognitio de tali
Bastardia obiecta ad forum pertinet ecclesiasticum, vobis mandamus quod
(conuocatis conuocandis) coram vobis, etc. vt supra, Here they were the parties
(by the objection of the adverse part) the parents namely of him or her to whom
this objection was made, and from whence this writ proceeds, affianced,
betrothed, and contracted; they wanted only the Churches benediction. i. They
were never solemnly nor vnsolemnly married in the face of the Church, nor
elsewhere: hereof more largely in the chapter of matrimony hereafter.

The fourth and last transmission that we purpose here to treat of, is
conceived in this form of words, viz. Rex tali episcopo salutem. Sciatis quod
cum A. in curiae nostra, etc. peteret versus B. tantum terrae cum pertinentijs
in tali villa vt ius suum, idem B. venit in eadem curia and obiecit eidem A.
quod nihil iuris inde clamare potuit quia Bastardus est, eo quod natus fuit per
tantum tempus ante matrimonium contractum solemniter in facie ecclesiae inter
talem patrem ipsius A. responsum fuit a predicto A. quod natus fuit post
matrimonium co^tractum inter patrem and matrem suam tempore interdicti,
adhibita omni solemnitate que tunc potuit adhiberi. Et quoniam huiusmodi causae
cognitio, etc. vt supra, Question was moved here of the nativity ratione
interdicti ecclesiae: that is to say, Grounded upon the prohibition of the
canons; hereof likewise in the chapter prohibition canonical: this may suffice
for the writ or transmission to the Ordinary, and so we be come to the
statutarie antecedents to the same. The occasion whereof was, a fraud objected
in parliament, in 10 of king Hen. 6.

This objected fraud was touched in general terms by Mr. Bracton in the reign
of king Henry the third: for writing (then) of the effect of legitimation,
Delegi^ and consuet. ang lib. 5. tit de except. n. 17.
his words be these, viz. Effectus vero legitimationis probatae hic est, quod
cum semel probata fuerit and indicium protali red datur in curia regis, semper
quoad omnes legitimus crit, nisi in probatione interuenerit fraus, etc. sed
fraudulenter posset fieri inquisitto hoc modo, vt si quis plures terras vel
amplus haereditates peteret a diuersis, procurare poterit petens per fraudem,
quod ab aliquo ipsorum ei opponeretur Bastardia, and it a pacisci cum eo, ne
quid diceret in testes, and contra testificata: and sic fraudulenter probare
possit legitimationem; and hic obtinere versus omnes: quod quidem esset
iniquum: The effect (says he) of legitimation is this; that once proved, and
judgment thereof given in the kings Court, he shall be always reputed and
with all men a legitimate, except there shall happen to fall out and be fraud
in the proof, etc. But thus th'inquisition may fraudulently be made, that is to
say, If one demands diverse lands, or ample hereditamentes of diverse men,
the demandant may procure by fraud, that Bastardie (by some one) be objected
against him, and covenant therewithal that he excepteth not (at the time)
against his witnesses, their persons, or depositions: and so he should prove
his legitimation, but fraudulently, and consequently prevail against all the
rest: but this were very unjust.

This fraud how near it comes to the objected fraud in the statutes, the
readers may easily discern. But to our purpose, hence proceeded the Statutarie
antecedents, mentioned to be handled in this chapter; to eschew as well such
subtle disherisons, (if need should be) in that said case, as in other the like
in time to come: touching therefore these Statutarie antecedentes, it was (by
the advice and assent of the spiritual and temporal lords, as also the
special request of the commons in that Parliament assembled) ordained and
established by authority of the same, as follows, viz. That from henceforth
all Judges of or in the courts, where any plee is, or shall be depe^ding,
taken, or moved, in which Bastardie is, or shall be alleged against any
person party to the same plee, and thereupon an issue joined, which by the law
ought to be certified by the Ordinary, that the Judges, or one Judge, of, or
in the courts where the said plee is, or shall be depending, taken, or moved
(before the time that any writ of certificate pass out of the same court to
the Ordinary, to certify upon the issue so joined, or to be joined) shall
make a remembrance under their seals, or his seal, at the suit of the
demaundant, or tenant, playntife, or defendaunt in the plee, in which the
Bastardie is or shall be alleged; reciting the issue that is joined in the
same plee of Bastardie, and certifying to the Chauncellor of the king of
England for the time being, to the intent, that thereupon proclamation be made
in the said Chauncery by three months, once in every month, that all persons
pretending any interest to object against the party, which pretends himself
to be mulier, that they sue to the ordinary, to whom the writ of certificate
is, or shall be directed, to make their allegations and objections against the
party which pretends himself to be Mulier, as the law of holy church
requires, and the said chauncellor having notice of the said remembrance and
issue joined, and required by the said demaundant or tenant, plaintiff or
defendant, having the said remembrance to make the said proclamation, as before
is said, the same chancellor for the time being, shall do to make proclamation
in form aforesaid, and the proclamation so made, shall certify in the court
where the said plee, in which Bastardie is alleged one other time shall be
depending, and that the Judges of or in the court where the same plee is, or
shall be depending, taken, or moved, before any proclamation so to be made in the
chauncerie, make one time such proclamation in the court, and also one other
time, when the proclamation shall be certified by the chauncellor of England, and
made in form above rehearsed; and then the said Judge shall award the said
writ of certificate to the Ordinary, to certify upon the issue so joined, or
to be joined; and if any writ of certificate be made or granted before that
all the proclamations in the form aforesaid be made, and certified, that then
the the said writ of certificat, and the certificate of the ordinary thereupon
made, or to be made, shall be void in law, and of none effect.

Thus much touching the Statutarie antecedents, I have thought good to deliver
verbally as I read and received the same from the Statute it self.

CHAP. IIII.
The Ordinary his office: and order in proceeding.

THe court christian is possessed (now) of the cognizance, the secular Plee in
suspense quousque, i. till return be made of the inquisition again: the
Ordinaries office (in order) ensues next: But first we will define the
Ordinary, then his office, and show withal (as what) how manifold his office
is.

It requires (this) a larger discourse, and every branch it bears, than is
convenient here, or possible to be related in so small a content; it is
therefore reserved (this) to a treatise of it self, entitled The Ordinary, as
life, health, ability, and other opportunities may finish it, only here,
according to the nature of the process, and this cognition which is summarie, it
shall suffice to relate it summarily.

The Ordinary is he, Cui a lege vel ab imperiali culmine competit ius dicendi
potestas. i. 2. q. 6. c. in iud: c.
To whom is power given, and authority from the law, or from the Prince, to
render judgment: ad vniuersaliter, i. Universally. For there be many
Ordinaries, according to the verse, Illustris primus medius, spectabilis imus,
but such an Ordinary here (by the title of Ordinary) we must understand, that
is to say, to whom is power given and authority, from the law, or from the
prince, to render judgment universally, such be the BB. of every province:
howbeit their jurisdiction is not (in this cognizance) ordinary, but delegata:
such as the jurisdiction is, quae demandatur a principe specialiter ad vnam,
vel plures causas. ff de iurisdict. om. Iud. L. morte. de off. delegat.
Quoniam. and Cap. super. and cap. pastoralis.


The under or inferior Ordinaries, principally such as be surrogates abroad in
exempted jurisdictions, we will not handle here, but else where, and there in
their places, Hi enim leuia tractant, i. Their jurisdiction consists in
lighter matters, as did the potestates and defensores, Ciuitatum and
municipales magistratus, x. Autent. de defensor Ciuit.. nos igitur, and.
audient. Colla. 3.
whose cognizance exceeded not three hundred shillings. Latissime patet, his
office is exceeding spacious, it is interposed sometime in place of principal
actions, as in case where auxilium ordinarium, i. relief y Autent. eod. d..
audient ff. de iurisdict. om. Iud. L. fin.
by way of ordinary action is wanting, but where ordinary means may be had,
there is no recourse to his extraordinary assistance, and this either at, or
without the instance of any party, aut cis inuitis, sometime it is interposed
incidenter, incidently: it rejects sometime the action, sometime it detracteth
from it, quandoque deseruit ei, i. It serves other whiles the action, or
subiecteth it self unto it: this we cannot prosecute here particularly. It is
generally his office twofold, that is to say, Noble, or mere and mercenarie,
they differ thus, (these offices) viz. His noble office is that, Quod per se
subsistit nulli actioni vel exceptioni deseruiens vel adhaerens, sed sui solius
nobilitate gaudens, his Mercenarie that, Quod adhaerit actioni, vel exceptioni,
impotens stare per scipsum, vnde famulando) deseruit alij, sicut faciunt
mercenarij, that is to say, It subsisteth his noble office of it self, relying
neither to action nor exception, but vpholden only by the exellencie of it
self, the mercenarie that, that serves or subiecteth it self to the action,
not able to stand of it self, but depends, (as mercenaries or hirelings do)
so termed. Quia nomina esse debent consequentia rebus, i. Names must be
appliable to their things.

Touching their jurisdiction, Pet. de serr. in form. lib. in act. confess.
proseruit. ver. Plenam and omnimodam. ll. ad haec vtitur and auctoritatibus
maximis, and plurimis.
the word comprehends generally merum and mixtum imperium: these be included
in the offices we have mentioned here. It comprehends also, modicam
cohertionem, or, simplicem iurisdictionem, as much to say as that quae commissa
intelligitur, eo ipso, quod causae alicuius commissio demandatur: Sp c. de
iurisdict. om. Iudicu^. d^c. expedito. modica vero coertio.
such is the cognizance of the trial of Bastardy: that is to say, Committed to
the Ordinary from the Prince.

Hence his jurisdiction in this trial is not ordinaria (as I said before) but
delagata: Nevertheless we repute him generally, namely the B. a perpetual
and natural Ordinary. Prouinc ang. in glo. Lindw. ver. ord.
.

Here we will leave the Ordinary and his general office, and return to the
point, viz. His office in the trial of Bastardie, and his order in proceeding
there: but let no man understand (by order) the order iudiciarie, substantial
process or regular solemnities required by the law: all which be discoursed in
their places in the Ordinary, according to that part of policy, and manner of
government of this land, and without which, a sentence or judgment has no
validity: for that were nothing else in summarie causes, such as this cognition
is, but to pervert order: we might speak of here plenarie, and summarie
causes, their natures, cognizance, and difference; but because the argument
will not endure herein their discourse at large, we will also amongst the rest
leave them to the tractat of the Ordinary.

Officium vero ordinarij: briefly the Ordinaries office is this, viz.
Conuocatis conuocandis, etc. that is to say, The parties summoned that be
required to be called before him in this trial, in their presence then and
either of the^ (if they appear) that he proceed to a diligent and summarie
inquisition according to the tenor of his writ, Bracton.
the order and scope whereof the law comprehends in these words, viz.
Summarie and de plano sine strepitu and figura iudicij: that is to say,
Summarily, plainly, sine strepitu, i. Without noise of advocates, such as was
the finishing of Salomons Temple: wherein was neither hewing nor hammering
heard. Reg. 3. 6.
Figura imports as much in judgment, as a perfect similitude or likeness
does in any thing else, i. The very apparent form, picture, and face as it
were of judgment it self, framed of that substantial iudiciarie order, and
process that we have mentioned.

Hereof, viz. Of such summarie causes, the plenarie cognition was reputed in
the end a wastfull prorogation, and grew to be in process of time both
hurtful, and hateful. Such be the causes of Benefices, Tithes, Matrimonies,
and Vsuries: from whence sprang the constitution, Dispendiosam.
in the canons Dispendiosam, in manner and form ordained as follows, viz.
Dispendiosam prorogationem litium quam interdum ex subtili ordinis iudiciarij
obseruatione causarum docet experientia prouenire restringere in subscriptis
casibus cupientes: statuimus vt in causis super electionibus: postulationibus,
vel prouisionibus, aut super dignitatibus, personatibus, officiijs,
canonicatibus, vel prebendis, seu quibusuis beneficijs ecclesiasticis, aut
super decimis ad quarum etiam prestationem possunt qui tenentur ad eas
premoniti censura ecclesiastica coerceri: nec non super matrimonijs vel vsuris
and eas quoquo modo tangentibus ventilandis, procedi valeat (de cetero)
simpliciter, and de plano, ac sine strepitu iudicij and figura: volentes non
solum ad futura negotia, sed ad presentia and adhuc etiam per appellationem
pendentia, hoc extendi.

I must not omit the question and doubt that arose in those times, touching
these words, summarie, de plano sine strepitu and figura iudicij: The question
and doubt was great, the Decretall therefore entitled Sepe contingit, ensued
hereupon, to manifest and explane the constitution, the question, and doubts.
Sed adhuc per ipsum decretalem (writes a learned doctor of the law) non fuit
plene consultum seu succursum auribus causidicorum: Neither (says he) is that
any marvel; and his reason is, Quia ipsorum natura ad lites querendas est
inclinata: and semper cogitant lites ex litibus suscitare.

The regular solemnities were abrogated in such summarie causes, and reserved,
so far forth, as they be mentioned to be in that decretall abrogated and
reserved, and not otherwise. The Judge is therefore freed from (in these
cognitions) the observation of judicial order and form required in other
causes in the body of the laws, Canonici and Municipalis. Nevertheless he
continues, as also the decretall forbids not, that observation in judgment
in these causes still that nature and natural reason ordained, citation c.
Pastoralis ext d^^ent. and re iudict.
(for example) is one: observed after the canonistes in Adam, whom upon his
transgression God called before him in the Garden, Genesis 3.
Adam, Vbies? Where art thou Adam? etc. Another, though no regular libell, yet
a petition or kind of narration is natural (at the least) Oretenus: This was
observed in the question of the women before Solomon: viz. Filius meus viuit,
and filius istius mortuus est: c. Afferte. de presumpt. Reg. 3. c.
As also in the woman before Jesus, Mulier, vbi est qui te accusat? etc. Her
accusation was here required. The exception also is natural (so termed) Rei
iudiacatae, and the reason is, Ne sepius iudicetur in id ipsum: But other
exceptions, such as rather tend to frustrate or delay the process, than
inform the Judge, be repulsed, as opposite (more) than agreeable to nature.
The Sacrament or oath, so termed Iuramentum calumniae, Howbeit derived from the
civil law, yet it sauoureth so of natural equity, that it is retained
amongst the rest; for this does bridle the malice of contenders. The secret
examination of witnesses, and regard of their depositions, viz. How they
accord, and conclude, is another, observed in the Elders (before Daniel)
against Susanna. "These natural observations be familiar to our reverend
Ordinaries, and their learned Officials, in their places, and the regular
solemnities in theirs; it were to be wished they were as familiar to the
residue, our rurals inferior and peculiar Judges.

But with these we have nothing to do in this trial: briefly our natural
ordinary his Processus, i. His order, is this, viz. he proceeds without
solempnitie either of Libel, or Contestationis litis: Ordinary vacatio^s he
respects not, ordained for man's necessities, dilations he abridgeth, cutteth
off frustratorie and frivolous exceptions and appeals, the multitude he
represseth of witnesses, advocates, and proctors, natural and just defenses
only he admits: urges the oath de calumpnia and veritate dicenda; Cites
unto sentence, and determines his final decrec in writing. This is the sum of
the Decretal, the substance of the text ensues. viz. Sepe co^tingit.
Sepe co^tingit quod causas committimus: and in earu^ aliquibus simpliciter ac
de plano ac sine strepitu and figur a iudicij procedi ma^damus; de quoru^
significatione verboru^ a multis conte^ditur: and qualiter procedi debeat
dubitatur. Nos autem dubitationem huiusmodi (quantum nobis est possibile)
decidere cupientes, hac in perpetuum valitura constitutione sancimus, vt iudex
cui taliter causam co^mittimus, necessario libellum non exigat, litis
co^testationem non postulet, in tempore etiam feriarum ob necessitates hominum
in dultarum a iure, procedere valeat, amputet dilationum materiam litem quanto
poterit saciat breuiorem, exceptiones, appellationes dilatorias, and
frustratorias repellendo: partium aduocatorum, and procuratorum contentiones
and Iurgia, testiumque superfluam multitudinem refrenando, non sic tamen Iudex
litem abbreuiet: quin probationes necessariae and defensiones legitimae
admittantur.

Citationem vero, and praestationem iuramenti de calumnia velmalitia, sieve de
veritate dicenda, ne veritas occultetur per commissionem huiusmodi intelligimus
non excludi.

Verum quod iuxta petitionis formam pronunciatio sequi debet per partem
age^tis, et etiam rei (si quid petere voluerit) est in ipso litis exordio
petitio facienda: siuescriptis, sieve verbo, actis tame^continuo, vt super
quibus positiones and articuli for mari debea^t, possit haberi plenior
certitudo, and vt fiat desinitio clarior, inserenda.

Et quod positiones ad faciliorem expeditionem litium propter partium
confessiones and articulos ad clariorem probationem vsus longeuus in causis
admisit, nos vsum huiusmodi obseruari volentes, statuimus vt iudex sic
deputatus a nobis (nisi aliud de partium voluntate procedat) ad dandum simul
vtrosque terminum dare possit and ad exhibe^dum omnia acta and munime^ta quibus
parts vti volunt in causa; post dationem articulorum diem certam quandocunque
sibi videbitur valeat assignare: eo saluo, quod vbi remissionem sieri
contingeret pro testibus producendis, possint etiam instrament a produci,
assignatione huiusmodi non obstante: interrogabit etiam parts sieve ad earum
instan tium sieve ex officio, vbicunque hoc equitas suadebit: sententiam vero
definitiuam citat ad id, licet non peremtorie partibus inscriptis and prout
magis sibi placuerit stans, vel sedens, proferat: etiam si ei videbitur
conclusione non facta, prout ex petitione and probatione and alijs actitatis in
causa suerit faciendu^. Quae omnia etia^ in illis casibus in quibus per aliam
constitutionem nostra^ vel alias procedi potest simpliciter, and de plano ac
sine strepitu and figura iudicij voiumus obseruari. Si tame^ in praemissis
casibus solemnis ordo iudiciarius in toto, vel in part, non contradicentibus
partibus obseruetur, non erit processus propter hoc irritus, nec etiam
irritandus.

The incident question is now returned whence it came, and certified to the
secular court: the ordinary Functus est officio suo, we leave the nativity
therefore discussed, by virtue of the kings transmission, to the, censure of
the secular judges, and descend continuing still our style (in natiuities)
canonically to matrimony and legitimate issue.

CHAP. V.
Of matrimony, and Legitimat issue.

Our scope has been hitherto tied to a limited jurisdiction, viz. The secular
Transmission from the king: we have not therefore defined Bastardie, and so we
deem it needless still, the legitimate issue may verily suffice for this:
that is to say (as contraries do) the one to explane the other.

But legitimat issue, let no man understand legitimate only, that is to say,
such as be adopted children, for there is in such but a bare immitation of
nature, neither have we use (in this land) of adoption nor arrogation, but
natural and legitimat, that is the legitimate issue we speak of here, viz.
Natural and Legitimate both: natural, so termed, Quia naturaliter generati;
legitimat, ex Legitima parentum coniunctione approbata per leges, that is to
say, Natural, of their natural begetting; legitimat, of their parents lawful
conjunction, approved by the laws: this is the issue of the body lawfully
begotten, other issue have thou none but Bastards.

What shall then become of the issue sprung from Clandestine marriages?
Clandestine marriages we call them Quae clam contrahuntur, that is to say, That
be contracted so privily that they cannot be lawfully proved by witnesses, C
1. andC. Cu^ inhibitio ext. de Cland. desp.
shall that be bastarded? I say not so without exception, but I counsel thee
trust it not, for I assure thee, (howsoever the matrimony holds before God
and the world) if the parties shall both of them acknowledge it, incurring
only a corporal penance, and the clerk that shall celebrate the same, but
3. years suspention from his office, yet if the one confess it not, or that
which is more, renounce the marriage, and the other prove it not, (for in this
case the party is enjoined to prove that pleads the matrimony) d. c. 1.
Cland. desp.
verily proved, it holds, Coram Deo and Ecclesia, i. Before God and the
congregation, otherwise, Coram Deo, qui corda scrutatur, etc. that is to say,
Before God it shall stand; the searcher of the secreats of all hearts: but
Ecclesia non iudicat de occultis, It is too secreat for the church to
determine. Touching therefore this issue, to come to the determination of the
church, i. The law of the church, Let us wade but a little further, and suppose
by the way but that that falls out indeed often times: viz. Thou contractest
thy self and marriest (privily) with a woman, who afterward contracteth and
marries openly with another, whose wife shall she be?

Touching the resurrection, our savior Christ answered such a question to the
Saduces Mat. 22.
but thus the law does answer this. viz. either it may (the Clandestine
marriage) be proved, and then it shall preiudise the public ensuing contract,
touching first the consumation c. Quod nobis in sin. de Cland. desp. etc. quod
nobis. qui fill. sunt legitimi.
of the public, if it be not consumated: next, it shall prejudice it, if it
be consumate, touching the legitimation of children: but namely of such as be
borne of the public matrimony, post receptionem ecclesiae, that is to say,
After the Church has received and published the Clandestine: c. 2. Qui filsunt
legit.
and not otherwise: For from the publication of the clandestine marriage, the
public shall be judged unlawful, but the issue not disabled of the public
that is sprung before, d. c. 2. Eod. tit.
though the marriage be disolued afterward: so this danger thou contractest
withal, whosoever, that weddest thy wife in the dark: And more than that, if
happily he beget her with child (as such mischances fall, whether before or
after publication of thy marriage) so it be borne in matrimony, be advised
whether the law (in favor of legitimation) groundeth not more upon thy
possible excess, than the actual cohabitation of the other: presuming him an
adulterer Bald. in L. si a matre. Eod. de suis and legit. Ab. in c. accedens.
de purg. Can. ext.
; co^seque^tly if thou verifiest not the proverb, my cow, my calfe: the bull
is not regarded.

For touching the cohabitation of thy wife with an adulterer, whatsoever may be
said in the canon and civil laws, consider (for more surety) after the
laws of this land, whether thou art within or without the foureseas, at such
time as the child be conceived. Bracton. De leg. and cons. ang. lib. 1. c. 9.
in fin. Brook. tit. Bastardy. n. 4.


A second danger thou hazardest in Clandestine marriages, whether greater,
less, or equal with the other, I will not stand to prove, but measure it,
and take it as it is, viz. Thou tastest happily the forbidden fruit: Look more
for this in the figures and declaration of consanguinitie and affinity in the
6 and 7 chapters ensuing, there is pictured for thee the tree and the fruit:
Well, thou tastest the forbidden fruit with good intent: for so the law
inte^deth thou had bonam fidem, if thou knewst it not: i. Thou tookest her
not to be of kin, or at the least so near of kin unto thee: thy issue
shall be bastarded (here) by reason of thy Clandestine marriage: Nec de parentum
ignorantia, vllum est habitura subsidium, i. Excluded quite from the benefit
of their parents simple ignorance: of whom the law presumes (in case of
Clandestinitie) that they were not (thy parents) unwitting of their impediment,
or affectors rather of that ignorance: howbeit otherwise, that is to say,
contracted in the face of the Church, their ignorance had relieved them. d. c.
Cum inhibibitio. Si quis. ext. eod. tit.


Nevertheless understand this in issue that is had ante latam sententiam
diuortij, i. Before the sentence given of divorce: for so conceive withal,
they must be divorced howsoever. Si tamen infideles, qui secundu^ vetetis, vel
propriae legis instituta, circa gradus co^sanguinitatis, vel affinitatis a
canonibus notatos, coniu^cti sunt, domino inspirante, conuersi fuerint,
matrimoniu^ antea contractum non erit post baptismi lauacrum irritandum: cum
per sacramentum baptismi, non soluantur coniugia, sed crimina dimittantur. Vnde
and proles indenata legitima censibitur. c. de infidelibus. ext. de co^sang.
and aff. Haec instit. iuris can. lib. 2. tit 13. si tamen. Lancelot.


Touching legitimation, it is otherwise in these prohibited marriages, howbeit
openly and solemnly had in the face of the Church where the parents be privy
to their impediments. d c. Cu^ inhibitio. eod. tit


The like of him or her that marries a second husband or wife, living the
first: Bracton.
in which case also as in the other before, Solemnity, Clandestinitie,
Priuitie, and Ignorance, have their effects accordingly.

Here we may remember (and not without cause) the divorced husband and wife:
but why do I term them divorced, if man and wife? or why man and wife, if
divorced? do they not marry again with others (living the divorced)? they
do, but they do not well therein; the positive laws of the Church be against
it: and therefore I term them the divorced husband and wife, that is to say,
divorced only a cohabitatione, i. From mutual dwelling and cohabitation
together, and not (as some would have it) a vinculo, from the band of marriage,
which is indissoluble.

They may read in the Epistle to the Corinthians 1. Cor. cap. 7
thus: Unto the married I command, not I, but the Lord; Let not the wife depart
from her husband: but and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be
reconciled to her husband: and let not the husband put away his wife. And
again, Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be loosed: they answer,
Except Cap. eod.
it be for whoredom: they say well; hereby they put her away: but do they
marry (during her life) with another, by the same exception? When Jesus had
showed himself to his disciples at the sea of Tiberias, which was the third
time he appeared unto them after he was risen from the dead, he communed there
with Simon Peter, when they had dined, and signified in the end unto him by
what death he should glorify God. Lord (said Peter) what shall this man do?
meaning that disciple who^ Jesus loved so, and that leaned on his breast at
supper. What is that to thee (saidour savior) if I will that he tarry till I
come? follow thou me. Then went this word abroad amongst the brethren, that
this disciple should not die: yet our Lord said not, he shall not die, but if
I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? So, this is gone
abroad, He may marry another: yet the Lord has not said, He may marry
another; no more than (when he spoke, Thou shall not take a wife with her
sister during her life) he said, Thou may marry with her sister, thy wife
being dead: Basilius therefore answered unto this, Epist. ad Diodorum, Non
temere ex eo quod scriptum est, colligendum esse quod scriptum non est: that is
to say, That that is not written, must not be unadvisedly gathered, from that
that is written: no nor yet that thou shall put away thy wife for whoredom art
thou commmanded to it, nor commended for it: nevertheless (for that) thou art
permitted. Will thou be assured in this case, and walk where thou need not
waver, but ground thy self on faith indeed, August. in coment. suo ad ^. Cor.
cap 7. and in Hom. 49. de adulteritus coniu^is. quae sententia allegatur in
cap. ^ Quemadmodum 32. Q 7. Idem tenet Hieron. ad damas praesbit. (...) cap.
omnes. D. 32. Q. 7. vid. Q. per totum, and con(...) allegat.
and so to be free from sin? Abstain, or else be reconciled: in no wise
contract a new with any other upon divorce, and separation made by the Judge
for a time, the laws yet standing to the contrary. Besides diverse learned
and most reverend Fathers and Councels of the Church be against thee.

But, Hinc illae lachrimae: These contracts we have mentioned, afford them
the greatest favor the law presumes for them: the Scandal remains yet a
blot (in perpetuity) notwithstanding: for, Post secutam copulam and sufceptam
prolem detectis quibusdam impedimentis, non sine graui scandalo contracta
matrimonia retractari oporteat. Marriages (that is to say) confumat with bodily
knowledge and children, detected afterward of certain impediments, without
great offense, cannot be dissolved. Glo. in sum. 30. Q 5 and can. Si quis (...)
5^. His itaque. did. 30 Q 5.


A second offense arises exceeding this in a higher degree so termed, Reatus
adulterij: as much to say, as the breach of the 6 commandment: and thus it
falls out, viz. Si alter coniugi^ qui clam contraxerit coniugiu^ negauerit
(legitimis probationibus deficie^tibus) iudicis sente^tia rite fuerit
absolutus; vterque alijs nubendo, incurrit reatum adulterij, i. If one of these
privy contractors shall deny the matrimony, and consequently (for want of
proof) be freed from the other by sentence of the judge, they incur either
of them, by marrying unto others, the danger of adultery. De clandest. desp.
Iud. iuris Canon Lancelot.


Hence it was provided, Consultissime by the law, C. 2. 30. Q 5.
vt nullus fidelium occulte nuptias contrahat. i. That Christians should not so
privily make their marriages, but that the minister of the Church should
against the co^sumation of the same, proclaim or publish (as we term them)
the bans to this effect, that if any man or woman could allege any lawful
impediment why such and such, etc. should not be joined in lawful matrimony,
they should then allege it, etc. at the first, second, third, or last
publication, etc. the minister is also enjoined, vt ipse inuestiget vtrum
aliquod futuro matrimonio obsistat impedimentum, as much to search, as in him
may lie, if any obstacle (or not) may repulse the matrimony approaching. D. c.
cum inhibitio in princip. ext. eod. tit.


This law is more precisely observed in other countries than in many parts of
ours, especially our exempted iurisdictio^s, for there it will not serve, I mean
where this observation is, to dwell a year or two in a place (having been a
stranger else all the days of his life) to make him of that parish only where
he dwells in respect of matrimony, if he contracteth there: but shall be sent to
seek the places whence he came, and letters testimonial from thence, namely
from the ministers of those remote and far distant places, to testify of him,
(touching marriage there) whether he be bound or free; Abbas reports this
observation in his time, the which Panormita^ relating, two learned doctors, of
great authority of opinion is clear touching the mind of the letter of the
law, that so it ought to be in such cases: and for mine own part, (Saluo
semper meliori iudicio) if the law be not such with us, it shall lie open to a
manifest fraud, for what is that to Barwicke where I was borne, and lived
thirty years together, the bannes should be published two years after at
Islington or S. John's parish, by London, where I dwelt and am dwelling, in the
one and in the other, but two bare years, happily two months, yea why should
not two days serve my turn? I fly from Barwicke, and am entertained at
Islingto^, where I rest a winters night, and having contracted my self with my
Mistress, or her maid, for some causes best known to our selves, I take my
leave honestly in the morning, and am entertained again fresh and fasting in S.
John's parish, there I pray (the morrow after) publicatio^ in the parish church
of matrimony, betwixt me and I know not whom, for my accquaintance was but
small, yet I can name my self, my mistress (you must suppose her a wyddowe) or
her maid, or if my memory fayles me, I have their names in writing; Islington
is a common name known far and near, there dwells mine old mistres and my
fellow, and there dwelt I for a long winters night together: as for S. John's
parish, I shall not need to charge my memory with it, it is sufficient I tender
the bannes there, and say whose man I am; we shall be thus denounced, my new wife
and I together, at these two parishes, and my poor old wife at Barwicke,
shall be never the wiser.

This (says Panormitan) he has seen, De facto, in his time, and surely
iniquity is riper in ours, yea rotten ripe, it is but needless to feign an
example, for let him say that has not seen, or credibly heard of, (in this
age of ours) as great experience as this: and whence comes it? verily, after
Clandestine marriages always premised first, next from the inconsiderat
examining the condition and state of the person, and certifying with the like
discretion, and receiving their certificates together, whose bannes and marriage
they publish and solemnise.

This I could counsel them whom it concerns in that behalf, to look unto,
for two causes; the one, the open scandal that may ensue such marriages and
contracts; the iminent danger the other, of the Canon; that points at the
world, this at themselves: the law has Duplicem mente^, not a double meaning,
such as is their exercise that fold them as they list, but the same
understanding in both, the only difference is, the one is nearer, the other
further off, viz Extensiua^, and comprehensiuam, of these in the tractat of the
ordinary. In the mean time (touching the mind I have delivered here of the
canon in Clandestine marriages) such as be disposed, and whom it concerns
besides, let them learn if they please, and sure it is worth the knowledge,
whether it comprehends, or we have extended unto it.

And touching Clandestine marriages generally, such be moreover said to be so,
in which be omitted Solemnitates quas ecclesia de honestate requirit. D. c. cum
inhibitio. eod. tit.
that is to say, Such decent solemnities as the church has ordained, as
Publicu^ proclama, traductio in ecclesia^, benedictio sacerdotis, annulus, etc.
Nevertheless they shall not, the defect of these, frustrate the marriages had,
if no other impediment ensue, only it hinders the co^sumatio^ of the contract
not had, and as we have said, they agrauate the pain, they be not otherwise
reputed for substance, but dece^cy, according to the text, Omnia decenter and
secundu^ ordinem fiant etc. Nevertheless concurring with lawful impediments
and detected (as in other cases of Clandestinitie) they disable also the issue.
Glo. in d. c. cum inhibitio ver. Clandestina. eod. tit.


Hostiensis, of no less authority tha^ learning, concludes generally that
every matrimony had against the churches prohibition general, or special,
expressed, or not expressed, shall be deemed Clandestine and subject to the
Canon. Host. super c. cum inhibitio Pan. eod.


Here I might speak of the prohibited times to marry, that is to say from the
first sunday in aduent, to the octaues of the Epiphanie inclusiuely, the first
prohibition. The second from the Lxx. sunday, to the octaues of Easter
inclusiuely. The third, from the first Rogatio^ day, till the seventh of
Pentecost, that is to say, till Trinity sunday: upon which day it is lawful
to solemnize De ferijs c. capellan. exc. ^^nd. de dec. and oblat. ver.
nubentium.
.

This has been, and is the observation of the Church at this day, namely to
suspend in these times not the beginning, nor ratification of matrimony,
Patrimonium initur. per spo^sionem, ratificatur per conse^sum, co^sumatur per
copulam.
but the accessorie solemnities only, and the consumation of the contract;
neither can I find it so strict, this temporal prohibition, as it is (for the
most part) interpreted to be, for thus I find it qualified, viz. Haec autem
seruanda sunt, si vxor consensum adhibere voluerit, the gloss adds and
contra: that is to say, This abstinence takes place, if the wife shall consent
thereunto: and likewise if the husband, for they have not power of their bodies
in themselves, but either over other in due benevolence: this the canons term
Debitum coniugale, wherein they be prohibited to defraud one another, except it
be by consent for a time 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4. 5.
; no reason then the Church should defraud them both. Let me not offend, in
showing the significations I have read of these prohibited times to marry,
leaving the same unto them, that best be able to judge them.

The time of Aduent, represented Tempus absentiae sponsi, i. The absence of the
bridegroom, in the which his spouse most of all desires, Aduentum, i. The
coming of her husband, and which she importuneth daily. This she inquireth of
passengers too and fro, abandoning all delights, so says a father, Sponsa
ecclesia tempore aduentus querit in lectione prophetarum quos tunc legit and
qui de hoc certam habuerunt reuelatione^: Ideo in memoriam sponsi absentis, sed
desiderati, ecclesia tunc temporis ordinat filios suos a nuptijs abstinere. The
spouse (says he) the Church, even seeks so this time, the coming of her
bridegroom in the Prophets, which then she reads and who have had thereof
certain revelation; and therefore she has this time of Aduent in remembrance
of her absent, but most desired bridegroom, ordained that her sons should
abstain from marriage Itinerar. Paradis. de mat. ser. 2.
.

The second prohibition represented Tempus luctus in quo lugemus casum Ad^: and
casum nostrum in ipso. The second prohibition, that is to say, the time of
lent, it represented a time of mourning; wherein we bewailed the fall of Adam,
and (in him) our own: and the dangers consequently herein we have fallen into.
We should not therefore in these dangers rejoice, but lament rather and pray:
it has not therefore in this time, the Church, wherein she bewailed her sins,
in dread of such imminent dangers, given liberty to her children to marry.

Here they have inferred, that Noah whilst he was in the Arc, knew not his
wife, nor his sons theirs; but lived there apart, yea and all other creatures
besides, both male and female: for having continued in the arc, by the space
of a year, they are not read any of the^ to have multiplied. Again the
scripture Genesis 7. 7.
speaking of the entrance of Noah into the Arc mentions it thus; Noah
entered, and his sons: and afterward (as though they went apart) and his
wife, and his sons wives: but otherwise of his going forth, viz. Go forth of
the Arc, thou and thy wife, and thy sons and thy sons wives with thee: Genesis 8.
16.
So that the words which were in their entrance used apart; were used together
in their going forth. Hence Hierome writes upon Zachary, Temporibus
tribulationis and luctus non debere sapientem inserutre operibus nuptiarum,
that is to say, That they ought not, the acts of marriage, to be yielded to
(of him that his wife) in the times of tribulation and mourning.

Plangent terrae, etc. And the Prophet Zecharian. 12
writes thus of the siege of Judah against Jerusalem. In that day shall there
be a great mourning in Jerusalem, etc. And the land shall bewail, every
family apart: the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart;
the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart; the family of
the house of Leui apart, and their wives apart; the family of Shimei apart,
and their wives apart: all the families that remain, every family apart, and
their wives apart.

The third prohibited time, including the Ascension and Penticost, (hereunto
were added the 8 days after Easter) represented Tempus glorificationis, wherein
(says the Lord) Luke 20. 36.
we shall be Sicut angeli Dei, i. Equal with the angels of God, which neither
marry, nor are married. Briefly, the first prohibited time mentioned here,
represented the time of reconciliation: the second of tribulation: the third of
glorification.

This for the prohibitio^s (I have read) of the times; but where we have
mentioned De legitima parentum coniunctione approbata per leges, in the
beginning of this chapter, that is to say; Of the lawful conjunction of man and
woman approved by the laws: it rests of the prohibition of the persons: for
so we shall judge of lawful conjunctions, and so of lawful issue. And
touching these persons since they be in nearenesse in themselves, discerned
by consanquinity, and affinity; and consequently whether prohibited (there) to
marry or not, we have next declared consanguinitie and affinity in their
orders, to manifest the prohibitions the better.

CHAP. VI.
Of consanguinitie or blood: the figure and declaration thereof.

COnsanguinitie is a bond or link of persons descended of the same stock,
derived from carnal propagation: so called, Consanguinitas, quasi sanguinis
vnitas: That is to say, Consanguinitie of the unity or community of blood.
Io. And. in decla. arb. consang.
And this, whether it be lawfully contracted or otherwise: that is to say,
Carnal knowledge and issue had in fornication, equally contracteth
consanguinitie with matrimonial knowledge, touching the prohibition of
marriage. De preb c. per tuas. 28. 11. 8. c. 7 statute.


Now to discern prioritie or neerenesse in blood, two things must be regarded
principally, so called, Linea, and Gradus: as much to say as the line and
degree: whose uses the figure here ensuing shall declare at large, viz. to be
the one of them, namely the line that, that gathers together the persons,
containing their degrees, and distinguishing them in their numbers, this is
called Collectio personarum: the other the state or condition of the distant
persons, showing them how near they be, or how far asunder (in themselves)
from their common stock, or either from other: This is called Habitudo
distantium personarum: and dicitur gradus ad similitudinem scalarum graduum,
sieve locorum procliutum, quia ita gradimur de proximo ad proximum. L.
Iurisconsultus. ft. de arb. aff.


It is also to be noted, this line to be threefold; that is to say, Ascending,
Descending, and Collateral. L. 1. aff. de grad. aff. c. 1. 26. Q. 5.


The ascending line is from me to my father, to my grandfather, great
graund-father, and so vpwardes: in this figure from to A. B. C. D.
Contrariwise, the descending line from me to my son, nephew, his son,
downwards: in this figure, likewise from to a. b. c. d.

The collateral line is placed on either side: this is also noted to be
twofold, viz Equal and unequal. The equal colleteral is that, where equally
they differ, the persons, from their common stock: as brothers and sisters be
equally distant from their father, as also be brothers and sisters children
from their graundfather.

The unequal, where one precedeth or goes before or after another, such be
brothers, and their brothers or sisters children, and others apparent in this
present figure, as also in the Legal figure before, easily discerned by their
equal or unequal distance, by relation from themselves to their common stocks.
Common stocks understand such as be placed in this figure from vpwardes in the
ascending line, A. B. C. D. there is proceeding from these, on either side, a
generation manifest in this figure; such be Collaterals, equal or unequal,
distinguished by their places: for example, Let us make A the first stock in
the ascending line, for so it falls out by order and course of nature, is
descended from him, who points at his equal collaterals b 1. b 1. on either
side: behold then the descent from b 1. is c 1. from thence d 1, from thence e
1; now b 1 is in the first degree to, c 1 in the second, d 1 in the third, e 1
in the fourth; these be all from the stock A. viz. b 1, c 1, d 1, e 1,
collaterals unto, i. one equal on either side, at whom he points
equilaterally, namely b 1; the other three unequal, each further distant from
him than other: for so they exceed (first) the equal collateral line of, and
next they exceed themselves in descending as they go.

The second stock is B, A is descended from him in this figure, and c 2. on
either side: from c 2. is descended d 2, from d 2 e 2, from e 2 f 2. B is here
in the second degree ascending unto, and b in the second degree descending unto
him, unto whom upwards and downwards he points directly, he points also at
d2. and d2. collaterally, these be all from the stock B. viz. c2. c2. d2. d2.
e2. e2. f2. f2. collaterals unto as the other were in the stock before, that is
to say d2. and d2. equals, c2. and c2. extend not to his line, and e2. e2. f2.
f2. exceed it. Here is likewise one equal collateral unto on either side, and
three unequals, exceeding (as the other did) themselves, in their descending as
they go.

And they be thus in degree unto viz. c2. and c2. in the second degree, d2. and
d2. in the same second degree, e2. and e2. in the third, f2. and f2. in the
fourth, not increasing in the collaterals from the stock til they exceed the
equal collateral line of, such be from the first stock c1. d1. e1. which
increase in every person, from the equal line unto one degree.

Such be also from the second stock e2. f2. from the third stock g3. The
fourth generation determines in this figure at the collateral equal line, viz.
h4: from the fourth and last stock in the fourth degree unto. This is after
the Canons, and not the secular laws, whose reason and difference we have
handled in the second chapter before, nevertheless it shall not be superfluous
to deliver (as they term them) such Magistral rules as the autenticall
masters, fathers and doctors of the law have determined in these lines to
distinguish as well the degrees, as to show the difference we have mentioned
between the laws and the Canons, the first whereof is this, viz.

In the right or straight ascending and descending lines, how many persons
there be (computation had The first rule
of themselves and the persons that be placed betwixt them) whose distance is
demanded, substracting but one, there be so many degrees. For example, if Vna
dempta.
thou will know how many degrees D. differs in this figure from, thou shall
find (with themselves and those together betwixt them) five persons, conclude
there be four degrees, and that they differ consequently, and D, either from
other, in the fourth degree.

The same conclusion is of and his descending d. for there be numbered likewise
five persons, and so concluded four degrees.

If thou would know how they differ, D. from d, thou shall find there be
numbered nine persons, conclude eight degrees, and that they differ
consequently D. and d. either from other in the eight degree: the rule holds
in this line in the residue, all one here after the laws and Canons, only
their difference is in the Collaterals, whose Magistral rules be these, viz.
Collaterals in the equal line, how many persons The second rule.
there be from either of them to their common stock, so far they differ either
from other; from (for example) to D. there be four persons, from h4. likewise
to the same stock D, be four persons, and h4. shall differ therefore, and be
distant from themselves in the fourth degree. This is after the Canons.

After the laws it is otherwise, viz. collaterals in the equal line, how far
they differ either of the^ from their stock in number of persons, in that
number doubled they be distant from themselves; this is apparent in the Legal
figure, in the 2. Chap. before, for example, in that Legal figure differs as
it does here in the same number of persons from D and from h 4 to the same D
there, there be numbered likewise four persons; either of these numbers doubled
from the persons to their common stock, that is to say, either from to D, or h
4 to the same D, in that Legal figure makes the number of eight: so many
degrees shall the persons be a sunder, and this diversity arises as we have
touched in the 2. Chap. before, in that every person adds a degree in the
collaterals, after the laws: as two brothers make two Legal degrees, which
after the Canons do make but one. Their computations be diverse, as also their
causes be diverse, whose reasons and difference we refer to the said 2.
chapter before, only this difference we may note in this place, because it is
not mentioned there, viz. In the equal collateral line, whether the line
consists of even or odd numbers, the degree falls always out (in number)
to be even, after the laws: this may be seen in the Legal figure in the 2. and
4. and 1. and 3. stocks there, for 2. make 4. and 4. make 8. in the equal
collateral line, as also do 1 make 2, and 3, 6, in the same collateral line:
this appears in this Canonical figure otherwise, for 1 makes one, 3 three,
5. five, etc.

The rule remains now to be spoken of, touching The third rule.
collaterals in the unequal line, which after the Canons is this, viz.
Collaterals in the unequal line, how far they differ (the furdest of the^) from
their stock, so far they be either of them distant from themselves: for
example, D is the stock to and f4 in this figure, to know their distance in
blood, we must make our computation from the furthest: this appears in the
figure to be, which differs in the fourth degree from D, so many degrees
therefore shall he differ from f4 and consequently and f4 either from other.
The same in the other descending collaterals unto, Vsque ad lineam
aequalitatis: that is to say, The same computation that is had from to the said
common stock, the same computation shall hold between and every descending
person from the same stock collateral unto, even to his equal collateral
line: for they increase not (as we have said before) one degree unto, till they
shall have exceeded his equal collateral line.

This (if we prosecute our example in the same stock, D) shall be manifest: for
differing from this stock in the fourth degree, differs therefore from e4 in
the fourth degree, from f4 in the fourth, from g4 in the fourth: and from h4 in
the fourth. Hence it is holden an infallible rule in the canons, that a person
begotten, begets not a degree, till the equal line be exceeded: and then
(and not before) they increase in every added person.

It is otherwise after the legal computation, for after the laws it is thus:
viz collaterals in the unequal line, how many persons there be, (substracting
the stock) so many degrees. This appears in the same stock and persons that
we supposed in the canonical computation before: for differs here (as
there) from D in the fourth degree: but e 4 (here) in the fifth, f4 in the
sixth, g4 in the seventh, and h4 in the eight, and so every person without
exception (after the laws) does increase a degree. I refer thee for example
to the legal figure.

It shall be needless to prosecute every particular stock in this figure at
large, for the same reason holds This figure is placed at the end of the next
chapter here ensuing: together with the figure of affinity there. Secundum,
Ioh. An.
of those we have touched, and the residue: We leave them therefore (with this
relation) to the figure ensuing here of Consanguinitie, descending to the
figure and declaration of affinity, according to our promised order.

CHAP. VII.
Of affinity or alliance by marriage. The figure and declaration thereof.

Affinity is (after the Laws) personarum proximitas proueniens ex justice
nuptijs: as much in effect, as a neerenesse of persons proceeding from lawful
marriages Non facile.. affines. and. sciendum ff. de grad. affinit.
: for so it is contracted, and not otherwise, after the civil laws: howbeit
the canons have and do also, respect affinity in this place, as we have
mentioned of consanguinitie in the chapter going before, that is to say,
Equally contracted in matrimony, and otherwise De prob. d. c. per tuas.
statut. praeal. H. 8. Anno. 28. c. 7.
: for after the canons, it is (Affinity) personarum proximitas ex quocunque
coitu proueniens: owni carens parentela, A ncerenesse of persons proceeding
from every carnal knowledge, without any manner of parentage, or auncestrie.
And of that affinity we speak of here: so called (Affinitas) quasi duorum ad
vnum finem vnitas: As much to say, as an union or consolidation of two, viz.
that be diverse in one: for so they be, diverse kinreds, by marriage or other
copulations conjoined.

By this, it is contracted (Affinity) two manner of ways; First by lawful
marriages; next by unlawful knowledge c. Discretionem. c. penult. ext. de eo
qui cog. consang. vx. suae.
: And hereof there be three sorts or kinds. The first is contracted thus, viz.
My brother and I be Consanguins in the first degree, he takes a wife, her they
call Personam additam personae per carnis copulam, as much in effect as, a
person added to another by carnal or fleshly knowledge: this is the first kind
of affinity, contracted by means of my brother; that is to say, between his
wife and me: and the first degree: for thus they be (the kinds and degrees)
discerned in affinity, viz. By the persons that be in consanguinitie or blood,
nearer or further off: distinguished in the figure before, by their several
distance. For example, my brother is the first degree to me in consanguinitie:
his wife in affinity: my brothers son, in the second: his nephew in the
third: his nephews son, in the fourth, they in consanguinitie: their wives in
the same degrees; second, third, or fourth unto me, but they in affinity: they
alter verily attinentiam, these added persons: that is to say, They attain not
to (in me) by their addition that, that I have attained (by blood) in the
persons they be added unto: for herein (that is to say, in attinencie) we be
distinguished by consanguinitie, and affinity: briefly (that I may use the
terms) my brother is my consanguine, his wife my affine, only they retain
and participate with me the degree, be it first, second, third, or fourth, that
I have with the persons they be carnally known by, the which they alter not.

Consequently they shall be, every person in consanguinitie to my wife, in
affinity unto me; in what degree in the one, in that degree in the other; but
always in the first kind, be they brother, sister, nephew, niece, or any
other person mentioned in this figure: for note, it contains not (this
figure) but only affinity in the first kind, and that to the fourth degree:
forasmuch as the prohibition of marriage, by the canons (now) exceeds not the
same in kind, nor degree. c. Non debet consan. and aff.


It shall be necessary here, we further declare the force and operation of
affinity (touching this prohibition of marriage) that is sprung by unlawful
knowledge, either in matrimony, or without: for so it may be as unlawfully
contracted in the one, as in the other; as if Titius shall have knowledge with
Berta, whose mother he marries afterward, and knows her likewise carnally,
in this case shall Titius be divorced from Bertas mother, and prohibited to
contract with Berta her self; and the reason is, Titius shall not dwell with
the mother whom he married, because he contracted affinity with her before,
in his knowledge had with her daughter. And he shall Stat. anno 28. Hen. 8 cap.
8. verse, and further to dilate. etc. Haec etia^ per can per issin.i iuris.
not marry with Berta, because he contracted affinity also with her, in his
knowledge had with her mother: and therefore (in this case) the first affinity
dissolues the marrimonie had with the mother: the second hinders the matrimony
to be had with the daughter.

Briefly thus the law considers in these cases, viz. which goes before, or
follows, the affinity, or the contract; if affinity, then the contract is
disabled that is had afterward; but if the contract, that affinity
prevails nothing that is subsequent. We shall not C. discretioneme. tuae, c.
fin. de eo qui cog. cons. vxoris suae.
greatly seem to digress from our purpose briefly to rehearse the other two
kinds of affinity, if but to distinguish the later from the repealed Canons:
for note, the prohibition also extended unto them 35. Q. 3. c. de affinitate,
and ext. de cland. desp. c. inhibitio.
.

The second kind therefore of affinity is this, viz. Ad to the first kind
thereof a person carnally, as to thy brothers wife (supposing thy brother to be
dead) a second husband, a second husband I term him, in respect of thy
affinity with her; for happily she had uttered a double second before, with
these thou have nothing to do, but this second to thy brother, more properly
thy brothers successor, is the second kind of affinity unto thee 35. Q. eod.
de propinquis.
.

If thou will have the third breefly, it is this, ad to thy second affinity a
person likewise carnally, as to thy brothers wives husband (supposing her to
be dead as thy brother was before) another wife this is, Quid pro quo, one for
another, merrily englished. For a reed a Rams horn; but in earnest take her
and thy third affinity together.

So it is said to be Primum genus, i. The first kind of affinity, Quia primo
emanat de consanguinitate: vel quiae (vna persona mediante) contr ahitur.
Secundum, i. The second kind of affinity, Quia secundo loco emanat, post
primum, vel quia duabus personis mediantibus contrahitur. Tertium, i. the third
kind of affinity, Quia in tertio loco, vel quia (tribus personis mediantihus)
emanat.

The effect we have explaned hereof, in these three several kinds already,
briefly they be so called, the first of one, the second of two, the third of
three; but we prosecute only the first, for the other we have related them to
manifest the better this first, as also to give a light (as I have said) of the
former Canons, and otherwise they have no being here.

Touching therefore this first kind of affinity, it is to be noted, and so it
may be gathered by that we have said before, viz. It is contracted inter sp
onsum and consanguineas sponsae, and again, inter sponsam and consanguineos
sponsi, as much to say, It is contracted (this first kind of affinity)
reciprocally, i. between the husband and consanguines of the wife; and e
conuerso, between the wife and consanguines of the husband, howbeit between
the consanguines themselves, by this marriage, there is no affinity
contracted, more than was between Hobson and Iobson, by looking through a
hedge when they spyed one another: somewhat nearer, but Hoc aliquid nihil est,
i. so far from this attinencie, that it has no consequence at all.

Hence it is that the father and son may contract and consumate marriage with
the mother and daughter, as widows and widdowers do; and may do, and their
sons and daughters, such as be so provided for their children, when they
covenant for themselves: hence may also two brothers contract and consumate
marriage with two sisters C. quod super his ext. de cons. and aff.
, the like of the uncle and nephew C. r. and 2. eod. tit. xxxv. q. v. sane.
.

Many attinencies may hereby be sprung between the same persons: this may be
seen in children of diverse families, that be sons either of them to their
mothers; to their husbands, sons and brothers; and uncle and nephew, to
themselves. And thus it falls out, I marry a wife that has a son that
marries with my mother, term me (for examples sake) Ambrose; my wife, Mary,
who had to son Theodor, who married (as I did his) with Martha my mother; I
have issue Peter; he has issue John: these attinencies happen (here) between
Peter and John; for first, sons they be reciprocallie, that is to say, to
their mothers, John to Martha, mother to Ambrose; and Peter to Mary, mother to
Theodor; and so they be sons to their husbands; John to Theodor, Peter to
Ambrose; brothers to the same, i. either to others father; John to Ambrose,
father to Peter; Peter to Theodor, father to John: for so it is in this
example, John and Ambrose had one mother, Martha; and Peter and Theod. the same
mother, Mary; hence they be brothers, Peter is therefore John's brothers son;
and John, Peter's brothers son; consequently John shall be uncle to Peter, and
Peter uncle to John; how they be nephews it follows by this. Conclude them
therefore briefly, each others mothers son, each others fathers brother,
each others uncle, each others nephew. The figure may be formed, as follows
in the page next ensuing.

Peter. Marye. had T. O. son Theodor. who married with Martha.

John. Martha. had T o son. Ambros. who. married with. Marye.



The computatio^ it has of degrees, (I mean this affinity) it borrows of
Consanguinitie before, Non habet suam specialem computationem graduum, It has
no computation of it self in degrees; this we have sufficiently mentioned in
this chapter already, only we may describe the figure, the better to conceive
it formed.

First there be placed in the same (in the midst) four compasses with
several superscriptions, viz. In the first, the first degree, in the second,
the second degree, in the third, the third, and in the fourth, the fourth.

On the right side to these be placed likewise four compasses, written in the
first, brother; in the second, brothers son; in the third, brothers nephew;
in the fourth, brothers nephews son: again on the same side of these be
placed four other compasses, written in the first, brothers wife: in the
second, brothers sons wife: in the third, brothers nephews wife: in the
fourth, brothers nephews sons wife.

On the left side of the first four middle co^passes, be placed likewise four
other compasses with several superscriptions, viz. In the first, sister: in
the second, sisters daughter: in the third, sisters niece: in the fourth,
sisters neeces daughter. Likewise on the same side of these, be four other
compasses, and written in the first, Sisters husband: in the second, sisters
daughters husband: in the third, sisters neeces husband: in the fourth, sisters
neeces daughters husband.

There be added (to these) two other compasses, on the rightside one, on the
left side another: the rightside compass, contains; Brothers wives husband:
the left, Sisters husbands wife. In these the doctors agree they be added for
ornament and demonstration besides, of the not prohibited kinds (in affinity)
to marry at this day, they are not otherwise of the substance of the figure.

There be yet observed two bending lines; one begins at the compass of
brother, and ends at the compass of sisters husband: wherein is written; The
first kind of affinity prohibited at this day to marry.

The other begins at the compass of sister, and ends at the compass of
brothers wife: wherein is written the same. This form was first invented, as
also the figures of consanguinitie (before) by the famous learned doctor,
Johan. Andre. and autenticall in the canons Can. Isidor. and Alex. 35. Q. 5. c.
1. 2. and vlt.
: for after diverse contentions in his time had, touching the natural form of
the figure, and the description thereupon of Johan. de Deo. Hispan. who seemed
by his metrical rules, to open thereunto the right understanding indeed,
howbeit the multitude of the same, and obscurity he begat in his rules and
verses, brought forth another effect: Attendens ipse Johan. Andr. For so he
writes of himself, Antiquorum scripta, etc. Recounting with the canons, the
ancient and autenticall writers, he composed it: handling therewithal these
three points besides amongst the rest, viz. The necessity of it: the
authority: the often repetition.

For the first, Probatio ad oculum: as much to say, as an eye witness: the
necessity of it appears both in the laws and canons; this we have touched
in the second chapter before. For the second, the canons we have cited here
already of Isidor. and Alexander, viz. 35 Q. Cap. 1. 2. and vlt. may suffice.
And for the third, that I may use my learned authors words: nomini venit in
dubium: id satis esse validum, satisque famosum, quod repitita lectio probat:
Let this suffice for affinity: the figure whereof ensues.

THE CANONICAL FIGVRE OF CONsang.
Great grandfathers father. The same mother. iiij D 4
e Great uncles uncle. The same aunt. iiij. 5 f his, her, son daughter. iiij.
6 g his, her, nephew niece. iiij. 7 h his, her, nephews neeces son daughter.
iiij. 8
Great grandfather, Mother. iiij C 3
d Great uncle. The same aunt. iiij. 4 e his, her, son daughter. iij. 5 f
his, her, nephew niece. iij. 6 g his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. iiij.
7
Grandfath. grandmo. ij B 2
c Uncle. Aunt. ij. 3 d his, her, son daughter. ij. 4 e his, her, nephew
niece. iij. 5 f his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. iiij. 6
Father, mother. j A 1
b Brother, Sister. j. 2 c his, her, son daughter. ij. 3 d his, her, nephew
niece. iij. 4 e his, her, nephews neeces son daughter. iiij. 5


THE FIGVRE OF AFFITIE.
The fist kind of affinity prohibited at this day to marry. The first kind
of affinity prohibited at this day to marry Thesbe be added for ornament only
and demonstration of the kind of affinity but they be not prohebited to
marry. first degrees. brother. sisters husband sister. brothers wife brothers
wives husband sisters husbands wife. second degrees brothers son. sisters
daughters husb. sisters daughter brother sons wife third degrees. Brothers nephew
Sisters neeces husband Sisters niece. Brothers nephews wife four degrees. brothers
nephews son. Sist. nee. daughter hus-ba^d Sisters neeces daughter bro. nep.
sons wife



This figure shows only the first kind of affinity, in the first
collateral descendents, by carnal addition, that is to say, to thy brother a
wife, tothy sister a husband, and so to the fourth degree.

The same affinity thou have that is to say, in the first kind, by the same
addition, to every other person in this figure of consanguinitie.

The degrees shall be more or less, according to the distance of the persons
they be added unto: but always in the first kind, the which the prohibition
of the Canons at this day exceeds not.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Prohibition Leuiticall.

HAc itaque consuctudine quae ab ipso exordio humanae propagationis originem
habuit, quam nulla lex contra iubendo euacuauerat, excusantur Abraam, Isaac,
and Jacob, and ceteri qui de propria cognatione ducebant vxores 35. q. 2. and 3
c. igitur.. hac itaque.
. The question of their ages provoked (in their times) the makers of the
positive canon laws to answer such objections had against the Patriarchs and
others that had married in their kindreds and tribes of the families of their
fathers. They concluded (therefore) they were excused (Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob) by that custom that had grown from the beginning of humane
propagation; and that, which no law (then) had abolished.

The premises, or reasons that they used (before) were these, viz. They were
not prohibited d. c. cum igitur: in princip.
: that Idolatry might be avoided Eod est
: that the Church might be instituted in the peculiar people of God Eod. autem.
. Deus enim quamuis.
sic ab initio salutem humani generis dispensauit, vt primitiuam ecclesiam in
illo populo institueret, qui sibi carnis consanguinitate erat propinquus: Hence
the Apostles were chosen first of the Jewish nation, whom God appointed (then)
the foundation (as it were) of the Church. Deinde (in cecitate suae perfidiae
Iudaica plebe relicta) It was translated afterward (the preaching of the
gospel) unto strangers: Tam fide, quam cognatione carnis a Christo: Despising
as it were the company and conversation of his co^sanguine, chose him a wife
of another family: fulfilling these prophecies Oseae. c. 4 Isaiah. 5 c.
: In peccatis vestris dimisi matrem vestram quasi adulteram and repudiatam,
etc. Vocabo plebem meam, non plebem meam. The canons have enferred hence, that
they were permitted first (these marriages) but now prohibited.

What the Lord commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, Mahlah,
Tirzah, Hoglah, Milah, and Noah, they did; that is to say, they married to
their fathers brothers sons Nomb. 36
.

But this was after the commandments and laws which the Lord had commanded by
the hand of Moses unto the children of Israel in the plain of Moab by Jorden,
toward Jericho: these be handled more at large in the table at the end of
this treatise, Sect. 8. Vide tab. sect. 8
we leave them therefore here, and to our purpose, the Leuiticall prohibition,
viz.

6 None shall come near to any of the kindred of his flesh to uncover her
shame. I am the Lord. Leuit. 18. and 20.

7 Thou shall not uncover the shame of thy father, nor the shame of thy mother,
for she is thy mother, thou shall not discover her shame.

8 The shame of thy fathers wife thou shall not discover, for it is thy fathers
shame.

9 Thou shall not discover the shame of thy sister, the daughter of thy father,
or the daughter of thy mother, whether she be borne at home, or born without;
thou shall not discover their shame.

10 The shame of thy sons daughter, or of thy daughters daughter, thou shall
not I say, uncover their shame.

11 The shame of thy fathers wives daughter begotten of thy father (for she is
thy sister) thou shall not (I say) discover her shame.

12 Thou shall not uncover the shame of thy fathers sister: for she is thy
fathers kinswoman.

13 Thou shall not discover the shame of thy mothers sister, for she is thy
mothers kinswoman.

14 Thou shall not uncover the shame of thy fathers brother, that is, Thou
shall not go into his wife, for she is thine aunt.

15 Thou shall not discover the shame of thy daughter in law, for she is thy
sons wife, therefore shall thou not uncover her shame.

16 Thou shall not discover the shame of thy brothers wife, for it is thy
brothers shame.

17 Thou shall not discover the shame of the wife and of her daughter, neither
shall thou take her sons daughter, nor her daughters daughter, to uncover her
shame, for they are thy kinsfolks, and it were wickedness.

18 Also thou shall not take a wife with her sister, during her life, to vex
her in uncovering her shame upon her. These in the gloss be briefly collected
thus viz.

Nata, Soror, Neptis, Matertera, Fratris', and vxor. Et patrui Coniux, Matter,
Priuigna, Nouerca. Vxoris quae soror, Priuigni Nata, Nurusque. Atque soror
patris Coniungi lege vetantur.
As much in effect amongst the residue in the admonition or table of prohibited
marriages, set forth by the most reverend father in God, Matthew, Archbishop of
Canturburie, primate of England, and Metropolitan. An. 1563. as follows; that
is to say.

A man may not marry his Mother. The right ascending line, and first degree.
Stepmother. Wives mother. Sons daughter. The right desce^ding line and second
degree. Daughters daughter. Wives sons daughter. Wives daughters daughter.
Daughter. The right descending line and first degree. Wives daughter. Sons
wife. Sister. The equal collateral line, and first degree. Wives sister.
Brothers wife. Fathers sister. The unequal collateral line, and second
degree. Mothers sister. Fathers brothers wife.

30 Therefore shall ye keep mine ordinances, that ye do not any of the
abominable customs, which have been done before you.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Prohibition Canonical.

THe Egyptians were condemned and the Canaanites, in these wicked and
incestuous marriages before, the Israelites forewarned therein (by Moses) to
whom the former prohibition was given, for so they were commanded, the
children of Israel, that after the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein they
dwelt, they should not do; and after the manner of the land of Canaan, whether
then the Lord would bring them, they should not do, nor walk in their
ordinances Leuit. 18. 3.
; for in all these the nations were defiled, which then the lord had promised
to cast out before them Leuit. 18. 34.
. This condemnation therefore of the Egyptians, and the Israelites warning, may
be spectacles unto us.

The positive constitutions of the church of England In tabula quadam a
reuerendissimo patre ac domino Archiepiscopo Cantuar. scripta. publicata, and
post a ab Archiepiscop and Episco, rescripto imperiali. Anno Elizabethae.
congregat. app^o^ at. and confirmat.
, it falls out to handle the positive Canon law, but because Ecclesia
anglicana, i. the English church, is nearest unto us, we will handle it first,
and the rather, that this order has seemed the nearest to manifest (in this
chapter) our purpose, the Canons shall ensue afterward.

The positive constitutions therefore of the church of England have added
certain persons unto these; that is to say, only in names and terms, but
not in degree, for though they be not found to be mentioned in the Leuitical,
in their names and terms their nearness (notwithstanding) in the same
degrees, is as manifest as the rest, and whose shames thou discouerest equally
with theirs, and thine own abhominatio^ together. Be not therefore deceived, it
is not the name of Consanguinity, or affinity, wherein the substance consists
of this prohibition, but the degree. I might cite many laws, but let the
statutes suffice, they follow in their orders, viz. in the chapter next
ensuing, there thou shall find them mentioned, not the Leuitical names, but
degrees.

Such be in the ascending line, thy grandmother, grand fathers wife, wives
grandmother; not mentioned (there) in their names and terms, equally
(notwithstanding) distant in degree from thee, with thy sons daughter,
daughters daughter, wives sons daughter, wives daughters daughter, whom the
prohibition comprehends, in their several names and terms: add unto these
thy sons sons wife, daughters sons wife, whom the church has decreed the
same prohibition extends to. For note, their difference is in their lines, viz.
They be distinguished by ascending and descending lines: that is to say, Of thy
grandmother and thy sons daughter, and daughters daughter, which be only of
the persons we have mentioned last, consanguines unto thee, and in the second
degree.

The same reason (in affinity) is of the rest, that is to say, Thy
grandfathers wife, thy wives grandmother, be equally (from thee) distant
with thy wives sons daughter, and wives daughters daughter these in
affinity, the other in consanguinity, as for thy sons sons wife, daughters
sons wife, they be equals unto thee with thy wives sons daughter, wives
daughters daughter, i. They differ not in line nor degree: only as before is
said, they be distinguished from the persons we have mentioned before by
consanguinitie, and affinity: otherwise the prohibition equally holds in
them all. Such persons be also in the unequal collateral lines, viz. Thy
brothers daughter: thy sisters daughter; brothers sons wife; sisters sons
wife; wives brothers daughter; wives sister daughter: that is to say, equally
distant from thee in consanguinitie, thy brothers and sisters daughters, with
thy fathers and mothers sisters: add unto these in affinity thy fathers
brothers wife, thy mothers brothers wife, wives fathers sister, wives mothers
sister: These in the ascendents. In the descendents, to the other; that is to
say, to thy brothers and sisters daughters, consanguines unto thee, and
descendents, add (in affinity) thy brothers and sisters sons wives, and thy
wives brothers, and her sisters daughters.

These be all in consanguinitie and affinity unto thee in the unequal
collateral lines, ascending and descending, as well mentioned as not mentioned
expressly in the Leuitical law in their names and terms, in the same second
degree. This may appear more plainly in the table of prohibited marriages,
comprehended within that table annexed at the end of this book.

Touching now the canons, i. The positive canon law, I refer thee to the
figures of consanguinitie and affinity before, as also to this table mentioned.

It shall be therefore needless, further to speak of the prohibition of the
canons, than briefly that description and computation canonical we have
mentioned already may declare it: for that understood, understand withal the
prohibition of the canons; that is to say, to the fourth degree: for in that
example, may not marry with any letter in the figure. This exceeds the
positive constitutions of the Church of England, in every line two degrees,
viz. First in consanguintie in the right ascending line two degrees, i. C and
D, in the descending line likewise two degrees, i. c. d. in the collaterals,
from A two degrees, i. d 1. e 1. In the collaterals from B. three degrees, d 2.
e 2. f 2. In the collaterals from C and D, every person that is mentioned;
these in consanguinitie.

The prohibition in affinity is exte^ded thus, that is to say, beyond the
positive constitutions of the English Church: from the first stock in the same
figure understanding the persons to be added carnally, for that is the use of
the figure, as may be gathered by that we have said in the 7. chapter before,
to thy brothers nephews wife* brothers nephews sons wife: sisters nephews
wife: sisters nephews sons wife: brothers neeces sons wife: sisters neeces
sons wife. From the second stock, to thy fathers brothers sons wife: fathers
brothers nephews wife: fathers brothers nephews sons wife: mothers brothers
sons wife: mothers brothers nephews wife: mothers brothers nephews sons
wife. From the third and Understand (with these) their neeces sons wives.
fourth stocks, to the carnal additions, in either sex, that be mentioned in
their lines. These we have placed severally in their sections, for the plainer
demonstration thereof in that table at the end of this book. The reasons that
the canons have yielded of this extension is this, viz.

Habita est enim illis ratio certissima charitatis, vt homines quibus esset
vtilis atque honestissima concordia, diuersarum necessitudinum vinculis
necterentur: nec vnus in vno multas haberet necessitudines, sed singulae
spargerentur in singulos si ad socialem vitam diligentius plurimos obtinerent.
Pater quippe and socer duarum sunt necessitudinum nomina; dum ergo habet quis
alium patrem, alium socerum, numerosius se charitas porrigit: vtrumque autem
vnus sc. Adam esse cogebatur, and filijs, and filiabus suis, quando fratres
sorores que iungebantur coniugio; sicut Eua vxor eius vtrique sexui filioru^,
fuit and socrus, and matter. Quae si duae feminae fuissent, altera matter, altera
socrus, copiosius se dilectio socialis colligaret. Sed hoc vnde fieret tunc non
erat, quando nisi fratres and sorores ex illis duobus primis nulli homines
era^t. Fieri ergo debuit quod potuit, vt existente copia vnde ducerentur
vxores, quae iam non erant sorores, non solum illud non sicret, vbi nulla
necessitas esset, verumetiam si fieret, nefas esset: quod humano genere
crescente, etiam inter impios deorum multorum falsorumque cultores, sic
obseruari cernimus: vt etsi legibus permittantur fraterna coniugia, melior
tamen consuetudo ipsam malit exhorrere licentiam: sic que aduersetur quasi
licere nunquam potuer it. Copulatio ergo maris and feminae (quantum attinet ad
genus humanu^) quoddam seminarium est charitatis; That is to say, in sum,
though not in literal construction, (besides other arguments of greater
consequence in the laws of God and of nature) they grounded thereupon an
infallible argument to ensue of love and charity, if men and women Diuersarum
necessitudinum vinculis, as much to say, should knit themselves together with
bonds of sundry friendships, and not that one in one should have many: such be
the persons mentioned in their several sections in the table here ensuing
from thy grandmother, Sect. 1. Number. 1. to thy wives mothers sisters daughter,
Sect. 8. number. 42. And every ascending person and descending rightly in every
section after; namely from thy great grandmother, Sect. 9. number. 43, to thy
daughters neeces daughter. Sect. 17. number. 106. Father is a name unto thee of
tender kindness; none nearer, none deerer: thou make of him thine uncle: and
again of him (I mean thine uncle) thou make thy father in-law, whilst thou
matchest in that kindred, see Sect. 8. It is needless to wade through every
particular sectio^; the table is at hand, and the same reason holds in the
rest: the nearer therefore thou co^mest to the kindred of thy flesh, the further
off thou art from friendship that is expedient, that amity (I mean) and love,
that all mankind vpholdeth, and is vpholden by it: for what is that conjunction
we speak of, of man and woman? Quantum attinet ad genus humanum? It is
answered thus, That is to say; So far as it touches humane kind, it is
nothing else but quoddam seminariu^ charitatis. And how behoofefull and
expedient is this, there is none that cannot discern: the which how it rises
and spreads abroad it self, we have declared in the chapter of affinity
before.

PROHIBITIONVM, CAVSARVMVE MATRImonium dirimentium in cap. 8. and 9.
praecedentium, aliarumque (saepe in iure contingentium) Tabula.
Prohibitio matrimonij aut est Absoluta and simplex, eaque est vel Ad tempus,
veluti si quis matrimonium contraxerit Qui per aetatem matrimonium contrahere
non potest, nam vel quis est Minor septennio, and non potest neque matrimonium,
neque sponsalia contrahere. c. literas. de desp. impub. Mayor septennio, sed
impubes, and sponsalia contrahere potest. c. 2. de desp. impub. matrimonium non
potest. Proximus pubertati, and si coire possit. c. de illis eod. quoniam
malitia aetatem supplet, contrahere matrimonium potest. Pubes, and licet vir
non sit, neque coire posait, nisi tamen perpetuum sit impedimentum, contrahere
matrimonium potest. Ioh. And. and Pan. and d. c. Puberes. de desp. impub.
Qui vxorem superstirem habet (ea viuente) alteram ducere non potest. quisi Cum
altera sponsalia inierit, nulla ex ijs nascitur obligatio, quin vt possit
(mortua vxore) aliam ducere. Matrimonium cum altera contraxerit de facto, eaque
sit Nescia eius rei, and non valet quidem matrimonium, sed (vxore mortua) cogi
poterit vt secundam ducat, si modo illa hoc petierit. Et tunc ex nouo consensu,
etiam tacito, constabit matrimonium. c. 1. de eo qui duxit in vx. Sciens quod
alteram habet, and non potest etiam ex nouo consensu istam ducere, modo eam
(viua prima vxore) cognouerit. cap. fin. de eo qui duxit.

Qui dilueida furoris interualla habet, non potest, dum furore tenetur,
matrimonium contrahere.
Perpetuo, and prohibentur alij, vel ratione Ordinis, and vel ordines sunt
Maiores, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum est, prohibitio absoleta est. Anno. 28.
H. 8. cap. 7. Minores, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum est, prohibitio absoleta
est. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
Voti, est que votum vel Solemn, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum est, prohibitio
absoleta est. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7. Simplex, Sed in hijs omnibus, notandum
est, prohibitio absoleta est. Anno. 28. H. 8. cap. 7.
Frigidtaris, and impotentiae coeundi, ea vero est vel ^aturalis, and vel in
Marem incidit, and dicitur frigiditas, quae quidem matrimonium de facto
contractum, ostendit ab initio nullum fuisse. Aut. de nupe.. Si vero. Col 4.
Foeminam, and arctatio est, quae si huiusmodi sit, vt non nisi open medicoru^
and cum periculo vitae cognosci possit. ditimit matrimonium. c. ex literis. c.
Fraternitatis. de Frigid. and mal. Si vero cognosci potest, licet abortum
faciat, vel fine miraculo aperiri possit, tenebit matrimonium. Host. in sum.
Hoc tit.
Accidentlis and vel Aperta, vt in spadonibus quibus detracta sunt virilia, and
si praecessit impedimentum, slatim soluitur. Occulta, veluti cum quis ita
fascinatus sit. vt cum vxore nequeat, cum alijs vero rem habere possit, quod
malificium dicitur. Et si Temporale fuerit impedimentum, non est impedimento
matrimonio. Perpetuum, expectandu^ erit ad tempus quo effluxo, poterunt
(Prestitis quibusdam propinquorum iuramentis) separari. c. Fin. eod.


Perpetuo furore detentus contrahere matrimonium non potest.

Respectiua, cum quis matrimonium co^trahere potest, sed hane, vel illam,
ducere non potest: huius prohibitionis causae sunt Consanguinitas, ea est vel
Spiritualis, eaque ex Baptismo and confirmatione oritur inter leuantem and
leuatum, ac parents leuati: Iter^ inter leuatum, and filias and coniugem prius
cognitas leuantis; postremo inter parents leuati, and vxorem leuantis: idem de
confirmante and baptizante. Notandum etiam est in hijs, prohibitionem esse and
fuisse absoletam, H. 8. statut. praeal. c. eod. Legalis, quae sit per
adoptionem. Notandum etiam est in hijs, prohibitionem esse and fuisse
absoletam, H. 8. statut. praeal. c. eod. Naturalis eaque inter Ascendentes and
descendentes perpetuo prohibet. Collaterales vsque Ad certos gradus lege diuina
prohibet. In quartum gradum lege humana. c. Fin. de consang. and aff.


Affinitas quam secundum canones etiam illitita facit copula. c. descretionem:
De eo quia cog. cons. Et quidem Inter maritum and vxoris consanguineas, and e
contra oritur affinitas: c. Fin. de cons. and aff. and si Antecedat affinitas
matrimonium, veluti si quis prius cum consanguinea rem habuerit eius quam
postea ducit, tam impedientur nuptiae, quam dirimentur, in prohibitum gradum.
c. Fin. de con. and aff. Sequatur matrimonium affinitas, veluti si quis
postquamvxorem duxerit, eius consanguineam nouit: extali affinitate Sponsalia
quidem praecedentia dirimentur. c. 2. de eo cog. cons. vx. Matrimonium autem,
vel (de presenti) sponsalia. cap. discretionem eod. vel praesumptum c. Fin.
eod. non dirimitur.

Inter maritum and vxorem nulla orritur affinitas, hij enim vna caro sunt, and
causa affinitatis, non affines.



CHAP. X.
Of the succession of the statutes in marriage: and their force at this day.

TOuching the succession and their force, (of the Statutes) it follows as it
was enacted in An. xxv. of king Hen. 8. cap 22. viz. Since many inco^uenie^ces
have fallen as well within this Realm, as in others, by reason of marrying
within the degrees of marriage prohibit by Gods laws, i. The son to marry the
mother or the stepmother, The brother the sister, the father his sons daughter,
or his daughters daughter, or the son to marry the daughter of his father,
procreate and borne by his stepmother, or the son to marry his aunt, being
his father or mothers sister, or to marry his uncles wife, or the father to
marry his sons wife, or the brother to marry his brothers wife, or any man
to marry his wives daughter, or his wives sons daughter, or his wives
daughters daughter, or his wives sister, which marriages albeit they be plainly
prohibited, and detested by the laws of almighty God, yet nevertheless at some
times they have proceeded under colors of dispensations by man's power, which
is but usurped, and of right ought not to be granted, admited, ne allowed, for
no man, of what estate degree or condition soever he be, has power to dispense
with Gods laws, as all the clergy of this realm, and the most part of all
the famous universities of Christendom, and we also do affirm and think.

Be it therefore enacted by authority, aforefaied, that no person or persons,
subjects or resiants of this Realm, or in any your dominions of what estate,
degree or dignity soever they be, shall from henceforth marry withn the said
degrees before rehearsed, what pretense soever shall be made to the contrary
thereof.

And in case any person or persons of what estate, dignity, degree, or
condition, soever they be, has been heretofore, married within this Realm or
in any the kings dominions, within any the degrees above expressed, and by any
of the Archbishops, Bishops, or ministers of the church of England, be separate
from the bonds of such unlawful marriage, that then every such separation
shall be good, lawful, firm, and permanent for ever, and not by any power
authority or means to be revoked or undone hereafter. And that the children
proceeding or procreate under such unlawful marriage, shall not be lawful ne
legitimate: any foreign laws, licenses, dispensations, or other thing or
things to the contrary thereof notwithstanding. And in case there be any person
or persons, within this Realm, or in any the kings dominions, already married
within any the said degrees above specified, and not yet separate from the
bonds of such unlawful marriage, that then every such person so unlawfully
married, shall be separate by the definitive sentence and judgments of the
Archbishops, Bishops, and other ministers of the church of England, and in
other your dominions within the limits of their jurisdictions and authorities,
and by none other power or authority.

And that all sentences and judgments given, and to be given, by any
Archbishops, Bishops, or other minister of the church of England, or in any
other the kings dominions, within the limits of their jurisdictions and
authorities, shall be diffinitiue, firm, good, and effectual to all intents,
and be observed and obaied without suing any prouocations, appeals,
prohibitions, or other process from the court of Rome, to the derogation
thereof, or contrary to the Act made since the beginning of this present
Parliament, for the restraint of such prouocations, appeals, prohibitions, and
other processes.

And Anno xxviij. of king Hen. 8. Chap 7. it was enacted to the same effect,
and in the same form of words with this addition only, viz.

And further to dilate and declare the meaning of these prohibitions, it is to
be understood, that if it chance any man to know carnally any woman, that
then all and singular persons being in any degree of consanguinitie or
affinity as is above written to any of the parties so carnally offending,
shall be deemed and adjudged to be within the cases and limmits of the said
prohibition of marriage.

There ensued after this Anno, xxxij. Hen. 8. cha. 38. an act concerning
precontracts of marriages, and touching degrees of consanguinitie, the occasion
whereof (as by the proheme of that Statute appears) was this, viz.

It was supposed that no marriage so surely could be knit and bounden, but
that it should lie in either of the ^^

and administration thereof, by the vetuous and most noble Queen Elizabeth,
natural and legitimate daughter to king Hen. of famous memory the eight, the
author is imperfect, whose weakness if thy skill shall supply, or thy patience
bear for a season, he craves no more, in the mean time his labors he
commends unto thee, and thy self to the author of all perfection.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Leuiticall, English, and positive Canon Catalogues: THEIR
CONCORDANCE, and difference.

IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NULLA.


Anno. Dom. 1594.

Of the Table and Catalogues heerin contained of degrees.
COnferring these Catalogues in the table that ensues together, that is to
say, the English and Canonical with the Leuitical, some persons there shall
appear within the Leuiticall names and degrees; some without the Leuiticall
names, but in the degrees; others there shall appear without the Leuiticall
names and degrees; the due consideration whereof is this, viz.

First of the ascendents and descendentes, such no doubt, though they exceed
the Leuiticall names and degrees, yet they be prohibited infinitely to marry,
in so much that Adam if he had lived to this day, could not have married again.

The second consideration, viz. of the Collaterals, such (with the Leuitical in
name and degree) no man doubts of their prohibition; otherwise, that is to
say, If they differ but in name, Communi co^sensu and iudicio putantur in
Leuitico prohiberi, thou art (for example) expressly in the Leuiticall forbidden
to marry thy brothers wife, thy wives sister is not mentioned there in name,
otherwise than thus, viz. Thou shall not take a wife with her sister (during
her life) to vex her in uncovering her shame upon her; but thy brothers wife
nevertheless comprehends her degree, and whom equally thereforethou art
prohibited to marry, that is to say, as with thy brothers wife, so with thy
wives sister, this understand of the residue in this table, viz. Mothers
brothers wife, wives fathers sister, etc. For the third, that is to say, such
collaterals as exceed both the name and degree Leuitical, do also exceed this
prohibition, i. they may marry without question or scruple, consideration had
of such collaterals as do savor so of the ascendent and descendent lines,
that they be parents, or in loco parentum the one to the other, such be in
names collaterals, because we have no other terms to call them by, Plures enim
sunt res quam vocabula, such is the scarsity of our speech, that more things
there be, than we have names to call them by; such be thy brothers line, so
near thine own as may be, we must not call them descendents, for confounding
of lines, nor yet allow them that laterall liberty to make them outward
degrees, Laterall they be termed or Collateral a latere, as much in effect as
sideward of the side whereon they be placed, as by the figure it may appear and
other descriptions in the treatise: but so near they be the side, that they
warm it, and be warmed by it, side by side, and blood by blood; and yet we
must call them Collaterals, and yet I exhort thee beware of them, they be not
forbidden expreslie, and by name by the law, the Leuiticall law I mean, no
more thou shall find it forbidden expressly to marry with diverse other persons
of thy kindred besides, thou will not therefore say it is lawful, god forbid thou
should. This I have red in the works of learned men, it is for bidden by the
right of nature, it is forbidden, by the law that is written in every man's
heart and conscience, it is forbidden by love and charity, the which we have
handled in this treatise before, it is forbidden by title and right of nigh
kindred: to conclude, many great things shall thou find, if thou look about
thee, not forbidden expressly by the law that Moses made, and yet the same be
forbidden by a certain plain express commandment of nature, and
consequently by the law of God: for what commanded Moses from the Lord, as
lawful to be done, that was not expedient? Shall we seek a prohibition then
by name, for every person, and do the thing (if we find it not) that is
neither expedient nor honest? God forbid. I find it written of S. Ambrose,
that he affirmed plainly, The law of God forbids that brothers children
should marry, and yet I cannot find it there expressly; the occasion grew by
one Pattern, that had a son by one woman, and a daughter by another, which
daughter had a daughter, whom Pattern would have married to his son, the
maidens half uncle, wherein consulting with Ambrose in this case, received
this answer; I neither think nor judge, says S. Ambrose, that your bishop
an holy man does so much as look after my sentence and judgment in this
matter, for if he had, he would have written to me of it, and in so much that he
writes not, he shows plainly that he judges this no matter to be doubted
on: for what doubt may there be in this case, whether thy son and thy
daughters daughter, or thy niece by thine own daughter may marry together,
seeing the law of God forbids, that thy son should marry with thy brothers
daughter. And what (faith the same author) is moresolemne, accustomed, or more
reverently observed, than the charitable kiss between uncle and niece, which
he owes to her of duty, as to his daughter, and she to him as to her father?
shall thou then go and make this innocent kiss of love and charity, in which
is none offense nor suspision of evil, to be suspected, whilst thou inte^dest
such a marriage? as if he should say, Will thou betray (as Judas did his master)
the holy law of nature, and take away from thy dear pledges or children so
devout and religious (a sacrament) he terms it, but a token of pure and
natural love, as also he does, we may term it still.

And touching the furthest distant of the persons we have mentioned last, viz.
Brothers children, because in a manner, they be brothers and sisters, coming
all of one parent, grandfather grandmother, or both; but the second stock of
the tree, or figure of Consanguinitie, in this treatise before, if it were for
nothing else, yet for the reverence that they owe to the same parents, Theodos
the Emperor would have them abstain from marriage the one with the other. But
to leave the Emperors law, there is a law of this land, (the Lord preserve it
and the life of the same) this we have touched in the division of this table
hereafter; but there is a law, and this we have touched too, the Lord write it
in our minds and in our hearts, that he may be our God, and we may be his
people.

Amen.
A Table of the Leuiticall, English, and positive canon catalogues: their
concordance, and difference.
1. Section.
2. Degrees. The right ascending line, and second degree.
Can. Eng. Grandmother. 1 Con. Grandfathers wife. 2 Aff. Wives Grandmother. 3
Aff. 2. Section.
2. Degrees. The unequal collateral line ascending, and second degree.
Can. Eng. Leu. Fathers sister. 4 Con. Mothers sister. 5 Con. Fathers brothers
wife. 6 Aff. Can. Eng. Mothers brothers wife. 7 Aff. Wives fathers sister. 8
Aff. Wives mothers sister. 9 Aff. 3. Section.
1. Degrees. The right ascending line, and first degree.
Can. Eng. Leu. Mother. 10 Con. Stepmother. 11 Aff. Wives mother. 12 Aff. 4.
Section.
1. Degrees. The right descending line, and first degree.
Can. Eng. Leu. Daughter. 13 Con. Wives daughter. 14 Aff. Sons wife. 15 Aff.
5. Section.
1. Degrees. The equal collateral line, and first degree.
Can. Eng. Leu. Sister. 16 Con. Brothers wife. 17 Aff. Wives sister. 18 Aff. 6.
Section.
2. Degrees. The right descending line, and second degree.
Can. Eng. Leu. Sons daughter. 19 Con. Daughters daughter. 20 Con. Can. Eng.
Sons sons wife. 21 Aff. Daughters sons wife. 22 Aff. Can. Eng. Leu. Wives
sons daughter. 23 Aff. Wives daughters daughter. 24 Aff. 7. Section.
2. Degrees. The unequal collateral line descending, and second degree.
Ca. En. Brothers daughter. 25 Con. Sisters daughter. 26 Con. Brother sons
wife. 27 Aff. Sisters sons wife. 28 Aff. Wives brothers daughter. 29 Aff.
Wives sisters daughter. 30 Aff. 8. Section.
2. Degrees. The equal collateral line, and second degree.
Canon. Fathers brothers daughter. 31 Con. Mothers brothers daughter. 32 Con.
Fathers sisters daughter. 33 Con. Mothers sisters daughter. 34 Con. Fathers
brothers sons wife. 35 Aff. Mothers brothers sons wife. 36 Aff. Fathers
sisters sons wife. 37 Aff. Mothers sisters sons wife. 38 Aff. Wives fathers
brothers daughter. 39 Aff. Wives mothers brothers daught. 40 Aff. Wives fathers
sisters daughter. 41 Aff. Wives mothers sisters daughter. 42 Aff.

Hitherto extends the heart of the tree, or figure of consanguinitie,
described in the sixth chapter before, and formed at the end of the 7. chapter
following, where the reader may behold, as in a glass, how near they be
couched together; namely, the kindred of the same flesh.

Here therefore we will pause a little, and make as it were a division in this
table between them and the rest that ensue; namely, the branches that be
further off. Consider therefore of the concordance and difference of these
catalogues hitherto first, and then peruse the other.

These catalogues do concur together in 16 persons, wherein they differ not
in name, number, nor degreee: there the Leuiticall ceasseth, in name and
number; and the English and canonical go on, accompanied still with the
Leuiticall degree, to the number of 14 persons more: there ceasseth the
English, and the positive canon goes on alone, nevertheless accompanied with
the 2 degree, to the number of 12 persons more; and there that degree rests,
and leaves the canon catalogue alone, and yet the catalogue rests not, but
has betake^ it to outward degrees, namely the 3 and 4, wherewith it goes on
to the number of persons mentioned in this table hereafter.

These the statute does entend in An. 32. H. 8. cap. 38. to be mere humane,
and invented for their lucre that devised them: namely, the BB. of the sea of
Rome, commonly called the Popes; who were enabled (as the statute inte^deth) to
dispense with such by their power, because they were outward, and so the
statute terms them outward degrees; and specifieth moreover cosens germans,
and so to fourth and fourth degree. Now, Quere of the mind of the statute
touching cosens germans, viz. What germans they should be? for the Pope could
never dispense with germans in the 1 and 2 degrees: if therefore the
construction be of the statute, of such dispensations that were reserved; for
so the statute mentions them, viz. The dispensation whereof they always
reserved to themselves, etc. we look amiss at what he did, for what did he
not almost (in the end) dispense withal? but our mark must be at what he
might do lawfully, i. by his laws: for other reservation had he none, but
thereby pre-eminence over them, but never over the laws of God nor of nature.
And that which is more, so far they were from dispensing in the 1 and 2
degrees, that in the 3 and 4 degrees they have refused the same generally: and
to that (upon Question proposed to Gregory, by Faelix Messan of Scicilia) was
appealed to, the whole dominon of Rome. It is evident by this, what the
prohibition and reservation have been of the Popes law.

Touching the daughter of Zolophehad, of whom mention has been made in the 8
chap. of this treatise, to this effect, that they married to their fathers
brothers sons: this was because the inheritance of the children of Israel, of
whom the daughters of Zelophehad were, should not remove from tribe to tribe:
for so they were commanded, that every one of the children of Israel, should
join himself to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers. And that every
daughter that possessed any inheritance of the tribes of the children of
Israel, should be wife unto one of the family of the tribe of her father, that
the children of Israel might enjoy every man the inheritance of their fathers:
and therefore the Lord commanded concerning the daughters of Zelophehad,
saying; They shall be wives to whom they think best, only to the family of
the tribe of their father shall they marry, and so they did. Numb. 36. 11.


But this was a law of judgment, as other Judicials were, that belonged (then)
to particular justice, Numb. 27. 11.
and have had their beginnings, and endings. To the rest of the canon catalogue.

9. Section.
3. Degrees. The right ascending line, and third degree.
Canon Con. 43 Great grandmother. Aff. 44 Great grandfathers wife. Aff. 45
VViues great grandmother. 10. Section.
3. Degrees. The right descending line and third degree.
Canon. Con. 46 Sons niece. Con. 47 Daughters niece. Aff. 48 Sons nephews
wife. Aff. 49 Daughters nephews wife. Aff. 50 VViues nephews daughter. Aff.
51 VViues neeces daughter. 11. Section.
3. Degrees. The unequal collateral line ascending, and third degree.
Canon Con. 52 Grandfathers sister. Con. 53 Grandmothers sister. Aff. 54
Grandfathers brothers wife. Aff. 55 Grandmothers brothers wife. Aff. 56 VViues
grandfathers sister. Aff. 57 VViues grandmothers sister. 12. Section.
3. Degrees. The same line, and third degree.
Canon Con. 58 Grandfathers brothers daughter. Con. 59 Grandmothers brothers
daughter. Con. 60 Grandfathers sisters daughter. Con. 61 Grandmothers sisters
daughter. Aff. 62 Grandfathers brothers sons wife. Aff. 63 Grandmothers
brothers sons wife. Aff. 64 Grandfathers sisters sons wife. Aff. 65
Grandmothers sisters sons wife. Aff. 66 Wives grandfathers brothers daughter
Aff. 67 Wives grandmothers brothers daugh. Aff. 68 Wives grandfathers sisters
daughter. Aff. 69 Wives grandmothers sisters daughter. 13. Section.
3. Degrees. The equal collateral line, and third degree.
Canon Con. 70 Grandfathers brothers niece. Con. 71 Grandmothers brothers
niece. Con. 72 Grandfathers sisters niece. Con. 73 Grandmothers sisters niece.
Aff. 74 Grandfathers brothers nephews wife. Aff. 75 Grandmothers brothers
nephews wife Affi. 76 Grandfathers sisters nephews wife. Affi. 77 Grandmothers
sisters nephews wife. Affi. 78 Wives grandfathers brothers niece. Affi. 79
Wives grandmothers brothers niece. Affi. 80 Wives grandfathers sisters niece.
Affi. 81 VViues grandmothers sisters niece. 14. Section.
3. Degrees. The unequal collateral line, descending, and third degree.
Canon. Con. 82 Fathers brothers niece. Con. 83 Fathers sisters niece. Con. 84
Mothers brothers niece. Con. 85 Mothers sisters niece. Affi. 86 Fathers
brothers nephews wife. Affi. 87 Fathers sisters nephews wife. Affi. 88 Mothers
brothers nephews wife. Affi. 89 Mothers sisters nephews wife. Affi. 90 VViues
fathers brothers niece. Affi. 91 VViues fathers sisters niece. Affi. 92 VViues
mothers brothers niece. Affi. 93 VViues mothers sisters niece. 15. Section.
3. Degrees. The same line and third degree.
Canon. Con. 94 Brothers niece. Con. 95 Sisters niece. Affi. 96 Brothers
nephews wife. Affi. 97 Sisters nephews wife. Affi. 98 VViues brothers niece.
Affi. 99 VViues sisters niece. 16. Section.
4. Degrees. The right ascending line, and fourth degree..
Canon Con. 100 Great grandfathers mother. Aff. 101 Great grandfathers fathers
wife. Aff. 102 Wives great grandfathers mother. 17. Section.
4. Degrees. The right descending line, and fourth degree.
Canon Con. 103 Sons nephews daughter. Con. 104 Sons neeces daughter. Con.
105 Daughters nephews daughter. Con. 106 Daughters neeces daughter. Aff. 107
Sons nephews sons wife. Aff. 108 Sons neeces sons wife. Aff. 109
Daughters nephews sons wife. Aff. 110 Daughters neeces sons wife. Aff. 111
Wives sons nephews daughter. Aff. 112 Wives sons neeces daughter. Aff. 113
Wives daughters nephews daughter. Aff. 114 Wives daughters neeces daughter. 13.
Section.
4. Degrees. The unequal collateral line descending, and fourth degree.
Canon Con. 115 Great grandfathers sister. Con. 116 Great grandmothers sister.
Aff. 117 Great grandfathers brothers wife. Aff. 118 Great grandmothers brothers
wife. Aff. 119 Wives great grandfathers sister. Aff. 120 Wives great
grandmothers sister. 19. Section.
4. Degrees. The same line, and fourth degree.
Canon. Con. 121 Great grandfathers brothers daughter. Con. 122 Great
grandfathers sisters daughter. Con. 123 Great gra^dmothers brothers daughter.
Con. 124 Great grandmothers sisters daughter. Aff. 125 Great grandfathers
brothers sons wife. Aff. 126 Great grandfathers sisters sons wife. Aff. 127
Great grandmothers brothers sons wife. Aff. 128 Great grandmothers sisters
sons wife. Aff. 129 Wives great grandfathers brothers daughter. Aff. 130 Wives
great grandfa. sisters daughter. Aff. 131 Wives great grandmothers brothers
daughter. Aff. 132 Wives great grandmothers sisters daughter. 20. Section.
4. Degrees. The same line continued still, and fourth degree.
Canon. Con. 133 Great grandfathers brothers niece. Con. 134 Great grandfathers
sisters niece. Con. 135 Great grandmothers brothers niece. Con. 136 Great
grandmothers sisters niece. Aff. 137 Great grandfathers brothers nephews wife.
Aff. 138 Great grandfathers sisters nephews wife. Aff. 139 Great grandmothers
brothers nephews wife. Aff. 140 Great grandmothers sisters nephews wife Aff.
141 VViues great grandfathers brothers niece. Aff. 142 Wives great gra^dfathers
sisters niece. Aff. 143 Wives great grandmothers brothers niece. Aff. 144
VViues great grandmothers sisters niece. 21. Section.
4. Degrees. The Equal collateral line, and fourth degree.
Canon. Con. 145 Great gra^dfathers brothers nephews daughter Con. 146 Great
grandfathers brothers neeces daughter. Con. 147 Great grandmothers brothers
nephews daughter. Con. 148 Great grandmothers brothers neeces daughter. Aff.
149 Great gra^dfathers brothers nephews sons wife. Aff. 150 Great
grandfathers brothers neeces sons wife. Aff. 151 Great gra^dmothers brothers
nephews sons wife. Aff. 152 Great grandmothers sisters nephews sons wife.
Aff. 153 VViues great grandfathers brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 154 VViues
great grandfathers brothers neeces daughter. Aff. 155. VViues great
gra^dmothers brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 156 VViues great gra^dmothers
brothers neeces daughter. 22. Section.
4. Degrees. The unequal collateral line descending, and sourth degree.
Canon Con. 157 Grandfathers brothers nephews daughter. Con. 158 Grandfathers
sisters nephews daughter. Con. 159 Grandmothers brothers nephews daughter.
Con. 160 Gra^dmothers sisters nephews daughter. Aff. 161 Grandfathers brothers
nephews sons wife. Aff. 162 Grandfathers sisters nephews sons wife. Aff.
163 Gra^dmothers brothers nephews sons wife. Aff. 164 Grandmothers sisters
nephews sons wife. Aff. 165 Wives gra^dfathers brothers nephews daughter. Aff.
166 Wives grandfathers sisters nephews daughter. Aff. 167 VViues grandmothers
brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 168 VViues gra^dmothers sisters nephews
daughter. 23. Section.
4. Degrees. The same line continued still, and fourth degree.
Canon Con. 169 Fathers brothers nephews daughter. Con. 170 Fathers sisters
nephews daughter. Con. 171 Mothers brothers nephews daughter. Con. 172 Mothers
sisters nephews daughter. Aff. 173 Fathers brothers nephews sons wife. Aff. 174
Fathers sisters nephews sons wife. Aff. 175 Mothers brothers nephews sons
wife. Aff. 176 Mothers sisters nephews sons wife. Aff. 177 Wives fathers
brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 178 Wives fathers sisters nephews daughter.
Aff. 179 VViues mothers brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 180 VViues mothers
sisters nephews daughter. 21. Section.
4. Degrees. The same line continued still, and fourth degree.
Canon. Con. 181 Brothers nephews daughter. Con. 182 Sisters nephews daughter.
Aff. 183 Brothers nephews sons wife. Aff. 184 Sisters nephews sons wife.
Aff. 185 VViues brothers nephews daughter. Aff. 186 VViues sisters nephews
daughter.

Note that their neeces daughters, and neeces sons wives, not mentioned, as
well as their nephews daughters, nephews sons wives, mentioned in this
Section; be also parcel of this Catalogue. And likewise in the 21. 22. 23
Sections before, where they be not mentioned in their particular terms, yet
nevertheless be of the same Catalogue, line, and degree, with their Section:
such be in the 21. Section, great grandfathers, and mothers sisters nephews,
and their sisters neeces daughters: and in the 22. 23. Section, grandfathers
and mothers, and fathers and mothers brothers neeces, and their sisters neeces
daughters. This understood, the Canon Catalogue cease.

Of the necessary parts of this treatise, to the understanding of the reason
of the Computation in the Catalogues of this Table.
IF thou come (Christian Reader) to this Table, not having read the treatise
before, nor read nor excercised in the Canon and civil laws both, it will
seem somewhat strange unto thee, why the second degree in the 2 Section of this
table, should not increase in the eight Section following: and likewise why the
third degree in the 11. Section, should not increase in the 12. and 13.
Sections of the same: and that the 4. degree in the 18. Section, should
continue the fourth, so many Sections after.

These computations be (verily) natural: and yet (without industry) more than
common reason can reach unto, such be the secrets of blood.

Now, if thou will be idle, thou may wonder still, otherwise, this treatise is
but small it self in the whole, but much less that part of the same (by many
degrees) that is the total sum to resolve thee.

To the understanding therefore, or thy understanding of this Computation
readily in the Catalogues of this table, first confer (with the same) part of
the 2. Chapter, viz. from these words, A new found Question, fol. 12. to these
words that follow, viz. Have therefore in one degree etc. fol. 13. there thou
have the Lateran synod. Secondly, the 6. chap. in all there is described the
collection, state, and condition of every person, his line and degree by the
laws, by the Canons. Thirdly I commend thee to the figure and declaration of
Consanguinitie or blood, at the end of the 7. chap. this appertains to the 6
chapter, and that to this, either giving light unto other, but both a
manifestation to the diligent reader.

Last, I refer thee to this consultation, viz. In contracts of matrimony,
what is lawful, what honest, and what expedient. Some small helps, if these
shall not minister unto thee, with some little labor of thine own, they shall
somewhat prepare thee (at the least) to consult with the Learned.

FINIS.

