THE THIRD BOOK Of Amadis de Gaul.

CONTAINING THE DISCORDS and wars which befell in Great Britain, and there
about, occasioned by the bad counsel, which King Lisuart received from
Gandandell and Brocadan, against Amadis and his followers: whereby many good
Knights (afterward on either side) cruelly concluded their Lives.

Written in French by the Lord of Essars, Nicholas de Herberay, Commissarie in
Ordinary for the Kings Artillery, and his Lieutenant in the Country and
Government of Picardie, under Monsicur de Brissac: Great Master and Captain
General of the said Artillery.

Translated into English by A. M.



LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, dwelling in Foster-lane. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight, Earl of Montgomerie,
Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
RIght honorable, according to the saying of Cicero, writing in the
commendation of Histories, he avouches M. T. Cicero, in Epist. ad Plane.
them to be the Treasure of things past; the pattern of those that are to
come, the picture of man's life; the touchstone of our actions, and the full
perfecter of our honor. And Marcus Varro says: They are the witness of
Times, the light of Marcus Varro in Lib. de Hist. Cap. 16. Forsan and ^ae^olim
m^isse iuuabit.
Truth; the life of Memory; the Mistress of life; and the Messenger of
Antiquity. And in very deed (Noble Lord) Histories cause us to see those
things without danger, which millions of men have experimented with loss of
their lives, honor and goods: making many wise by others peril, and exciting
imitation of precedent men's virtues, only to reach the like height of their
unconquerable happiness.

Wisdom won by experience, proves oftentimes very perilous, and
(questionless) is so long in the coming, that a man may die before Reading of
Histories are the enstructers to true happiness.
he can come near it: so that a second life were necessarily required, and
all in employment only about it. It is therefore to be hastened forward, by the
search of passed examples, where of History affords the greatest plenty.

Warranted then by so worthy presidents, but more especially, by an honorable
Ladies earnest importunity, for these two labors by me undertaken, and now
(after longer delay then was intended) fully concluded: I am bold to present
your honor with these two Books, or parts of Amadis de Gau^e, the Third and
the Fourth, never extant before in our English, and which long since had been
with your Honor; but that I had a purpose (according to my promise to that most
Noble Lady) to have published the whole first five volumes together, where-of
three have formerly (though very corruptly) been translated and printed, but
these not till now.

May it please your Honor to accept these two in the mean time, and, to make
amends for so long iniuring your worthy expectation: in Michaelmas Term next
ensuing, the two former parts, the First and Second (somewhat better suited then
before) will come to kiss your Noble hand: And then the Fifth and Sixth shall
immediately follow, with all the speed conveniently may be used, and so
successively the other volumes of the History, if time will give leave to
finish them all.

So, humbly craving pardon of your Honor, for this my present boldness, and,
but such kind acceptance of my good will, as may encourage me to go on with
therest: Among them that are fairliest affected to your continual Noble and
flourishing happiness, and wish it to eternal perpetuity:

Remains your Honors in all duty. A. M.

THE THIRD BOOK OF AMADIS DE GAVLE
Containing the discords and wars which befell in Great Britain and there
about, occasioned by the bad council, which King Lisuart received from
Gandandell and Brocadan, against Amadis and his followers: whereby, many good
Knights (afterward, on either side) cruelly concluded their lives.

CHAP. I.
THE sons of Gandandell and Brocadan, being (as you have formerly heard)
overcome, the Knights of the Enclosed Island came to seek Angriote and his
Nephew and (with great joy) conducted them into their Pauillions. But King
Lisuart (some small while before this victory) had with-drawne himself into
his Chamber; not for any good that he wished to the vanquished, knowing
already the Treason of their wicked Fathers: but because he would behold
nothing, that might redound to the glory of Amadis, whom he held in so great
hatred, as to let him the more familliarly understand it: he would hardly admit
leisure to the two Conquerors, to have their wounds respected. But very hastily
sent command unto them, that they should depart out of his Country, never
presuming afterward to enter it again, least they would have worse welcome
then stood with their liking, whichnewes were so displeasing to them, that
instantly they complained to D^n Grumedan, Brian de Moniaste, and other
Gentlemen, who often used to visit them. And to them they said, that seeing
the King (forgetting the^ former services done unto him) held his favors so
far off, and in such strange manner from them: that himself likewise should
not count it strange (having thus forsaken them) if they sought to displease
him to their utmost power. Suddenly therefore arming themselves, and mounting
on horseback, both they and their companions rode toward the Enclosed Island,
and the third day following, arrived at an Hermitage, where they found the
Niece to Brocadan, the friend of Sarquiles, by whose means the treason had
been before discovered: and because her Uncle had threatened her, she secretly
absented her self from the Court, when beholding Sarquiles, she came and
embraced him, and prevailed so fairelie with her, as to lead her along with
them.

But you must understand, that soon after Angriote and his associates were
departed; Grumedan (who had been their Conductor) (...) to King Lisuart, and
acquainted him with all that he had heard of Angriote: whereon when he had
long considered, he thus answered.

I know right well, that patience is a virtue highly to be commended, and
beneficial: Nevertheless, often times of a slender evil, it begets a most
mighty ruin. For proof where of, if I had (at the first) shown such
countenance to Agriote and the rest, as I should have done, and not entertained
them so kindly as I have done: it may be they had never entered into such
boldness, not only to use threatenings against me, but also to enter my
Country so preuily. Notwithstanding, having done according as reason persuaded
me, God (with his own good liking) will allow it, and it will (no doubt)
redound wholly to my honor, and their confusion, which that it may be the
better known unto them, it is my will (without any longer temporizing) to send
defiance to them, and especially to Amadis, who is the only Author of all
this evil; and so much the rather, that by the very same means their pride
may be chastised.

At this very instant, Arban, King of North Wales, one of the wisest and most
virtuous Princes in all the Land, was there present, who looking with
discretion on this sudden enterprise in the King, spoke thus unto him.

Sir, I am of the mind, that (before you do what you have intended) you would
use the advice of the chiefest men in your Kingdom, for you do very well
know, that Amadis and they of his line, are good and valiant Knights, admired
for their power, and not neglected by their friends. Moreover, there is no man
ignorant, how falsely they have been accused to your Majesty, as the victory
which Angriote and Sarquiles enjoyed so lately against the ac^, has delivered
sufficient testimony for, had not right and truth supported their cause,
although they are good and approved Knights indeed: yet could they not so
easily have gone clear from the soones of Gandandell, nor of Damas, whereby
sufficiently appears, that the hand of heaven was powerful in maintayning
their justification. And therefore Sir, were you so pleased, as to forget your
concerned displeasure gone out against them, and make a repeal of them to your
service: in my poor opinion it would be for the best, considering, it has
never past with any honorable allowance, that a King should war with them,
whom he may easily, and with his no mean dignity, command to yield him both
love and service: whereas in doing otherwise, often times it proves to the
loss of his people, extreme expenses, and weakening his authority, a matter
so dangerous, as (upon such advantage) inciteth neighboring Commanders, to
thirst in desire o novel attempts, to hurl off awe and subjection, and to
win more liberty then they could formerly aim at. And therefore, a wise
Prince, if possible it may be, should never give occasion to his subjects, to
run from that fear and reverence which in duty they owe unto him: but rather
ought to essay by all means, that his government may relish of temperate
discretion, winning their hearts and wills rather by cordial louc, then the
least savor of vigor and tyranny, as a faithful Sh^^pheard respects his
flock. Wherefore Sir, it is requisite to quench the fire already ^ndled,
before it get head to a full ^ne of devouring: for often times, after an error
is perfectly known, the remedy falls out to be too far off. Amadis is so
humble minded, and so much yours; as if you but send to recall him, you may
quickly have him, and all they that follow him, of whom you may dispose to be
much better served, then ever you have been.

I know well (replled the King) that your advise is very good, but they urged
me with such a demand, as lay not in my power to grant them, having made
promise thereof before to my daughter Leonora. And I know withal, that their
strength is no way equal to mine, wherefore, forbear to proceed herein with
me any further, but prepare you and the rest to keep me company: for to
morrow, Cendill de Ganote, shall go to defy them all in the Enclosed Island.

You may do as seems best to your Majesty, answered King Arban, who
perceiving the Kings anger to be highly provoked, would contest with him no
longer: but without any show of coffeehouse, retired into his own lodging.
But you must understand, that Gandandell and Brocadan, perceiving their Treason
to be so apparrantly published by the death of their sons, and waxing weary
of living any longer among people of virtue and honesty: caused the dead
bodies to be had thence, and afterward, they and their adherents embarked
themselves in a Ship, and sailing away, arrived in a small Island, where they
finished the remainder of their wretched lines, wherefore our History will make
no more mention of them.

Let us now return to King Lisuart, who, after he had a long while considered
on the message sent him by Angriote, and what speeches had been urged to him
by King Arban: summoned a great company of his Knights together, and began a
heavy complaint unto them, concerning Amadis and his followers, declaring the
bold speeches and insolent terms, which Angriote had sent him by Grumedan.
Wherefore, my loving friends (quoth he) I pray ye to counsel me, how I shall
govern myself in this case. For if I endure this injury, it will redound no
less to your dishonor, then mine own disadvantage: considering, that a
Prince cannot be wronged, without great blame to the Subjects, if they suffer
it, and use no defense against it.

Hereupon, war was concluded against Amadis and his allies, and instantly he
called Condill de Ganote, saying thus unto him. Go to the Enclosed Island,
where you shall find Amadis, and tell him, that hence forward neither he nor
any of his friends may attempt the boldness (upon any occasion whatsoever) to
enter my Countries: for if any of them may be taken there, I shall in such sort
bestow them, as they will hardly escape agine with ease. Furthermore make this
addition, that I do defy them, and let them rest assuredly persuaded, that I
will be their utter destruction both in body and goods, wheresoever I can meet
with them. And because they make vaunt of ayding Galuanes against me: I am
determined to go in person, and will take possession of the Isle Mongaza,
whether if they dare persume to come, I will cause them to be surprised and
hanged.

In this manner departed Cendill de Ganote, and the same day the King
dislodged, to soiourne in the City of Gracedonia, and there also to assemble
his Army: whereof Oriana was most joyful, knowing the time of her de- (...)
speak whatsoever them pleased.

Sir, replied Gandales, here is Sadamon, who has charge from all the Knights
now abiding in the Enclosed Island, to acquaint you with their joint
deliberation. As concerning my self, I am sent particularly to you, as I shall
make known to you from my Lord Amadis, if it may please you to let me have a
sight of your Queen, as one that desires to do her most humble service, and
to your self, mine honor reserved. Believe me Gandales my good fr^end,
answered the King, I am not offended that you should take part with Amadis, for
I am persuaded, that you account him as your own son. And whereas you desire
to see the Queen, I am well pleased therewith; only for your loves sake,
having so kindly entreated her daughter Oriana, during the time she ^o^ourned
in Scotland. In the mean while, seeing Sadamon is the principal Ambassador,
in the business for which you are both sent hither, he has permission to
speak his pleasure.

Then Sadamon advanced himself, and with a manly countenance began his speech,
declaring first to the King, the wrong that he had done to Ga^^anes and
Madasima, and generally to the kindred and friends of Amadis. From whom (quoth
he) King Lisu^rt, I bring thee defiance, and here pronounce, that they are and
will be thy deadly enemies, so long as thou pretendest any ^ght to the Isl^
Mongaza, which (with shame) constr^i^^dly you en^oy. Afterward, particularly he
delivered all the rest, not omitting the ^^ast particle of his charge. What
(replied the King) do^ they think to fear me with (...)? No, no, they shall
not en^oy a ^^te of their demand, much (...) any peace with me. And the better
to manifest their folly, I am well cont^^ted, not to wear any Crown during my
life time, nor think my self worthy the name of King, except I can prevail
against their overmuch boldness.

Sir, answered Sadamon, you know the greater part of them* and are acquainted
sufficiently with what they can do: therefore, if you ^^^sider well thereon,
you will find them not to be so easily o^ercome* as (^erhaps) in rash
conjecture you may imagine. And Sir (quoth (...)) my Lord Amadis (...) me
charge, to deliver from himself only, as much as Sadamon has said unto ye:
Only he sends you word, that he will not be seen in the Isle of Mongaza, for
seeing he only conquered it for you, he will be no occasion of your loss
thereof, neither will appear in any other place, whereat the Queen may take
the least dislike, all which he does only in honor of her, and for her sake.
Let him do as he pleases (replied the King) it shall not heat my blood
overmuch, whether he be there or no. A^bei^ instantly (and before so many)
he appeared to make no account of (...) yet his mind and (...) were far
different, and there was not one man in the whole company, but made most high
esteem of A^a^is.

So the King arose, commanding that Gandales and Sadamon should dine in the
Hall, accompanied with Gi^nt^s and his Nephew Gu^llan, with some other of the
best esteemed Knights, to whom for their deeds of prowess, the King daily
affoorded no mean honors, which incited many to imi^ their virtues, in hope
to re^ the height of their fortunes. Dinner being ended, Gandales was conducted
to the Queen, and he entered into her Chamber, even as Or^ana and M^ were
conferring with her about him. Doing his humble reverence and coming to the
Queen, he ki^^ed her hand, and afterward she caused him to sit down by her,
when showing him Oriana, she said, Friend Gandales, know you this Lady, to
whom (some-time) you have done so many services? Madame (quoth he) if I have
don her any service at all, I hold my self very happy therein, and when I can
compass ^ust occasion, am ready to do as much both to you and her. I thank you
(quoth she) and what news bring you us from Amadi^ Madame, rep^ed Gandal^s,
he expressly commanded me to see you, if possibly I might, and to present his
most humble ^^lutions to your gracious acceptance, certifying you more-ouer,
that it is no mean motive to his high coffeehouse, to be thus enforced to
abandon your service. As much said my Lord Agrayes to me, who entreats you,
that in regard both he and Don Galuanes his Uncle, are in such displeasure
with the King: you would be pleased to send him his Sister, for he is verily
p^^swaded, that they standing so far (...) of favor, her presence can hardy
be well taken in this Court.

When (...) heard these words, never was woman more heavily afflicted, because,
over and beside the love she bare her, she only was the chief gardi^^ of
her most intimate secrets; and withal, knowing her childing time to be so
near, it made a double addition to her sorrow; for loosing her, she stood
vtte^ly (...) ^ure of confidence in any. But (...) be^ the te^^es in her ^^es,
closed ^ly with her in this ^ner. Bele^ me Madame, i^ the King should off^r me
so much wrong, as to make a separation between you and me, it would be (...)
my mind. Why (quoth Gandales) wherein should it be so off^nsiue to you? cannot
your entertainment be as gracious, in the Court of King Person your Uncle,
with the Queen Elisenna, and Melicia your Cousin, all of them being so
desirous to see you?

Trust me Gandales, said the Queen, Agrayes does me no little displeasure, in
making this demand for his Sister, and before I mean to send her to him, I
will speak with the King, who if he will follow mine advise, she shall not
depart hence with you, if her self take liking to continue with us M^dame,
answered Candales, let me then have my d^spatch so soon as may be, because I
must endure no long tarying here. As he deli^^red these words, the King (...)
the Chamber, when (...).

Sir, ^u^l well you know, the good entertainment and great honor, that the
King and Queen of Scots affoorded me, during the time you left me in their
guard, and such affiance they reposed in you, that to keep me company* they
sent their daughter hi^her with (...) and (...) if you (...) f^^m (...) All
which her Brother Ag^ (...) her come (...) by (...) hence. (...), and Man (...)
the (...) him that (...) (as yet) to be (...) Oriana, but, with (...) of the
di^cords hap^ her kindred, she might still remain in his gracious (...)* which
moved the King to such c^mpassion, that he returned her this answer.

Fair Cousine, do you conceit, that for any difference between them and me,
I can grow forgetful of your

(...) for better proof of himself against king Lisuart, that makes such
account of him.

During the space of eight days, they awayted apt and convenient time, to
ship themselves for passage to the Isle of Mongaza; and while they thus
consulted together, the Mariners came and gave them warning; that except they
meant to lose opportunity in their enterprise* they must now away, because the
wind stood commodiously, which made every man hasten to get him aboard, the
Trumpets and Clarions chearefully sounding. Now, as they were ready to weigh
Anchor, Amadis, who intended not to pass along with them, put him self into a
Skiffe with Drun^o, and went from Ship to Ship to take farewell of his friends,
persuading them to do their deuoire. And let me entreat ye (quoth he) my
dear esteemed companions, to be assistant one to another, and consider well
with your selves, that you go against a powerful king; in which respect if
you chance to fight, your fame and honor will be the greater. For I am not
ignorant that there is no one man among ye, but has been tried for a bold
and worthy knight, which gives persuasion to my hopes, that the hand of Heaven
assisting, and right in the cause you undertake; you shall replant a poor Lady,
in those goods and lands whereof she has bin too long disinherited.

The entering into the Ship, where were Galuanes, Que^ragant, Florestan, Brian
and Agrayes together; the tears trilled down his cheeks, and embracing them
each after other, he said; I was never in all my life so grieved, to forgo
such good company, as I am at this instant, but I know you will justly hold me
excused; and I would it had pleased God, that occasion had ministered some other
means, then thus to enforce our separation. But one request let me make unto
ye, that no discord may happen among ye; but live together like loving
friends and companions, for otherwise (assure your selves) the loss and ruin
will be yours. And thus speaking, he committed them to Heavens protection, and
went to take farewell of M^d^sima, who sat in her Ship conferring with her
Ladies, and thence returning to his Skiffe, the Mariners hoysed their Sails,
whereon the winds bestowed their breath so bountifully, as they soon lost
sight of the Enclosed Island, and on the sixth day following, about day-breake
in the morning, they arrived at the Burning Lake, where they secretly prepared
Bridges and Boats, for their easier and speedy landing. For they well knew,
that the Count Latin was there, with a great troop of Knights for defense of
the place, and notwithstanding all their diligence, they were discovered by the
watch, and intelligence was quickly carried to the Count, and G^ldar de
Rascuil, who instantly armed their men, and came to encounter their enemies on
the Seashore.

At their meeting, there fell an hard conflict on either side, the one for
landing, the other for withstanding; and do what they could, the knights of
the Enclosed Isle were beaten back to their Ships. Which being noted by
Florestan, Galuanes, Agrayes, Orlandin and some others of them: they leaped
forth into the water, and in despite of the Countes people, they got landing.
For they were followed by their friends with such fury, as the other side
retired, falling into a confused rout. Which the Count perceiving, he drew
back fair and softly, not doubting but to enter the Town at his own
pleasure. But immediately news were brought him that the inhabitants had
revoked, and that but one Port only was kept for him. Beside, that Dandasida,
Son to the aged Gi^sse (which the day before had been brought prisoner into
the Castle) with about twenty other Gentlemen of the Town, had broken open the
prisons, as the guards labored to supply the fight at the Seaside, and they
have (quoth he that brought the tidings) broken all in pieces, striking up an
Alarm in the Town; where the inhabitants have slain all them that you left
to defend it.

This report was so dreadful to the Count Latin and all his followers, that
they intended to turn back, and fly into the mountains: but considering at
length, that they might save themselves by the Port, kept yet purposely for
them, and so fall to some composition with their enemies; they resolved on that
course, and made their retreat. Whereupon, Galuanes would not pursue them any
further, but caused his people to draw back, attending till the rest of the
army might be safely landed. And as he was taking order for his camp, a
Knight came to him, being sent from Dandaside, to advertise him, that (without
all further question) he and his should be Lords of the town and Castle, if
they pleased to come with their imedeat succor. For the Count and his troops
held no more but one silly Port, where they contended to recover what they had
lost, and might easily be disposed of at his pleasure.

Galuanes wanted no diligence upon this advantage, but setting on with his
Army, marched directly toward the Town, conducts my Madasima all the way, to
quicken love and spirit in his Subjects, who came to welcome them with all
honor and reverence. Thus the Knights of the Enclosed Is^and made their
entrance, and while the Ladies were conuaied to the Castle; Galuanes calced a
Council, for b^tter direction of what was further to be done, and v^^er
expelling all his enemies, because it appeared that they endeavored to fortefie
their Port which they held. Agrayes spoke first, saying. If my advise be
worthy allowance, I would not admit them the least leisure to repair their
decayed fortune: but presently begin our assaut so lively, that not a man
should possibly escape. My Lord Agrayes (answered Florestan) we shall do much
better, if it like all our company, without any further hazard of our men, to
send them a summons of yielding themselves to us: which (perhaps) they will
gladly accept, and it will redound more to our honor, then if we proceeded
otherwise.

This opinion was generally commended, and A^gri^^^ and Gr^^^te appointed as
messengers to the Count, where giving (...) to understand what they had in
charge, and assuring him withal, that if he did not suddenly yield, that was
the very day of assault, and none would then be admitted to mercy: the Count
was soon persuaded to submission, especially all the rest that took part with
him, beholding their present condition of danger, no mean number of their
fellows being cruelly wounded, and the whole Country already revolted from
them. Therefore, they rather chose to embrace the mercy of such worthy
Knights, then fondly to stand on the strength of our poor Por^, or further to
tempt their fortune; by seeking safety abroad among Country Boores and
Peazants. This also was well liked by the Knights of the Isle, for they were
almost all wounded, or so shrewdly shaken in the fight, (which lasted all the
day) that few were able to endure their Arms. Howbeit, this joy was of no long
continuance, because (well n^^re in the same instant (news (...) that King
Arban of Northwailes, and Gasquilan, King of Swetia, were entered on the Isle,
with more then a thousand Knights, on the behalf of King Lisuart, which fell
out to their no little amazement. Nevertheless, they concluded to stand upon
their best defense, maintayning the place with their utmost power, and
forbearing to fight, until they had recovered better ability. But because we
would not stray too far from Amadis, and what ensued to him, at his return to
the Enclosed Island with Bruneo: we will leave these Gallants in expectation
of their enemies, to tell you that which next succeeded.

CHAP. II.
How Amadis being in the Enclosed Island, enquired of Gandales tidings
concerning the Court of King Lisuart, determining to pass into Gaul with
Brunco, to shake off his melancholy. And of those adventures which happened to
him by a tempest, that threw him upon the Sad Island.

AFter that the Army by Sea had set sail, and Amadis quite lost the sight of
them; he and Bruneo returned into the Enclosed Island, and because he had no
leisure to enquire of Gandales, news from the Court of King Lisuart, by reason
of his friends so sudden departing: the very same day, walking alone in the
garden, he called Gandales unto him, and entreated him to tell him, if he saw
the Queen and his Cousine Mabila. Believe me Sir (answered Gandales) I spoke
with them both, and for ought I could perceive, they bear you very kind
affection: especially the Queen, who desires you (by all possible means) to
make your peace with the King. Then presenting him the Letter which Mabila had
written, he further said. Madame Oriana, and your Cousine Mabila commend
themselves very lovingly to you, and are much grieved, at the hard opinion the
King holds of you, and Madame Oriana prays ye, to remember what kindness and
respect you some times found in the Court of the King her father, and the
Letter sent ye by your Cousine, will acquaint ye more at large with other
tidings.

Then Amadis turning his back on Gandales, doubting the alteration of his
countenance, opened the Letter, and saw that his lineage increased, Oriana being
so near the time of childbirth, then which, nothing could more content him.
Notwithstanding, his enforced absence from her, bred in him such extremity of
affliction, as his spirits forsook their ordinary functions, and caused him to
send forth sighs in stead of words. Hereupon, he purposed to go visit his
father King Perion, and pass into Gaul: commanding Gandalin to provide
shipping for him, for on the morrow he would away in the company of Brunco.
Gandalin very diligently fulfilled his charge, so that the day following they
set to sea, with a prosperous gale at the beginning: but at length it grew so
tempestuous and turbulent, that they were thrown upon an Island, which
appeared very pleasing to them, by the plenty of goodly trees therein planted.
And because they were much wearied with long being at sea, Bruneo said to
Amadis: Behold Sir, here is a pleasant resting place, after our tedious
travail, if you like thereof so well as I do, and perhaps we may meet with
some adventures.

I am well content, answered Amadis, and commanded the Patron to make to the
land. Marie God defend ye (quoth he) from so great an evil. And why? quoth
Amadis. Because ye are but dead men, replied the Patron, if you take landing
here, for this is the Sad Isle, where the cruel Giant Madraque lives, who is
the bloodiest Tyrant in all the Isles about this Sea: and let me tellyce, that
for the space of fifteen years, neither knight or damsel, has entered
here, but either they suffered a piteous death, or else were detayned in
shameful imprisonment. When Amadis and Bruneo heard this, it was no mean
motive to inflame courage in them, their maine desire aiming at the destruction
of such damnable customs: and therefore they said to the Patron, that he
should take no care for landing them there, which if he would not willingly
yield to, they meant to enforce it. So arming themselves, and mounting on
horseback, without any other company then their Squires Gandalin and Salinde,
they rode on into the Isle, giving them charge, that if they chanced to be
assailed by any other then knights, they should assist them to their power.

So long they iourneyed, til coming upon a plain, they discovered a Castle,
which appeared to them very fair and goodly, and directing their course
thither, they heard a horn so strongly winded, that the whole Isle made report
thereof. I remember, quoth Bruneo, that the Patron of the Ship told us, when
such a horn sounded, the Giant went abroad from his fortress, to fight with
such as his people could not conquer, and his fury is often times so extreme,
that every man dies he can meet with all, yea, and his own followers may not
escape him.

Let us on then, said Amadis, to find out this devil; and they had not gone
any great way of ground, but they heard a great noise of men, and blows
between them, which caused their greater haste, to defend any that were
injuriously assailed. At last they espied two knights very violently pursued by
a great number of horsemen, but on foot were they thus cruelly oppressed, very
near breathless: for their horses had been slain under them, and yet they
defended themselves courageously. Now, as they approached nearer to them, Ardan
the dwarf, knew Amadis by his Shield, whereupon he cried out aloud: Ah my
Lord, help your brother Galaor and the King Cildadan his intimate friend.
Amadis and Bruneo astonished at these news, without returning any answer to
Ardan, put spurs to their horses in their rescue. But instantly they espied
Madraque making toward them, mounted on a, great black horse, very thick
covered over with plates of iron. In his hand he held a Spear of such weight,
as hardly could any knight lift it up from the ground. Threatening his own men,
he said: Ye vile dogs, are ye so many, and can ye not foil two poor tired
knights? Give place ye Catiues, and let me delight my self with sluicing the
blood out of their bodies.

Amadis seeing him make toward his brother and the King Cildadan, with more
then an ordinary kind of fury, and doubting their ability of resistance, said
to Bruneo. Loving companion, succor you my Brother, and let me alone to
encounter (...) which unfortunately took the thigh of Bruneo, and passing
quite through, brake afterward in pieces against the Orelope. And so vehemently
did she labor in sending more Darts to them, that her feet slipping, she
fell down from the Rock into the sea, making such a dreadful noise in her
fall, as if some huge Tower had been battered in pieces, they in the ship
verily supposing he had been drowned. But afterward, they beheld her to swim
so nimbly, and to cut through the waves with such agility, that no fish could
perform it more actiuely: but out of the ship they let fly Arrows at her,
and wounded her in three several places. All which notwithstanding, so soon
as she recovered landing; she fled so swiftly among the thickets, as if the
devil had borne her on his wings, or a whirle-winde hurried her away.

She was covered with the skin of a black Bear, and appeared so hideous and
dreadful to behold that she might easily have been reputed some maine
monster, or diabolic^^ phantasma, so affrighting them in looking on her, that
they blessed themselves with the sign of the Cross. Now, because Bruneo lost
much blood by this unhappy hurt, they committed him to the Chirurgions care
and attendance, who opening the wound to see the danger thereof: the Gyantesse
showed her self again aloft on the Rock, crying to them with a loud voice,
You damned dogs, do ye think me to be a devil, that ye make such
crossing signs? No, no, I am Andadone, who will do ye all the mischief I
can, not sparing all possible pain and travail to perform it. They shooting
two or three Arrows more at her, she ran ouer-thwart the Island, and so they
all lost sight of her. But if Bruneo had not been so ill, they would have
pursued her, and taken her, if they possibly could, to have punished her as she
well deserved: but fearing least w^rse might befall him, the grief of his wou^
would grow to more extremity, they launched forth into the sea.

And now had Amadis leisure, to acquaint his Brother with all that had happened
in the Court of King Lisuart, since the time he had been there, especially,
how he, and the great part of his kindred and (...), had left Great (...)
regard of the Kings refusal to Don Galuanes, concerning the (...) of Mongaza;
as also the outrageous speeches he sent them. And believe me Brother (quoth
he) he will undoubtedly repent it, for within these fifteen days, a great
Army has past the burning Lake, conducted by Galuanes, Agrayes, Florestan and
(...), all proposing to bring the (...) under obedience to (...) as reason
justly re^th. And had not I made conquest of it for King Lisuart, I would have
gone my self in person: but I much rather desire to visit Gaul, having no
hope at all of seeing his Court any more.

It greatly grieved Galaor to hear these news, considering what harm might
ensue thereby in time: And on the other side, he had continually been so
affected to the service of King Lisuart, as he could not forsake him,
notwithstanding his love to Amadis, or any other, and being unable to conceive,
what should move him thus to estrange himself, from the place he sometime so
highly esteemed; he desired to understand the cause. Brother, answered Amadis,
you may well think I do it upon urgent occasion, and I would to God I could no
more remember it, seeing the thought thereof is death to me, and therefore (I
pray ye) spare any further speech in this case. Where-to Galaor gladly
yielded, and finding discourse on contrary matters, they arrived at Monstrel,
where they went on shore, because they understood that King Perion soiourned
there, for it was the nearest Town that he had in Great Britain, and there
he made expressly his abode, to hear tidings of his Sons Amadis and Galaor.

No sooner did he behold the Ship put into the Port, but he sent to know who
were in it, and the Messenger delivering his errand to Amadis, was answered,
that King Cildadan and Bruneo were come thither, only to do their duty to the
King, who was not a little joyful of the news, hoping that they would inform
him, in what he further desired. So mounting on horseback, they rode on to the
Court: but Amadis and Galaor went another way, for they desired first to see
their mother, to try if she would acknowledge them, or no. So, as the King
came forth of the Town, they entered the Castle, where they met an Esquire, to
whom they said. Friend, we would entreat (if you were so pleased) to acquaint
the Queen, that two knights of her kindred, desire to do her reverence, and to
see her. The Squire was quick in delivering the message, and brought them
answer, that they might enter. Here you must observe, that the had not seen
Galaor, since such time as he was carried away by the Giant, being then but
two years old. Nevertheless, so soon as they came before her, beholding
Amadis; instantly she presumed the other to be Galaor, and was so rapt with
extremity of joy, that as she was about to embrace them, she fell forward on
them, as entraunced, being unable (a long while) to speak unto them, at last
she said. Ah blessed Virgin Mary, what do I behold? dear joys, has Heaven so
favored me, as to let me see you both together. So she swouned again
between their arms, but she was quickly recovered by her Ladies, and then
came to Melicia, who had no mean part in this novel joy.

Thus the Queen had now her three children with her, and called to mind her
passed misfortunes, not only in respect of Amadis, but also of Galaor, the one
escaping the dreadful shipwreck on the Sea, the other from the hands of the
Giant Albadan: and now, what with sorrow past, and joy in presence, so strong a
war fought with her affections, that her cheerful countenance became quite
changed. Notwithstanding, after she had recovered her spirits, and some
ordinary discourse past between them; she demanded if they came alone into
Gaul.

Madame, answered Amadis, King Cildadan came with us in the Ship, and Bruneo
also in company who (by great misfortune) chanced to be wounded some few
days since. He is a good knight, valiant and hardy, and my desire is, he may
find entertainment fitting his desert. Trust me Son (quoth she) he shall have
here all the honor and respect may best be devised, as well for his own sake,
as for your fair affection toward him. And I will command your Sister (who
knows right well how to cure all kind of wounds) that she shall be careful
of his health. Sister, said Galaor, I join with my Mother in this suit to
you, for he is worthy of all help, and I know no Gentleman living, more
forward then he in the service of fair Ladies. Witness the Arc of loyal
Lovers, where he made proof of his love to one, that well may esteem her self
most fortunate, to be honored with the service of so loyal a man, as never
could be taxed with any disloyalty.

When Melicia heard these words of her brother Galaor, in behalf of him, whom
she loved as dearly as her own life; she could not avoid blushing:
nevertheless, being discreetly wise, she modestly excused this alteration, and
said to her Brother Galaor. Sir, since it stands so well with the lyking of you
and my Mother; here I promise ye, that I will use my very best endeavor in
his service. At this pause entered the Kings Cildadan and Perion, who (as yet)
had not heard of his Sons arrival, that kneeled down, and did him humble
reverence. Enfoulding them lovingly in his arms, he demanded, what fortune had
brought them thus together, considering the general report, that Galaor was
lost on the day of battle, which King Cildadan had against King Lisuart. You
say very true Sir, replied Amadis, and so began to discourse, how he and Brunco
arrived at the Sad Isle. Alas (quoth King Cildadan, can we talk he^re of
Bruneo, and wrong him so much, as leave him so long a while in the Ship, when
it were much better for him to be on land? In sadness (answered the Queen)
there is nothing more contrary to a green wound, then coldness of the water.
And therefore instantly commanded, that he should be conveyed into one of the
best Chambers in the Castle, which accordingly was done forth with.

Then came the Ladies to visit him, and the Queen gave him most gracious
welcome, desiring him to be of good cheer: For here is my Daughter (quoth
she) right skillful in the Art of Chirurgerie, that means to be your often
visitant. But Bruneo took these words otherwise then the Queen meant them,
because (as formerly has been related) he affected Melicia with his souls
best integrity, and for her love only, and none other, had approved and
ended part of the adventures of the Enclosed Island. N^uerthelesse, at this
time he knew how to govern his passions, thanking the Queen most highly for
this her kind and gracious offer. So she withdrawing, left her Daughter, and
some other of her Ladies, to provide such things as were needful for him. By
this advantage of time and place, Melicia seated her self so apparently in his
eye; as he might perfectly apprehend the ra^^^y of her beauty, which fed his
^^pes with such ease and happi^es, the he coueted no recovery of his new
received wound, feeling the smart of the old one, and g^uen him by love so
long ago. And no little comfort did he receive, by the sweet speeches of the
fa^e young Pr^ncesse, who gave him assurance, that in very short time his
wounds would be cured; provided, that he perfo^med wholly what she^ appointed
him: For otherwise quo^h she^ you may fall into far greater danger. I trust
Madame (quoth he) not to disobey any counsel that comes from you: because if I
should do otherwise, it will be the ending of my days.

Well understood Melicia, to what effect this answer tended: yet would ^hee
not seem to yield any apparent note thereof, but having concluded his first
dressing, said my Lord Brunco, for my sake (I pray ye) receive a little
sustenance, and afterward take some rest if you can. Then calling for such
food as she knew meerest for him, and with a hand (more white then
Alablaster) making it ready for his eating: she quickened such delicate
apprehensions in his soul, that his eye went far beyond his appetite. So,
commanding every one to depart the Chamber, that the least noise might nor
offend him, she said. You have promised me, that you will essay some repose,
let me see how obedient you will be herein, till such time as I come to visit
you again: Then her self departing, she called Lasinde, Bruncos Esquire, and
said unto him. Friend, you know (better then any other) your Masters
conditions, make demand therefore of such things as you think fittest for him.

The Squire was not now to learn, what intercourse of affection had passed
between them, and therefore, presuming more boldly in his own wit, then one
less skillful, he returned her this answer. Madame, I wish no worse to my
worthy Master, then that good fortune would conduct him to some such place,
where he might make acknowledgement of the favors you afford him. But it
appears to me, that such as are desirous to recover a wounded body, first of
all, they should apply help to the place principally offended. Which kind of
Physic instructs me, to entreat your pity to my poor Master, who
endures, not so much pain by the hurt so lately received; as by a disease of
greater antiquity, and you that are the only cause, can best minister the
mittigation. Friend (quoth she) I can tell how to help an infirmity wherewith
I am acquainted, but secret soars are quite out of my curing. Trust me Madame,
replied the Squire, if the one seem plain to you, the other is no less
apparrant, for you are not ignorant, that the extremity of his affection to
you, was the maine motive, why he went to behold the Images of Apolidon and
Grimanese in the Enclosed Island. Lasinde (quoth she) they that become sick
by such a strange means, had need have much time to compass their amendment;
without urging any other remedy, then that which experience shall repute most
necessary.

And so she left the Squire, who went forthwith, and acquainted his Lord with
all the conference, that had past between him and the Infanta Melicia:
wherewith he was not any way displeased, persuading himself, that she had
thus discreetly answered, reposing (as yet) but slender confidence in the
Squire. And like as true lovers often use to do, he converted all to his own
best advantage; being much better contented then ever heretofore, and thanking
God, that Andadones hurting him, had favored him with such an extraordinary
felicity. For, under the happy fortune of this wound, he oftentimes enjoyed
her gracious company, without whom, life was most tedious to him.

Some few days after, Amadis, Galaor and King Cildadan walking together,
Galaor perceiving the nere approach of King Perion, he went unto him with these
words. Sir, I most humbly entreat your Princely advise, in a matter something
questionable with mine own judgment. You know (my Lord) quoth he to his
Brother Amadis, that you gave me to King Lisuart, commanding me to serve him,
and that I should be wholly his, whereof I made him faithful promise, and you
likewise. Now, beholding how great a difference has happened between you two,
during the time of my absence: I find my self very strangely perplexed,
considering, what error I may commit, by taking part with him against you, as
also, how justly I may be blamed by him, forsaking him in a time of such urgent
necessity. Wherefore most Royal father, I humbly crave your opinion in this
case, to prevent my dishonor on either side, and that reason may be preferred
before mine own will.

Son, answered King Perion, you may not fail to follow your Brother, against
a King so headstrong and ungrateful, for if you gave your self to his
service against all men: yet your brothers cause ca^ies an exception herein, in
which respect, you may well forgo your attendance on him, not only because
he declares himself to Amadis (in his own person) a deadly enemy, but also
to all his kindred and friends, amongst whom you ought to hold the prime place.
Sir, replied Galaor, it appears to me (under correction) that I shall greatly
forget my self, and run into no mean blamefull imputation, by withdrawing
my service from him, before his own permission to that purpose: for, seeing
(in the times of peace) he gave me honor and good entertainment; what will
be noysed abroad of me, to forsake him when affairs of importance be fall
him?

Well knew Amadis, whereto the speeches of Galaor aimed, and that he had no
will to keep him company: wherefore, formalizing himself answerable to his
Brothers fantasy, he thus answered him. Brother, although we both stand
highly obliged, to obey the council and command of the King our father: yet I
will humbly desire his pardon, in telling my mind concerning your intention.
Seeing you are so earnestly addicted to return into Great Brittan, and to
continue in the service of King Lisuart; it likes me well that you should do
so. For, in the case that concerns our difference, I doubt not, but ^^w many
good Knights soever shall come to attend him; God, who is a just Judge, will
(in the end) make him know, what wrong he has done us, and his ouer-great
ingratitude, especially to me, that have honored him with so many well
deserving services. Therefore, may it so please our Kingly father; he may
license your departure, for I am contented with it. Why then (quoth the King)
God be your guide, and I will rest in this hope, that you may (one day) be the
means, of compounding peace in so unhappy a war.

Thus Galaor obtained his desire for departure, and because King Cildadan would
shape some honest excuse to go along with him; he began in this manner. My
Lords, it is sufficiently known to you all, to what issue the battle came,
which I had against King Lisuart, who only (by your means) got the glory of
the day, to my no little disaduantange: for such honor as (in Justice)
appertained to me, converted to my great confusion, in regard, that by the
covenants on either side concluded before, I was constrained (for a limited
time) to acknowledge him as my Commander, and to serve him (...) with all my
knights, which was no mean grief in me to accomplish. But valuing mine honor
much dearer then life, I yielded to control and check mine own will, and
(according to my promise) to bring him a number of my subjects in his
assistance, whereof already he has given me summons, and no later then this
very morning; for at the ending of Mass, I received Letters from him to that
effect. Wherefore my good Lords, in doing no more then mine honor binds me
to, let me go along to him with my friendly compa^^^n Galaor. You may d^e as
you please replied King Perion, albeit I am persuaded, that in the end, he will
be as little courteous to you, as to others casheered out of his favor.

At the ending of these speeches, they withdrew to their Chambers, where they
continued till such time as they went to rest, and in the morning came to take
their leave of King Perion and Amadis, embarking themselves in a good Ship,
that waited there for them, and the winds sitting prosperously for their
departing. So weighing Anchor, they sailed into Great Britain toward King
Lisuart; who (the very same day) had tidings of the Count Latins overthrow and
his men. Whereat he conceived such displeasure, that without attending his
levied Army, he purposed to part thence, with so few knights as were then in
his Court. Nevertheless, he concluded first to hunt the Heart, with all the
Ladies in his company; wherefore mounting early the next morning on
horseback; he met the whole assembly to the Forest, where his Tents were
readily prepared for him. Great delight had they in hunting, but he himself
could not forget the injury, received by the knights of the Enclosed Island at
the Burning Lake, minding nothing more, then how he might be revenged on them,
according as hereafter you shall hear declared.

CHAP. III.
How King Cildadan and Galaor, in trauayling toward the Court of King Lisuart,
met with twelve Knights, and a Lady, who conducted a young Gentleman, that
entreated the King to make him Knight.

DOn Galaor and King Cildadan arriving in Great Britain, immediately heard
news, that King Lisuart prepared his Army for passage to the Isle of Mongaza,
and that his departure would be speedily in regard whereof, they made all the
haste they might to be with him before he dislodged thence, and coming near
to the place of his abiding, they rested in the midst of a great Forest. On
the next morning as they were ready to mount on horseback, they heard (not
far off) the Bell of some hermitage, and making thitherward to hear Masse^at
their entrance into the Chapel, they beheld twelve green Shields, each
having a golden Tower painted in the midst, all set in order about the Altar,
and by them stood another Shield, wholly white, garnished with fine Gold, and
enriched with many precious stones, whereat they were somewhat amazed, because
they saw no knights to whom they appertained. Notwithstanding, as they kneeled
at their prayers, a Squire entered, of whom Galaor demanded, who had placed
those shields there? Sir (quoth the Squire) your request may not now be
answered: but if you go to the Court of King Lisuart, there you will quickly
know some ^uelties.

Now as they were issuing forth, there entered twelve knights; each of them
guiding a Damsel by the hand, the fairest and best formed that possibly could
be seen, all of them holding conference with a Gentlewoman more ancient in
years, that seemed as a conductres to the rest. Well perceived Galaor and King
Cildadan (by her habit) that she was a stranger, and maruailed the more what
she should be: but they deferred any further enquiry for that time, because
they beheld the Hermit readily habited to say Mass. Which was no sooner
ended, but the elder Damsel addressed her self toward King Cildadan and
Galaor, demanding of them, whether they were of King Lisuarts Court, or no.
Why ask ye? answered the King. Because (quoth the Damsel) we earnestly
desire your conduct thither, so please it you to afford us such favor. For
we are advertised that he is in this Forest, accompanied with his Queen, and
a goodly troop of Ladies, where he runs the Heart. Believe me Damsel,
replied Galaor, so please it you, we will keep you company. Sir, quoth she, a
thousand thanks, and seeing we find you so gently disposed, and are (as we
imagine) some of his followers: our suite to you is, that you would entreat
him, to bestow knighthood on this young Squire here present with us, assuring
ye, that he is derived of so high birth, as he well deserves to have that
honor, and much greater, if possible it might be.

Truly Damsel, answered Galaor, I shall very gladly do it, and am
persuaded, that a King so good and gracious, will not deny me a request so
reasonable. Let us presently then, replied the Damsel, set forward to him,
while our Gentleman (according to commendable custom) shall perform his
devotions here in this Chapel. So mounting on horseback, she rode on alone
in the company of Galaor and King Cildadan, and as they descended down an
hill, they espied the King crossing the Valley, who perceiving two knights
armed in that manner, imagined that they made their abode there, to Iouste with
any other that should first pass by. And albeit he had thirty knights in his
company as his guard, and each man ready for any such encounter: yet (at that
time) he was not willing to have any such trial of the Lance; but sent
Grumedan toward Galaor and his company, to request their instant repair to
the King, which accordingly he did: and so soon as Galaor perceived his
nearer approach, he presently knew him, and showing him to King Cildadan, said.
This is old Grumedan (quoth he) who bare King Lisuartes Ensign in the battle
against you. By my faith (answered King Cildadan) he is a very worthy man; for
on that day, I contended more against him, then any other in the whole band.
And I well remember, that we grew (at last) to hand-gripes, when I strove to
wrest his weapon from him: but it was a matter beyond my power, and yet I brake
it in the handle, as himself fast held it.

Their helmets were off, in regard of the heates extremity, by which means
Grumedan quickly knew Galaor; and giving his horse the spur, he rode to
embrace him, saying. My Noble Lord, you are welcome, behold the King, who has
sent me to ye, imagining you to be otherwise then you are indeed, and
therefore desires you to come speak with him. Lord Grumedan, answered Galaor,
king Cildadan is here with me, and we both will go to salute his Majesty. In
good faith (quoth Grumedan) he will be very joyful for your return, and if
you please, I will ride before to acquaint him therewith. Do so, replied
Galaor, and we will follow ye. Grumedan returning, and the king having
observed his long conference with the two knights, demanded (at his arrival)
who they were. Sir, answered Grumedan, the one is my Lord Galaor, who has
brought ye king Cildadan in his company. How? quoth the king, is it possible?
Yes verily, replied Grumedan. It is, said the king, the highest good hap that
could now befall me, let us therefore go and kindly welcome them. As he made
toward them, he beheld Galaor and king Cildadan, dismounted from their horses
to do him reverence, whereupon, he embraced them with so cheerful a
countenance, that it might easily be noted by the whole company, how pleasing
their arrival was to him.

His next demand, was concerthe ancient Damsel that came thither with them.
Sir, answered Galaor, we found her (a while since) in an Hermitage near
adjoining, accompanied with twelve K^s and a young Gentleman, the goodliest
person that has been seen, who (as is given me to understand) has travailed
from a far off Country, expressly to receive his Knighthood, so it stood
with your liking to bestow it on him, for he will not have it of any other as
he says himself. Wherefore King Cildadan and I do entreat ye, most humbly,
that you would grant it him: in regard, that his looks and behavior do
speak no less, but that he is well and worthily descended. The King never
used to afford such an honor, but where he knew it to be especially
deserved, wherefore, hearing this request made by Galaor (leaning upon King
Cildadans shoulder) he stood pensiuely a long while, without any answer:
because, that by denying them, he imagined they would take it offensiuely, and
in yielding to their motion, it appeared uncouth unto him, and irregulare to
his wonted custom. Nevertheless, he demanded of the Damsel, whose son
he was? Sir, quoth she, you may not know that as yet: but I dare swear upon
my soul, that he is extracted of Royal seed by both sides.

What think you then my dear friend, quoth the King to Galaor, may we make
him Knight? You may very well do it Sir (answered he) without standing longer
on any excuse, for I presume he will prove of no mean merit. On Gods name then
be it so, replied the King: yet I would have the Queen and her Ladies
witnesses thereof, and therefore go you before to them, and cause them to
meet us at the place where he remains, for be well assured, they all will
be right joyful to see ye. So the King took ^he way toward the Hermitage,
and Galaor, with King Cildadan, went to find the Queene^ where you may well
persuade your selves, that never did men meet with more gracious welcome,
especially by the Princesses Oriana and Mabila, for their hope was (by them) to
hear some news of Amadis, and that they would work his means, for
recovering the Kings favor again. Having finished their best salutations on
all sides, Galaor told them, that the King had sent for them, and upon what
occasion, to their no little joy and contentment: for every one was desirous to
see the young gallant, of whom Galaor had given such high commendations.

The Queen and her Ladies being all mounted, made such speed to the Hermitage,
that they alighted there, even as the King was entering into the Chapel, where
beholding the twelve Shields, placed about that which was altogether white, and
the young Gentleman very devoutly at his prayers: he appeared so pleasing in
their eyes, that the former report came far short of their present opinion of
him, for, in their best of judgment, they had never beheld a more comely
creature, nor of a more settled and assured countenance. He seeing such a goodly
company of Ladies and Knights, arose, and gave them most humble reverence. Then
the King took him by the hand, and demanded if he would be a Knight. Sir,
quoth he, for nothing else have I iourneyed from so far a Country, but to
crave it at your hand, so pleased it you so much to honor me. Trust me said
the King, you shall not be denied, and he falling on his knees, the King gave
him the Accolade, according to the ceremony then used in Knighthood, saying
unto him; Be a Knight in the name of God, and so took him up. Now, quoth he,
for receiving your Sword; you may make choice of any in this company, that
stands fairest in your own liking. Sir, replied our new made knight, I desire
then, that Madame Oriana may do it, for if she perform it, I have the thing
that my soul most longs after. Is it even so? said the King, I will solicit
her on your behalf, and stepping to the Princes, thus proceeded. You hear how
desirous the knight is, that you would bestow such an honor on him; let me
entreat ye, not to deny him.

Now, the fair young Princess, to whom (never till then) any such request had
been made, neither knew what might be his reason that made the motion: had so
little power over her present condition, that a most amiable blush mounted up
in to her cheeks. Yet taking the Sword presented to her, she guided it to the
knight, after the usual manner. Then spoke the ancient Damsel to the King, so
low as none but himself could hear her. Sir (quoth she) seeing you have done
such honor to our knight, he shall remain (if you be so pleased) in your
service, with these twelve other knigh^s, that hitherto have kept him company.
And because duty commands so much in me, as to return again to her that
sent me hither: I must entreat your favor for my departure, first letting
you know, that he is named Norandell, and is more yours then you imagine, as
you shall further understand by this Letter; which having very closely conveyed
into his hand, she took her leave, and rode on her journey, leaving him
pensiuely perplexed at her words And because he doubted, that the Letter might
contain some more important matter: he feigned, as if he would return to
his huntsmen, the better to read the Letter where himself pleased: desiring
Galaor and king Cildadan, to reconduct the Ladies back to their Tents,
awayting there the hour of dinner, while he (in mean time) would kill a Heart.
But if I fail (quoth he) in coming to dinner, expect me not till supper time.
So setting onward to the chase, and finding himself accompanied but with few:
he opened the Letter, which contained as hereafter follows.

The Letter from the Infanta Celinda, to King Lisuart.
MOst mighty and excellent Prince, by reading this Letter, it may be, you will
remember, that when you trauersed strange Countries, and a Knight errant,
giving end to many great adventures: Fortune directed your course into the
kingdom of my Father, who was lately before deceassed, and you found me
retired to one of my Castles, called the Great Rosier; where Anti^on le brave
kept me besieged, because I disdained to join with him in marriage, he being
no way equal to me in nobility, and a much less friend to virtue. As he made
good proof thereof, ^r by force and tyranny he usurped over me (a poor young
Lady) the greater part of all my Countries, when at ^ur arrival you offered
him the Cem^te, in defense of my right: which he accepting, as trusting more to
the strength of his own arm, then any justice in his quarrel. And therein
heaven declared just judgment; for, you being far inferior to him in
composition of body, but much exceeding him in (...) of courage, prevailed
against him. By means whereof, I was (...) after ^restored to my rights, all
which I must and do confess, to hold of you for ever, as being wholly yours,
and my self also. And you pleased then to honor me so much with your
presence, that you came into my Great Rosier, where we conferring together in
the delightful Arbours: you gathered the flower of my virginity, as we were
sporting in cropping sweet Roses, whereas the place was (and yet is) most
plentifully abounding. Neither am I able to say, whether love would have it so,
or my beauty proved the maine occasion: but well I wot, your command was so
potent over me, and I so feeble in resistance; that before you departed hence,
you left me conceived of this young Gentleman, endued with such fair form and
feature, as it appeared, that Nature was well pleased, to complete him perfect
in all excellence, thereby to deface all remembrance of our sin committed.
Wherefore Sir, receive him as your own, being of Royal seed both by you and
my self, which verily persuades me, that he will prove a valiant man, as
retayning in him part of your famous prowess, and part of the exceeding love
wherein he was conceived, at such time as you gave me this Ring, which I send
ye here enclosed likewise, in the testimony of the faithful promise you then
made to your humble servant Celinda, Daughter to King Hegide, who kisseth the
hand of your Royal Majesty.


When King Lisuart had read and re-read over this Letter, word by word, he
perfectly called to mind, all that the Princess had there set down, albeit
it was long time before his soiourning in the kingdom of Denmark, where (as a
wandering Knight) he performed such actions of Arms, as he won the love of
the Infanta Brisenna, whom after-ward he married, according as formerly has
been declared. Notwithstanding, he determined to make no account at all of
Norandell (though he knew him to be his natural Son) until he perceived
how he would bear himself, and deserved by his deeds, to prove such a one
as he desired. As he continued in these private considerations, a goodly Heart,
pursued by a full cry of Hounds, passed hard by him, and the Huntsmen followed
on so closely, that there the Dear lost his life. In regard whereof the King
was willing to give over further sporting, and commanded the Huntsmen to bear
the Heart to the Queens Tent.

Afterward, being set at the Table. Galaor and King Cildadan keeping him
company; all dinner while he had but little conference with them, for thinking
still on Celinda, and her Letter sent him. Dinner being ended, he took Galaor
aside, and as they walked, thus discoursed with him. My worthy friend, so much
do I rely upon your fidelity and love, as I hold you to be the only man in
the world, to whom I dare make known my very intimate secrets. And setting
aside those matters of no mean importance, which (during the time of your
absence have happened to me: I will only acquaint ye with an especial
accident this day befalne me. So, delivering him the Letter which Celinda had
sent, he willed him to peruse what it contained. Galaor reading it over
advisedly, perceived thereby, that Norandell was Son to the King, whereat
conceiving no little joy, he returned this answer. Assuredly Sir, if you took
such pains for your fair friend, in mine opinion, she is no way behind ye in
honorable recompense, having brought ye such a goodly Son, as will prove a
worthy man, and a valiant knight in Arms. Nor let the concealment hereof be
irksome to ye, because when you shall please to make it known, it will
redound to your great joy and honor. And if it agreed with your good liking,
to let me enjoy him as my companion, what services heereaster I shall do for
you, I will account to be most worthily employed.

What? quoth the King, would you trouble your self with a Boy, affoording him
(at the first) so great an honor, not knowing his temper, or how he will carry
himself? It is well known, that there is not any knight in Great Britain,
but he will repute himself much happy, to have such grace as you offer him.
Sir, (quoth Galaor) it is the first request that ever I made to ye, and I
humbly desire, that I may not be denied. On my faith (quoth the King) if you
honor him so much, you shall highly oblige him to you, and do me also an
especial favor. And no mean glory to my self, replied Galaor for he being
Son to so famous a (...) cannot fail to be one of the best knights in the
world. Do then (quoth the King) as shall (...) best. And as they held on this
discourse, the Queen came in, w^ made them break off, and she being
accompanied with King Cildadan, Norandell, and many other knights, continued
familiar conference together, till Galaor entered into these speeches.

Sir, you know that by the custom here used in this kingdom of Great
Britain, no new made knight ought to refuse any knight Lady or Damsel, the
first demand they shall make unto him. You say very true Sir, answered the King
there wherefore do you move t^stion? Because Sir, replied (...) am a knight,
and I would (...) Norandell, to grant what I shall require of him, to wit,
that (for one whole year) he and I may be fellows, and companions, not any
way to be sundered or divided, except death or imprisonment shall enforce it.
When Norandell heard this, he was no less amazed then well pleased: for he
very well knew, that Galaor was esteemed one of the best knights in that Court,
and that the king affoorded much more honor to him, then any other that, kept
him company, and thereupon he thus replied. My Lord Galaor it may easily be
discerned by your demand, in how many obligations of duty you would have me
bound unto you, in wishing that grace to me, which I much rather ought to have
begged of you. And this I dare assure ye, that not only do I grant what you
have desired, namely, my company: but also I give my self wholly yours, and
require, that in that nature you would receive and accept me. Believe me, quoth
king Cildadan, you have both reason in these several requests: you Lord
Galaor, in urging such a favor, and you likewise young Norandell, in granting
it: for if heaven be pleased therewith, as we need not use any doubt, it will
redound to the honor and benefit of either.

At this very instant, the King received intelligence, that his Army was to
depart very speedily, wherefore the next morning he rode to the City, and
riding alone by himself he called Galaor to him, telling him. He was well
contented, that his daughter Oriana should know Norandell to be his son, and
her Brother, (...) she should the better love and respect him; but yet he w^
have it revealed to her very secretly. Sir, answered Galaor, I am persuaded,
that it will not a little please her, and therefore (if possibly I may) I will
acquaint her therewith before we come to Court. Do so, quoth the king; Galaor
riding backward, came to the Princess, and to him (after some other conference
had together) she spoke in this manner. Sir Galaor, I am persuaded, that the
Gentleman who was yesterday made knight, has been a long while known to you,
in regard you made choice of him as your associate and companion: for I know
not any knight in this Court, but would think himself highly honored, to be
so graced by you, yea, though it were your brother Amadis.

Madame, replied Galaor, your comparison of me with my Brother, is so
unequal, as the like speeches may be spoken of heaven and earth: considering,
that (in respect of me) he may be termed heaven, and I (compared to him)
far inferior to the lower element. And therefore, I repute it great
presumption in any knight whatsoever, to think himself his second: for it
plainly appears, that fortune favored his election, to hold the primarie
place in valor, feature, and all other gracious gifts required in a Gentleman.
Full gladly did Oriana listen to these praises of her Amadis, while inwardly
she thus spoke to her self. Alas poor Lady, thy misfortune were unmatchable,
if in being thus severed from the presence of thy friend, thou should be as
far distant from his entire affection: in good sadness, death would be a
thousand times more welcome to me, then such a deep discomfort. But Galaor
purposing a longer continuance of his discourse, thus proceeded. Let it be no
matter of marvel in you, fair Princess, that I accepted Norandell into my
company; for you may be well assured, that I did it not but upon great and
good occasion, and perhaps, it will no more dislike you, then it does me, when
the cause is more familiar to ye? I pray ye Sir, quoth she, if it be a
matter that your honor may dispense withal, not to conceal it from me.

Madame, said Galaor, the secret were very important, that I would not impart
to you, and upon faithful promise of your priuacie, I will discover it. Rest
boldly assured thereof, replied the Princess. Understand then Madame, quoth
Galaor, that Norandell is son to the King your father and your Brother. And
so declared, how he had read the Letter from the Infanta Celinda, and the king
likewise which she had sent to the king, with all the other speeches passed
between them. In good faith, answered the Princess, I am highly pleased, to
know this new affinity between Norandell and me: and now I give you thanks
withal my heart, for the worthy honor you have done him, in accepting him to
be your companion. For, in being with you, he cannot fail of proouing to be
a good man, and a famous knight: whereas, should he be otherwise addicted, yet
such a bad nature would be quite altered, only by keeping your company, as he
has faithfully promised. Madame, quoth Galaor, you have power to say of me
whatsoever you please, as of him, that is a most humble servant both to the
king and your self, when and how it shall like you to employ me.

So breaking off this enterparlance, they rode to the Queens lodging, where
Galaor dismounting the Princess, and having conducted her to her Chamber: he
departed thence with his new companion, until the next morning their going to
the king, who told them, that he purposed that night to sleep aboard his
Ships, and the day following to set sail away, giving order for every man's
being in readiness. The Drums and Trumpets summoning all soldiers to their
colors, they weighed Ankors on the morrow, and had the wind so auspicious
for them, as quickly they love the sight of Great Brittan: but soon after
arose a shrewde Tempest, which made them very doubtful of perishing.
Notwithstanding, it calmed so favorably in the end, that (on the fifth day
following) they discovered the Isle of Mongaza: where they landed, near to the
place where king Arban lay encamped and fort fled, awayting for their succor
and supply. (...) long before, they of the (...) Lake had made a (...) forth
upon them, and pursued them so violently: as if king Arban men had not won
the top of the mountain, they could not have avoided discomfiture.

There did Florestan make good acknowledgement of his manhood, for, meeting
with Gasquilan, king of Swetia, he wounded him so daungerously, as every one
reputed him for dead. Nevertheless, Briande Moniaste (aduenturing over
forwardly into the throng, with full intent to charge King Arban) was taken
prisoner, being no way able to help himself, so that on other side, many good
knights were wounded, and laid along on the ground. All which king Lisuart
heard at his arrival, whereat he was so displeased, as no man could be more,
concluding to be revenged on them. Which the better to perform, he gave
commandment through his Camp, that no one should presume into the field,
without license thereto first obtained, hoping that the enemy would come
again to assail King Arban, as formerly he was wont to do before his coming
thither. But the other side had intelligence of this fresh succor, in regard
whereof they had retired themselves, attending further fortune.

By this time, the hour drew near, when the Princess Oriana should be
delivered of her child, and her Fathers departure fitted it very well: for,
within a day or two after his shipping thence, the pains and throws of
childbirth grew so extremely on her, that (about midnight) she expected
death every minute. Therefore she caused Mabila to rise, as also the Damsel
of Denmark, who had (long before) provided all things in readiness, to be
required in such a necessity. They being come to her, found her so overcome
with pain and anguish (not daring to cry or use any complaint) that she was
unable to hold out any longer. But Heaven pitying her oppressions, before the
break of day, requited her sorrows with the birth of a goodly Boy, which the
Damosel of Denmark received, while Mabila gave further attendance on the
Mother. As she was making it ready in the swaddling clothes, she discerned
seven Caracters under either little teate, some as red as blood, and the other
as white as snow: whereat being not a little abashed, she called Mabila, and
showed them to her. But neither of them had the skill to read them; for they
were all Greek Letters, composed in Latin words, in which report, they forbear
(as then) to acquaint the Mother therewith, wrapping it up in the clothes, and
laying it by the Mother, till she gave order for conueighing it thence,
according as formerly has been determined, which being done, the Damsel of
Denmark departed to call her brother Durin.

In the mean while the Princess holding the Infant in her arms, and
bestowing many sweet kisses upon it, spoke in this manner. Alas little
Creature, Heaven enlarge such blessings on thee, that thou may prove to be as
good and virtuous a knight as thy Father, and make the beginning of thy
fortunes more prosperous then his has been. Alas, I am enforced to forgo
thee, and show my self toward thee more cruel, then any Tiger or Leopard to
their young ones. For I know not whether thou go, nor when I shall see thee
again, which fills my soul with such affliction, as Fortune cannot afford
thee the very least danger, but I shall find it presented before mine own
eyes. Oh that I could but know the Nurse that shall give thee suck; I would
entreat her to be very careful of thee. For it may so come to pass, that
she will be so negligent of thee, that before thou can be able to help thy
self: she may many times leave thee in the danger of wild beasts, while she
attends on slighter affairs, or else sit gossipping with her neighbors,
telling vain tales and fruitless fables. Neither can I therein much condemn
her, because both she (and many more beside) may judge thee to be the son of
some silly woman; and perhaps the best favor they will bestow on thee, shall
be to make thee a Shepherd, or some other flock-keeper on the field, who
cannot always be provident in their pains, but (even in despite of their
utmost diligence) the Wolf or Lion passing by, may make spoil and bloody
ruin.

These words were accompanied with inundations of tears, and yet she purposed
their longer continuance, till the Damsel of Denmark entering the Chamber,
said. Madam, it will soon be day, therefore expedition is more fitting for us,
then unthrifty delay Alas (quoth the Princess) what intend ye to do? What?
said the Damsel, marie to save your honor, and the life of your child: do
not you remember, what we have (long since) concluded together? And let me tell
ye, my Brother Durin waits beneath under the window, to receive the Infant as
we shall let it down. I fear, (quoth the Princess) that you will kill it in
the descent. Let our care be your warrant, answered the Damsel. So taking it
out of the Mothers Arms, she was ready to swoune with grief; and but that
Mabila spoke somewhat angerly to her, she would have risen to follow it; but
she said unto her. Madame, if you grow so forgetful of your self, we will
forsake ye to: therefore suffer what must of necessity be done, and (by the
grace of God) all will go well. So putting the child into a wicker Basket, and
fastening a strong cord thereto, they let it down at the window, to the place
where Durin attended to receive it. Afterward the Damosel descended, and
finding the horses there, which Durin had brought thither: they mounted on
them, taking their journey through the Forest, because they would not meet
with any body.

So long they rode, till about day break they arrived to a goodly Fountain or
Spring, which issued forth of an high Rock, and under it was a Valley so
obscure, as well in regard of the depth thereof, as also the plenty of huge
great Bushes and Trees, that it was almost impossible to discern bright day,
as men passed along through it, and continually it was haunted with Wolves,
Lions and such like cruel beasts. From time of all antiquity, in a remote
corner of this Valey, stood a small Hermitage, wherein lived a holy man, named
Nascian, of whom it was every where reported, that his life was so acceptable
in Gods sight, as he was oftentimes fed with heavenly food, when earthly
sustenance grew scant and failed. All the company he had, was a young Lad his
Nephew, who went abroad to get their daily sustentation, and himself (in
person) would diverse times drive his Ass before him, and yet no savage beasts
offer once to touch him, albeit they met him vsualy on the way; but rather
would humble themselves to the good old man, making him what mirthfull sport
their rude natures affoorded.

This place was so solitary and unfrequented, that a Lyonnesse did there
yearly bring forth her young ones, and they would vsualy and privily visit
Nascian, even as if they had been his household little dogs, and as duly
would he walk to see them in their den. Whereinto, so soon as the
Lyonnesse saw him enter, she would wander abroad to seek her prey, as
seeming to leave her whelps in his safe protection: because continually he
haunted thither twice or thrice each day, such was his delight in seeing them
play with one another. Now, by such time as the Damsel drew near to the
fountain, the prime of the mornings clearness began to appear, and she
found her self so spent with travail, which all the night time she had
endured, that she said to Durin. I pray ye Brother, let us refresh our selves
a while in this place.

Hereupon, they alighted from their horses, he taking the Infant from his
Sister, to lay it at the root of a tree near the fountain, while he received
her down in his arms. The Lyonnesse then walking in the depth of the valley
began to send forth such dreadful roarings, that the horse whereon the
Damsel road (being fearful at his noise) ran swiftly away with her,
before Durin had scarcely laid down the child, and do whatsoever she could
to the contrary, carried her ouer-thwart the Forest, she not having any
power to descend. Durins horse also ran away in the like manner, whereat he
stood as confounded with amazement; for he saw his Sister in danger, heard her
cry and call to him for help, and yet he could not lend her any, because he
was on foot, laying down the child that slept full sweetly. At length,
perceiving no present sign of peril to the Infant, he concluded to follow
the Damsel, and therefore ran that way which the horse had taken: finding him
in a thicket of young trees, and she fallen down, almost deprived of her senses.

Having helped her up, he prayed her to sit there a while, until he had
recovered their horses, and casting his eye aside, espied hers so far entered
into a quickset, that he easily took him, and brought him to her. As he
intended to pursue his own, she said unto him; Good Brother, go first to the
child, and bring it hither to me, for if the bloody beast find it, farewell
all hope of life. I will go fetch it, quoth Durin, therefore stay you my
return in this place; And as he offered to mount up on her horse, she
persuaded him to the contrary, least meeting with the Lyonnesse, or hearing her
cry again, worse might befall him. Durin followed her advise, and departing
thence without any longer delay, went directly toward the fountain. But some
small while before he could get thither, the Lyonnesse had passed by, and
taken up the Infant with his teeth, not doing it any harm at all. By this time
the morning was so far grown on, that Nascian (having sung his Mass) walked
abroad (according to his wonted custom) before the den of the young Lions,
and beholding the Lyonnesse to bring them such an unusual kind of prey:
stepped just in her way of passage, not a little wondering where and how she
had found it. Approaching nearer to her, in threatening manner, he thus spoke to
her. Cruel beast, who made thee so bold, to offer injury to a creature, sent
by God into the world, to do him service and honor? It is no food for thee,
or thy whelps.

The Lyonnesse seemed to be fearful, and (even as if she had understood the
command of Nascian) couched down presently on the ground, and moving her
ears and tail in loving manner, laid down the infant, and began to lick
it. Then the good old man took it up in his arms, and in blessing it, said,
Alas little Babe, thy mother that has thus unmercifully left thee, is well
worthy to be curssed of God. The child began to cry, and make much moan,
which moved the aged man to such compassion, that the tears streamed
abundantly down his reverend beard. And not knowing how to quiet it with any
present sustenance, concluded in the end, to drive the Lyonnesse into her
den, and there to suckle it among her whelps; which as he did, he said. I
command thee by the power of God, to whom all things living do owe obedience;
that thou give nourishment to his creature, and to be as careful of it as to
any of thine own. The Lyonnesse made no refusal, but suffered the child to
suck so long as it listed: and then the Hermit taking it from her, carried it a
long with him lovingly to his Hermitage.

Presently he sent for his Sister to come to him, to advise what should be
done with the child, and his young Nephew was dilligent in the business: but
fortune was so contrary, that he found not his mother at home, because the
day before, she and her husband was gone to a village somewhat far off, so as
they could not be returned in the space of eight whole days. During which
time, Nascian found himself much encombred, for he was but badly acquainted
with the office of a Nursse, and therefore, finding no other remedy: till they
were returned, he made his best means by the Lyonnesse, as also a fair Ewe,
that had newly eaned, and these help to foster our poor forsaken infant.

But returning now to Durin, thinking to find the child at the fountain,
where he had left it: he was greatly astonished, when he perceived his purpose
defeated. Nevertheless, he so earnestly endeavored, to know what was become of
it; that at last, he found the tracke of the Lyonnesse which had carried it
thence, and presuming that she had devoured it, in mournful tears he returned
to his Sister. She understanding this hapless fortune, fell down as one
entranced, and breathing forth many pitiful lamentations. (...)ssed the hour
of her own birth, having lost thus all her hope and comfort; wretch that I am,
quoth she, what shall I do? where shall I bestow my self? what answer shall
I make to my Lady, when she hears of this misfortune? O dear God, would
thou permit so young a creature to perish, that never in it self offended thee?
It is I that am justly worthy of the seuearest punishment, and I would that
this mishap had fallen upon my self, for life is now but loathsome to me.
Sweet Babe, thy Father (even as young as thou) began to prove the dangers of
this world: and yet our Lord (in his great goodness) pleased to preserve him.
But thy misfortune is much more strange then his, because when he was left to
the mercy of the waves, Gandales (in a happy hour) met with him, and
afterward did foster him, as every one well knows. But alas, little darling,
thou did fall into the mercy of a brute beast, that had no more pity then
his own nature governed, and so did thou finish thy days, before they were
(well near) begun.

These lamentations were sleeped in many floods of tears, Durin being no way
able to comfort her, because (for a long while) death more appeared in her,
then life. Notwithstanding, he knew so well how to manage arguments of reason,
that having somewhat prevailed over her passion, he thus spoke to her. Sister,
it may so fall out, that heaven has been gracious to him in pity, for many
other have been borne away by wild beasts, and yet afterward attained to
great perfection. Therefore, the best way is, to comfort your self for you may
do yet many services to the Princess, and to Lord Amadis, who, in loosing
you, shall sustain a double loss. What would you advise me (quoth she) to
do? marie this, answered Durin, that we mounting both upon your horses, (...)
^^^ce to Mirefleure, and soiou^^e there two or three days, before we do
return to Court. And when your Lady enquireth concerning her child, you may
tell her (listening somewhat to the counsel of Mabila) that he is in the
government of a very good Nurse. This advice being allowed for good, they
departed thence, taking the direct road way to Mirefleure, where they remained
for a time, before they would returne^ to the Court, and there let us leave
them, we going back again to the good old Hermit.

About ten days after he had sent for his Sister, she came unto him,
accompanied only with her husband. Then he declared to her, how and in what
manner he did find the child, in the devouring mouth of the Lioness, carrying
it as food for her young ones: but by Gods permission he recovered it from
her, and away^^g for the time of her coming to him, the Lyonnesse and an Ewe
had suckled and nourished it. Wherefore Sister (quoth he) questionless our
Lord has reserved it for his service, preserving it from such dreadful
danger: in which respect, let me entreat you to provide for it hereafter, and
bring it up, till it be capable of such learning as I will teach him. And if
it be the will of He^uen to bless him with long life, I make no doubt but he
will prove a worthy man, and acknowledge the good which we shall do for him.
Then the Hermit brought her where the Infant lay sleeping upon a bed of
leaves and moss, and she no sooner saw him, but his very appearance pleased
her beyond measure, and she asked of him, what was his name. In troth, quoth
he, that is (as yet) unknown to me, but to clear us of all doubt, I will
presently bapti^e him. And so he willed her to vnswaddle him; and she espying
the Caracters under his breasts, showed them to the Hermit. He bestowed such
pains to understand them, that he found this word Esplandian in Latin
letters, but his skill reached not so far as the Greek. Hereupon persuading
himself, that he brought his name from his mothers womb, he would not rob
him of it, but confirmed it by Baptism, naming him Esplandian, and so was he
afterward known in many strange Countries, where he brought to end many great
adventures, as we shall read heere-after.

But for the present, we spare to speak of them, let it therefore suffice ye,
that the child being christened, and committed to the care of his Nurse and her
husband: they returned home to their house, where they tended him with such
loving respect, that time brought him to such comely shape and growth, that
every eye delighted to look on him. Thus as their own Son they nursed and
provided for him, until such time as they returned him again to the Hermit,
according to his former appointment.

CHAP. IIII.
How King Lisuart fought a Battle against the Knights of the Enclosed Island,
whom he vanquished. And of the great liberality he used afterward to Galuanes,
in restoring him to all the lands and Seigneuries belonging to Madasima.

Heretofore you have heard, how King Lisuart and his Army landed in the Isle
of Mongaza, where they found King Arban fortified in the mountains, doubtful
of Galuanes and his forces, who twice or thrice had given him shrewd repulses.
Now you are to understand, that after they were thus met together, the King
gave command to raise his Camp, and pass thence to the plain Champian
ground: for he had advertisement, that the knights of the Enclosed Island were
departed from the Burning Lake, as purposing to bid him battle. So marched on
these two Armies each against other, and had given charge the very same day,
but that night prevented them; and therefore they were constrained to defer
it till the next morning. Then arming themselves, King Lisuart ordained his
forces into three bat tallions; the first led by Galaor and five hundred
knights, among whom were Norandell, Guillan the Pensive, Ladasin and Cendtle.
The second was guided by King Cildadan, with seven hundred other knights,
having in their company Ganides, Brandoynas and Philippinell. The third, King
Arban of Northwales had charge of, with Don Grumedan, and many other knights
beside, both bold and valiant, appointed as guard for the person of King
Lisuart: who before he meant to enterfight, beholding his enemies approach so
near him, gave these speeches to al his followers.

My worthy friends, you have here present before your eyes, the reason that
moved us to cross the Seas, to defend the honor of Great Britain, and this
Country which is ours; as is most notoriously manifest, by our agreements made
with Ardan Canile, avouched by Madasima, and the aged Giantes her Mother. And
yet notwithstanding, under what couller or pretense I know not, they have dared
to make their entrance, and (by treason) have surprised both the Town and
Castle of the Burning Lake, where we planted the Count Latin as our
Vicegerent, whom they yet detain as prisoner, and many more with him. This
has raised their courage to such a height of arrogancy, that they hold
Fortune to be only their Goddess, and that she (with them) will beat us
hence, even home to our own houses, whereto it appears they will likewise
lay claim, to order them and us by their own disposition. But you shall see it
fall out quite contrary; for, the reputation wherein we have so long time
lived, and the hand of Heaven (I am assuredly persuaded) will not suffer us to
be disgraced by them. For I dare engadge mine honor, that there is no one man
among ye, but will rather dye with credit and virtuous repute, then live in
obloquie and detested shame. And such perfect acknowledgement I have had of you
for many years together; that I must justly confess, I have no mean occasion
both to love and highly esteem ye. And if I had received no such knowledge of
ye, yet it cannot be denied, but that from the very hour of my birth, Fortune
strictly engadged me to ye all: as well in regard of the sidelitie, euer-more
continued by ye to your former Princes, as also for the manifold services done
by ye to me in diverse places. Especially against barsinan, when he delivered
me into the hands of Arcalaus, to make himse^^e King. And ^y, in the battle
which I (...) King Cildadan, (...) to every one. All which reasons have
grounded this belief in me, that, without respect to some particulars, who
have entered into rebellion against us, being heretofore our friends, and now
coveting the best and dearest blood in your bodies: you will declare such zeal
in duty, (according to your ancient virtue and faithfulness) that we shall
let them soon perceive, how fondly they have opposed themselves against us. And
that shall we very easily do, being far above them in number, and that which
is beyond all things else, the right being on our side: So let us boldly march
on to meet them; foryee see how forward they are to the field.

While the King was thus busied in these remoustrances, Galuanes sat not
idly down on the other side but being in the midst of his battalions, went
from rank to rank, persuading his knightsto fight manfully, and using these or
the like speeches to them.

Understand, my dear friends and companions in Arms, that the chief and most
sovereign happiness, that can be in any Army what-soeuer, is, to have one sole
Head or Commander, whose wisdom in ordinances, and counsel in things
requisite to be done, may compass obedience for the execution of his command.
Now, it is apparent that ye have not here one Captain only, and such a man
as I have noted to ye: but two or three, yea, more then twenty, who are all
so sweetly linked together, as if it were but one will, one heart, and one
advice. Seeing then, that this prime felicity is not wanting to us; let us
appropriate our selves to the second, and help forward my fortune, in ayding
us against a King, the most ungrateful man of the world: who makes full
account to ruinate our goods and lives with a great and powerful Army brought
hither against us, only to impouerish, and exterminate the right of a silly
Gentlewoman. But he may come short in his account; for we will aid and
maintain her cause, so long as life remains in our bodies; according to our
oath and promise, whereto we obliged our selves when we received the order of
knighthood. But if we dye with this attempt, it shall be to us immortal glory,
that we had so just occasion to fight against him, who ought to desend the
right of all Ladies. So that, that which (in many men) may be termed rashness
or presumption, in us will be truly (...) virtue and magnanimity of courage.
Proceed we on then bol^y, and enter the field, not dr^ding death or any danger
whatsoever, honor being the only object before our eyes. For in such martial
actions, Fortune admits neither fear or doubt. And if we come off with
victory, they so far outgoing us in number, our glory will be the greater,
and our fame the further enlarged, having enterprised, with such height of
spirit, a matter almost incredible to men.

Such were the words of the gentle knight Galuanes to his followers; which
animated them so sprightfully, as they imagined the time ouertardied, till they
were at fight. But Quedragant required a little longer respit; And in the mean
while (quoth he) I hold it very expedient, that we should send to King Lisuart,
and advise him, that if he expect any honor in fighting with us: that he
would withdraw his Archers, as we will do ours, by which means, it will be
the fairest form of battle among knights, that ever was seen. This advice
was well liked by the whole company, and Elian the Deliberate had the charge of
this message. Whereupon he went to the Camp of King Lisuart, giving his sign
afar off, that he came to confer. Galaor, who led the auantguard, sent a
Gentleman to meet him, and conduct him surely. Being brought to the King, he
made known what the knights of the Enclosed Island had commanded him. In good
sooth, answered the King, I am very well pleased with their motion, and bid
them not fail in doing their uttermost. So Elian returned, and informed
Galuanes, who had likewise divided his Army into two parts.

But they were over few, in respect of the Kings power, which consisted of six
times as many men more, and yet they were not daunted or dismayed. Only they
grieved for the want of Brian de Moniaste, who was taken prisoner on the day
that they assailed King Arban; and for Agrayes also, who was gone to levy men,
and make provision of victuals from little Britain. These two battles being
ranged, and ready for fight, they marched each against other in this manner.
For them of the Enclosed Island, the auantguard was led by Florestan,
accompanied with two hundred and fifty knights, beside Quearagant, Angriote and
Sarquiles; among whom also was Gasinan, bearing a goodly great Ensign, wherein
were figured twelve Ladies. Next marched Galuanes, Palomir, Dragonts, Listoran,
and four hundred other knights, all worthy men, and resolved to fight.

Then Drums, Trumpets and Clarions sounded on either side so chearefully,
that the air returned back as gallant an echo: and as they were upon
joining, Galaor, who led the vauward for King Lisuart, showing to Norandell,
Florestan, Quedragant; Angriote, and Garnate, said. My friendly companion,
mark well these four first that march hither-ward so bravely, assure your
self, that they are reputed among the best knights in the world. He that
bears his Shield Gules, with three Lions Argent, is my Brother Florestan. The
other that bears azure, seamed with Flowers and Lions Ore, is Quedragant. The
third that bears Azure, with so many flowers Argent, is Angriote. And the
fourth who bears all Sinople, is Garnate of the Dreadful Dale: he slew a
mighty Serpent, and therefore was that name imposed on him. Let us therefore
charge them boldly, without any thought of difference. So placing their Lances
in their rests, and giving spur to their horses, they entered pell mell. The
first that Norandell encountered, was Garnate of the Dreadful Dale, to whom he
gave such a salutation with his Lance, that his Saddle girts breaking, he fell
down backward with the Saddle. This was the first bold adventure that ever
Norandel made which caused his estimation after-ward to be the more glorious.
Galaor was the next to him, against whom ran Quedragant, and met each other
with such maine violence, that they lay both ouerthrown on the ground, and
their horses upon them.

Then began the fight to be dreadful and cruel, and such was the noise of
strokes delivered on either side, the sound of Trumpets, and the outcrys of
men; that it was a matter most strange and fearful to hear. Knights lay
overthrown and wounded on the earth, in heaps together; and they that had
beheld the fight between Galaor and Quedragant, after they ^ce recovered
footing, might easily have judged, how little favor they meant to each other.
And as they declared themselves worthy renown for deeds of Arms, even so did
Norandel, Guillan and the rest make good the like: But Angriote and Florestan
resisted each other in such sort, as neither of them could gain the least jot
of advantage, and, which was more; means was made to remount Quedragant, while
the other withdrew Galaor out of the throng. Then came in king Cildadan with
his troops, who did set the^ all to such serious employment, as if Galuanes had
not bin suddenly succored, there had bin no means for further resistance. And
yet Florestan was in the midst of the crowd, laying on all sides so valiantly
about him; that he well deserved, to be ranked among the best knights of the
world; for heperformd such deeds of arms, as all were glad to give him way.

Now as he continued his traversing among the ranks, he chanced to meet with
King Cildadan, who made much havoc among his followers: in regard whereof, he
caught him fast about the body, purposing to lay him along on the ground, but
the other held firm footing, and they strove together so extremely, that the
fall happened equal to them both. Notwithstanding, they were up again quickly,
with their swords fastened in their hands, and as they hacked and hewed each
other; Angriote d'Estrauaux, and Enill came in to them, and gave assistance to
Florestan, that in despite of Galaor and Norandel, (who seemed to come to the
rescue of king Cildadan) they set him on his horse again. In which time
Cildadan retired, for he was sore wounded on the head, with a stroke that
Dragonis gave him with a sword.

At this time King Lisuarts men began to have the worst, so that the most
part of them turned their backs, and took themselves to flight: but they met
the king and his guard, that came to assist them, and he made means to stay
them. Nevertheless, beholding this disorder, he became so amazed, that he
said to Grumedan; Shall all the honor of Great Britain, be now shaken and
weakened, by a poor handful of spent and tired men? So clasping down the beuer
of his Helmet, and covering himself with his Shield, he gave the spur to his
horse, crying aloud to his men. Is this a time for flight? follow me, follow me
men of courage, and let us ratheer die together, then fly to our own shame. So
entered he among the thickest of his enemies, and the first he met withal was
Galuanes, to whom he gave such a shocke with a short Lance, that he made him
bend in the back, and drawing forth his sword like an angry Lion, he entered the
prease, performing such deeds of arms, as no knight could do more. But
Quedragant, Florestan, Angriote and Garnate came, who overthrew him, and beat
back his people courageously.

Now began King Lisuart to imagine, that Fortune turned her back upon him,
and meeting with Arban, Grumedan and Gasquilan, he said unto them. I fear
that heaven intends punishment upon us: but I had rather be termed a dead
King with honor, then (being foiled) to live with shame. And so he entered into
the wood, where seeing what spoil was made by Quedragant and his men, he
charged him with all his might, and gave him such a wound on the head, that the
blood ran down all about his face. And surely, he had been in very great
danger of life, but for Angriote and Florestan, who thrust in between them;
and as they labored in his defense, king Lisuarts Sword entered the flank of
Florestans horse, so that he fell down dead under him. But Florestan quickly
revenged this injury, for in recovering himself, he so hought king Lisuarts
horse, that he was glad to forgo his Stirrops, and in dismounting, gave such a
stroke to Florestan on the head, that both astouned, and shreudly wounded him.
Notwithstanding, Florestan was not thus to be discouraged, but beholding the
king ready again to charge him with his Sword, he vnder-ranne the blow; and
catching him about the middle, seized his Sword, by which means he might easily
have slain him if he would: but he refused that advantage so freely offered
him, which afterward proved to his own harm.

Galaor beholding the king in so great danger, rushed suddenly in, and without
respect to brother, or any other kinsman, behaved himself so boldly, that in
despite of Florestan, he recovered the king out of his hands, and remounted
him on horseback again, by the help of Norandell, Grumedan, and some others,
which gave fresh encouragement to the knights of Great Britain, so that they
which before fled away with fear, stood to it now more resoluedly then ever.
So turning head upon their enemies, who (having lost Florestan and Quedragant,
that were among the dead bodies) became so weakened in their strength, as they
were constrained to retire: for even Galuanes himself was so grievously
wounded, as he was no longer able to sit on horseback. Nevertheless, like a
discreet and hardy knight, until his people had gained the hill, he stood
upon his best guard, wi^ Palomir, Elian, Branfill, Enill, and Sarquiles, who
were all (in the end) taken prisoners: And had it not been for Dragonis, who
forcibly recovered Galuanes, he had remained among the rest.

Thus the king obtained the victory, by virtue of his courage, and the favor
of Florestan, who having him in his power, became enemy to his own good
fortune. For she is such an inconstant Mistress, as will have no man to let
slip advantage against his contrary, lest she turn her back, and frown at
his folly, as she did to Florestan. For if he had slain king Lisuart, when in
heat of blood (with tolerable excuse) he might have done it; the honor of
the day had fallen to him and his friends assuredly, which therefore thus he
lost, to their shame and confusion, as formerly has been related.

Galuanes and his associats, being retired among the mountains, keeping very
circumspectly all the ways and passages: king Lisuart commanded the retreat to
be sounded, and pitched his Tents in the same place where he had won the
victory. But as Galaor returned from pursuit of his enemy, he espied his
Brother Florestan and Quedragant lying among the slaughtered bodies: whereat he
conceived such inward grief, that he was ready to fall beside his horse. Being
alighted, and perceiving in them no motion of life at all; his complaints were
so pitiful and extreme, that every eye did much compassionate him, and the
King was made acquainted with his heavy case. Whereupon, immediately he mounted
on horseback, not for any good will to Florestan or Quedragant, but only to
comfort Galaor, whom he loved most entirely. And yet notwithstanding all his
malice, he considered, as he rode along, what danger Florestan did thrust
himself into, on the day of battle against King Cildadan, and that (but for
him) he had been wounded to death by Gandacuriel, as already has been at
large declared. In remembrance whereof, he desired to save his life, if
possible it might be; and therefore, so soon as he came to them, he commanded
their bodies to be carried into one of his Tents, and that his own Physicians
and Chirurgions, should look diligently to their wounds.

Upon sight and search made, according to their skill and experience, they
found their hurts to be very dangerous, but not deadly: for at their first
dressing, they found such hopeful signs of recovery, that they undertook
(within certain days) to warrant their cure. Galaor on this comfortable
pe^rswasion, left them to their rest and quiet, and went to the King, who was
set in Council, demanding the opinion of his knights, what further was to be
done against his enemies, declaring what danger might ensue, by admitting them
to gather fresh supply and strength, and that it would be both honor and
profit, to ^old on still the pursuit of victory. For, quoth he, I am very
certain, that Agrayes is gone to levy men in little Britain, and that he
will come quickly with new assistance: wherefore I hold it most necessary,
speedily to follow on them, not suffering them to take heart or breathing; and
having now so good means to do, let us take the benefit of so apt an
opportunity.

To this advice all the knights condiscended without contradiction in any one;
and hereupon it was resolved, that each man should be in readiness the next
morning, so soon as the Trumpet gave forth summons, which was performed
accordingly, But they met with stouter resistance then they expected; for
Dragonis, with so small a company of men as he had with him, had so fortified
the passage, and maintained it so manfully, that a great number of them were
sore wounded, before they could get the least means of entrance.
Notwithstanding, in the end, he was feign to leave it, and seek for safety in
the Fortress of the Burning Lake: but thither he was pursued, and there
besieged both by Sea and land, to keep them off the Town from issuing forth,
and to cut off all hope of succor, which they continually awayted from little
Britain.

But because it would be a matter too prolixe and tedious, to report all the
skirmishes and attempts which they had against each other during the siege, and
it being a thing very little appertaining to out history, which tends only to
the actions of Amadis, who remained now in Gaul with his Father King Perion:
Let it suffice ye, that after the siege had continued 3, months and more, two
things were the cause of bringing them to accord. The one because they of the
Town had received Letters from Agrayes, that he lay sick in little
Britain, by which means he could not leuy competent forces to their
expectation. The other, because King Lisuart reciued advertisement from his
Uncle Count Argamont, that seven of his neighbor Kings, had made great
provision for the inuading of his kingdom, which required such care, as
needfully thereto belonged. This advice likewise gave further intelligence, that
Archalaus the Enchanter, was the only means hereof: because he had persuaded
them to this attempt, upon the advantage of King Lisuarts absence at the
Burning Lake, and the small store of knights remaining then in Great Britain.

When King Lisuart heard these news, he consulted with his thoughts, what was
best to be done; and after much discourse with his own mind, he concluded, to
take composition with Galuanes, if he would but propound it. And it fell out
so fortunatly, that the very same day, desire of conference was urged by the
other side, with offer of rendering the place. Provided, that the king would
permit him and his people freely to depart, and such prisoners as he deteyned,
with an agreement of truce for two whole years, if he liked to allow thereof.
Upon many entercourses passing on either side; the offer was accepted, and
truce concluded, so that the King (the very same day) entered the Town.

And as Madasima presented him the keys, humbly casting her self at his
feet, tears streaming abundantly from her eyes, she said. Alas Sir, if ever
pity found place in your Princely breast, let it now appear, and take
compassion on a poor dis-inherited Lady.

This humiliation of hers, won such power in all the knights there present,
as there was no one of them but gladly made tender of his service in her
behalf. Especially Galaor, who undertook the matter for her speaking thus to
the King. Upon my faith Sir, respect in this case is very needfully required,
and if ever in my life I did ye any acceptable service, let me now humbly
entreat and to my uttermost possibility, that (for my sake) you would be
gracious to her. Trust me Galaor, answered the King, if I should recompense
your high deseruings, the Exchequer of all my uttermost, were not able to do
it. So calling Galuanes, he thus proceeded. Galuanes, at the request of
Galaor; and hoping, withal, that hereafter you will acknowledge the favor I
afford ye: I give this Country to you and Madasima, which (against my liking)
you have usurped, and now (against your will) is to me rendered. See therefore,
that hereafter you declare your selves to be better advised, and both you and
yours to use homage and fidelity to me, according as you ought to do in duty.

Most humbly did Galuanes give thanks to the King, swearing instantly the oath
of allegiance; and the, Army having taken refreshing for the space of seven or
eight days, the King commanded preparation to depart thence. So on the Sunday
following, early in the morning after Mass, they went aboard their Ships,
accompanied with Galuanes, and many more to take their farewell. Ankers being
weighed, and their sails hoysed, they set forth to the maine Sea; the winds
serving them so prosperously, that in few days (without any disaster) they
arrived in the Port and haven of Gra^edonia, where the Queen and Ladies
waited and attended in expectation of their return. And there (for this time)
will we leave them together, and declare what happened to Amadis, who abode in
Gaul, to hear tidings from them.

CHAP. V.
How Amadis, being with his Father King Perion, found himself subject to
overmuch melancholy, to be so far sundered from his Oriana. And contrariwise,
Bruneo was highly contented, having so apt occasision, to see and confer with
his Melicia, at what time himself pleased: And of their several enterprises,
to satisfy their own humors and fancies.

AFter that King Cildadan and Galaor had left Amadis in Gaul, he became much
more solitary then ever he had been: for the company of Bruneo was now grown
inco^patible to him, being so diversely entreated in their affections. Because
Bruneo enjoyed (almost) whatsoever his soul desired, beholding daily the
Princess Melicia, whom he so dearly affected, that all things else slipped
beside his remembrance. On the contrary, Amadis being so far distant from his
Oriana, all pleasures whatsoever were to him irksome and tedious: which caused
him to refrain all company, the better to conform himself to solitude. It
chanced on a day, being walking alone, (his Squire only excepted) in the
Forest, and near to the Sea side: he cast his eye toward Great Britain,
and espied a Ship making in to the Port, which Ship he supposed to come from
London; whereupon he presently commanded Gandalin, to go know of whence it
was, and he seated himself (in the mean while) under a spreading Tree, to
enter into his wonted lamentations. Leaning his head upon his left arm, and
sending a pittious look toward the Country, where formerly he had found such
sweet entertainment: breathing forth a vehement sigh, thus he began.

Poor unfortunate Amadis, is it possible for thee to continue long in this
torment? Alas, if Love heretofore was favorable to thee, he now makes thee
pay too dear usury for it. What said I? Love? O no, it is not Love, not is
Love the cause thereof: but mine own misfortune, that being envious of thy
sweet ease and felicity, forged and enforced the Kings coffeehouse, thereby
to be thy utter ruin, by loss of her sight, on whom depended thy life and
only happiness, which is a burden more unsupportable for thee to bear, then if
a thousand deaths were imposed on thee together. But no beatitude is destinied
to me, and I may well be ashamed to wish it, considering, Oriana would be too
much offended thereby. Why then shall I covet any such evil, she never
affoording me but grace and favor? For the very least sadness that I can
suffer, she feels it even as sensibly as mine own soul. These complaints
were accompanied with such floods of tears, that maine riuolets ran down
his cheeks, leaving him unable (along while) to utter forth one word.

As he continued in these passions, a dart flewe hard by his ear, whereof he
took no care, so much was his mind addicted elsewhere. But Gandalin returning
then toward him, espied (in a bushie thicket) a Giantesse of immeasurable
stature, preparing to let fly another dart at his Master: whereupon he cried
out aloud to him; and Amadis suddenly starting, demanded the reason of his
clamor. Why Master, quoth he, do ye not see yonder devil, that endeavors to
wound ye. And so showed him the Giantesse, toward whom Amadis directed his
steps; but she fled away thwart the Forest, running as swiftly as a Heart,
and (in her flight) recovered Amadis his horse, whereon mounting her self, she
thus cried out. Know Amadis, that I am thine ancient enemy Andadone, the
Giantesse of the Sad Isle: who tells thee plainly, that if I cannot compass
mine intent, yet time shall let thee know how much I love thee.

When Amadis perceived, that it was a woman whom he had pursued, he would
follow her no further: but commanded Gandalin to do it, and to kill her if he
could. Gandalin obeyed his Lords command, and labored earnestly till he
ouer-tooke her. In which time, as Amadis was sitting down again under the
tree, with intent to recommence his former complaints: he espied Enill,
otherwise called Durin, whom Gandalin had found abord the Ship, that his Master
had sent before to enquire of. Whereupon Amadis ran and embraced him,
demanding what good news he had brought from Great Britain. My Lord,
(quoth he,) Madame Oriana most kindly commends her self to ye, and sends ye
this Letter; which instantly he delivered to him. Amadis perceiving that she
reposed trust in Enill, bade him discover what she had further commanded him.
My Lord (answered Enill) she entirely entreats you, that you would grieve so
little as possible may be in this Country, and not to depart hence, until you
shall hear further tidings from her. And she also certifies you by me, that
your lineage is increased, by the birth of a gallant sweet Son, which my
Sister and I have conveyed to safe nursing: but he was wary enough in
discovering the manner of his loss. Great was the joy and comfort of Amadis, to
understand such pleasing news from Oriana, howbeit, her command that he should
not part thence, was somewhat irksome to him: because it might be presumed by
sinister judgments, that either neglect, or lack of courage, had driven him to
this retired kind of life. Nevertheless, happen whatsoever might to him, he
concluded, not to transgress a jot of her charge and command.

As Enill had ended his discourse, Gandalin returned, who had slain the
Giantesse, and brought her head hanging at his saddle bow. Amadis was very glad
to behold it, and desired to know in what manner he had done it. My Lord, quoth
Gandalin, I pursuing her very closely, and she gallopping on the horse which
she had stolen from you, as hoping to ship her self before I should
overtake her: the poor horse was so weak in the back, being ouercharged with
the load of so huge a devil; as I imagined, he had broken his neck with
falling down under her. At which apt opportunity, I instantly arrived, and
before she had power to recover her self, I was her deaths-man, as this
testimony thereof may well witness to ye. By my troth, said Amadis, this will
be a goodly present for Bruneo; therefore we will return to the Court, and
there shall thou have the honor of delivering it. As for thee, my dear friend
Enill, without being seen any where else, I would have thee return to my
gracious Princess, and give her to know, that I most humbly thank her for her
Letter, as also for thy further message from her. But yet I entreat, her to
take some pity and respect on mine honor, in compelling me to lead an idle
life here: Nevertheless, I will be obedient to her in any thing, and all my
days are dedicated solely to her service. And yet I very well know, that no
man can (by virtue) win himself such renown and reputation; but time and
men's malice, will disgrace him on the very least occasion offered. Go then in
Gods Name, to whose safe protection I commend thee, and do my humble duty to
my sacred Goddess.

So returned Enill to his Ship, and Amadis to the Court to his friend Bruneo,
who was much better healed of his late received hurt, then of his old
loue-sicke languishing, the fire whereof still more and more increased the
flame of his torment. Which he well perceiving, and that he could not (as yet)
reach the height of his intent, without much loss of time and hard endeavor,
as a purgation to such slothful negligence, and the better to enlarge his
knighthoods reputation, he resolved to visit strange Countries, in search of
adventures, and to accomplish such actions of Arms, that his fame might speak
it self in all places. Hereupon, so soon as the Giantesse head had bin shown
him, Amadis and he walking aside together, he thus spoke. Trust me my Lord, the
youth of my years, and the slender esteem whereinto I have hitherto lived,
especially among knights of fame and merit, does instantly incite me, to
forsake this loytring life of ease and pleasure, and undergo another more
painful, yet profitable, to rank my self with men of so high estimation. And
therefore I humbly beseech you, that if you have any disposition to seek after
adventures, you would be pleased to accept of my company, or else to license my
departure alone, for I must be gone to morrow morning very early.

When Amadis heard these words, and remembered the iniunction, so strictly
imposed on him by the Letter from Oriana, which Enill formerly had brought him;
he grew extremely offended: yet both dissembling his distemper, and excusing
himself to Bruneo, he thus answered. Believe me (dear Friend) I have (all my
lifetime) been desirous of such company as yours; being well assured, that
nothing but honor and happiness could then happen to me. But the conference I
have had so lately with the King, and his strict imposition, for my not leaving
his Country as yet, abridgeth me of your association, then which nothing can be
more displeasing to me. Wherefore I desire you to hold me excused, not
doubting, but that the hand of Heaven will every where defend ye.

Bruneo seeing himself thus dispatched by Amadis, went to visit Melicia, whom
he acquainted with the reason of his sudden departing: entreating her to
continue gracious unto him, because he preferred her favor before all things
else whatsoever. Melicia discreetly answered him, that she must wholly incline
her will, according as pleased the King and Queen, to dispose of her: assuring
him nevertheless, that he was the Gentleman, whom (before all other) she
could willingly accept as her husband, if so be it stood as well with their
liking. As he and she continued this conference, taking gracious and amiable
farewells of each other: the king entered, to whom Bruneo addressing himself,
he declared the occasion of his departure. Which the King allowed to be both
good and reasonable; and because it grew somewhat late, and a seasonable hour
for rest and repose: all was referred till the next morning, for more ample
parting discourse. Bright day no sooner began to appear, but Bruneo armed
himself at all points, afterward, going to hear Mass deuoutely. And as he
was ready to mount on horseback, the King and Amadis came to him, conducting
him forth of the City, where they committed him to God and all good fortune:
wherein it seemed he proved so prosperous, that (in short time) he finished
so many rare adventures, as would require larger scope then here is limited;
beside it is not material to the purpose which we labor to continue.

Return we therefore to Amadis, who having already soiourned in Gaul three
months and an half, while King Lisuart made his war in the Isle of Mongaza,
and his reputation being much diminished, by his discontinuance from Arms, so
that every tongue babled to his disadvantage: especially Ladies and Damsels,
who came from all parts in quest of him, and not finding him, returned so
highly discontented, that they laid on him many blamefull imputations, which
came continually to his ear. Nevertheless, for any respect in the world
whatsoever, he would not disobey the command of the Princess Oriana: but
rather chose to undergo those taxations of disgrace, till King Lisuart returned
into Great Britain again. Who received tidings at his arrival, that his
enemies were already passed into the Isle of Lionine, and even upon entrance
into his Country. Now, albeit he appeared to make small reckoning thereof
before his own people, as being fearful to distaste them; yet afterward, his
mind was far otherwise busied. But especially the Queen was much moved,
greatly bemoaning the absence of Amadis, and those that went away with him,
speaking it publicly; that if the King had them now in his service, and as
ready at his command, as they were wont to be; he might assure himself of the
victory.

And if the Queen were so discontented, what shall we think of Oriana and
Mabila? who as they sat devising together, spoke of the knights then absent
from the Kings service, only through his wrongs done to Amadis and his
followers, so that Mabila said to the Princess. Madame, although the King has
run into an error, it follows not, that you should do the like, especially
in matters so much importing you. Me thinks you should rather send to my
Cousin, and prevent all occasions that may offend him, earnestly entreating
him, that if he will not stand for the King; yet (at least) he will not be
against him, in the hope you have one day to be his heir and Lady of his
Countries, which then may succeed to him by your conjunction in marriage. Send
therefore some message that may content him, and if he be displeased at his so
long abiding in Gaul, let him elsewhere recreate his spirits, till time and
fortune send a season more fit for your desires.

Oriana liked well this friendly advice, and wrote immediately to Amadis (by a
Damsel)) that newly had brought her diverse presents from the Queen Elisena)
all that she and Mabila had concluded together, and by her Letter fully
acquainted him therewith. Whereat he was not a little joyful, being now at
liberty to go where himself listed. And yet he was in some perplexity, not
knowing readily what to determine. For it was the will of Oriana, that he
should not serve against King Lisuart, and to lend him any assistance, was as
much against his own mind. To reconcile these two extremes, he resolved to
use the advice of King Perion, and finding him one day at convenient leisure,
walking along by the Sea side; as they were entering into the purposed
discourse: they espied (afar off) a knight ryding toward them, mounted upon
a bay Courser, but so spent and weary, that he was scarce able to endure any
travail. The knights Armor, Shield and Coat of Arms, were bruised and
battered, that it was (almost) impossible to take knowledge of him: and yet
King Perion gathered by his outward appearance, that he was some knight errant,
wherefore he stepped forward to welcome him, and Amadis looking advisedly on
him, knew him to be his brother Florestan, whereupon he said to the King (who
had never seen him.) Sir, know you not this knight? he is one of the best in
all the world, and your Son. My Son? answered the King. Yes truly (quoth
Amadis) it is Florestan, of whom I have remembered you many times.

Florestan beholding Amadis, began to conjecture, that the other was King
Perion: wherefore dismounting suddenly from his horse, the King came to embrace
him, and he kneeled down to kiss his feet, but King Perion would not permit
it, taking him up lovingly in his arms, saying, he was most heartily welcome.
Then taking him by the hand, they walked on toward the Castle to the Queen:
who gave him most gracious entertainment, as well for the Kings sake, as for
his renowned fame through all Countries. And as they conferred together on the
fortunes of King Lisuart, king Perion said unto him, Son, have ye heard of his
enemies enterprise against him? I have Sir (replied Florestan) and for ought I
can collect to the contrary, their power is so strong, as, if heaven be not
favorable, impossible is the vtter-most of his resistance, whereat we have
little reason to be sorry, considering how matters have been past. Son, quoth
the king, I can easily believe, that king Lisuart has failed in some
occasions; nevertheless, I have often heard him commended for diverse good
virtues: which persuades me, that this business may fall out as successful
for him, as many others heretofore have done. Moreover, it ill becomes any
king, to wish or desire the ruin of another, except he make war against him,
upon some unjust occasion.

It began now to wax somewhat late, and the Tables were covered for Supper,
wherefore the king said to Amadis: Son, conduct your Brother, and see him
disarmed, then bring him to supp^ with us. So Amadis and Florestan withdrew
themselves, and being alone, Florestan thus spoke. My Lord, the maine and
principal occasion that drew me into Gaul, was to advertise you of the wrong
which you do not only to your self, but likewise to all your race and
kindred, continuing so long a time ^full, and careless of Arms, whereby many
tongues are liberal in your disgrace, and judge (that being become
faint-hearted) you are grown altogether negligent. In good faith, answered
Amadis, they may judge as they please: but I hope hereafter, to cause them
alter their bad opinion of me. As they held on this discourse, the King came,
and had them with him into the Haule, where refreshing themselves with variety
of viandes, the Tables were at length with-drawen, and a due hour came to go
to rest; Amadis and Florestan taking their leave of the King for that night.

But Amadis being unable to sleep, his thoughts labored continually, how he
might recover the credit he had lost: concluding with himself to run a
contrary bias, to the rash speeches rumorde out against him. And that he might
the better attain thereto, one while he determined to go against king
Lisuart: but suddenly (remembering the prohibition of his Lady Oriana) he
became quite changed, not knowing (on either side) how to make his election.
Till after a long combat with his private cogitations, he thought it best to
forget the injuries done him in Great Britain, and to take part with the
King, as well in regard that his side was the weaker, as also, if he should
sustain the foil, Oriana might lose all hope of ever being his, or he hers.
Hereupon, he rose very early the next morning, and being accompanied with
Florestan, entered the Kings Chamber, where finding him awake, they gave him the
good morrow, and Amadis spoke thus.

Sir, all this night my mind has endured much travail, about your conference
with my Brother Florestan, the last evening, and concerning the danger
whereinto King Lisuart may fall, through the want of succor. In these
meditations I remembered also that duty, which (as you then said every virtuous
Prince stands obliged unto, to maintain the rightful liberties of another
Prince, being wrongfully, and (upon no just occasion) invaded. In regard
whereof, I am determined, if you think it convenient, and will thereto license
me; go into Great Britain, and without any regard of the wrongs I have
sustained, not only to assist King Lisuart, but his subjects also, who stand
no way guilty in his offense. And trust me Sir, I use not these speeches to
ye, but upon urgent occasion; for here is my brother, who knows what
reproaches are spread abroad of me; for having a while absented my self from
Arms: whereby it appears to many, that I am grown cold in the pursuit of
adventures, for the dangers elsewhere happening, where-of I never dreamed.
Therefore, that every one may take true notice of me; if heaven be so pleased,
I will in such affairs make such real appearance of my duty, that my renown
(which seems to lie buried) shall revive it self again, and with much more
glory then ever it yet gained.

Son (quoth the king) you well know, that I have ever been a lover of good
men and goodness, and perceiving king Lisuart to be one of that number. I
have just cause to afford him any aid and favor, wheresoever I am able to
compass the means. And if I should defer it this instant; the cause is
easily known, only the difference between him and you. But seeing that your
intention is changed, and that you will make one in so worthy a business: I will
go along with ye for company: grieuing at nothing else, but that the time is
too short for leuying our people. For if I had the leisure to prepare an Army;
assure your self, I would lead along with me a Royal assembly. But that
defect shall not stay my present purpose. I will only take such knights as are
readiest for me, and so away upon my journey.

When Florestan heard this deliberation; he stood silent a long while, as
unable to utter a word, but at last; he said to the King. By my faith, Sir,
when I consider the cruelty of king Lisuart, which (but for the favor shown
to us by Lord Galaor, in the Isle of Mongaza) had cost the dear price of all
our lives: I hold it impossible for me, to do or wish him any good. Your
Highness is not ignorant, how long a time (before then) he deadly hated us,
many times making his vaunt, to be the utter ruin and extirpation of us all.
Nevertheless, seeing matters stand on such terms as now they do: I am well
contented, both in the honor of you, and for you are thereto so nobly affected,
to forget all injuries at this time, and will follow you, as it is my duty to
do. Moreover, by our agreement made at the Burning Lake, for the space of two
years, I may bear no arms against him, whereby I stand partly bound, that if
I will be seen at all in the action, I must needs be for him.

Sir, said Amadis, the best course that we can take then, is closely to pursue
our enterprise, without any other company, then we three only. For if our
number should be greater, whatsoever we can do, will but deserve the latest
welcome: and therefore (if it, were possible) in mine opinion, we would not
willingly be known of any. Let it be so then, replied the king, I like the
motion well, and I have three Armours alike in all respects, very apt and
proper to our intent, for our better knowledge and assisting of one another;
let us go presently, and make proof of them. So leaving the Chamber, they
descended down into the Court, where presently entered before them, a Damsel
very richly attired, mounted on a beautiful Palfray, she being accompanied
with three Squires only, each bearing a goodly square. Chest before her, and
the king thinking she demanded for him, went toward her with Amadis and
Florestan, saluting her courteously, and demanding if she would speak with
the Queen. No Sir, quoth she, my errand is only to you, and these two
knights, to whom I am sent by the Lady of the Unknown Isle, with these three
presents which here you behold.

Then causing the chests to be set down and opened, three Shieldes, three
Helmets, and three Coat-Armours, were taken out of them. The Shields were
Silver, seamed all over with golden Serpents, so artificially wrought, that
they appeared near to life. The Coat-Armours were all alike, but the Helmets
differed; for one was white, the other green, and the third gold. The white
was presented by the Damsel to the king, and the Coate-Armour thereto
belonging; the green to Florestan, and the gold to Amadis, with these words.
Sir, my Lady has sent you these Arms, and desires you by me, that you will
heere-after employ them better, and your self also, then (for too long a time)
you have done here. Amadis hearing her so forward in speech, stood in fear,
lest his love affairs with Oriana should be discovered: therefore, to break
her off from any further language in that kind, he answered. Fair Damsel,
I pray ye most humbly thank your Lady on my behalf, and tell her; I make
much less account of her counsel sent me, then I do of her present, which I
will employ according to my power.

My Lords, replied the Damosel, she has sent arms to you all three, to the
end, that you may know, and help one another (if need be) in King Lisuarts
war. How? quoth the King, does your Mistress know that we mean to be there,
and we our selves (within less space then an hour) did not so much as dream
thereon? I know not that, answered the Damsel, but she assured me, that (at
this very hour) I should find ye all here, and in this very place, further
commanding me, that after I had delivered ye these Arms, I should pass hence
into Great Britain, whither she has likewise sent me; wherefore bethink
your selves, if you will command me any service. Now trust me Damsel,
(replied the King) you shall not depart hence, until you have dined. And so
conducted her further into the Castle, where the best entertainment that could
be devised, was bestowed on her. Having sustained Nature, and taken leave of
her three knights, she set onward on her way to the Seaside, and instantly
embarked her self.

After her departure, Amadis considered with himself, that the day of battle
was not far off, and that (not without great cause) Vrganda had sent them
those Arms: in regard whereof, his desire grew much more earnest to be there,
then formerly it had done: and therefore to hasten the enterprise, he caused
Gandalin (secretly) to provide Shippint, wherewith acquainting both the King
and Florestan, they resolved to set away, the night ensuing. Being all aboard,
the wind sat so conveniently for them, that, unespied by any, they launched
forth into the maine Sea, coasting about the Isle of Great Britain: where,
very soon after, they landed so near as possibly they might, to the place
where the seven Kings lay encamped: hoping, after they had once noted their
disposition, to join themselves with King Lisuart. And to that intent, they
entered a Forest, where their Squires erected them a Pauillion, and where they
attended more ample news of the Army: sending daily one of their followers to
the enemies Camp, to enquire when the day of battle should be. Also they sent
another, to Galaor, by whom they gave him to understand, that they were in
Gaul. And the Squire had express charge to tell him, that he left them al
three together, and earnestly desired, that (after the victory) he would write
to them, concerning his own good health, and their other friends.

Wisely did the Squires fulfill the charge committed to their trust, so that on
the third day following, the first returned to them, and reported, that the
Army of the seven Kings was very great and strong, by reason of infinite
numbers of strangers, who were lately there arrived, and that they laid sharp
siege to a Castle, which was said to belong to certain Ladies. And albeit it
was very strong, and almost impregnable by power of Arms; yet they were in
great danger of yielding it, because food and sustenance greatly failed
therein. And further (quoth the Squire) as I crossed through the Camp, I heard
Archalaus the Enchanter confer with two of the Kings, saying, as he walked
along with them, that within six days they would bid the^ battle, because no
further order should be taken, for bringing them in any victuals by Sea, and
that their munition began to fail them also. Yet all goes well (answered
Amadis) in the mean while, we shall have good leisure to refresh and recreate
our selves.

The very same day, the other Squire (sent to the Camp of King Lisuart)
returned likewise, who declared, that he met with Galaor, and what countenance
he showed in reading the Letter. And trust me (quoth he) very hardly could he
refrain from tears, when he understood, that you were all three in Gaul: for
he made a settled assurance of the victory, if the King could have enjoyed ye
in his company. Moreover, he sends ye word by me, that if he escape with life
from the field, he will forthwith make haste to see ye. But what (quoth Amadis)
is thine opinion of their Army. Trust me my Lord, (answered the Squire) so few
fighting men as they be, yet are they al marshalled in exceeding good order,
and diverse worthy knights are said to be among them: but they are all over few,
in regard of the others mighty multitude. Notwithstanding, King Lisuart is not
daunted a jot: but intends (as I heard it credibly reported) within two
days to meet them, or else the Castle of Ladies will be constrained to yield
it self, having no supply of men nor meat. Well, said Amadis, we shall see
what will ensue on this business.

Thus they continued in the Forest, until such time as they had intelligence,
that the two Armies prepared to join: whereupon they dislodged, and drew
nearer to the Camp of King Lisuart, which was seated on the ridge of an hill,
and so near to the enemy, that but a little River divided them, running through
the plain, where King Aranigne (earnestly desirous of fight) had passed his
men. This King last mentioned to ye, was chosen the chief; and Coronall of the
whole Army: belonging to the seven Kings, and to him all the principal
Captains of the band, had made solemn oath and promise the day before, to
obey him without any contradiction. For he desired nothing else (as he said)
neither could have any jot more; but only the honor of the enterprise:
referring all the spoil and booty to his companions, and the common Soldiers.
And that he might the better accomplish his intent, he ordained nine
battalions, in each of which he appointed twelve thousand knights: reserving
to his own charge, fifteen hundred, and more, commanding on the morrow (by
break of day) the Trumpets and Clarions to give summons, for all to set
themselves in order, and be in readiness. Before he would dislodge, seeing
his men forward to their deuoire: for their encouragement, he thus spoke.

What need it (Gentlemen) that I should use any great persuasion for your bold
fighting: considering you are the only authors of this war, and wherein you
have elected me for your chief conducter? And that is the only reason moving
me to speak, to the end, you may the more heedfully fix before your eyes, the
cause why you are assembled in so great a multitude. Resolve your selus that it
is not to defend your Country your liberty, your wives, children, nor your
goods. But it is to conquer and subdue a nation, the most proud and arrogant
people this day living; who make of us (dwelling somewhat far from them) so
small esteem, as of nothing less. Nevertheless, as near as they are, I
hardly think that they dare abide us; for though they carry a kind of fury in
their marching: yet if you note well their looks, there appears an apparent
testimony of doubt and difficulty in dealing with us, which may move and give
ye more heart to fight, then all the words of ^^^ng men can do; yea, althoug^
ye were then ill ordered, and h^l^e tired. We are here, the very stoure and
full strength of most part of the Ocean Islands, and in such a gallant number,
that it were (almost) a sin to make any doubt of our certain victore. And for
our further assurance, let us remember, that we are in a strange Country, a
large and long distance from our own, not among our lovers and friends, but
even in the very midst of our enemies, that every hour expect our ruin and
death. A matter which we cannot avoid, if we be once broken and disseuered. For
they have worthy horsemen, by whom we are certain to be pursued, without any
means o^ret^^ing to our ships; wherefore, we must resolve to conquer or dye,
because the necessity wherein we are, is much rather to be feared then their
power. Let each man therefore do his duty; and I make no doubt, but before dark
night do check our forwardness, we shall be Lords and Masters of the whole
Country, and thereby be held dreadful in other parts of the world.

King Aranigne having thus encouraged his Soldiers, he caused them to march
in good order toward their enemies: who likewise marched in maine battle on
the hill top, making such a glittering radiance with their Arms, that it was a
most goodly sight to behold. And they; were divided into five squadrons; the
first being guided by Brian de Moniaste, with a thousand knights of Spain. The
second, by King Cildadan, with the like number of knights. The third by
Galuanes. The fourth by Giontes: And the (...), by King Lisuart, accompanied
with Galaor, and two thousand (...) knights: who seeing so great a (...)titude
come marching against him, began to be very doubtful of the victory.
Nevertheless, like a p^nt and magnanimious Prince, he went from battation to
battalion, to persuade his Cheualiers, to fight bravely. And for their better
encitation thereto be gave them to understand that (with great shame) he was
thus assailed by these enemies, without any quarrel at all against them; but
only through the persuasion and procurement of Archalaus, the most disloyal
traitor and villain that ever lived, they were thus entered his Country, with
an absolute hope of conquest. And therefore my loving friends (quoth he) right
being on our side, God (who is most just, and in whose hand are all victories)
will undoubtedly assist us. If they say, that they war thus upon us, in revenge
of them that last invaded this kingdom with K. Cildadan, assure your selves,
they may well account to be therein deceived. For in weening (under confidence
of power) to revenge their injuries, their shame shall thereby be increased,
and a miserable conclusion of their lives, voluntarily enforced, and sought by
themselves. Full well you know, that we are no new learners, how to be seen in
such conflicts as these: but old and well tried Soldiers, so experimented and
approved by themselves; and so (I hope) at this time they shall find us.
Their imaginary victory, is grounded only on the huge multitude of men in
their Camp, a base and rascal breed of people, collected from many infamous
places, the most part of the^ without order, obedience or discipline. The very
sight of our well-directed approach, will strike amazement in their souls;
yea, before we shall have leisure to veil our lances: and let us but once
enforce them to disorder, we have as much as we can desire. March we on then
undauntedly, and let us make them know, that they are no meet companions for
our company: Only, that our ground will be fastened in being their graves, and
our hungerstarued wolves satisfied with their carrion, as three or four times
already, such as they, have been ouer-thrown in several battles, by the
virtue and magnanimity of you and your ancestors.

Such were the words of this gentle King to his knights, who perceiving their
enemies making toward them, marched in a well ordered part to meet them. King
Perion, Amadis and Florestan, lay hard by, closely ambushed, with no intent to
stir themselves, till they saw how the fight would speed on either side.
Perceiving Brian and his troop to coutche their lances, they beheld them
forthwith among their enemies; money good knights laid along on the earth, and
as many slain outright. But King Targadan, who led the first battallion of King
Aranigne, was suddenly succored by Absadan, with 1200. knights, by which
means Brian was constrained to give back again. King Perion perceiving it,
said to Amadis and Florestan. Me thinks, it is now high time to show our
selves; for never can we look for fitter occasion, seeing the enemy has to
much advantage over King Lisuarts people. On then Sir (quoth they) in Gods name
let us go help them.

Thus speaking; they gave the spur to their horses, and the first that King
Perion met, was king Targadan, who before had not charged any knight, but down
he went to the ground. But King Perion gave him such a welcome with his
Lance, that it pierced his Shield and armor, and so passed on quite through his
body, that he fell down dead to the ground. If this encounter proved so hard
to him, no less was that of Absadan the Brave: for Amadis met him with such
might, that he gave his soul present passage out of his body. The enemies
became so daunted hereat, that their hearts failed them, and Brian and his
followers pressed sore upon them. Florestan made his aim at King Cardueil, in
whom consisted (well near) all their hope, and met him at such apt advantage,
that he cast him quite out of his Saddle, and down he fell between his horses
feet. Now began a most dreadful conflict between the two armies, because they
strove with mainest violence, which should most offend the other: and they that
had seen Amadis cut the way through the crowds, would have thought him no such
manner of man, as layslothfully idle six months together; for he never stroke,
but it either slew outright, or most cruelly wounded, notwithstanding all their
stout resistances. For they of Great Britain fought for their liberty and
safety: whereas K. Aranigne and his men, labored only to conquer another
country, thereby to enrich themselves; thus each side contended who should do
best, in bearing thence the honor of the day. Amadis had his horse slain under
him; but he was speedily succored, by such aid as King Lisuart, King Perion
and his followers sent him: who did all perform such incredible deeds of
Arms in enery place as their enemies fell into confusion; and King Aranigne
was so sore wounded, that, being past any hope of life; he fled to his
Ships, and the greater part of his people after him likewise.

As the other side pursued them very valiantly, Brutaxat, one of the best
knights in the whole Army of the seven Kings, beholding this faint-hearted
flight, and foul disorder: thrust in with his followers, and made stay of them
that chased King Aranigne, beginning as bloody a fight again, as formerly had
bin. In which space, they that most feared the fights success, got into their
Ships, and many were so saved: but Amadis entering among them, assailed Brutaxat
with such a powerful stroke, that down fell heon the earth. This, much
augmented the terror of the enemy, so that, for their easy means of flight,
they threw down their weapons and armor in the field; some running to the Sea,
others to the woods and rocks, even as Fortune could best conduct them. And
although King Lisuart and his knights, found work enough against their foes in
the beginning: yet every ey took particular observation of wonders done that
day, by three knights, bearing Serpents in their arms, so that the King
himself often spoke aloud, saying: Either these are Amadisses, or three devils
in their likeness. Notwithstanding, when he considered, what injury he had done
him, he then fell into a contrary persuasion.

Thus King Lisuart remained victorious, and encamped himself (for that day) in
the same place where he conquered his enemies: and as he disarmed himself, he
questioned, what was become of the knights of the Serpents? No other answer
could then be returned, but that they were seen gallopping toward the
forest, with all the swiftest speed their horses could make. On my faith
(quoth the King) I am not a little displeased, that they would not remain with
me: for he that has three such knights in his company, may boldly boaste of
secure assistance. Sir (answered a Squier, that met them ryding to the Forest)
all three of them spoke to me, and gave me charge to tell ye, that they were
constrained to leave your Army, and bestow their trauails in far countries
where they may chance to fall into his power, that means to show them but
little mercy: humbly entreating you to hold them excused, that they gave you
not due reverence before their departing.

Undoubtedly, these words proved truer, then Amadis expected when he spoke
them: but the Squier, continuing on his meslage, further said. Sir, moreover
they desire you, that if any part of booty be fit for them: it may be given to
those Ladies, that defended their Castle so worthily for you, that so they may
receive some recompense for the injuries done to them. Before God I swear,
answered the King, their request shall be accomplished. But fair Sir (quoth he
to Galaor) do not you imagine your brother Amadis to be one of the three? No
surely Sir, said Galaor, because I received Letters (some few days since) from
him, whereby he gave me to understand, that neither he, nor Florestan would
stir out of Gaul, until they heard some news from me. I cannot choose then,
replied the King, but marvel, of whence, and what they are. I know not,
(quoth Galaor) but whatsoever they are, heaven shreld them from any il
success; for (never in my life) did I look on more brave and worthy Knights,
or men that could do more for you, then this day they have done.

So spent they out the rest of the day, in no other discourse (almost) but
only concerning the knights of the Serpents. And raising their Camp on the
morrow, they went to Gandale, where the Queen and Ladies awayted the Kings
coming: there also he brake up his Atmy, discharging every man to his own
home.

CHAP. VI.
How the three Knights of the Serpents, returning homeward into Gaul, were (by
contrary fortune) cast on the place where Archalaus the Enchanter dwelt, who
resolved on their death, and what afterward befell them.

THree whole days together; King Perion and his two Sons kept themselves
closely hidden in the Forest: as well for ease and refreshing after so great
toil, as in expectation of a convenient wind for shipping, which on the
fourth day fortunatly happened; and so they set sail, with a purposed intent
for returning home into Gaul. But it fell out far otherwise with them; for
hardly had they attained into the maine Sea, but it began to swel and rise in
such dreadful manner (being stirde and enraged with contrary winds) as if
Heaven and earth had contended together, and the Ship was so hurried by
impetuositie of the waves, that, notwithstanding all the pains and endeauours
of the Mariners, they were constrained and driven back again, toward the
coast of Great Britain, and to land far enough from the place where they
took shipping. There the three knights went on shore, and mounting on their
horses; without any Squire to attend them; they would needs seek after some
adventure, until the Sea should be better settled, having left express command
with their men, not to depart thence, till their return.

They had not ridden any great length of ground, but descending down a Rock
to a goodly plain, they ^et with a Lady, attended by thre^ Squires, and two
Damsels, each carrying a Falcon on their fist, as if they intended an hourly
flight. The Lady beholding them, made way with her Palfray toward them,
delivering most^ gracious gesture for their happy meeting: and using ceremony
of kind salutation, gave them to understand by apparent signs, that she was
bereft of speech, and dumb. Most lovely and fair she appeared to the knights,
which moved them to compassionat greatly her hard fortune; and she going to him
that had the golden Helmet; making signs of embraces, and offers to kiss his
hand, gave outward notice both to him and the rest, of request to have them
accept alodging in her castle, which was at hand. And lest the knights should
mistake her meaning: she made the like signs to her Squires, who fully
acquainted them with her desire, entreeting them (at their Ladies motion) to
accept of one nights entertainment in her Castle.

The knights being somewhat crazie, and wearied with the rough tempest endured
on the Sea, imagined that her will accorded with their words, and that no
treason lay hid under this honest outside; yielded to hers and their request,
riding softly on with her, and entering into a pleasant seated Castle, where
they were most graciously entertained, and conducted to a very goodly Chamber,
and there they unarmed themselves. When they were set down at the Table for
Supper, diverse Damsels came, each of them having an instrument, and began to
play most melodiously: passing the time away in these pleasing recreations,
until the hour for rest drew near. Then withdrew the Musicians, and the
thread knights, being left all alone, laid ^hrm down in one bed together;
where (soon after) they fell asleep, as men that had some need of repose.

Here ye are to observe, that the Bed wherein the knights lay, was fixed upon
a vice or screw, to be let down and mounted again (without any noise at all)
into a dungeon of twenty fathom deep: and there the knights found themselves
in the morning at their awaking, and whereat they were not a little amazed,
perceiving themselves to be betrayed, for they could not discern any light at
all; nor devise how they should be transported thither. At length, they arose
to find either some window for air, or door for passage to get forth, but
all was in vain, no likelihood appeared anywhere of opening, or that might
yield them the smallest comfort. But continuing on, in this doubtful maze,
they could hear the steps and treadings of people over their heads, and
about seven or eight hours after, they saw a window opened up aloft, and a
knight (but meanly aged) putting through his head, demanding (very unmannerly)
what new-come guests came so willingly to look for good entertainment there?
By my faith, lusty Roisters (quoth he) since I have gotten hold of ye, I
shall be soundly revenged of the wrongs ye have done me; but that your lives
is not any part of sufficient payment. I am not now to ^arn, that you are they,
which caused the overthrow of Aranigne and his Army, maintaining the quarrel
of that wicked Lisuart: and let me now tell ye, that you are in the power of
Archalaus, who will soon enough make known what love he bears ye. Look
well upon me, and if you never saw me before this instant: take good notice
of me now, to know me again, if you can escape from me. Oh how glad a man
should I be, if that villain Amadis de Gaul were one among ye? By my soul,
I would not sleep, till I had cut off both his nose and hands, and put him to
the most cruel death that ever was devised.

Presently came the Lady, who (the day before) counterfeited her self to be
dumb, and said. Uncle, yonder youngest man (pointing to Amadis) is the knight
that wore the golden Helmet, who (you said) had so bravely behaved himself in
Arms. This Lady we now speak of, was the daughter to Ardan Canile, naming her
self D^raa, the most malicious and subtle woman that those times affoorded;
and had not come into these parts, but only to take Amadis, and procure his
death, which was the principal reason why she dissembled her self to be
dumb. No sooner had she uttered these words, but Archalaus went frem the
window, and shutting it again in most churlish manner, said to the knights. Be
as merry as ye may; for before night, I will have your heads cut off; and then
I Will send them to king Aranigne, in satisfaction of the injuries he received by
your means.

Much more amazed now, then ever, was King Perion and his sons, to see
themselves thus in the power of Archalaus; and perceiving so palpably, that
(under the counterfaited show of dumbnes) the Lady whom they meant al good to)
had thus deceived them. But that which redoubled the sorrows of Amadis and
Florestan, was, to behold their aged Father in such danger, now upon the very
ending of his days; this moved them to such compassion, as they could not
refrain from weeping. Nevertheless, he being a wise and virtuous Prince,
began not only to be of courage, but also to comfort them, in this manner.
How now my Sons? are ye so soon daunted at the dissemblings of Fortune? are
ye now to learn her mutabilities (upon my faith) I did ever hold ye to be
more strong and constant. Let me entreat one favor from ye, to lay no more
affliction on me, then I am possessed of already. For, your extremity of
sadness does so over weigh my soul, as that is sufficient only to be my
death. Therefore, resume your wonted courage, and let us put our trust in God:
he is almighty, and able to free us from this place, committing all care to
him, and resting persuaded of his providence.

But who could ever have imagined, that, escaping the dangers in so bloody a
Battle: we should fall into such an accident, by the persuasions only of a
silly woman, and under the couller of such a dumb device? Therefore, loving
Sons, seeing we are not in case to dispose of our selves; setting apart all
natural pity and compassion, which either you can have of me, or I of you:
let us be patient, and not mislike our fortune, which we are not able any way
to mend. Amadis and Florestan, hearing their Father speak with such a
cheerful and constant resolution; it appeared to them, that they were
disburdened of the heauiest load of their disaster; and therefore concluded, to
rejoice in all tribulations whatsoever should happen unto them. And so they
spent all the rest of the day, without receiving either meat or drink, till
somewhat late in the evening: at which time Archalaus came to them again, and
opened the window, accompanied with Danarda, and two ancient knights, bearing
in their hands fair lighted Torches, and calling to his prisoners, he said:

Knights, you that sleep so soundly at ease, is not your appetite yet stirring,
to eat some good meat, if you could come by it? Sir, answered Florestan, if
you were pleased to give us any. By my soul, replied Archalaus, I have no will
to give ye any, but rather to take meat from ye, if ye had it.
Notwithstanding, because ye shall not be altogether discomforted, to delight
ye a little, I have some good tidings to tell ye, whereof (perhaps) you will
be joyful. This evening, two Squires and a dwarf came hither, making enquiry
after certain knights, bearing Arms of Serpents: them have I also taken into
my custody, and allowed them as fair a lodging as yours is; but if they tell
me not to morrow morning, of whence and what you are, you cannot imagine a
death more cruel, then that I will put them to. Herein, Archalaus did not
dissemble with them; for they in the Ship, perceiving that not any of them
returned again, sent forth Gandalin, the Dwarf, and Orpheus, the
Arras-weauer, to understand what was become of them, arriving (by chance) at
the same Castle, where their Lords and Masters were imprisoned.

The three knights hearing these news, were greatly discontented, and not
without especial cause: for they stood in doubt, lest torment, or some other
means, should cause them disclose, whatthey would have concealed. Yet Amadis,
making no outward show thereof, returned this answer to Archalaus. Trust me,
Sir, when you shall know of whence, and what we are, I am well assured, that
you will allow us better wel-come, then hitherto you have done: For your self
being a knight, as we are, and (perhaps) heretofore, fallen into the trecheries
of Fortune, as now we are; would find the favor of a friend, as we could
afford the like to you, stood you in the like necessity as we do. And if any
matter of manhood be in us, me thinks, that might well instruct ye (above all
things else) to offer us no wrong. How now Sir (answered Archalaus) have ye
learnde to prate so boldly? you shall find, who it is that holds dispute with
ye, and whether I offer ye wrong or right. And let this be your comfort, that
like fauous as I would use to Amadis de Gaul, were he in my power, the very
same, and no other will I extend to you.

Uncle said Dinarda, if you mean to send their heads to King Aranigne, do it
not, until severity of famine have caused their death: for, suffering them to
live somewhile in misery, death will then appear the more welcome to them.
Believe me Niece (quoth he) it is well advised, and I am content to allow
thereof: whereupon, he said unto them, that they should have some small matter
of feding; provided, they must resolve him, whether hunger or thirst most
offend them; answer therefore (on your faith) which is the most irk esome to
ye? Seeing, (said King Perion) you conjure us so powerfully; I could like well
to have meat, but thirst does afflict us in much extreamer manner. So, (quoth
Archalaus) I have a piece of fat Lard, which has lien in powder above these
three months; that (I am sure) will quench your thirst. Presently it was
brought, and he hurling it in at the grate, said. There, take it friends, make
good cheer with it, and say not now, but you are kindly entertained. So they
departed, leaving a Damsel at the window, to listen what speeches should
pass between them. Much talk had she heard concerning the feature of person
and manly prowess, of him that wore the golden Helmet; especially, that in the
late battle against King Aranigne, he had declared such deeds of Arms, as no
knight else could perform the like. This raised (in her) great pity and
compassion, and for his sake, she provided a Flagon of wine and water, which
letting down softly to them, she said. Gentlemen, be secret in this favor I
send ye, and (as I may) I will defend ye from perishing. The knights returned
her most hearty thanks: so shutting fast the window, she bade them go to such
rest, as that foul place would assoord them.

Now, concerning the entertainment of Gandalin, and the two other, that sought
after King Perion and his company, being fallen into the hands of Archalaus, as
has bin said already: be it known to ye, that they were suddenly shut up in
a dark vault, over the Chamber where the supposed dumb Lady had formerly
lodged their Masters. There they found two knights and a Damsel, wife to the
elder of the knights, who had long time been kept there as prisoners: who
declared to the Squires, that by the window of their prison, they saw three
knights (bearing Arms of Serpents) brought in thither, and very worthy welcome
given them at the first. Nevertheless (quoth one of them) at length they were
let down into a deep Dungeon, by the most horrid treason that ever was heard
of: for the Bed wherein they lay, was fixed on a screw or giving vise; which
easily, and without the least noise, conveyed them above twenty fathom in
depth, they being in a sound sleep, dreading no harm at all.

Full well knew Gandalin and the other, that these knights were their Masters,
thus betrayed: notwithstanding, they made no outward appearance thereof; but (as
if they had never seen or known them) Gandalin thus answered. For ought I can
perceive, most unhappily came we hither, where such worthy men are so cruelly
handled, of whom we have heard much fame and fair report. But is there no way
or means whereby to succourand help them? I am undoubtedly persuaded, that if
they were delivered, our abiding here would not be long. Let me tell ye
(answered the ancient knight) the maine butte or end of the vice, which
supporteth the bed wherein they lie, is under the plancher of this Chamber, and
here you may behold it. If all our strength and labor will serve to turn it
about, and remount the bed up again to his former place: they may easily get
forth, because the door is never shut; and moreover, the Guardes or Keepers of
the Castle, are now all in their deadest sleep. Let us try (quoth Gandalin)
what we can do; so every one set to their hand.

Such was their painful labor and endeavor, that the screw of the vice
turning by little and little, the bed began to rise: and King Perion (being
then not able to sleep) felt how it moved: wherefore, awaking Amadis and
Florestan, he said unto them - Do not you feel that we are remounting up
aloft? Assure your selves, the villain Archalaus will keep promise with us,
for (doubtless) we are discovered to him.

I know not (said Amadis) what may be his meaning: but he that first lays
hold on me to do me outrage, shall pay the reckoning for all the rest. While
thus they conferred; by little and little the bed drew up near to the
plancher, and attained to fixing in his first place. Then our knights, leaping
lightly on their feet, drew forth their Swords, looking all about them, to see
who had thus raised them again. But they could not see any body, to their no
little marvel, and they found their Arms in the same place where they had
left them, before they went to rest, wherewith they armed themselves
immediately. Afterward, they issued forth so secretly, that seazing the Guards,
they hewed and sliced them in pieces, before any ey could take notice thereof,
until such time, as, by the great noise they made, in breaking the bolts and
bars of the gates, and sharp assayling such as they met withal: Archalaus
awaked, and heard Amadis cry with a loud voice. For Gaul, for Gaul, this
Castle is ours.

In great affrightment he rose, and having no leisure to arm himself, he ran
into a strong Tower, mounting to the top thereof, and drawing up the Ladder
after him; where seeing himself in safety, putting his head out ata window, he
called to his people so loud as he could. In the mean while, our three knights
had made way to Gandalin and the rest, freeing them from the slavery of
Archalaus: whom they espied bawling aloft on the Tower, with some other, for
their better safety. And because they could by no possible means come at them,
they made a great fire, and smoakt them in such sort, as they were glad to
descend into-he lowest vaults, where they were likewise almost smothred with
smoke.

At length, the knights, seeing the Castle all engirt with fire; commanded
their horses to be led forth; where mounting on them, they commended Archalaus
to all his devils; and the Dwarf cried out, Archalaus, Archalaus, remember how
kindly thou did use me, when thou tiedst me fast by the feet; in the Castle
of Valderin, where I was as well perfumed, as thou art now. The dwarf
delivered these words so angerly, and with such a strange gesture, as made them
all to laugh heartily. And when they were somewhat further off, they looked
behind them, and beheld the Castle flaming gallantly: persuading themselves,
that they were sufficiently revenged on Archalaus, and that he could no way
escape with life.

By this time, bright day appeared, and they arrived at the place where they
left their Ship; and there, the Gentlewoman that had bin delivered with the
rest, remembering the words of Amadis in the Castle, when he cried, For Gaul,
for Gaul: desired to know of Gandalin, which of them was the man. Gandalin
pointing her to Amadis; she went and fell at his feet, desiring pardon of
him. For (quoth she) I am Darioletta, that committed your life to the mercy of
the Sea, even the very same day that you were borne. But believe me, my Lord, I
did it to save the honor of the Qaeen your Mother, who otherwise had bin put
to death: for no one did know, but my self only, that the King your Father
(who is here present with ye) was as then married to her. Amadis; was much
amazed heereat, for he had never heard the cause, wherefore he was left in such
sorsaken manner: so, taking Darioletta by the hand, he said unto her. Fair
Friend, I pardon ye, perceiving it was done upon so just an occasion: and
(heretofore) Galuanes has often told me, that he found me floating on the Sea;
but, till this instant, I was utterly ignorant, how it came to pass. Then she
related all from point to point (without omitting any thing) even from the
beginning of King Perions love, to his Queen Elisena, and the success of
every accident: wherein the king took no little delight, and often entreated
Darioletta to repeat the sweet pleasures of his youth.

But while this company were thus in quiet and contentment, the case of
Archaiaus carried no correspondencie therewith: for he and her, remained inthe
deep vault under his sower, where he was as well fauouredly smoakt and
perfumed, as ever Rainard the Fox was in his underground kennel. And if his
Niece Dinarda, and some others had not succored him; he had there miserably
ended his days. But they came to him so soon as the knights were gone,
finding him so suffocated and overcome, as he was not able to stir either
hand or foot. Taking him forth of that smothering vault, they threw vinegar
and cold water in his face, so that (soon after) he began to breathe, and
opening his eyes, beheld his Castle all on a s^^me. Then heavily sighing even
as if his heart would have split in sunder, he said. Vile traitor A^ how many
injuries have thou (...) since thy birth. Be well as^ therefore, that if I can
catch th^^, I will be revenged to mine own hearts contentment. In the despite of
thee, I will never keep any knight (falling into my power) above one night, but
he shall dye the death; to make him sure for scaping from me, as ^ow (much
against my mind) thouh^st done.

So calling for his Litter, he would presently be thence conuayed to Mount
Aldan. For (quoth he) it vexetl my very soul, to behold the ruin of so
beautiful a place, without any means in me to help it. As they rode on the
way, at the entrance of a near neighboring Forest; they espied two knights,
refreshing themselves by the brim of a goodly Spring or Fountain; who seeing
the Litter attended by five knights, and two Damsels: they imagined, that some
wounded body was therein; where upon, they made toward it to be resolved: which,
when Archalaus perceived, he said. Go, bid yonder highway spies come to me,
and if they make any denial, hew them in pieces: but be careful, that you do
not tell them who I am, lest they fly away with fear.

Here you must note, that these two thus sent for by Archalaus, were Galaor,
and his companion Norandel; to who^ ^hen the other knights came, fiercely they
commanded them to lay down their Arms, and come speak with him that was in
the Litter. What saucie Sir is he, said Galaor, that would have us disarme our
selves, and then come to him? You shall know no more then you do, replied one
of the other knights: but if ye use any longer contesting, we will make ye come
to him with cudgelling. I would laugh at tha (tsaid Norandel) I am sure you
mean not as you say. That shall appear (quoth they) and so ran against them:
but Galaor and Norandel unhorsed the first two they met withal, albeit they
all five gave the encounter together, and yet could not stir them in their
saddles. The fight grew fell and fierce between them; but the knights
belonging to Archalaus, were not able to endure the blows of the other two,
who took such order with them, that three of them were slain out tight, and
the other fled into the wood to save themselves, whom they resused to follow,
lest he in the Litter should get away from them in the mean while.

To the Litter they came, and found Archalaus left all alone: because they that
kept him company, had quite forsaken him, upon the soil and flight of the sieve
knights; only there was a Boy remaining, who guided the horses of the Litter.
Archalaus was not a little amazed, to see himself in the power of strangers,
who might well be revenged on him, for the outrage done them: nevertheless, be
thinking himself on a sudden subtle shift, he saluted them in very humble
manner. But they (being justly moved with choler) coming near, and offering
to strike him, said. Treacherous thief, is this thy manner of behavior to
knights errant, seeking their death, that never offended thee^? I swear by
heaven. this is the last outrage thou shall do to any man living. Galaor
having spoken these words, lifted up his arm to smite him: but Archalaus (in
great fear) cried out. Alas my Lords, for Gods sake mercy. Mercy (quoth
Galaor) If Grumedan judge thee worthy of mercy, thou may perhaps have it,
otherwise not: for to him shall thou go, and by him shall thy vill any be
sentenced. Worthy Lords, answered Archalaus, you cannot do me a greater
pleasure, then bring me to my Cousin Grumedan, who knows me to be another
manner of man, then you imagine me. It is not unknown to him, that (at all
times) I have labored, served and honored Knights errant, such as I now
perceive you are.

When Galaor and Norandel heard him speak so honestly, and named Grumedan to
be his kinseman, they were half offended with themselus, that they had given
him such rough language, and answered him thus. What moved you then to send us
such an injurious command by your men? In good faith my Lords quoth he, if you
please but to hear me, I will acquaint you with the whole truth.

Know then, that as I (not long since) crossing the For est of the Black Lake,
I met with a Damsel, who made complaint unto me of a great wrong done her by
a knight, which my duty and order binding me to repair^e I pursued him
according to her direction, and entering the Combat with him, before the Count
of Ganceste, soyled him. But it chanced afterward, as I returned hometo my
Castle, that villain Traitor, which first of all you slew, accompanied with
two other knights, who lay closely ambushed to entrap me; watching their
fittest opportunity, did all set upon me, and would forcibly compel me, to make
them Lords and Commanders of mine own dwelling. What shall I more say to ye.
They followed me with such violence, as notwithstanding, all I could do in my
best defense: they took me, and sed me prisoner to a Fortress not far
hence, where they long time detayned me, in the most injurious manner could be
devised, not permitting so much as the dressing of such wounds, as I had
received in fight against them, and are here apparent to your view.

With these words, he showed them diverse skarres and hurts. And because (quoth
he) they stood in fear, lest I should escape from them, and go to the Court of
good King Lisuart, there to require aid and instice, of the gentle knight
Amadis de Gaul, or of his noble Brother Galaor, by the suitherance of my
Cousin Don Grumedan: this very day, they had me along with them in this Litter
(because I was not able to endure travail on horseback) purposing to carry
me, God knows whether: doubting the friendship and help of my honorable
kinsmen, that labored to release me out of their thraldom some few days
since. In which respect, they no sooner espied you, but thinking you to lie in
wait for the same occasion, they made no conscience in abusing you, as they
had done me in most rigorous manner.

Worthy Sir (replied Galaor) on the faith of a knight, by this discourse of
yours, they were truly villains. For, you being kinsman to one of the
best-deseruing men in the world, your wrongs have bin too great and
insufferable. But let me entreat you, to tell us your name, and to pardon the
injury we have likewise done ye, being ignorant of whence and what you were.
I am named (quoth Archalaus) Branfiles, and know not whether you have heard of
me here to fore or no. Yes that I have, and understand your merit among the
very best (answered Galaor) in doing all honorable courtesies to knights
errant, at what time soever you can compass the means, as Don Grumedan
himself has many times told me. I am glad of it (quoth Archalaus,) and seeing
you have received knowledge of me, let me in kindness obtain so much favor
at your hands, as to take off your Helmets, and to tell me your names, that I
may return thanks to my Cousin Grumedan, for your extraordinary courtesy.

This knight (said Galaor) my dear friend and companion, is called Norandel,
and he is Son to King Lisuart. And I am Galaor, brother to Amadis de Gaul.
Happy man that I am (answered Archalaus (dissemblingly lifting up his eyes to
heaven) could any greater felicity befall me, then to be thus relieved with
two of the best knights in the world. This conference he continued the longer,
taking good note and observation of them, that if ever they should happen into
his hands, he might be the better revenged on them. And my good Lords (quoth
he) command me what service shall like you best, for I confess my life to be
only yours: assuring ye on my faith, that if you at any time come where I may
entertain ye, you shall effectually find what love I bear ye. Friend
Branfiles, answered Galaor, good success attend ye: but if you please, we will
ride along with ye, for your better security. I heartily thank ye, replied
Archalaus, but this day I shall need no further defense, I am so near to a
Castle, where I am assured of kind welcome.

So he departed from them, not a little glad, that he was so well rid of them;
for if they had known him, he had not easily escaped from them: wherefore, he
commanded him that guided the Litter, to make all the haste he possibly might,
and to take the most vnfreque^ted ways, lest they should pursue and recover
him again. By this time it waxed so late, that the Moon shone brightly:
wherefore Galaor (seeing no other help) concluded on their byding that night
by the Fountain, whereto Norandel was as willing as he. As they disarmed
themselves, one of their Squires told them, that they should have better cheer
then they expected. How shall we have it? quoth Galaor. It is ready enough for
ye (answered the Squire: for, while you were fighting with the 5. knights they
that remained with Branfiles, forsook him also, and left a horse laden with
victuals, whereof I took the charge, while the 2 damsels, which accompanied
the litter, entered among yonder old ruins of houses, from whence (as yet) they
are not gone, because I have observed them warily. So much the better, answered
Norandel, conduct me where they are, that they may have part in this booty

Galaor went with him and the Squire, who showed the place where they had hid
themselves, which was an old Cave: in regard whereof, the Damsels had fallen so
deeply into it, as they could not by any means get out again. Now, because
the Squire knew not certainly, whether any knights were in their company or no,
the entrance of the Cave being so unaccustomed, and neither Galaor or Norandel
had their Arms about them: he would proceed no further, but with a loud
voice called unto them, saying. Come forth Ladies, come forth, and give me
not occasion to fetch ye forth, lest perhaps you repent it. Twice or thrice he
thus called to them, and they appeared not to hear him: when Norandel growing
offended thereat, advised Galaor, that fire should be made at the caves mouth,
and so to smoke them forth, whether they would or no.

Dinarda hearing these words, waxed very fearful, and cried out aloud,
saying. Alas Gentlemen, take pity upon us, and we will presently come forth
unto ye. Dispatch then said Galaor, and come away quickly, for we may not
attend your leisure. Believe it Gentlemen (quoth she) unfeignedly, that we
are not able to come unto ye, without your help, we are fallen so deep under
the ground, and further (perhaps) then you will believe. Hereupon, Norandel
went in himself, and help them out each after other; when, perceiving them
to be such beautiful creatures: I know not which of them was the forwardest,
to entertain a fair friend, so that Galaor pleaded possession of Dinarda; and
Norandel of the other. Then sending the Squire to prepare their Supper, mean
while, they wandered somewhat further into the wood; where you may well
conceive, that having a place so convenient, and being furnished with such
provision, as such young years and wanton desires could wish for: neither of
the knights was so dull spirited, but knew well enough how to entertain his
amorous Mistress.

Which dalliances being ended, the knights conducted them to the Fountain,
where they friendly supt together, with such food as the men of Archalaus had
left behind them; using such conference all the time of Supper, as doubtless
was not any way displeasing. By means whereof, the Damsels, who (at the first
encountering) seemed strange, and half angry, were now become so gentle, mild,
and tractable; that Supper was no sooner ended, but they went into the wood
again with the knights, as familiar in their kisses, and kind embraces, as
formerly they had been to Galaor and Norandel. In which pleasures they
continued til the break of day, when Norandels Lady thus spoke unto him. In
good sadness Sir, I fear lest Madame Dinarda will be offended with me,
because I have absented my self so long time from her. Never think you so
(quoth he) for she needs none of your presence, being so well accompanied as
she is: And I dare make it good, that she is as willing to be alone, as you
are, or can be. But resolve me in one thing I pray ye; is not this Dinarda, the
daughter to Ardan Canile, who (not long since) came into this Country, to ask
the counsel of Archalaus, how she might be revenged on Amadis de Gaul, and
compass his death? I am not acquainted (said she) with the cause of her
coming hither; but well I wot, she is the daughter to Ardan Canile, and in my
poor opinion, he that has been pleased with her company this night past, may
well boast of his happiness and good fortune: for he has won that, which many
great persons could never gain so much as a sight of.

Here let me tell ye, as heereto-fore I have done, that this Dinarda was both
cunning and malicious, expressing to Galaor such an outward show of love and
entire affection, as if her soul and behavior truly consented together. And
so far was his belief abused by her, that, notwithstanding his aduertising
by Norandel, what speech had past between him and his nightcommodity, yet he
made no account at all thereof, but declared as fair friendship to her, as
before, not wanting in his very best courtesies to her. But at length, he
demanded of her, if she knew the knight that was carried in the Litter? Full
well (quoth she,) and did not you know him to be Archalaus the Enchanter?
Archalaus? (answered Galaor.) Had I but known so much before, he should have
felt the keen edge of my Sword. Is he not dead? (replied Dinarda.) No (quoth
Galaor,) my ignorance (for this once) has privileged his life: but if ever
hereafter we chance to meet again, he shall well find, that a debt delayed,
is not paid, another day will serve the turn.

Right glad was Dinarda, to hear that her Uncle had escaped with life:
notwithstanding, wisely she dissembled her contentment, and returned this
answer. Trust me, Sir, it is no long while since I hazarded my life for the
safety of his: but now finding my self so far interrested in your fair
affection, assure your self, it is one of my greatest grieuances, that you did
not kill him; for there is not a heavier enemy in the world, to the life of you
and your brother Amadis. I know it too well, (replied Galaor) and so long a
forbearance, should now have found a full discharge for all his trecheries, but
that his subtilty outwent my honest simplicity, which will be quickly footed
when time shall serve.

Broad day breaking off these private conferences, they mounted on horseback
with the Damsels: who took no great pleasure in their company, though they
bare it out with notable dissembling! But that which most offended Dinarda, was
the report of Galaor, that he had left the Court of King Lisuart, only to
find his Brother Amadis de Gaul, whom she hated more then any man living. So
long they iourneyed together, that on the third day following, they came to a
Fortress, the gates whereof stood wide open. In they rode, not meeting with
any body whom they might speak to: but soon after came the Lord of the place,
named Ambades, attended with some of his servants, on whom (beholding this new
come company) he looked angerly, because they had not drawn the Bridge before
their arrival. Nevertheless, considering, that now it could not be helped,
he made a show of courteous entertainment, and much against his mind. For he
was near kins-man to Archalaus, and every way as wicked as he, quickly taking
knowledge of his Niece Dinarda: by who^ he understood the fortunes of his
Cousin; and Dinarda also persuaded him, that she and the other Damsel had bin
violently deflowred by Galaor and Norandel.

Hereat he grew so incensed with fury, that instantly he would have assailed
them: but Dinarda willed him to be better advised, because they two only had
foiled five knights, that had the conduct of her Uncle, and might prove as
powerful over him and his. Therefore Sir, quoth she, as yet it is hest to
conceal your coffeehouse, till their departing hence to morrow morning,
when I and this Damsel will guide the^ forth: then letting down the
Port-cullies of the gate, we shall be sure to tarry with ye in the securer
safety.

Ambades did not mislike this counsel, but went to Supper with the Knights and
Ladies, betaking themselves (afterward) to rest in their appointed lodgings;
and the next morning, being risen, their host came to them, saying.
Gentlemen, when it shall please you to depart, I will be your guide, thus
armed as I am: for so am I used to do, with any that accept of
entertertainment here; and before my return back again, I take delight in
the search of adventures, according as other knights errant do. My kind Host
(answered Galaor) we heartily thank ye for your great courtesy. So, their
horses being brought, first they help to mount the Damsels, and themselves:
but they gave way to Galaor and Norandel to ride out foremost, the women
coming slowly after with Ambades. No sooner were the knights beyond the gate,
but down fell the Port-cullies, and he (with the Damsels) were now out of
their power.

Forthwith, they mounted on the wall over the gate, and seeing the knights
look back for the Damsels coming after, he cried out to them. Villains,
hell be your confusion, before you get them again in your possession. Go
dwell among all the devils, and let them use you, as ye have done these poor
Ladies; who dare venture no further with such base-minded men, but choose rather
willingly to abide here with me. Is it possible mine host (answered Galaor)
that after such honor, and honest entertainment, affoorded by your self to us
in your Castle; you should express such lack of manhood, as to rob us of
our fair friends, so treacherously? If ever they were yours, (replied Ambades,
or gave themselves to ye without constraint: it likes me the better thus to
take them from ye, as thinking it may the more vex and molest ye. But I am
assured, that lustfully, and merely against their minds, you have pursued and
enjoyed them; and therefore, at their earnest request made to me, I use ye as I
do; shame then to quarrel any further in this manner, considering how much
they detest ye. Let them but say so much themselus (quoth Galaor) to us, and we
shall quickly get us gone.

Dinarda, who (all this while) had hid her self, began to appear upon the
wall, whereupon, Galaor spoke thus unto her.

Fair Mistress, this Knight would gladly make us believe, that willingly you
remain with him, and that our company is offensive to ye: We can hardly credit
any truth in his speeches, remembering some occasions that have past between
us.

Then I perceive (answered Dinarda) that foolish credulity betrayed your best
judgment in me; for my affection was never so earnest toward ye, but I had
rather behold your head parted from your shoulders, then to enjoy one minute of
your company.

Fond, and ydle-headed knight, did not thou know that I am Daughter to Ardan
Canile, and that thy Brother Amadis is the man, whom (above all other) I have
most cause to detest and hate?

How then could thou dream, that any good inclination remained in me
toward thee: considering, that thy greatest favor to me, since our late
begun familiarity, has aimed at no other end, but for conueying me to Gaul,
there to behold him whom I least desire to see? You may therefore depart hence
at your pleasure, and forget not to assure your self, that in being persuaded
I most faithfully affected you, you do, and shall find me the most deadliest
enemy you have.

If I had given ye any such occasion, (answered Galaor) yet I am well assured,
the sweet satisfaction you received so latel / from me, and to you no mean
contentment (as I imagined) did well deserve more lovely language. But I can
easily aim at your intention; you would gladly borrow as much friendship of
another man, as fearing that I was not able to pleasure ye any further: wherein
truly, now upon better consideration with my self, you have reason so to do,
and I none at all to mislike it.

For, over and beside that general disease, incident to all women of your
witty disposition, to affect change and nouelty: I ought to have remembered how
difficult a thing it is, from so badde a stock as is worth just nothing, that
any good fruit can be expected. For thou art Niece to the only vile wretch in
the world, and thou must needs resemble him in all kind of villainy.

But Madame, said Norandel, I hope my amorous Mistresie, has no such cause to
complain of me: for never woman was better entertained by her friend, then
(for so long time together) she was by me, and that I dare refer to her
own report.

As he spoke these words, he espied her peeping over the others shoulder;
whereupon he called to her, saying. How say you sweet heart, is it not true?
It is so true (quoth she) that if I could compass the like power over thee,
as (when time was) thou had over me; I should easily make known, with what
affection I endured whatsoever thou did to me, which pleased me so well, that
I refer thee to the devils recompense.

The devil (said Norandel) cares not for my company, he likes yours so well,
and that villain that is with ye. By Saint Mary (answered Ambades) you do
me wrong, to think so badly of me, holding you in such reputation, that if I
could have conquered two such as you are, I could vaunt thereof among the best
knights in the world; for I hold ye to be but a couple of base Grooms. These
words moved Norandel to such choler, that he presently replied, Base Gromes:
Have thou any such in thy pay or wages? If thou hold us in no better
esteem, come down from thy Castle wall, and thou shall soon see, that a
Groom of my breeding, can knock a bigger knave then thou art. But if thou
conquerest me, then boldly make thy vaunt, to have foiled one of the greatest
enemies, that either thou or Archalaus can have.

Gentle words (answered Ambades) have not I told thee already, that I mean
not to meddle with any such paltry companions? what honor then can be had by
so base conquest? Tell not me of thy hatred to my Cousin Archalaus, thou art
unworthy to speak of a man of his merit; who, as he cares not for thy love or
kindness, so he dares thee to thy uttermost malice against him. So, bending a
Turkishe Bow, he let slye three or four ar^owes at them, which caused Galaor
and Norandel to part thence, smyling heartily to themselves, that they had bin
so deceived by two treacherous women. And yet (quoth Norandel) me thinks,
they liked their wine so well, as they will grieve for the miss thereof, when
they remember us. And howsoever they have beguiled our expectation, yet I can
be well content to be mocked so again, paying no dearer charges then we have
done.

They rode on still thus merrily jesting, till about some three or four days
after, they came to the Port of Arsill, where they found a Bark ready bound
for Gaul, whereinto they entered, and the wind sat so fitting for them, that
(without hinderance or impeachment, they landed where King Perion then
soiourned. At that instant, Amadis was walking on the Seashore* accompanied
with his Brother Florestan, and he remembering his Oriana, sent many a longing
look toward London,

But so soon as he beheld the Bark to cast Anchor in the Port, he said to
his Brother Florestan. Let us go learn of them, who are come hither to take
landing, if they can tell us any happy tidings. Go we then (replied Florestan,
for perhaps we may meet with some of our acquaintance. So walking down to the
Shore, Amadis saw Galaor already come forth of the Ship, and Norandel
following him; wherepon he went and embraced his brother.

As yet he had no knowledge of Norandel, but Florestan had formerly seen him,
telling him, that he was the bastard Son to King Lisuart, and companion to
Galaor, as a so, one of the best knights of his age, and so he did worthily
declare himself; in the battles at the Burning Lake, where many men of mark
ended their lives. Nevertheless, he was then scarcely known to be the Kings
Son, neither would his Father make any auouchment of him, until the
overthrow of King Aranigne: but there he performed such deeds of Arms, that
the King himself greatly gloried, he had begotten so famous a knight; and
therefore cared not (that day) who took knowledge of him.

Not a little glad was Amadis of his arrival, and for his Sister Orianaes
sake, he gave him the more kind and gracious welcome, sending presently to
King Perion, to advertise him of their landing, who came to meet them, and
embraced Norandel in most loving manner, feasting them royally and
magnificently three days together. On the fourth day following, Amadis (who
formerly had resolved on his departure from Gaul, to pursue the search of
strange adventures) finding the King at fit and convenient leisure, he thus
sp^ke unto him. Sir, my long abiding here with you, and discontinuance from
the use of Arms, has bin the cause of much lavish language to my disgrace.
Wherefore I humbly entreat your Majesty, to license my departure to morrow
morning. Son, answered the King, I hold your honor in such precious esteem,
that notwithstanding pate^all love and affection, which well may make me loath
to leave your company. I am content, that you shall part hence at your own
pleasure.

By my says (quoth Galaor) were it not for one quest whereto I and my
companion (...) have religiously bound our selves by ^oath; no occasion
whatsoever could divide us from your company. But we have vowed the same before
so many worthy personages, and to continue our travail one whole year
together; as nothing must hinder us from that we seek for. And what may be
the ground (said the King) of this serious inquisition? Sir, answered Galaor,
in King Lisuarts battle with the seven Island Kings, three knights (utterly
unknown to us) (...) and took our part, all armed alike, except their
Helmets* for one was white, another green, and the third gold, and had no
difference, but their Shieldes emblazed (...) S^ents.

Th^se three of whom I make re^, performed such admirable deeds of prowess,
that the King (...), and all his knight^, with confirmation of the whole army
beside ascribed the cause of our victory only to heaven and them: much did he
in the white Helmet, also he in green: but (above all) the golden Gallant
might not be m^^ed. And because none of us could attain to the knowledge of
them by reason of their sudden parting thence upon our victory: my companion
and I have solemnly vowed and promised, according to the custom of Great
Britain, to spend one whole year in the quest of them, before we give over,
or undertake any other enterprise. Son (said the King) when heaven pleases,
you may have news of those knights, and sooner then you look for.

So spent they out the day, disco^sing on many things, till the due hour
summoned them to rest. The next morning, Amadis being armed, went to hear
Mass; and having taken leave of the King, mounted on horseback, accompanied
only with Gandalin and the Dwarf. Notwithstanding, the King would needs bring
him somewhat on the way, out of the City; and as they rode together, Amadis
thus spoke. Sir, you know what travail my brother and Norandel have bound
themselves to by vow, which will be pains without any profit, except you
please therein to ease them: for, by no means possible can they compass their
intent, but one of us three must end their royle. Wherefore, I think it
expedient, if your Highness were so pleased, that when you have forsaken my
company, you would tell them the whole discourse, and what we did in the
service of King Lisuart. Since you will have it so (replied the King) it shall
be done. Florestan was very desirous to have ridden along with Amadis, but he
would not permit it: because in trauayling alone, he had the more free passage
for his considerations concerning Oriana; and beside, he aimed at adventures of
no mean peril, the honor whereof should be his own only.

Anadis being gone, as Fortune best pleased to direct him, and the King with
his company returned home to the Court: he called for Galaor and Norandel, with
whom he discoursed in this manner. You have betaken your selves to a strange
kind of quest, wherein (I am certain) you will have but slender success,
except it be in this kingdom. And therefore, account your coming hither to be
fortunate, in that I can shorten your long-intended travail.

Know then, that the knights you seek after, were none other then Amadis,
Florestan and my self. So he declared the whole manner of their enterprise,
and how at the very instant of their proceeding, Vrganda the Unknown, sent
them the coat Armours, with the Serpents, the golden Helmet for Amadis, the
white for himself, and the green for Florestan: showing all instantly to
them, and what harm had happened to them in the battle.

Sir, said Galaor, heaven has bin very favorable to us, considering our
long-intended time of travail: only to enter the Combat with them, and make
known to the whole world beside (in extinguishing their glory) that one of us
deserves as much as the best of them. Yea (quoth the King) but it is much
better to fall out thus, as now it does.

Then he reported to them, how in their returning from the battle, they
chanced to be imprisoned by Archalaus, and in what ungentle manner he used
them. That villain, (answered Galaor) not long after escaped out of my hands,
by a most queint and cunning treachery. Relating at large, how they met with
him, their courtesy to the Damsels, and their treason afterward at the
Castle of Ambades.

The King walked thence with them to his own Chamber, where all the Armours
were, whereof they had spoken: which they presently knew, as having well
observed them in the battle, Norandel importuning the King so earnestly, that
he frankly gave him them. Afterward, having remained there about the space of
fourteen days, they obtained leave to part thence; and passing into Great
Britain, arrived at the Court of King Lisuart: who, not a little glad of
their coming, instantly sent for them, to understand what had befalne them in
their quest.

Sir, (said Norandel) we have brought ye happy news, and answerable to your
own desire. In testimony whereof, behold here the Arms of them, that
performed such worthy service for you, and in such a time of urgent necessity.
This white Helmet was then worn by King Perion, and your self saw him in the
place, where it cost many the price of their lives. This green Helmet belonged
to the gentle knight Florestan, who well declared how hardily he could handle
his Sword. And this of gold appertained to Amadis, whom deeds of arms cannot be
seconded by any: for by his assistance, the benefit of the battle redounded
to you; but the honor thereof to his immortal glory. How could they (quoth
the King) come so conveniently to help us?

Hereupon Norandel discoursed from point to point, how every thing had
happened, without the least omission, to the great contentment of all the
hearers. Believe me, said the King, I perceive that King Perion has bin long
time your favorer, and him I never saw out of his Arms, albeit I greatly
desire to know him. You shall then know (answered Norandel) a wise virtuous and
most magnanimious Prince.

And on my faith (quoth Grumedan) his Sons come not behind him in any of his
best parts. These words were hardly pleasing to the King, though he made no
outward show thereof: but falling from this manner of discourse, he departed
thence, leaving Galaor and Norandel, to whom Oriana and Mabila instantly
coming, they delivered most kind commendations to them, both from Queen
Elisena and the Princess Mabila. Declaring afterward, that Amadis was departed
from Gaul into far distant Countries, to seek after strange adventures,
which tidings made them very sorrowful, because they feared to hear no news
of him in a long while after.

CHAP. VII.
How Esplandian was neurished by the old Hermit Nascian. And what adventures
happened to Amadis in the mean while, changing his known name, and calling
himself, the Knight with the green Sword.

ESplandian having attained to the age of four years, or thereabout; Nascian
well knowing, that now it was fit time, to begin his instruction in virtuous
exercises: sent to his Sister, that she should bring the child to him, which
she accordingly did. The Hermit perceiving his growth, to be beyond the
ordinary stature of such young years, besides his beauty and commendable
form: conceived in his mind, that heaven had thus preserved him to some
especial end: so that, if formerly he presumed of his future happiness; he
gave more credit now thereto then ever he had done; endeavoring by all means
possible, to have him taught all commendable qualities, fit for the knowledge
of a Gentleman; embracing, kissing, and using him, as if he had bin his own
natural Son.

And surely it was not without great reason, because the child had always
declared, as apparent signs of love to him, and rather more, then to his
Nurse, whose breasts he sucked. In regard whereof, Nascian concluded to keep him
still, sending his Sister home to her own house: yet requiring the company of
one of her Sons, that might be as a play-fellow to Esplandian, who had sucked
with him of the same milk, whereto she willingly condiscended.

From that time forward, the Hermit was their sole guide and governor, they
living there in the nature of brethren; and for their daily delight and
exercise, he would send them to hunt in the Forest; so that at one time (among
other) they rising early in the morning to find some game, Esplandian waxing
faint and weary, sat down by a River side, and fell asleep. The Lyonnesse
(whereof we have formerly spoken) coming thither, and finding this new kind of
prey, smelling at his face, began to fawn and move his tail pleasingly, even
as if Nature had made an especial interdiction, of touching, or doing any
harm to the creature, which her self had before bin partly a Nurse unto. And
appeared to know him so perfectly, that had bin a while suckled with her milk:
as instantly, without offering the least violence, she couched down at his
feet, smelling, and licking his hands and garments. Which, when his
wakingcompanion perceived, being overcome with fear* he ran home to the
Hermit, crying to him, that he had left his brother with a great dog, that
would eat him, as he lay sleeping on the bank of a River, he not having any
power to wake him.

The holy Hermit, dearly affecting Esplandian, grew doubtful of his safety;
and commanded his young Nephew, to bring him where he left him; which
presently he did. Drawing near to the place, he beheld the Boy and the
Lyonnesse playing together: when Esplandian beholding the Hermit, said unto
him. Father, does this goodly dog belong to us. Son, answered Nascian, she
is sent of God, to whom only all things appertains.

Truly Father, replied Esplandian, I should well like his abiding with us, and
would make use of him in our hunting. When the reverent man heard him speak so
confidently, he grew as resolute in persuasion, and going nearer to Esplandian,
saw him kiss the Lyonnesse, even as familiarly, as she had bin a Spaniell.

Hereupon the Hermit said unto him. Son, would you give her somewhat to
eat? Yea Father, answered Esplandian, if I had any thing to give her. With
that, the Hermit took out of his Scrip the leg of a Dear, which a Hunter
had bestowed on him, and giving it to the Lad, he threw it to the Lyonnesse,
saying. Here Dog, eat this. The Lyonnesse took it; and while she was
feeding on it, Esplandian played with her ears, paws and tail, even as
familiarly as himself pleased, the beast offering him no other dislyking, then
if he had bin one of her whelps. Such perfect knowledge did she take of him,
and (even by natural instinct) loved him so dearly, as she followed him
thence to the Hermitage, and (from that time forward) would never willingly
leave his company, except when she went to seek some prey, which she would
also bring home with her, even as if she had been a household servant.

And both the Laddes grew into such familiarity with her, that they would lead
her oftentimes in a Leasse on hunting with them, as if she had bin a Greyhound
for game. Which Nascian well noting, provided them Bows fit fot their
strength, wherewith they continually used to kill Hearts, Hindes, Roe-bucks, and
such like, sending still the Lyonnesse after such game as they had wounded.

But here we purpose now to leave them for a while; returning to Amadis, who
being departed from Gaul, entered the Country of Alemaigne, where he performed
such rare actions of Chiualry, that every tongue talked only of him, and there
he was commonly called, the knight with the green Sword, or, the knight of the
Dwarf, because Ardan still attended on him, and there he spent four whole
years, before he returned to the Enclosed Island, not hearing any tidings from
his Oriana, which was his very greatest affliction, because he found no pains,
labor or ill success, any way comparable to the want of her presence.

So long he travailed from one part to another, that about the beginning of the
Springtime, he arrived in Bohemia, near to King Tafinor, on whom Patin the
Emperor of Rome made sharp war: who hated Amadis more then any man else,
for the reason formerly declared in the second Book. He ryding purposely
toward the camp, King Tafinor, who for a time, had taken truce with his enemy,
was then flying his Gerfaulcon at a Heron, which fell at the horse feet of
Amadis.

Now, because none of the horsemen could come at her, in regard of the moist
and marshie ground hindering them, the knight of the green Sword alighted, and
took her up, demanding the Falconers, if they were displeased thereat: And
they answered no. Soon after came the King, who had coasted all along the River
for passage, and seeing the knight so completely armed, stood in some suspicion
of himself; till he further noted the green scabberd of his Sword, being the
same which he had in lone of the ancient knight, as has bin formerly declared.

The King had many times heard much fame of his prowess, and was so well
pleased with his happy arrival, that he entreated his company to the City,
which Amadis denied him not; but ryding along with him, the King thus spoke.
Sir, I have a long while desired, that I might be but worthy of such a
companion as you seem to be. My Lord (answered Amadis,) the liberal renown of
you and your bounty, which makes you famous in many kingdoms, drew me hither,
only to offer you my service, if any way it may be acceptable to ye, because
I have heard, that you are warred on by a potent Prince, that gives ye no mean
molestation. You say very true (replied the King;) but I trust in heaven, and
by the means of your help, to see a short issue out of these troubles,
Fortune having so conveniently guided you hither.

By this time they were arrived at the Palace, where the King commanded he
should be lodged, and Grasandor his Son to keep him company. Now, in regard
that the truce taken between the two Armies, was upon the point of ending:
each side stood on their best defense, and the several Camps prepared for all
attempts whatsoever.

King Tafinor walking one day abroad, to understand some tidings from the
enemy, he beheld afar off twelve knights come riding toward him; and as
they drew nearer, he knew the Shield of Garadan, borne by his Squire, himself
being a near kinsman to the Emperor; and they came not to fight, but to
parlee. The King bare little affection to this Garadan, because he procured
and raised this war, and well he knew, that his coming was but to occasion
some fresh grieuance; which made stearne anger mount up into his face, so that
he could not forbear, but said. Ah treacherous villain, thou have already
done me so many mischiefs, that I have just occasion to hate thee so long as I
live.

Sir, (answered the Knight of the green Sword,) it may be, he comes to ye
for some good end; therefore, it shall well become ye, now to dissemble all
passion, entertayning them with good looks, not taking offense at any thing
they say, in regard they come to ye as Ambassadors from the Emperor their
Master.

Kind friend (quoth the King) I allow of your good advice, and will be directed
thereby; though it is no mean grief to me, to have so great an enemy near
me. Scarcely were these words ended, but Garadan and his troop saluted the
King, who gave them kind welcome desiring them, that before any speeches
passed, they would go along with him to him to his Palace. But Garadan made
refusal, showing himself as bravely proud and presumptuous, as formerly he
was wont to do, speaking thus.

King Tafinor, thou must understand the occasion of our coming to thee, and
before thou partest from this place, thou must make us answer, such as shall
seem best to thy self, without advice or consulting with any one but thy
self. For in thee only lies the conclusion of two things, wherewith I am to
acquaint thee from the Emperor: otherwise, assure thy self, before three days
can be passed over, the battle will fall out to be so cruel and bloody, as it
exceeds all possibility, but thou and thy Country will be utterly lost.

With these words he delivered him a Missiue of credence, for further
confirmation of his speeches. Believe me Lord Garadan, (answered the King,) I
hope that the Emperor, and you, will be more kind to me, then appears by
your message: wherefore, defer no further time, but deliver the remainder of
your Commission, that I may yield you satisfaction to my power.

Garadan hearing the King to answer so mildely, began somewhat to qualify his
own choler, replied thus. King Tafinor, the Emperor my Master, having power
sufficiently to prevail against, yea, and utterly to ruinate a more potent
Prince then you are, being desirous to make an end of this war, to provide
for other his more necessary occasions, makes tender to you of two conditions,
whereby you may enjoy peace if you please, or else not.

First, if Combat may be performed of an hundred of your knights, against as
many of his; or a thousand to a thousand, the conquerors leaving the vanquished
in such case, as to them shall seem best. Or, if you find this demand to be
ouer-great, he is content to allow of twelve against twelve, of which number I
mean my self to be one, who do think my self able to fight with six of
your knights, although your self made one in person. Therefore, of these two
elections, choose which shall appear the easiest to you: for otherwise, be well
assured, that, setting aside all other affairs, his Army shall never part from
this Country, till you be wholly vanquished, which will be very speedily,
because you are not able long to withstand his potent proceedings.

Don Garadan (answered the knight of the green Sword) were you to speak to a
King of much less merit, yet deserving more respect and reverence, me thinks
you should be more mindful of your own behavior, in using such proud
threatenings concerning your self, ill beseeming a Gentleman, appertayning to
so great a Prince. Notwithstanding, he may make you what answer shall like
him: albeit, in mine opinion, he should first understand, what assurance you
can make of your several offers, if he consent to your demands. When Garadan
heard the knight of the green Sword speak so resolutely in the Kings
presence, he maruayled greatly what he should be, and looking on him with a
disdainful eye, he said.

Believe me knight, it appears well by your language, but much more by your
boldness, that you are not only a stranger in these parts, but also to all
honor and ciuility. And it amazeth me, that the King will suffer ye to speak
so sottishly in his presence. Nevertheless, if his opinion of you be so good,
as not to disallow what you have said, let him first consent to my demands,
and then I will answer him as I see occasion. Go you on, quoth the King, with
the rest of your message: for whatsoever, the knight of the green Sword has
spoken on my behalf, shall be maintained, if in our power it lie to perform
it.

Garadan became now more amazed, then formerly he had been; perceiving, that
the man whom he had inburied in words, was the knight with the green Sword,
whose renown had already spread it self through all Countries, and made his
stout heart somewhat to tremble: Nevertheless, he held it as his chiefest
happiness, that he should have now so apt an occasion to combat with him;
for, he was so ouer-weening and vainglorious, that he made no doubt of
preuayling against him, and that very easily. Which idle fond opinion, caused
him to lose all the honor and high reputation, wherein he had lived till that
time, promising himself an assurance of victory, which afterward fell to his
enemy. And waxing more chollericke then before, he returned this answer to the
knight of the green Sword.

Seeing that the King gives you such power and authority, why are ye so slow
in electing the fight? Because (answered the knight of the Dwarf) it is a
matter of such importance, as well deserves to have the advice of the Princes
and Ladies of this kingdom.

And it would highly content me, if the King pleased so much to honor me, as
to entertain me for one of the twelve hundred, or thousand, that are to be
appointed for this fight: for no man can be more desirous then I am, to do
any service against you, on whom I would not only adventure my best blood, but
serve for him in any place, where he shall please to employ me. My dear
friend, (replied the King,) I most heartily thank you, and will not refuse the
offer you have made me: but do request withal, that you would make election
of the fights in my behalf, according as you shall judge it best, and for our
most advantage.

In good sooth Sir, (replied the knight of the green Sword) therein you shall
pardon me, (if you please;) for you have about ye so many good knights, all
loving and respectfull of your honor, that if you demand their advice in this
case, their counsel will be both faithful and honorable. Nevertheless,
before you shall fail in this, or any other matter that Garadan can urge;
presume upon my loyalty and ready service. Only let me entreat your Majesty,
to demand, what power he has received from his Master, to warrant the offers
already proposed: and accordingly you may shape your answer, for the
acceptance or refusal.

Saucie companion, (answered Garadan,) I know thy meaning well enough, as
seeking how to shrink back, and shun all the offers made for fight. If you
knew me well, (said the knight of the Dwarf) it may be, you would hold
better estimation of me, then rashly your rash opinion seems to deliver.

And do not think it strange, that I gave such advice to the King, as you
have heard: for if your several offers should afterward be disallowed or
disclaymed; they may be the cause of stearner war then yet* has been, in
steed of a milder purchasing peace.

Garadan could no longer forbear, but drew a Letter forth of his sleeue,
sealed with thirty fair Seals, in the midst of all which Seals, stood
that, that belonged to the Emperor: And delivering it to the King, he bade him
to consider on a speedy answer. By my faith, (quoth the King,) seeing you are
in such great haste, you shall be answered before you part from this place. So,
withdrawing thence, and calling some of the chiefest Lords of the company: he
entreated them to advise him particularly what were best to be done in this
urgent necessity. Then each man delivered his opinion, which fell out to be
different and contrary, because some approved the fight of an hundred against
an hundred, and others of twelve to twelve; but the greater number temporized,
and gave the like counsel, for continuance of war, in manner and form as it
had been begun. For (quoth they) to hazard a kingdom upon the strength of
so few men, is a matter very dangerous. And moreover, it appears by Garadans
own words, that the Emperor himself first begins to grow weary of this
war, and (it may be) is so ouerpressed in other places, as he will be
(thereby) enforced to withdraw his forces, and leave us in peace against his
own will.

Sir, said Count Galtines, it were very expedient (in my mind) to crave the
counsel of the knight of the green Sword. Now, was not he present at this
assembly, and therefore he was immediately sent for; and being come, the King
thus spoke unto him.

My worthy Friend, you have heard at large the speeches of Don Garadan to me,
so commanded (as he says) by his Master the Emperor: let me therefore
entreat ye, fair Sir, to advise us what you think meetest for our answer,
because the several opinions of our Lords here present, are so different, as
we know not which to elect for our best course. Then he related to him (in
order) all circumstances that had passed among them without omission of the
least particle, and the knight of the green Sword returned him this answer.

Sir, I am sure you can sufficiently understand, that the end and issue of such
attempts, are only in the hand of Heaven, and not guided or directed by the
judgment of man; but in regard you would have mine opinion in this case, I will
acquaint ye with my very uttermost power and ability.

If then Sir, I had but one Castle only, and an hundred knights at my
command, and were besieged by such an enemy, whose power twice exceeded mine.
If heaven affoorded me so much happiness, to cause him condescend to a
peaceful conclusion, under haxard of mine own strength, I should confess my
self beholding to him.

Nevertheless, honorable Lords (speaking to the other Barons and knights
there present) whatsoever I prefer as best in this case: forbear not you to
counsel the King, according to the fidelity wherein you stand bound and
obliged to him. Only my most humble request is, that he would so much honor
me, as to rank me among their number that shall be appointed for fight.

Let me tell you Sir, (replied the King,) that I now call to mind, what I
heard once reported, concerning King Perion of Gaul, having the like occasion
in hand, as ours now is, against King Abies of Ireland, who forcibly had taken
from him a great part of his kingdom. He was delivered by a single Combat,
which a young knight (not aged fully eighteen years) undertook against the
said King Abies, who was reckoned among the very best and boldest knights in
the whole world: yet was he slain, and King Perion put in possession of all
he had formerly lost.

But above all, as a matter most deserving note, he then knew him to be his
own Son, that had won for him that worthy victory: then termed the
Gentleman of the Sea, and afterward called Amadis de Gaul. Thus our Lord (in
one day) bestowed on him two mighty blessings, by the recovery both of his
kingdom and Son. Wherefore then (in the like case) should not I imitate so
worthy a man as King Perion, and essay to deliver my people out of those great
tribulations, as have afflicted them by a war so long and tedious? Well may I
grant the Combat of twelve of my knights, against as many of the enemy: in
regard that I am persuaded of them, as by the help of heaven, and the right of
Justice being on our side, they will bear away the honor of victory. What is
your opinion, Knight of the green Sword?

Sir, answered he, I never had knowledge of that Amadis; yet I long time
frequented the Country of Gaul, where it has been my good hap to see two
of his brethren, who are no way inferior to him in prowess, and I have heard
likewise, that according as you have* declared, so it fortuned to King Perion.

Now, as concerning the fight of twelve to twelve, whereas your Majesty has
resolved: before God I speak it, had I been in your place, I should have done
the like.

Nay, moreover Sir, if Garadan had demanded a much less number, let him be
now assured, he should not have been denied, were it to the aduenturing mine
own person against his. And if it pleased you but to tell him as much, I would
willingly hazard my life, to abate his pride, that prates so contemptibly of
all men else, presuming upon his own vain glory.

I hold it better, (quoth the King,) that you should be twelve equally in
number; and therefore I will bethink my self, to find out eleven of the best
knights in my kingdom, that may accompany you in this attempt. For which, the
knight of the green Sword thanked him.

This being done, the King returned to Garadan, and spoke thus.

Lord Garadan, you have demanded the Combat of twelve to twelve, and I have
yielded thereunto, under those conditions before offered, and to morrow is the
day, if you are as ready as we will be.

By my soul Sir, answered Garadan, you yield me the greatest contentment that
ever could happen to me, and I could wish (if it were possible) that your men
were as ready, as those that adventure for the Emperor. Garadan, (replied the
knight of the green Sword) so the King were so pleased, and you possessed with
the like desire of the Combat, as here you appear to make show of: I would
answer your heat this very instant hour.

What? (quoth Garadan) do thou doubt that I will fly from thee? were I sure
to be Emperor of Rome; I would refuse that dignity, rather then the offer thou
have made me. For, if I have not manhood sufficient, whereby to overcome
thee, and take thy head from thy shoulders before it be night, I will willingly
forfeite mine own in the Field. The like hope of success (replied the knight
of the Dwarf) have I over thee: let us then without longer trifling the time)
see, whom Fortune will allow the best favor unto.

So both withdrew thence to arm themselves, returning again within a short
while after; and to the knights that accompanied Garadan, thus he spoke. If
ever you beheld a brave encounter at the lance, do but observe, with what
skill and dexterious judgment, I shall give entertain to this bold companion,
that dare make trial of his poor fortune against me; and repute me never to
wear Helmet on my head, if I do not deliver his head to the Emperor, and
leave the Country quiet, not suffering any of you to lay hand to weapon.

While Garadan held on these brauing speeches, the knight of the green Sword,
being at the other end of the Field, cried out aloud to him to defend himself.
Then covering themselves with their Shields, couching their Lances, and giving
spur to their Coursers: they ran against each other with such violence,
that the knight of the green Sword was half amazed.

But Garadan fell to the ground, so far lost in himself, that he lay a long
while; unable to move either hand or foot, for the lance had pierced through
his arm, which did put him to intolerable anguish.

Then the knight of the green Sword, perceiving him in such a strange
perplexity, alighted from his horse, to see whether he were dead or no; and
as he came near him, Garadan being restored from his trance, started up
quickly, laying hand to his Sword, as if he had felt no harm at all.

Now began a very fierce and cruel battle between them, and it could not
easily be judged, which side had the better, because each stood so stiffely to
the other, as it moved no mean admiration in the beholders. And had it not
been for Garadans much enfeebling, by the great abundance of blood issuing
from the wound received in his arm, he had given his enemy more occasion of
trouble and danger, then as now he could do in so weak an estate.

At length he found himself so spent and weary, that to recover breath, he
thus spoke unto him. Believe me Knight of the green Sword, in regard that I
now know ye better then ever I did, I have iuster reason of wishing worse to
ye then before.

Notwithstanding, because it appears to me, that you begin to wax faint, I
am well contented, to suffer ye (for a while) to rest and ease your self.
How? (replied Amadis) do thou now talk of rest, and made vaunt not long
since to have my head so lightly? Assure thy self, thou shall take no rest,
nor I neither, till one of us two rest in death on the ground; and therefore
look to thy self I would advise thee. Thus speaking, he charged him fierce,
and fiercer, and at last let fall such a weighty blow on the top of his
Helmet, as cleft quite through the steel, head and brain together, so that he
fell down dead in the field. Whereat the Knight of the green Sword was not a
little glad, not so much for the ill will he bare him, as for the displeasure
he imagined to have done the Emperor, and especial contentment of King
Tafinor.

So wiping his Sword, he put it up into the sheathe, rendering thanks to GOD
for the victory he had given him.

Then came the King, and (embracing him) demanded how he fared. So well my
Lord, answered Amadis, as I have no wound at all to hinder me, from entering a
fresh fight to morrow morning, with whomsoever you shall please to appoint me.
Nay, by my faith (quoth the King) you have done enough for this business. Then
was he conducted into the City, with the greatest triumph that possibly
could be.

In the mean while, the Romans carried thence the body of Garadan, so daunted
with his death, that all desire of farther fighting was utterly lost: but
concluded together, to tell the Emperor, that their companion had engadged
them (in mere despite, adn his own rashness) to decide this difference by
Arms: wherein he would needs (over desperately) adventure himself alone, and
so lost the day.

No one was against this determination, but a young knight, named Arquisil, a
near kinsman to the Emperor, who perceiving the bad disposition of the rest,
and the injury they not only should do to the Emperor Patin, and to
themselves, but likewise to the whole Empire, spoke thus unto them. How now
Lords? will you thus forget your selves, and lose the reputation of our Empire?
Shall it be bruited abroad, that eleven Roman knights (through fear of
death) were so cowardly-minded, as not to combat with twelve Allemaignes,
grosse-headed fellows, and very slenderly experienced in Arms? So help me
God, put me alone upon the enterprise, and if you stand in doubt of him that
has foiled Garadan, leave him only to me, and settle your selves to the
other; for I dare assure ye, if our hearts be good, we cannot but speed
successefully, and recover that blemish, to our honor, which the misfortune of
our friends has thrown upon us.

Let us fight then, and die every man of us, rather then defer it any longer:
considering, we rather ought to make choice of a death so honorable, then live
hereafter in perpetual shame, or so wretched a condition of life, as ours must
needs be.

Assuredly, the valiant words of this young Prince, prevailed so far upon the
others pusillanimity, and made them so confounded with shame, as they all
resolved to tempt their fortunes, and even prostitute their lives to any
peril, rather then to depart thence, with such dishonor.

They were not so prompt and ready for the Combat; but the knight of the
green Sword (hating all sloth and negligence) was as forward to move the King
therein, desiring, that the next morning he would appoint the other knights to
be in readiness, acording to promise, and they would accompany them to the
field. But the King would feign have deferred it longer, in regard of the
wounds he received by Garadan: and being unable to prevail with him, he thus
spoke. Knight of the green Sword, you have already done so much for me, as I
dare not well deny you any thing you can demand of me. And seeing you will
needs have an end of this controversy, my Son Grasandor shall bear you
company; for in a better occasion he can never adventure his life, nor with a
man of greater merit.

Sir, answered Amadis, you should reserve him for a more serious business;
without hazarding him in so mean a matter, and where there is so slender need.
Ah Sir knight, replied Grasandor, would you offer me a greater wrong then any
man else can do? By the faith I bear to my King and Father, if I had so much
power over you, as I freely grant you have on me: I would then entreat you so
far to honor me, as that I might keep you company all my lifetime; and I
could rather wish that I had never been borne, then not to make one in this
elected number, and in a case of such importance. Seeing it is your pleasure
(quoth the knight of the green Sword) and that you will needs be one in the
fight, I make no doubt but God will assist us; for being in your company, it
cannot choose but we all shall speed the better.

So every one withdrew until the next morning when the King came to see his
knight, whom he found ready armed; and perceiving his Armor to be greatly
impaired, he said.

My worthy Friend, I think it not fit, that you should enter into so dangerous
a fight, so slenderly provided as you are. Wherefore, let me entreatye to take
other Arms, which in my judgment will be more convenient for ye, both in
security, ease and aptnes. Hereupon, he sent for an Armor, which he had kept
(a long while) for one of the best in the world, and presenting it to the
knight of the green Sword, said. Essay Sir, whether it will sit ye or no, and
(for my sake) arm your self therewith, which I bestow on ye with as good a
heart, as ever I kissed Lady in my life. Most humbly did Amadis give him thanks;
and looking on the Sword, perceiving it so well appointed, he drew it forth of
the sheathe, when it appeared so fair and goodly to him, as he said to
himself, that he never saw one of more perfection, then that belonging to King
Lisuart, and his own, which he dearly affected, as well for the goodness
thereof, as because he won it by the power of love, as we have formerly
declared in the second Book, in which respect, he would not leave it for the
best in the world. But seeing that this other weapon did well deserve, to come
to the hand of some worthy knight: he entreated the Prince Grasandor to accept
it, whereof he made no refusal.

As they were beholding the rest of the ^rmour, news was brought them, that
the eleven Roman knights were in the field, and there attended their coming
In regard whereof, eachman quickly armed himself, and the twelve knights rode
forth, accompanied with the King, and many other: but when Arquisil beheld them
approaching near, he thus spoke to his companions.

Lords, friends and kind companions, let me entreat ye to remember, that we
go to fight; not only to win land for the Emperor, or to maintain the
promise made by Garadan, but for the honor of the whole Roman Empire.
Moreover, I have spoke it, and once again do urge it, to permit me to combat
him, who yesterday had the victory of our associat. I see him come foremost,
and he shall be the first (I hope) overthrown: prepare then to meet them, and
make spare of no man.

So taking their shields, they marched directly against their enemies; who
perceiving them to come nere, placed their lances, as they ought, charging
manfully one another. Arquisil met the knight of the green Sword, so full
forward, that he brake his Lance upon him in many shiuers: but if himself had
not quickly caught hold by the main of his horse, the knight had laid him
along on the ground; for he met him with such a direct opposition, as he lost
his stirrops, and was quite out of his saddle. Afterward, perfecting his
carriere, he met with one of the other, to whom he gave so sound a salutation
on the height of his Helmet, as he disarmed him thereof. At the same instant he
was fresh charged by two together, and wounded so grievously in the thigh, as
he was near falling: whereat he grew so offended, that clasping hand to his
Sword, he gave so great a stroke to him that was nearest him, as if he had not
received it at his best advantage, he had been immediately slain thereby. But
the blow slyding by, lighted on the horses neck, and on the leg of his rider,
bearing them both together unto the ground.

When Arquisil saw that, he came behind him, and gave him such a stroke on the
Helmet, as made his eyes to sparkle fire: notwithstanding, he knew so well how
to revenge himself, that he cut off his left arm just at the shoulder. Then
began the fight to be more fierce then before, because they all came together
pell mell; and although Arquisil felt great pain by his so late received wound,
and lost his blood so extraordinarily; yet for all that, he gave the
bystanders apparent testimony, that his heart was unconquerable, and he still
maintained the fight, continuing as fresh and courageous as any of the rest.
Nevertheless, at length both he and his companions were so shreudly handled,
as the most part of them lay along on the earth, and himself found no means,
for enduring the sharp assaults of the knight of the green Sword, who
followed on him still so incessantly, not permitting him the least minutes
space of breathing, as he was well near unable to hold out any longer. Then
Grasandor buckled with him, and charged him so mainely with all his might, that
he instantly fell down in a swoune. Whereupon he alighted from his horse,
making show as if he meant to smite off his head. But the knight of the green
Sword persuaded him to the contrary, and going to him, took off his Helmet,
that he might receive air: when coming to himself again, he seemed not a
little terrified, when he perceived his death so nere; where-upon he craved
mercy of him. On my faith (quoth the knight) thou dyest, except thou yield thy
self. Alas, (said he) I submit to your mercy.

Then he took him up, and gave him assurance of life. At which very instant
came King Tafinor, who being joyful of so happy a victory, demanded of the
knight of the Dwarf, how he fared, and whether he were wounded or no. Sir,
quoth he, I have no wound so offensive to me, but I count it worthily received,
in regard that you are so honorably served. So mounting all on horseback, they
returned into the City, where the people stood in mighty crowds along the
streets, crying out aloud. Blessed be this good knight, by whom (if God be
so pleased) we shall have peace, and a final conclusion of war. In this
manner, they followed him to the Kings lodgings, where Chirurgions came to
visit him, assuring him (upon their lives) that in very few days they would
enable him to sit on horseback, if he would be ordered by their advice.

Now, in regard that all the Roman knights lay slain in the field, except
Arquisil, who was brought in as a prisoner: he entreated the knight of the
green Sword, to suffer him to depart thence upon his faith, that he might
carry home his dead companions, upon condition, that he would return to him at
all times, and as often as he pleased to command him.

Arquisil (answered Amadis) you are a Gentleman, and I am persuaded, that you
will perform what you have promised: go, and return hither again so
speedily as you can. So departed Arquisil, of whom our History now ceasseth to
speak, to tell ye, that within some few days after, the knight of the green
Sword, finding his hurts fully healed, and his body able to bear Armor, he
grew weary of longer tarrying with Tafinor, and finding him at convenient
leisure, he spoke unto him in this manner.

Sir, thanks be to our Lord, you are now in peace, and out of all troublesome
annoyances; wherefore let my departure be with your good lyking: for I am
determined to set forward to morrow morning, in pursuit of such good fortune,
as my fairest stars shall assign unto me. But thus Sir assure your self,
that wheresoever I shall abide, so long as I live I am your humble servant, as
the favor and honor you have done me, does justly bind me. How Sir knight
(answered the King) will you leave me? Are you weary of this Country, whereof
you only may dispose, and of my self also. I beseech you Sir, to accept it as
your own by due desert, and let me for ever be happy by your company.

Sir, (said the knight) I humbly entreat you to pardon me, and to believe, that
if it consisted in my power, (my earnest desire to do you any service
considered) I would yield to your request; but my heart by no means can permit
it. The King knowing that it was small reason to detayne him against his will,
said. To morrow morning I will tell ye more; first, we will hear Mass
together, and then if it shall like you to grant me one request, which I am to
demand of ye, you shall therein do me a singular pleasure. Sir (answered the
knight) you have such power in command over me, as (^mine own especial
intention reserved) I will not gainsay whatsoever you shall urge unto me.

I thank ye Sir, (quoth the King.) So, falling into other discourse, and night
drawing on, the knight of the green Sword, commanded Gandalin to make all
things ready, for departing thence the next morning by break of day. But as
he had a purpose to repose himself a while, the remembrance of his Princess
Oriana ouertook him in his private meditations, pressing him with extraordinary
passions, as he had no power to refrain from tears, speaking thus to
himself. Alas sweet friend, when shall I see the time, that I may once more be
so happy, as to embrace you in mine arms? Love, thou have lifted me to the
highest felicity, that ever loyal heart could attain unto. But how? look how
much my glory is unmatchable in favor, the like height it carries in
tribulation and torment; for the more desirous I am to see ye, the further of
still my cruel stars do send me. And that which is my greatest hell of all,
is a grounded fear, that my absence shall either betray me to forgetfulness,
or bring you to the entertainment of a new love.

Then suddenly he began to reprehend himself, saying. Whence should this
idle opinion proceed in me? Dear sweet, I have found you so firm and
constant, that I do commit a sin in thinking amiss of you.

And such is the assured proof of your fidelity, that the smallest sinister
doubt, is but mine own shame. For well I know, that as my whole life is
dedicated to your obedience, so you can never have just occasion to wish me
ill, or covet any unkind revenge on me, except you take your self to be
offended, in being more entirely and constantly affected by me, then any man
else in the world can do. And yet I cannot tell, whether Love be desirous to
punish me, because in disdaining all other, I made my self so wholly yours, as
many have been by me neglected, and discourteously refused.

But well I wot, that my thoughts are so familiar in your heart, and your
matchless beauty so divinely caractred and engraven in mysoule, as I may
assuredly resolve, that time will set a period to all oppressions, either by my
end, or your accustomed loyalty.

Spending thus the night in sighs and tears, even until the morning appeared,
he commanded Gandalin to rise, and being armed, he went to Church, where he
found the King at his devotions. Having heard Mass, the King took him by the
hand, and leading him somewhat aside, said.

My dearest friend, seeing you stand resolved to part from me, let me first
tell ye, that ye have a King and a kingdom wholly at your command, and
hereof take knowledge wheresoever you shall come. Me thinks you should
defer no longer, to let me know of whence and what you are; promising you,
upon the faith and word of a King, that by me you shall not any way be
discovered, except it may be done with your consent.

Sir (answered the knight;) let me entreat ye herein not to wrong me, for I
am minded never to disclose my self to any one, except by force I shall be
thereto compelled. Then you do me a great displeasure, quoth the King. God
shield me replied the knight, from offending so good and gracious a Prince: I
will rather dispense with my vow, and tell ye. Sir, I am that Amadis of Gaul,
Son to King Perion, whose name you remembered, when you agreed to the Combat
of twelve knights to twelve. By the faith I bear to God, (said the King) my
heart did always persuade me so, and rest your self assured, that this
knowledge of you is more acceptable to me, then any thing else whatsoever in
the world can be. Blessed be the Father and Mother, that have yielded the
world so worthy a man, by whom so many people have received both profit and
pleasure.

Now was the King much more desirous of his longer stay: but that Amadis most
instantly urged the contrary, whereto he durst not make refusal. Wherefore,
mounting on horseback, by a goodly company he was conducted forth of the
City, and there being commended to all good success: he took his way
toward Romania, seeking after strange adventures, as Fortune pleased to direct
him.

CHAP. VIII.
How King Lisuart hunting in the Forest, where he had left the Ladies,
accidentally met with a young Damsel, who showed him the way to the
Hermitage, where the good Hermit Nascian made his abiding: And how the infant
(long time after) was known to be the Son of Amadis and Oriana.

IN the gay season of Mayes flourishing month, King Lisuart having long
soiourned in one place, was entreated by the Ladies, that he would guide them
forth on hunting: whereto he very willingly condiscended, and presently
commanded his huntsmen, to prepare their toils in the next adjoining Forest,
and to erect their Tents by the Fountain of the seven Beech trees, which was
the most pleasing place in all the wood, and best agreeing with the time. Not
far off thence was the Hermitage, where Nascian the holy man nourished
Esplandian, as already has been declared to ye.

It happened on the same day, when the King had left the Ladies in their
Pauilions, he so long pursued a Heart, sore hunted and escaped from the toils,
that he was enforced to take up into the highest of the Forest, all along the
side of a great hill, very well covered with brakes and bushes. So soon as he
had attained to the top thereof, on the other side he espied a young
Gentleman descending hastily, aged (as it might be) about five or six years,
leading a Lyonnesse in a leashe; who seeing the Heart so hotly chased, he let
her loose after him, and she pursued with such speed, that she took him down
before the King. The young youth, glad of so good success, ran a pace to the
fall of the Dear, and another child that was his companion, where seazing on
the veneson, he took out a knife to cut his throat.

Then winding a horn very loud, two little Bratches, which ordinarily used to
follow him, came presently to him, and both they and the Lyonnesse, had their
fees of the game. This done, he took and coupled them in a leashe; and having
done the like to the Lyonnesse, crossed again overthwart the wood.

The King, seeing them make haste away from him, was very desirous to know what
they were, and coming forth of the place, where he had hid himself, to note
the behavior of these children, called to the young Gentleman, who instantly
stayed, until such time as the King came to him, using these words. Pretty
child, I pray thee tell me what thou art, and where is thy dwelling.

Sir knight (answered the youth, Nascian the Hermit has hitherto nursed me,
and (as I think) is father both to me, and this my companion. This answer
made the King very pensive, for he could not comprehend in his thoughts, that
Nascian (being aged and decrepit, as also reputed for a man of most sanctified
life) should or could have a child so young and goodly: wherefore, as one
covetous of further information, he demanded where the Hermitage stood. It
stands (quoth the youth) on the top of this Rock, and showing him a littly
path, lest him, saying. If it shall please ye to follow this tract, it will
guide ye thither: for I must needs after my fellow to the Fountain, where we
must dress the venison, which we have gotten this morning.

Then the King left him, and ascending up the Rock, espied on the height
thereof, the poor dwelling of Nascian, so environed with great bushes, as well
witnessed the wonderful solitude of the good Hermit. Alighting from his
horse, he entered into the first room, where he found the holy man upon his
knees, clothed in a religious habit, and reading in a Book of devotion, which
he gave not over at his arrival: but having finished his prayers, he arose,
demanding of the King what he sought for. Father, quoth he, not long since, as
I crossed the Forest, I met with a goodly child, leading a Lyonnesse in a
leashe, I pray ye (for courtesies sake) to tell me what he is: for, at the very
first sight of him, my mind gave me, that he is issued from some good place.

While the King continued on this speech, the Hermit so heedfully observed
him, that he knew him: as being the man to whom he had done many services,
during the time that he followed Arms. In regard whereof, falling down humbly
upon his knees, he craved pardon for his error, in not giving him such
entertainment, as beseemed so great a Majesty. But the King raising him up,
took him by the hand, saying. Good Father, will you not resolve me concerning
the young child which I mentioned to ye? Assure your self (upon my faith)
that the knowledge you may give me of him, cannot but redound to his great
benefit. Sir, answered the Hermit, our Lord has hitherto shown great signs
of love to that child; and seeing he has so carefully kept him, as I shall
relate unto ye, it stands with good reason, that you (as a King) should love
and defend him in such sort, as no harm or displeasure should be offered him.

You have (as appears by your speeches) an carnest desire to know what he is.
In truth Sir, during the time that I have nourished him, he may be termed
mine: albeit, it is not yet fully six years, since I took him from the teeth
of a Lyonnesse, that was carrying him to her whelps. Wherein our Lord
apparently declared, that he is the preserver of all his creatures, because
the beast never did him harm, but only suckled it among her young ones, so
that by the milk of her, and of a little Ewe, which then I had, I compassed
the means of fostring him for more then a month: In expectation still of mine
own Sister, Mother to the other young Lad that keeps him company, who
afterward coming to me, she became so good a Nurse and Gouernesse to him, that
(thanks be given to our Lord for it) I am persuaded, he is one of the
goodliest creatures this day living.

And one thing (more strange then all the rest) I am to tell ye: understand
Sir, that as I was about to baptize him, my Sister having taken off very rich
clothes, wherein he was swadled, she showed me a letter under his right pappe
as white as snow, containing the word Esplandian; and on the other side,
(directly against his heart) were other carracters as red as blood, which I
could never understand, because they are neither Latin, nor of our language.
Now in regard of that name, which at his birth (it seems) he brought with him
into the world, I have euer-more since, caused him to be called Esplandian,
accordingly.

In good faith Father, said the King, you have told me wonders: but seeing
you found him in such fort as you say, it is to be presupposed verily, that he
was borne not far off from this Country. That know not I, answered Nascian,
neither covet I to understand more, then what our Lord has permitted. Well
then, quoth the King, to morrow good Father, I pray you meet me at the
Fountain of the seven Beeches, where I shall be with my Queen, and a goodly
company of Ladies. Bring Esplandian, the Lyonnesse, and your young Nephew with
you, to whom I intend some good, for his Father Sergils sake, whom I sometime
knew to be a good knight. Sir, replied the holy man, I am bound to do what you
have enjoined me, and desire of God, that all may be to his honor and glory.

The King giving him the good morrow, rode thence, and arrived at his Tents
about midday. Now, because none there knew what was become of him, each man was
diligent in enquiry after him: and (although his most intimate familiars
desired to know where he had bin, yet would he reveal nothing, but commanded
to cover for dinner. As he was ready to sit down at the Table, Grumedan came
to tell him, that the Queen entreated him to see her Tent before dinner, about
some novel occurrences lately happening. Whereupon he went thence to her, and
being alone by themselves, she told him, that as they came ryding from the
City, a very beautiful Damsel, mounted upon a light ambling Hobbie, and
conducted only by a Dwarf, presented her self before her. And she being very
sumptuous in her apparel, rode by all my Ladies, and women, (^quoth the
Queen,) not vouchsafing one word to them, until such time as she came before
me: when she gave me this Letter, telling me, that you and I must read it
this day before dinner, because thereby we should be acquainted with
admirable matters. And no sooner had she spoken that word, but she rode away
from me so fast as her horse could gallop, without permitting me the least
leisure of any answer. So she gave the King the Letter, sealed with an
Emerauld chased in gold, with these words engraven about it; This is the Seal
of Vrganda the unknown. Then opening the Letter, the King read the contents
following.

The Letter of Vrganda the unknown to the mighty King Lisuart.
MOst high and powerful Prince, Vrganda the unknown, who loves and desires to
do you any service, does advise and council you to your great benefit: that
at such time as a Gentleman (nourishea by three diverse Nurses) shall appear
before your Majesty; you would embrace, entertain, love and dearly respect
him; for he is the cause of your quiet, by delivering you from the greatest
danger wherein ever you were. He is derived from blood royal on both sides,
and partaketh (somewhat) in the natures of those creatures that gave him suck.
By the first of them, he shall be so strong and magnanimous, as he will darken
all the valor of the very best Knights that have gone before: being
(nevertheless) so mild and gentle, that he will be loved and esteemed of all
men, occasioned by the nourishment received from his second Nurse. As for the
third, believe it Sir, that never was Gentleman of better spirit, more
Catholic, and complete in all good conditions: so that he shall addict
himself to actions pleasing to God, avoiding all vain affairs, wherein the
most of other Knights do commonly spend their time. And that which exceeds
all the rest; he will prove the only cause, of planting immortal peace
between you, Amadis, and all his Lineage. Therefore good King accept my
counsel, and you wall find it for the best.

Yours in all services, Vrganda the unknown.


These news drove the King to no little admiration, and but for the high
esteem he made of Vrganda the unknown, he should have given slender credit
thereto. But presently he called to mind, that this might be the child which
he found with the Lyonnesse: whereupon he said to the Queen; I dare assure ye
Madam, that this day I have spoken with him, of whom Vrganda writes unto us:
and to morrow he will be here with the good Hermit Nascian, who has revealed
strange matters to me.

Then he reported, in what manner he met him, and all that he had heard of the
Hermit: whereof the good Queen was not a little joyful, as well because she
should see the child; as to have some conference with the holy man, in cases
of Conscience, and to be confessed by him. Nevertheless Madame, (quoth the
King) I desire that you would not disclose this to any one, until such time as
he be in our presence.

Afterward, they went and sat down to dinner, talking of nothing all that
while, but what goodly Hearts and Hindes they had seen in the Forest. Then
came Galaor and Norandell with their venison, persuading the King to be early
sturring the next morning: for they had failed in the pursuit of a wild Boar,
the most huge and strangest that ever they had seen. But he made them
answer, that he had received certain letters from Vrganda, which he would
impart to them the day following, and prayed them therefore in the mean space
to cherish well the Hounds, till all were performed as he had determined.
Then rising from the Table, the King went and conuersed with the Ladies, so
spending all the rest of the day, until the hour of repose approached, when
each one withdrew to their lodgings: and on the next morning, having heard
Mass, each saluted other with the good morrow.

The day began to grow on apace, and the weather was so extraordinary warm,
that the Queen commanded the sides of her tents to be turned up, for better
receiving the fresh cool air. Then could she discern a goodly company of
Ladies, flocking together beneath the toils; in whose presence the King being
arrived (the Ladies and knights conferring on what they best affected) he drew
Vrgandaes Letter forth of his sleeue, which he had received the day before,
thus speaking to Galaor and the rest. Now will I show you an advertisement,
that was sent unto me yesterday, whereat (I think) you will no less wonder,
then I my self already have done. Then he read it out so loud among them, that
every one might easily hear it. Nevertheless, they could not presume what
this happy child should be, to whom destiny had promised such gracious
blessings: only the Princess Oriana excepted, whom it touched nearer then any
of the rest, not having (in so long time) heard of her lost Son. This was a
notice to raise suspicion in her, that this might be her child; whereupon, such
an biguous persuasions ouer-tooke her thoughts, that above ten times she
changed color: yet undiscerned of any there present; for they were all
attentive to the Letters reading, as also to the Kings speeches, who demanded
of Galaor, to know his opinion.

Sir, (said he) seeing that Vrganda has sent it to ye, we may well believe
that it will fall out so, considering the truth of those things, which so many
times heretofore she has foretold, and no doubt but God will so permit it;
for it would be the greatest to me, that ever can happen in all my lifetime,
to (...) fair a peace between you, my Lord Amadis, and all the rest of (...)
friends and kindred. Welcome be it, (quoth the King,) and as the will of our
Lord is, so let all be done. As he ended these words, afar off he espied the
good Hermit coming, the two young Laddes Esplandian and Sergil, with two
vanassours, kinsemen to old Nascian, in such order as I shall describe unto
ye. Esplandian had a great Hare, and two Partridges hanging on his shoulder,
which he had ^in with his Bow by the way as he came. Sergil led the Lyonnesse
in a leashe, fastened with a little cord, and these followed Nascian, and the
two other: the one of them carrying the Heart, which the Lyonnesse had kilde the
day before; as formerly has bin related, and the other led the two Braches
(belonging to Esplandian) coupled together.

When the Ladies saw the Lyonnesse so slenderly guarded, they were so afraid,
that they came all and sat about the king: who for their more assurance, said.
Let none be dismayed; for he that is master over this Lyonnes in power, will
defend us from a more dangerous beast then this is. I know not, said Galaor,
who has most command over the beast: but if she once wax displeased, the
Huntsman that leads her, will find those reins over weak, to rule and
control her at his pleasure. Why, (quoth the King,) she is in the conduct of
the holy man Nascian, therefore boldly let us go meet him. So each one arose,
and the King went and embraced the Hermit, saying, he was most heartily
wel-come. Then taking the old man by the one hand, and Esplandian by the
other, he presented them both to the Queen. Behold Madame, the very
goodliest Gentleman that ever you saw. Then Esplandian (e^ as fair
forwardness, as if all (...) lifetime he had bin brought up in the Court)
made her a very grac^s reverence, and presenting her his own carriage, said.
See here Madame, what hunting sport we have had by the way, which you may
dispose as best you please. Pretty youth, said the King, that power remains in
you only. No Sir, answered Esplandian, rather in you, or this Lady, to whom I
have already given it. Nay, quoth the King, she had much rather, that you would
divide it among her Ladies, according to your own understanding; then, if any
remain, we will expect our part.

As the King spoke these words, the Hermit cast his eye upon the child; who
fearing that he had committed some error in his talking, blushed so sweetly,
that very pleasingly it became him to behold, and pointing to the Heart, c^a^^ng
pardon of the King for his offense, said. My Lord, I humbly beseech you, to
accept this Heart as your own, and my Lady shall have this Hare: but these
Partridges are for the the other Lady standing by her. This he spoke of Oriana
his Mother, who darted such a loving look at him, as is easier for you to
imagine, then me to utter. How pretty Sir? said the King, will you give nothing
to these Gentlemen? I have no more to give, replied the child, but if I come
hither again tomorrow, I will bring them thus, such as I can get: in the mean
while if you be so pleased, you may let them be partakers of your venison.

All this young discourse was delivered with so good a grace, and such pleasing
life of gesture by Esplandian, that it procured much love and admiration
enterchanged with smiles and amiable regardes. In good sadness, said the King,
his gentle nature is not to be wondered at: for, by that which has bin
declared to me, by him who hitherto was his foster-father, fair destiny has
made large promises to him. Therefore good Father quoth he to Nascian, to the
end that every one here present, may understand the truth of his rare
fortune: I pray you once more to discourse, that wherewith you acquainted me
yesterday. Sir, answered the Hermit, it is now more then five years, since I
found the child in the mouth of this Lyonnesse, carrying it to her young ones
newly whelpt: and I am verily persuaded, that he was not then fully a natural
day old. Then he declared the manner of his swaddling clothes; what countenance
the Lyonnesse expressed, when she first gave him suck, and the care he had
all the while of his thus nourishing, in expectation of his Sisters coming.

All this discourse was diligently listened unto by Oriana, Mabtla, and the
Damsel of Denmark, well knowing (by the Hermites relation) that Elplandian
was (undoubtedly) the Son to Amadis and the Princess; which caused such
pleasing contentment in them all, that they knew not well how to dissemble it.
Old Father, (quoth the King to the Hermit) you told me yesterday, that seeing
our Lord had hitherto so graciously preserved the child, I ought to have care
of him in his following-dayes: wherefore, if it like you to leave him with me,
and his young companion likewise, I will cause them to be so commendably
educated, that (if God be so pleased) they shall both prove worthy men, and
good knights; and I desire that I may prevail with you in this request. Sir
(answered the Hermit) they are yours, seeing you are so desirous to have them:
and I will heartily pray unto our Lord God, to endue them with such grace, as
they may hereafter do you some acceptable service.

Then he gave them his blessing, with these words. My Sons, seeing the King
has done ye so much honor, to allow ye entertainment in his Court, take
pains to be obedient and pleasing to him. The good old man shed tears in
great abundance, during the time of this short sweet counsel: when the King
said unto him: Grave Father, make no doubt but I will so govern them, that they
shall become such men as I have promised ye. Then I beseech ye Sir, (said the
Queen to the King) that you would refer them to my direction, till they be
more fitting for your service: and your Daughter shall have Esplandian, and my
self will have care of Sergil. Be it as you please Madame (answered the King)
I commit them both to your disposition.

Thus the child was delivered into his own mothers governing, who accepted
him more gladly, then any gift in the world that else could have been given
her: and long time he continued with her, unknown to any, but those Ladies
that were best acquainted with her most private occasions. Now, before Nascian
departed thence, she would needs be confessed by him: whereupon (under shrift)
she gave him to understand, that Esplandian was son to her and Amadis, and in
what manner he was lost, by his carriage to nurse. Believe me Daughter
(answered the Hermit) our Lord must needs be offended with you, in offering
such injury to your own soul, through an inordinate and volupruous desire:
especially you being borne of so great parents, and ought to be a mi^ and
example to all the other people, above whom it has pleased him to advance ye.
Dear Father, (quoth she,) I know well, that I have most grievously sinned:
notwithstanding, that which I have done, was as a woman to her husband; for at
the instant, we affianced our souls mutually together. Hereupon she reported
how Archalaus had led her away, and how she was after succored by Amadis,
according as already has been related, in the precedent History.

Then the Hermit was reasonably well satisfied, accounting the offense so much
the less, being undergone with so good a condition: for after this confession,
the effect followed, because by this means, (though some long while before)
Nascian made peace with the King and Amadis, being on the very point of entering
into a sharp and cruel battle, as you shall understand more at large in the
fourth Book following. But Oriana having done penance, according as Nascian
had appointed her: he took leave of the King and the whole Court, to return
home to his Hermitage, taking the Lyonnesse along with him, and the King went
back to the City, to take order there for his further affairs.

CHAP. IX.
How the knight of the green Sword, being departed from King Tafinor of
Bohemia, came into the marches of Romania, where he met with Grasinda in the
fields, accompanied with many Gentlemen, Ladies and Damsels: Especially with
a Knight named Brandasi dell, who would compel him (by force of Arms) to come
speak with the Lady Grasinda, and of the Combat they fought together.

YOu have heretofore heard how the knight of the green Sword, departing from
King Tafinor, took his way toward the parts of Romania, where he made his
abode no long time, but had performed so many worthy deeds of Arms, that
every Province was filde with his praises. But it was not without mighty
sufferance of melancholy, by continual thinking on his Princess Oriana. It
happened upon one day among others, that crossing the Country, he arrived at a
Port or Haven of the Sea, whereupon was planted a Town, in the most pleasing
manner of situation that ever he had seen, it being called Sar^.

And because the hours of the day were not sufficiently spent, he would not
(as yet) make entrance: but turned his course on every side, to make the better
discovery at his own best advantage; where observing the Sea coaste, he
began to remember Gaul, from whence it was now above two years, since he
parted; which proved such an increasing of his ^^rrowes, that the ^^^res
trickled down his cheeks amain.

As he continued in this pensive humor, he espied a troop of knights, Ladies
and Gentle-women coming toward him: among whom there was one more beautiful
and goodly, (as it seemed to him) then any of the rest: for over her head was
borne a Canopie of white taffata, fastened to four rods of iron, to keep
her from the heat of the Sun, which was then very piercing and violent.

But because he took no delight at that time, to be seen in such company,
being so devoutly addicted to solitude: he kept off so far as he could from
all resort, that he might (with better disposition) think on the former
favors he had received in Great Britain.

Beholding this troop to draw nearer and nearer, he wandered aloof off: yet
was he not strayed so ^^^re; but he perceived a comely Damsel coming after
him, accompanied with a knight, that held a great Lance in his hand, which he
shaked so rudely, as if he intended to break it. The Damsel being hard at
hand, made her palfray get before him, leaving the other knight her guide,
behind, using these words to the knight of the Dwarf. Sir knight, yonder Lady,
whom I imagine you have taken little note of, has sent me to ye, desiring
that you would come speak with her, for your own good.

God defend her from al harms, (replied our sad knight,) albeit I have no
further knowledge of her. But tell me Lady I pray ye, what would this knight
have that came hither with you? Sir, (quoth she) let him no way procure your
distaste: only do what I have desired, and well will come of it. Assuredly,
(said he) if you will not tell me, I shall fail in fulfilling what you would
have. Seeing you are so earnest Sir, (quoih she) you shall be satisfied,
although it is much against my mind. Understand then Sir, that when my Lady
had espied you, and this Dwarf attending on you; because it has been told
her, that there was a strange knight in this Country, who performed such
actions of Arms, as no man possibly can do more, and goes always accompanied
as now you are: she is half persuaded that you are the man. In which respect,
she would gladly do you all honorable services she can devise, and discover an
especial secret to ye, which (as yet) she has not revealed to any person
living.

Now Sir, as concerning this knight, when he heard my Ladies motion, he made
her answer, that he would cause you to come to her by force or fair means,
which is very easy for him to do, in regard of the high chiualry remaining in
him; for his equal is not to be found in all these Countries: wherefore I would
counsel you to credit me, and go along with me.

Friendly Damsel, answered Amadis, I would gladly do more for your Mistress
then this: but I must first try, whether this knight can accomplish his
promise, or no. By my faith Sir, quoth she, I am the more sorry for ye;
because, so far as my weak judgment can reach, you appear to be a most
courteous knight. So she turned her palfray, and the knight of the dwarf
followed on his way, as before he had done.

When the other knight saw that, he cried out so loud as he could. Cowardly
and faint-harted knight, alight from thy horse, and lead him backward, using
his tail in stead of a bridle. Then come so, and present thy self to my Lady,
humbly craving her mercy, because thou did not follow her Damsel;
otherwise, I shall smite off thy head from thy shoulders; therefore make choice
of these two offers, which thou do imagine most honorable for thee.

Believe me Sir, answered the knight of the Dwarse, such service is better
beseeming you, then me; fall to it therefore, when you please. Is it even so
Sir? (said the other;) then I Will make ye do it, whether you will or no. So
placing his Lance in his rest, he made no doubt of foyling him, as he had
done many before. Nevertheless, our knight of the dwarf, omitting not the
least moment of readiness to receive him, gave the spurs to his horse, and met
the other (who was named Brandasidel) so full in the carriere, that he cast him
quite out of his saddle, and he lay in a trance upon the ground; but himself
was hurt a little in the throat, and finishing his course, he turned bridle
again for a fresh encounter.

When he saw Brandasidel lie so long upon the earth, he said to Gandalin.
Alight, and look if he be dead or not, and take from him his Shield and
Helmet. So Gandalin came to him; and as he was disarming him, Brandasidel
recovered from his trance; whereupon the knight of the Dwarf called to him,
saying. Villain, thou art dead, except thou perform that which thou would
have compelled me to done, a man utterly unknown to thee: for, seeing thy
self would make such a Law, it is convenient that thou should keepeit. As
Brand^l opened his eyes, he beheld the knight of the Dwarf, holding his
drawn weapon against his throat, looking steadfastly on him, and not uttering
one word. How? quoth our knight, have thou not the heart to speak? By the
faith I bear to God, thy head then shall give me a better reason. So
dismounting from his horse, and lifting up his Sword to strike; Brandasidel
cried unto him. Hold your hand Sir knight, for I will accomplish your command,
rather then dye in this vile manner. Rise then, replied the knight of the
Dwarf, and let me have it done immediately. Then Brandasidel arose, and called
his Squires to help him up on horseback, according as the knight of the
Dwarf had appointed him, sitting with his face backward, and holding his horse
tail in steed of a bridle, turning his Shield also the in side outward. In
this manner rode he to Grasinda, who seeing him come so honorably, could not
refrain from laughing, not any in her company, to see him thus worthily
corrected with his own rod. In which regard he was so ashamed of himself,
that he du^ not look up; but holding down his head like a micher, rode thence
away into the Town.

Now, the Damsel that was sent from this Lady to our knight of the Dwarf,
heard the words which passed between the two knights, and observed the manner
of their encounter, whereof as she was making report to her Mistress, the
knight of the Dwarf came thither, where humbly saluting Grasinda, he thus
spoke.

Madame, by that which one of your women told me, you have a desire to speak
with me. Indeed Sir knight, (quoth she) she told you nothing but truth; and
seeing it has pleased you to do me so much honor, you are most respectively
welcome. For, over and beside those miracles of manhood, which I have heard
(for truth) performed by you in these our marches: I was made acquainted (not
long since) with the extraordinary favor, which King Tafinor of Bohemia (my
Cousin) received by your means. In which respect, I must confess my self to
stand obliged to you, and do therefore entreat you (so far as my poor
power may prevail with you) to accept a lodging in my Palace, where your hurt
may be diligently attended: thus assuring your self, that to no place you can
be better welcome, nor receive speedier cure. Madame, (said he) perceiving in
what kind manner you have entreated me, let me persuade you to rest resolved,
that I will make no spare of my self in all perils of the world, to do you
any service: and therefore, reason strictly binds me, not to refuse your most
gracious offer, mine own necessity so much requiring it.

Thus rode they on toward the Town, conferring very kindly together: and
Grasinda seeing him to be so goodly and complete a person, instantly fell into
amorous affection. And let me tell ye, she was a Lady of most exquisite
beauty, young, delicate, well-spoken, affable, in the gayetic of her time,
worthy of the chiefest liking, as any Lady else could be, having lived in
marriage not fully a year, being now a widow, and without any child. But the
knight of the Dwarf had his thoughts elsewhere busied, the Idea of his Oriana
being continually before his eyes, by whose absence he endured extreme
passions: and yet notwithstanding, he knew so well how to conceal them, as the
cunningst eye could hardly make any discovery.

As they entered into the Town, the inhabitants (who had already heard of the
success between him and Brandasidel, who before had bin reputed the toughest
knight in all that Country,) thronged through the streets to see him, saying
to one another as he passed along: This were a happy fortune to our Lady, if
she might have this man to be her husband; for a more goodly person is no
where to be found, nor of greater valor. Being come to the Palace, and
conducted into a very sumptuous Chamber, he was there unarmed.

Then came Master Elisabet, a very excellent Surgeon, who having seen the
wound which he had received in his throat, said unto him. Sir, you are
wounded in a very dangerous place, and have need of long rest: otherwise, your
person will be in great hazard. Very sorry was our knight to hear these words,
and said to Master Elisabet. I will do whatsoever you will have me, provided,
that you promise me, (upon your faith to God, and your Mistress,) that so
soon as you shall see me in disposition, to endure travail, you will not fail
to tell me, because whatsoever I do, it is impossible for me to rest in any
quietness, until it please our Lord to permit, that I may be where my heart
desires to soiourne. Thus speaking, he fell into such a melancholy fit, as
tears issued abundantly out of his eyes, whereof he was much ashamed:
nevertheless, restrayning them so covertly as he could, he showed a more
cheerful countenance then before. And Master Elisabet said unto him: I pray
you Sir, use as little sadness as possibly you may, and I trust in God, in
very short while to see you safely cured.

Then were the Tables commanded to be covered, and Grasinda her self served in
person, persuading him very earnestly to be merry: and supper being ended, they
betook themselves severally to rest; but in steed of sleeping, he (according
to his wonted manner) began to remember his Oriana, in whom was his sole
delight and pleasure, entermixing (notwithstanding) those cogitations with
extreme torments and passions, which combatted continually one against
another, so that in the midst of this travail, at length he fell asleep. But
if love prevailed so powerfully in him, he was of no less might in our new
Love Grasinda, who being with-drawen into her Chamber, soon after, betook her
self to bed: when (suddenly) the comely graces and feature of our knight of
the green Sword, in lively conceit presented themselves before her, which
held so strict a command over her affections, as she had no ability to
contradict those impressions, so that she fell to this conference with her
self.

Alas, whence should proceed this idle fancy? The death of my late husband,
did so far estraunge me from this behavior, as I have many times solemnly
purposed, never more to come in subjection to any man living. Nevertheless,
this new come stranger who perhaps, makes no account of me^ has made such
stealth of my former freedom that I seele my self to be more his, then mine
own. And yet notwithstanding, if so fair a felicity might befall me, that he
would (...) himself Lord of me and my (...) never was woman more (...) to
Fortune; the ^are chi^ and rich virtues remaining in him, considered. But what
know I, whether his affections have another object, or no? Let come whatsoever
may happen, I will tell him my loves intention, and then (it may be) he will
take pity on me. But whence might ensue that extraordinary sadness, which
enforced tears from his eyes so abundantly, when Master Elisabet told him,
that his hurt would cause his long abiding here? If I could so compass it,
his Squire would therein resolve me: and (perhaps) prove the means, that the
more discreetly I may reach the ^hth of my purpose. To (...) I will attempt it,
if I can ^de him at convenient l^y^^re.

Thus spent she the nigh^ without any other resting. But when day came, she
sent one of her women, to know how her new Guest fared, and whether he had
taken good rest, or no: word being returned her, that he (...) awake.
Whereupon, she went to his chamber, and having given him the bon^, demanded,
how and in what estate he found himself? Well Madame, I thank God and you,
(quoth he.) In troth Sir, (said she) this night have I taken the worst rest,
that ever I did. How Lady, (replied our knight,) have you bin so ill?

Now, as she purposed to disclose her hearts oppressions, fear and shame,
inter-mixed with that modest bashfulnesse, which evermore held sovereign
dominion over her, had so closely locked up her lips, that she sat unable to
make him any answer. But she sent him such a heart-speaking look, as made her
^re complexion to alter; which our knight of the Dwarf well observed, but
imagining this weakness to proceed from some other occasion, he thus spoke.
Madame, seeing your disposition has bin so displeasing to ye, me thinks I
should not miscounsell ye, to go and lie down again, and sleep may come
upon ye better, then before. Let me tell ye Sir (answered Grasinda,) this
disease is too frequent with me, and will pass away (by Gods leave) as
sudd^ly, as he sent it.

She spoke this, to prevent all occasion of leaving his company, wherein she
spent the whole day, taking such delight in looking on him, as she had almost
forgot her self, that it was now a due hour to command her absence.
Wherefore, giving him the good night, she returned to her bed, where, if the
precedent night she took little rest, this that ensued, was much more
injurious to her, because incessantly she turned from one side to another, by
reason of this fiery love torment in her. So that, setting aside all other
cares, she concluded (without any further delaying) the very next morning, to
let the knight understand her martyrdom. And questionless, had he not bin
wounded, so violent was her extremity; that instantly she would have gone to
his bed. For, those delights and solaces, which (for less then a years space)
she had with her late husband, added fresh fuel to her flame, and was as
tinder to her oppressing passions: which at length so over wearied her, as she
fell asleep, and so continued till it was broad day.

Being up and ready; according to her usual custom, she went to see how her
knight did, more fearful then ever before ^shee had bin; and whereas in her
night fittes, she had resolved to acquaint him with her disquiet, Day had put
her on such a Robe of shame, as quite altered her determination. Thus for more
then a months space she continued in these agonies, till one day among other,
meeting with Gandalin at apt leisure, she thus bespake him.

Friendly Squire, in the love that you bear to God and your Master, let me
entreat to move one question to ye, concerning him, which cannot but return
to his great honor and profit, and by me shall not be discovered to any
living. Madame (quoth Gandalin) if your motion be within the compass of my
capacity, assure your self that I will resolve ye. Tell me then, sweet Friend,
(said Grasinda,) do you know of his affection to any woman, that may
contradict his love to another, if it should grow to such a purpose? Madame
(quoth he) it is but a little while as yet, since the Dwaife and I became his
servants; whereto nothing more incited us, then his admired virtues and
renown: And he has expressly forbid us, to enquire either of his name, or
any of his affairs: but to declare the fidelity of our duty, in knowing no
more then he thinks fit for us. But thus much I dare tell ye, that we have
already seen such valor in him, as you may well credit without all question,
that he is the best knight in the world.

Now, as Gandalin made a more ample relation of his Masters fortunes, she held
her eyes fixed on the ground, and (in sighing) showed her self so pensive,
that he easily perceived the love she bare to his Lord. But tell me then Sir,
I pray ye, (quoth she,) why did he fall aweeping the other day in our
presence. Truly Madame, said he, it is a matter continually happening to him,
and so often does he sighe both by day and night, that I marvel much how he
can live. Yet I know him to be such a man, and of so great spirit, that this
proceeds not from any dread of peril, or from any hazardous enterprise he can
undertake: whereby it may be easily presumed, that it is entire love and
affection, which he bears to some Lady that I know not. So God help me,
(replied Grasinda) I do believe as much, and highly thank ye for this
courtesy. Now, you may go to him, when you please, and heaven send him as
speedy a remedy for his hurts, as I could willingly wish to mine.

Having thus spoken, she withdrew thence into her Chamber, persuading her
self assuredly, that she was prevented in her hopes: where-upon, she promised
by all discreet means, to quench the fire already too much kindled.
Nevertheless, Love still gave a maine opposition, and fed her imaginations
with idle conceit, that (in time) she should hit the mark she aimed at. But
it fell out otherwise; for so soon as our knight felt himself able for Arms,
he commanded Gandalin to make all things ready, because he meant to ride away
the next morning.

At that very instant Grasinda came into his Chamber, where talking together as
they were wont to do, and falling from one discourse to another, the knight of
the Dwarse at last spoke thus. Madame, I feel my self so exceedingly well
recovered (thanks be to God and you) as I am purposed, so you be not
therewith displeased, to part from hence very early to morrow morning:
coveting nothing more in my defi^es, then to study how I may (during my
lifetime) best acknowledge the good and honor you have done me. Therefore
Madame, I most humbly entreat you, to consider with your self, if there be
any service that you shall please to command me, my employment therein shall
stretch so far as my life's extremity.

When Grasinda heard these words, she fell into such a heaviness, as she
could not return him any answer: nevertheless, at length she thus replied.
Knight of the green Sword, I make no doubt, but that your heart and tongue are
relatiues, the one agreeing with the others intention, as well for the good
which you say, you have received in my house, as for a matter of far higher
moment, which neither the time, nor your forward intent, will now permit to be
discovered.

Therefore, when the happy hour shall come best fitting me to urge my
recompense, assure your self, I will demand it so secretly of you, (without
either blushing, fear or shame) as you shall well perceive it to be a matter,
which I have hitherto kept concealed in my heart, and never revealed to any one
living. In the mean while, let me entreat you to tell me, which way you
purpose to direct your travail? Believe me Madame, answered our knight, I hope
in short time to be in Greece, as well to see the country, as the Emperor, of
whom I have heard many good reports.

Truly Sir, (replied Grasinda,) I wish all happy success to attend ye; and
I mean to provide a Ship for ye, and to furnish ye in such sort, as your
voyage shall be the easier performed. Moreover, I will give ye Master
Elisabet for your health and welfare, when any disaster or inconvenience shall
befall ye: with this promise, that if you find your body apt and able, you
shall come again hither to me within a years compass. Our knight had small
reason to refuse so great kindness; but in returning Grasinda most hearty
thanks, said. Madame, I were the most abject wretch in the world, and no way
worthy the name of knight, if I should not endeavor to acknowledge so many
gracious favors, as you have bestowed upon me; and I should think the wearing
of Arms far unfit for me, if either by dread of death, or any other accident
whatsoever, I should defer the fulfilling of what you have enjoined me. What
I desire (quoth she) to have you do for me, shall be respitted till your back
return, and it is no other thing, but what shall be for your honor and
advantage. Madame (said he) such is my confidence in your true appearing
virtues, that you will not use me in any other service. No, upon my faith,
(quoth she.)

Then she sent for Master Elisabet, to whom she gave charge for providing a
good Ship in readiness, and all necessaries else fit for travail, during the
knights voyage to Constantinople. Which he accomplished with such care and
diligence, as (the fifth day following) our knight taking leave of Grasinda,
went aboard with Master Elisabet. Hoysing their sails, they passed many
Islands of Romania, in the more part whereof he performed such rare deeds of
prowess; that his fame flew (in short while) through the whole Country. But by
reason he had no more then a years limitation, for his return to Grasinda,
the Mariners importuned him to more speedines: giving him to understand, that
it was impossible for him (making so many delays by the way) to finish the
voyage so soon: Whereupon he concluded, to land no more till he came into
Greece; and therefore launched forth into the maine: where (for this time) we
will leave him to speak of matters happening in Great Britain, during the
long voyage of Amadis.

It has bin told ye in the second Book, that Patin, being then no more then
a mean knight, without any great estate or possession, lived only in hope; to
be hereafter Emperor of Rome, when the death of his brother happened, who
had no procreated heir of his body. This persuasion, in respect of his love to
the Queen Sardamira, whom he most entirely affected, made him undertake the
voyage of Great Britain, where he was most honorably entertained by King
Lisuart, especially after he knew him to be the Emperors brother. There he grew
forgetful of his first love, beholding the beauty and comely graces of the
Princess Oriana, whom he requested in marriage of the King her Father. Upon the
answer made him, he determined to show himself among the most valiant
spirits, in search of strange adventures, and combatting all errant knights
he should meet withal. Crossing through the Forest, whereas then Amadis was,
despairing of ever seeing his Oriana any more (in regard of his banishment,
signified to him by Durin, brother to the Damsel of Denmark) he began to
sing the praises of the Princess, and to glorify himself in the love she
bare him in his opinion. At which time, Amadis and he fought together, where
Patin was conquered, and sore wounded in the head: in regard whereof, he
returned to Rome, without going back to King Lisuarts Court, leaving his
marriage in suspense till some other time.

But it fell out so well for him, that so soon as he was there arrived, the
Emperor his brother left his life, leaving him sole heir to the Empire.
Whereupon, he had far greater desire then before, to finish the affection he
had begun: hoping, by reason of the great dignity whereto he was now
advanced, he should the more easily compass his long-desired marriage. Which,
the sooner to effect, he sent Ambassadors to King Lisuart, with a new request
of his daughter in marriage: heereto were appointed Saluste Quide, Prince of
Calabria, Brondariel de Roce, the great Master, the Archbishop of Tarente, and
the Queen Sardamira, accompanied with a gallant troop of knights, Ladies and
Gentlewomen, to bring home the Princess Oriana, as they hoped. But matters
happened to another end, as hereafter more at large shall be related to you.

CHAP. X.
How within some while after the Knight of the green Sword had hoysed sail
into the maine Sea, and had quite left the Islands of Romania: By hard fortune,
he was cast upon the Devils Island, where he fought with a Monster, named
Endriagus.

THe Mariners having set their sails, with full intent for Constantinople; so
soon as they had lost sight of the Isles of Romania, the Sea exalted it self
in such sort, and grew to such a dreadful tempest, that, notwithstanding all
pains the Mariners could take, for best guiding and governing the Ship, it was
so tossed with contrary winds and waves, as very many times they were in
manifest peril of shipwreck. And being out of all further hope, safety not
appearing so much as in a glimpse of assurance: they attended only the mercy
of God, and continued in this extremity the space of 8, days, without knowing
where, or in what part they were. For the tempest of wind, hail and rain,
was so thick and continual, as it seemed that heaven and earth and the Sea
would meet together. But at length, the Ship was thrown on Shore about two
hours before day, and with such violence, as they feared it would be split;
for it was driven out of the Sea on dry land.

Notwithstanding, they sustained no harm at all, which gave them better hope
then formerly they had, so that when bright day appeared, they knew themselves
to be in the devils Island, which by reason of a strange Monster there
abiding, was so dispeopled, as no living creature repaired thither. Then a new
fear seized on them, and now they despaired of their lives more then before,
so that they were even ready to throw themselves into the deep: when the
knight of the green Sword demanded of them, what might be the reason of this
terror?

Alas Sir, (quoth they,) where do you imagine we are landed? what gulf, what
shipwreck could have been worse to us then this? Now we are in compass of
the Devils power, who in the form of a cruel Monster, ruinates all this
Country. How? said the knight, I see nothing yet that should thus amaze ye:
therefore tell me I pray ye, what devil or Monster is it, that works this
great despair in ye?

Then Master Elisabet (less dismayed then any of the rest) spoke for them al,
saying. Understand Sir, that this Island, whereon our disaster has brought us,
was not long since in the possession of a Giant, the most bloody Tyrant that
lived in all the Isles. he had to wife an honorable Lady, as wise, mild and
virtuous, as he was wicked and cruel: of whom he begot a daughter, named
Brandaginda, that was (in her time) one of the goodliest Ladies in the world:
And although many great Lords, and men of high merit, would gladly have
enjoyed her in marriage: yet notwithstanding, the rigor of the Giant was so
extreme, as he still kept them off, because by no means he would have her to
marry. In regard where-of, this Maiden increasing in years, and those desires
that would feign experiment, what happiness it was to live with a man, knowing
withal, that her father had set down his resolution, never to bestow her as a
wife on any man: prevailed so much by insinuating blandishments, and incestuous
demonstrances, that she drew him to affect her, and had his company carnally.
But that which was much worse, she machinated the death of her own mother,
that the more boldly, and without fear, she might live still in this horrid
incest, whereto the Giant gave quick consent. This Maid that was, perceiving
her self to grow great with child: one day, as her mother and she walked
together in an Orchard, passing by a deep Well, she thrust her therein so
rudely, as she brake her neck in the fall.

Now, because the people began to murmr, the Giant told them, that he
understood by three of his gods (one in the likeness of a Griffon, the other
as a Lion, and the third in the shape of a man) that of him and his daughter,
should be borne a creature, so much to be respected and feared through all the
Country, that none of his neighbors should dare to attempt any harm against
him. And under this color, he openly married his wicked daughter, who within
no long time after, was delivered of a Monster, in such manner as I shall show
unto ye. It was so full of hair on the face, feet and hands, as it appeared
to be a Bear, all the rest of the body was covered over with scailes, so hard
and strong, as no arro^ot from a Bow could pierce them* beside, they were so
broad and great, that they extended quite over the back, defending it like so
many Shields, so that no instrument of iron could enter through them. From under
them came forth arms, hands, legs and feet, with nails and claws so
piercing, like to them of a mighty strong Lion. His eyes seemed properly like
two burning coals, or brands, so red and sparkling, that in the night season
they seemed like two shining stars. And, that which was much more, his teeth
were so huge and sharp, that they would bite through and break the best made
Armor of steel.

By all these means, he did so many harms and mischiefs, that he brought
this Isle to be disinhabitable; especially because he could mount, leap and
run so speedily, as the very nimblest Heart in the world. And if at any time he
grew angry or offended (as it happened very often) in fighting with Bears,
Lions and wild Boares, he would send forth such a dreadful smoke from his
nostrils, as plainly appeared to be a duskie flame of fire, so loathsomly
stinking, as no living creature could escape infection thereby, which caused
every one to fly and shun him. When he yelled or howled, hemade such a
fearful cry or noise, grating his teeth in so strange manner, and clapping
his wings so hideously; as, to the very boldest courage, nothing could be more
dauntable. The people of this Sea, commonly called him Endriagus; as being held
and reputed by them, to be rather a devil, then any beast produced by nature.

Much amazed was our knight of the green Sword, to hear Master Elisabet make
this strange description; nor being able to comprehend any possibility, that so
horrid a thing could be engendered between man and woman. Except the ponderous
weight of a sin so monstrous, had in such sort alienated natural
disposition: that the soul fiend took the place of a reasonable soul, and so
caused this hellish procreation. Whereupon he demanded, why he was suffered to
live so long, and whether (as yet) he breathed there or no? I will tell ye
Sir, answered Master Elisabet, all such as have attempted his destruction, have
failed and finished theirliues most cruelly, Further-more, you must know, that
the Emperor of Constantinople, under whose subjection this Island always has
bin, has sent hither the greater part of his power, but all has proved to no
purpose. I marvel, (said our knight) why they did not kill him so soon as he
was borne?

Understand Sir, (replied Master Elisabet, that Brandaginda perceiving her
self to be great with child, the Giant her Father was not a little proud
thereof, as hoping to have such issue as his gods had promised him. And
hereupon, he caused three or four Nurses to be diligently sought for;
conceiving with himself, that seeing the infant should be so strong; reason
required, that his nourishing should be answerable thereto. But the mothers
time of delivering growing near, she began to feel the most bitter anguishes
in the world. Notwithstanding, the Giant and she took all in good part,
persuading themselves that those pains proceeded only from vigor of the
child: who at the time appointed) came so dreadfully forth of the mothers
womb, as all the women then present were amazed thereat. Nevertheless,
standing in fear of the Giant, they swadled it up in rich clothes, and gave it
to one of the Nurses to suck: at whose breast it drew so strongly, and without
any intermission, as, notwitstanding all her loud cries, he sucked the very
heart blood out of her body, so that she fell down dead on the floor. The
like did the second, and the third, all of the Nurses instantly dying, not only
by the poison issuing from him, but also by the violence he did unto them.
These tidings being sent to the Giant, in no little amazement, he went to his
gods, and having offered sacrifice according to his custom, he demanded of
them, why they had given him such a monstrous lineage? He that carried the
resemblance of a man, answered. It is necessary he should be such a one, that
as my works are strange and admirable, so should his be, and conformable to
mine, especially to destroy all Christians: therefore he has some semblance
of a man, to whom all things owe obedience. And I, (quoth the other) in favor
of thee, have given him the strength of a Lion to resemble me therein. That
which moved me, said the third, to arm him with wings, and sharpe-piercing
tallents or claws, was in imitation of my self, that as I partake in a
Griffons nature, so he should be Master and controuler of all creatures he
can meet withal. And let this suffice thee, without further sorrow for the
three women's death, that gave him suck but hence forward let him be nourished
with the milk of thy slocks and heardes, until it be the space of a year; at
which time, he will be so well formed, as he shall resemble us al three. In the
mean while, take heed (upon peril of thy life) that thou, thy wife, or any
other then she that must tend him, do see him; for else great harm will
happen to thee.

For this cause, the Giant (willing to obey the command of his gods) provided
diligently for all that they had appointed him; and so this deuilish Monster
(for a whole years limitation) was nourished and kept in a very close Chamber.
Which time being accomplished, and the mother understanding by her who had him
in governing, that he was grown great and strong, beyond all natural
capacity, had such an earnest desire to see him, as she caused the Giant to
yield consent. Entering both into the Chamber where he was nourished, and he
seeing his mother; suddenly leapt about her shoulders, and caught such hold
about her neck, that before his father could lend any help, he cruelly kilde
her. Whereat the Giant grew so enraged, that he ran on him to kill him, and in
casting a blow at him with all his might, the Sword rebounded back upon his
own leg, wounding it so deep, as in the extreme anguish he felt thereby, he
fell down to the ground, and there breathed his last. At the very same
instant, the Monster, being named Endriagus, finding the door of the Chamber
to stand open, flew thence into the mountains, leaving all them in the Castle
infected to death with his poison. Afterward, he did so many harms in every
place, that all the inhabitants were glad to forsake the Country, or else to dye
the death. Thus you have heard, how this Isle has remained desert for the
space of forty years, and so long is it since this hellish Monster has here
lived in this manner.

By my faith, answered our knight, you have told me wonders, wherein our Lord
has plainly declared, what long patience he has used, in expecting amendment
for the sins of men; but finding them obstinate and too hard-hearted, he has
continued this severity of vengeance. Nevertheless, I am not to part away from
this place, until I have fought with this Endriagus: hoping assuredly, to
revenge the wrongs he has done to so many, and to replant this Isle again with
people, that may religiously serve God. And because the day was well near
spent, he put off his purpose till the morning, his company being minded not to
leave the Ship, because their fear still continued, beholding the sea and
tempest nothing appeased, but rather increase more and more, by the Monsters
houering over the Island, and especially by the place where the Ship ancred.
Night being ouerpast, and the bright morning appearing, he called for his
Arms, and afterward heard Mass devoutly: then summoning them of the Ship
about him, he thus spoke. Loving friends, I will go directly to the Castle to
seek the Monster: where (if it so please God) I may have the victory over him.
And because it appears to me, that in two or three days we shall hardly put to
Sea again. I intend, if I find the Castle as yet habitable, to come again
hither for ye, that you may remain in safe security, until the weather be more
calm. So mounting on horseback, and taking none but Gandalin in his company,
they ascended up the Rock, where presently they espied the Fortress, and
ryding thither to it, found neither man or beast living in it. Hereupon after
they had thoroughly visited it, and found it to be strong and wel-defenced, they
returned to them in the ship, and causing them to bring victuals thither for
three days, commending them all to God, he said.

Stand upon your guard so well as you can, for I must go to effect mine
enterprise: thus aduising you, that if I have good success, Gandalin shall
wind his Horn to ye, and give you assurance thereby, that Endriagus is dead,
and I living. But if the contrary happen to me, there shall be no need of any
signal to ye, because you will know it soon enough. In the mean while, pray
to GOD both for me and your selves.

So setting on his way, he left them sad and mourning, for the small hope they
had of his returning. But their grief could not be compared to that of Ardan
the Dwarf, who being compelled to leave his knight, by a seueare command
imposed on him, made such ruefull moan, as every man took compassion on him.
Alas, (quoth Ardan,) am not I the most miserable wretch in the world, that when
I have most occasion to follow my Master, never having forsaken him before in
all my life, he should now forbid and prohibit me, as if I were a mere
stranger to him? Then Master Elisabet called them all to prayer, while our
knight and Gandalin were thwarting the Isle among brakes and bushes, and
finding nothing. But Gandalin was so pensive, as his Master, perceiving him to
weep, said unto him. Ah Gandalin, it appears by thy countenance, that being
with me, thou art afraid to dye: I pray thee, kind Squire, return back to
the rest, and there expect what shall become of me. If these tears proceed
from any doubt in thee, that I cannot prevail against the Monster, assure thy
self, that the hope I have in the mercy of God, and the remembrance of my
Lady, who now (even at this very instant) presents her self before mine eyes,
does arm me with such strength, as I am able to fight with the devil
himself, if I could find him. For my mind persuades me, that I see her in
the danger of Endriagus, and that I am come hither to defend her: Ah Gandalin,
can thou imagine, that I would suffer her to be offended or outraged,
considering, that on her, my life and best happiness does only depend?

So pausing awhile, he then began again thus. Do not thou know (my loving
Squire) that she has caused all the tears which have bin shed by me, and
greater perils already past, then this can be? Believe me, Gandalin, I feel my
forces newly redoubled, and my hopes a thousand times more increased, in but
thinking of her, as I have told thee. Then set aside all fear, and cry and
call as loud as thou can, that Endriagus may hear thee, and come hither to
us quickly, if he be in those parts. And one thing I do most earnestly
entreat thee, to wit, that if I dye in this attempt, thou would compass
some means, to carry my heart to my Lady, which is entirely hers, and tell her
I sent it, that we appearing before God, he may judge, that I present her
nothing, but what is her own as well as mine.

When Gandalin heard these words, his heart was shut up in sorrow, as he was
ready to fall in a swou^e: desirous rather of his own death, then (with pain)
to accomplish what his Master had commanded him. And as they insisted upon
these terms, they saw Endriagus come forth of a hollow Rock, casting from
his eyes and throat flames and smoke so noisome, as all the air thereabout was
infected therewith. So soon as he had espied them, he came toward them,
hissing and snoring in most admirable manner: notwithstanding, it could not
daunt our knight a jot, but he boldly marched to meet him, while Gandalin ran
to hide himself, fully persuaded, that his Master could never escape from such
a furious beast. Our knight perceiving that he could by no means cause his
horse to come nere him; quickly dismounted on foot, and taking his Lance in
both his hands, aimed therewith so courageously at Endriagus, that (by great
good fortune) he gave him a thrust in the left eye, and put it quite out. Then
Endriagus gave a horrible dreadful cry, and arising up on his hindmost paws,
caught hold on the Lance so strongly, as, intending to break it between his
teeth, he took it so far into his mouth, that our knight espying so apt an
advantage, by advancing it forward as occasion served, he wounded him both in
the tongue and throat, and left a part or tronchion thereof sticking fast
between his teeth. Nevertheless, he gave a great leap, purposing thereby to
surprise the knight: but he avoided it by stepping aside, and drawing forth
his Sword, gave him a manfull stroke therewith on the right shoulder, which
proved to no purpose; for he might as well strike on a rock or anuile.
Endriagus got hold of the Sword with his teeth; but by reason of the sharp
steel, and part of the Lance troubling his throat, he could not keep it as
he intended. And that which hindered him most of all, was his great effusion of
blood, which ran in such abounding measure down his throat, as he was
scarcely able to draw any breath.

At length, he rent our knights Shield from about his neck so rudely, as his
hands were his best helps, to keep him from the ground; and as he strove to
break it in pieces, our Knight having recovered himself, taking his Sword
fast in both his hands, smote on the top of his head but it entered no more then
into a mount of Adamant.

Then he persuaded himself, that except Heaven gave him assistance, he merely
labored in vain: for he saw no place else where to hurt him, but in the other
eye, which with great care) he kept and defended. Hereupon our knight made all
his aim at that side, and proved so happy in his blow, that lighting on his
snout, it entered into one of his nostrils, (which were great and wide staring)
so far, that it pierced the brain extremely. This made Endriagus so mad,
that he got our knight fast about the body, and with his sharpe-pointed
claws, tore his coat of maile, yea, and entered through the flesh to the bone:
when questionless he had quite killed him, but that his own blood so
ouerstifled his stomach, that, letting loose his hold, he fell down
back-ward. And as he rendered his spirit, the devil came out of his body,
causing such a clap of thunder, as all the whole Island shook with the sound
thereof.

This noise being heard by them in the Castle, they persuaded themselves
thereby, that their knight was then at the Combat: and albeit they were in a
safe and well-defenced Fort, yet the best and boldest man of them all, was
overcome with extraordinary fear.

Endriagus being thus vanquished, our knight rose very faintly; and purposing
to go find Gandalin, (who was then coming toward him) he fell down again
in a swoune, by a little perling brook, that descended from the mountain.

Then Gandalin (imagining his Master to be dead) fell into most doleful
lamentations: but coming near him, he beheld him to breath: whereupon he
unarmed him. Then recovering his spirits, called to Gandalin, saying. My dear
Friend Gandalin, now thou shall see the ending of my days; let me entreat
thee, by the kind nourishing which I received from thy father and mother, that
as thou have been loyal to me in my life, thou will continue so in death, and
so soon as my vital spirits have forsaken me, to take out my heart, and bear
it to my dearest Mistress. Tell her Gandalin, that as it veelded it self hers
the same day I first saw her, and ever since has continued better and better
in her service, while it was locked up in this breast, or sad habitation, never
wearied in any obedience to her: that she would be pleased so to receive it
now, in remembrance of him that kept it for her; and in so doing, I believe
that my soul shall have the happier rest in another world.

As he meant to speak more, words failed him, and again he swonded. Then
Gandalin (without staying to answer him) mounted on the top of the Rock, and
winded the horn which he carried (to give signal of the death of Endriagus) so
loud, that Ardan the dwraff, who was then on the highest of one of the Castle
Towers, easily heard it. Whereupon he ran down presently, to acquaint
Master Elisabet therewith; desiring him to make haste to his Master, who
(perhaps) stood in great need of his help. Master Elisabet, having all
things in a readiness, mounted on horseback, directing his course as fast as
he could ride, toward the place where he still heard the sound of the Horn.
Not long had he iourneyed, but he espied Gandalin, who coming to meet him,
cried out afar off: Alas Master Elisabet, Endriagus is dead: but if you
provide not the sooner for my Lord, he is gone likewise. How man quoth he?
Alas, said Gandalin, he has already lost so much blood, as he is not a ble to
speak a word.

Very sad and sorrowful was Master Elisabet at these news, and ran quickly
to the place where the Knight lay, so weak and over spent as he had no motion
of his pulse: yet his eyes were wide open, wherefore to comfort him, Master
Elisabet said. How Sir Kinght? will you declare such debilitie of courage,
having brought to end so great and glorious an interprise? do ye not know,
that I am hear to make you sound and well again, so soon as pleases God.
When the Knight heard him, he strove to make answer, but could not. Then they
laid him softly upon a cloak, and having wholly unarmed him, Master Elisabet
viewed his wounds; which he found to be so many, and dangerous, as he stood in
great doubt of his recovery? Nevertheless, he resolved to perform so much as
possibly he could, and instantly applied so sovereign unguents: as both
stanched his bleeding; and so assawaged all vigor of pain, that his speech
came to him again, when with a very feeble and low voice, he thus spoke.

Oh, my Lord God, who to redeem me took human flesh, in the blessed
Virgins womb, and afterward did suffer a most dolorous and painful
Passion: take pity on my soul, for I well know, that my body is no better
then earth. Truly Sir, answered Master Elisabet, you have good reason to
reco^mend yourself to him, considering that (by his assistance) you shall
receive the speedier help. As he ended these words, there arrived diverse of
the Mariners, who taking him up gently in their arms: conuayed him thence to
the Castle; where laying him in his bed, he was so void of allhis senses, as
he felt not any thing was done to him. Thus he continued all night,
complaining continually, as one that endured much, yet without uttering any one
word, till about break of day he fell asleep.

Hereupon, Master Elisabet commanded all to avoid the chamber, to prevent any
noise for offending him, and sat down close by him, till he heard him wake,
and cry: Gandalin, Gandalin, shield thy self from this devil, so cruel and
dangerous. In good faith, Sir, replied Master Elisabet; if you had been as
safely shielded as he, your health were the surer, and your recovery the
lesser.

At these words, our Knight opened his eyes, and knowing Master Elisabet, said
unto him; Oh, Master, where are we? Where? quoth he, in such a place, where
you shall do well enough, by the grace of God. And perceiving his Fever to
have left him, he brought him food to eat, and was so diligent in care over
him, that (before night) he recovered his memory perfectly, and began to
know and speak to every one.

Master Elisabet seeing all danger to be well quallified; both he, and all
the rest gave thanks to God for it, and continued still so respective of him,
as he grew hourly better and better: notwithstanding for twenty days he
kept his bed, without any ability of rising. At length, Master Elisabet
perceiving that (without any great peril to the his person) he might endure
the Sea, especially his Feauers beginning to forsake him: one day as they sat
devising together, he said, My Lord, thanks be to God, you are soundly
recovered, and (in mine opinion) when best shall please you, you may go aboard
your ship: whereto (I so much the rather counsel you) because our victuals
grow so short, that if we dislodge not hence the sooner, we shall be quite
emptied. My loving friend, answered our Knight, I may justly say, that next
unto God, you are the man to whom I am most beholding, delivering me from the
great danger wherein I was. And let me assure ye, that so long as my soul
lives as a guest in this body, you have a Knight ready to be employed for
you, without reservation of hazard or peril whatsoever: for you have done so
much for me, (I being none other then a silly knight, destitute of all means,
my best means consisting in a poor, broken and battered armor:) that while I
shall enjoy a day of life, you may worthily acknowledge it to be yours.

My Lord, answered Master Elisabet, you say what pleases you of your self,
but howsoever, I account my self the happiest of all other professing my Art;
that under Gods assistaunce, I have saved the life of the best Knight that ever
backed a Courser: which I dare publicly avouch; you having attempted and
finished matters incredible to common judgments. So that I am well assured,
from this time foreward, many that have endured shames and injuries, must
expect help by our means, whereas otherwise, they shall remain miserably
without any hope. Therefore Ibeing borne to be the poor occasion of so great a
blessing; do account my travel more liberally recompensed, then if I had all
the wealthy treasures of the world together.

Worthy Friend, quoth our Knight, leave these commendations to some other, on
whom (happily) they may be more deservedly bestowed; and council me I desire
ye, in the business I have undertaken, as I shall make it further known to ye:
you are not ignorant, that in no mean grief and heaviness, we parted from
the Isle of Romania, and by importunity of the Mariners only: we set sail for
further passage, as purposely bound for Constantinople, but that winds and
tempests have quite altered our course. All which notwithstanding, for any
peril I find in my self, my mind varies not a jot from my first
determination: so that if you can allege no contradiction, I am more ready
then ever, to adventure the Sea for Greece, where I would gladly see the
Emperor, and some singularities of the Country, which are no common matters
to our knights of Gaul.

Therefore, if you be as well contented, let us away for that part: our return
to Grasinda always remembered, at all times, when you please, and according to
promise at our parting.

CHAP. XI.
How the Knight of the green Sword made known to the Emperor of
Constantinople, (to whom the Island appertained, where he slew the Andriagus)
the great fortune and victory he there obtained: And of matters happening to
him afterward.

WHen Master Elosabet heard the mind of our knight of the green Sword, which
evermore was bent toward Constantinople, he said. Trust me my Lord, I think
it expedient then, that you should first write a Letter, to give advertisement,
that by your means; but more especially, the grace of our Lord assisting, you
have delivered this Country from the devils slavery and subjection.

Dear Friend (quoth the knight) I understand, that you have been known to
him a long time, but me he has never seen: therefore do you write such a
Letter, and according as your self shall best devise it. Whereto Master
Elisabet willingly consented, and instantly wrote at large to the Emperor, all
the adventures happening to our knight, since they departed from Grasinda:
especially (how miraculously) he had fought with, and conquered Endriagus, a
Monster more diabolical then humane. Desiring him, in the knights name, to
send people to replant, so desert a place, and to let it be called
thence-forward, Saint Mary Island.

So giving the Letter to a Squire his kinseman, he commanded him to go to
the Emperor, and to return again so soon as possibly he could with
provision to revictuall their Ship.

Being embarked, the wind sat so prosperously for him, that on the third day
following, he arrived at Constantinople, where the Emperor then being: after
such reverence done as best beseemed, he presented him the Letter from Master
Elisabet, saying.

Sir, Master Elisabet your most humble and affectionate servant, has sent you
this Letter, whereby (I hope) you will receive no mean contentment. Then the
Emperor took and read it, being mightily amazed, to understand that Endriagus
was vanquished, which caused him to speak thus out aloud Before GOD, here are
very strange tidings. In the presence then (among many others) were two Princes
his most familiars, the one named Gastilles, son to the Duchess of
Garastra, his sister; a Knight esteemed among the best, and Count Salender,
Brother to the fair Grasinda: taking them aside, he showed them the Letter
from Master Elisabet.

After much admiration among them all, the Emperor said. The Knight of the
Green Sword, of whom so many high praises are reported, has slain the
monster Endriagus in single fight: and because this messengers own eyes are
witnesses thereof, I pray you let him make relation of what he knows. Upon my
faith, answered Gastilles, verily, it is a matter hardly to be credited, that a
mortal man should combat a Devil with a Sword: I think it was never read
nor heard of before. Wherefore if it be so, as Master Elisabet has written to
ye, and that such a man has so much honored ye, by coming into your
Country, you ought to give him the best entertainment can be devised. Let me
tell ye, quoth the Emperor, what I have determined. I think it not much
amiss, that you, and Count Salender should first go to him, even to the
Island where (as yet) he remains sickly, and conduct him in the best manner
you can imagine: taking along with you such victuals and other necessaries, as
is convenient for such a purpose. But above all the rest, forget not to take
some excellent Painter with you, to draw in natural figure that horrible
beast: because there is no possibility of bringing him hither, yet we would
have his proportion so near to the life as may be. For it is my purpose, where
he has been conquered, to erect a high Pillar of brass; on the top whereof
shall be advanced the Knights Figure that fought with him, and the Monsters
also, in lively shape: with so ample a description in golden Charracters
engraven thereon: that all succeeding times may know this famous Action. In
which respect, I pray ye to use your speediest diligence, for I shall never
rest in quiet, until herein I am fully satisfied.

The two Princes, knowing the Emperors will, took so good order for their
shipping, as very early the next morning they were embarked: when hoysing
Sail, with apt and prosperous winds, in few days they landed in the Isle,
Saint Marie: so newly called, at the request of the Knight of the Green Sword.
He being advertised of their arrival, went to meet them; doing them all the
honor that the time and place could permit: especially to Count Salender,
knowing him to be brother to the beautiful Grasinda. And although he looked
somewhat wanne and meagre, by reason of his long sickness: yet our Grecians
reputed him to be one of the most complete Cheualiers, that ever they had
seen. Whereupon, after ceremonious welcoms ended on all sides, Gastilles
taking him by the hand said: Sir Knight, Mine Uncle, the Emperor, has sent us
expressly to you, to thank you (in his behalf) for the great good you have
done to this whole Country, which has so long time layen wast and ruined.
Moreover, for the earnest desire he has to see you; he entreats you by us,
to pass (with what convenient speed you may) toward Constantinople, where
he will welcome you according to your due merit.

Lord Gastilles, answered our Knight, I have so often heard of the Emperors
goodness and magnifice^ce, that although I never saw him: yet am I earnestly
desirous to do him any service: and to be employed as he shall please to
command me. I must further entreat you, said Gastilles, to let us see the
Monster Endriagus, that his lively portraiture may be taken by an expert
painter; which for the same purpose, is sent hither with us. Here is Master
Elisabet, said our Knight, and Gandalin my trusty Squire also, who was present
when I fought with the beast; they can easily conduct ye where he lies. But I
fear his body is so infectious, as you will hardly be able to come near it.
Let us make trial of that, replied Count Salender, to give the better report
to others, how, and in what manner we found him. Our Knight perceiving their
unalterable desire, prayed Master Elisabet to guide them to the place where
he was assailed, and to let them know the truth of all.

So they mounted on horseback, for it was somewhat far from the Giants
Castle, and (by the way) Gandalin reported to them, the manner of the sights
beginning, the doubt he had of it, and little hope or expectation of his
Masters return. And in this time of conference they were come to the place,
where Endriagus lay so stinking; as if Master Elisabet had not formerly given
them excellent preservatives, they had been in great danger of their health.
But by this means they might come the nearer to him; while the Painter drew
his Figure so artificially, as nothing was wanting but life it self. But the
more they observed him, the more they found the adventure to be: so that no
just comprehension could have been made of the substance, except their eyes
were real witness.

Afterward, they returned back to the castle again, and soiourned there with
our knight three days, visiting the Isle in every part: and the day following,
they took shipping thence, with so good a gale of wind, that they took landing
in the port of Constantinople not long after.

The Emperor having intelligence thereof, sent Chariots and horses, for the
Knights more honorable conuoye to his Court: and himself, accompanied with a
goodly Train of Princes, and great Lords, rode in person to meet him. Our
Knight offered to kiss his hand; but the Emperor embraced him, telling him,
that he was heartily welcome, as he that justly deserved by his valor, to
hold rank among the greatest Lords of the world. For if I (quoth he) and such
as resemble me, are constituted in the preeminence and authority of Emperors
of Kings: it comes to us by the means of our Predecessors, when got and
conserved such fortune for us: but you having performed such rare deeds of
Chivalry, are not only worthy of an Empire, but even of the Monarchy of the
whole world, and that merely by merit.

You have power, mighty Prince, answered our Knight, to paint me in what
colors you please: not withding, all that I am or can be, is no more then
your humble vassaile and servant; and would it pleased God to afford such
means, as might express my earnest love to you, in any serious or importa^t
service. So ceasing, the Emperor walked along with him to a chamber which he
had caused to be prepared for his lodging: being so fair and sumptuously
furnished, as never had the like bin seen: except that belonging to Apolidon,
in the Firm Island. The Emperor withdrawing, left him accompanied with
Gastilles, and Count Salender, and went to the Empress giving her to
understand; that the Knight of the Green sword (so much renowned through the
world) was come to Court: To whom he purposed all the kind entertainment could
be devised.

And therefore Madame (quoth he) be not sparing toward him in the very best
graces may be affoorded: commanding your Ladies so to deck and adorn
themselves, that it may move his desire to continue in our Court. For beside
his repute and estimation, of being the very best Knight in the world, and
bringing under awe and obedience, that goodly Island, so long time dispeopled:
I am undoubtedly persuaded, that he can be none other, then some great Lord
disguised, for his better veiwe of strange Princes estates; therefore let me
commend him to your very choycest respect. My Lord (quoth she) seeing it is
your pleasure; I will not fail in effectual performing what you have
commanded me.

By this time it waxed and grew somewhat late, and our Knight finding himself
not half current, after his sailing on the Sea: departed not out of his
chamber till the next morning, when having bin with the Emperor at Mass, he
brought him afterward to see the Ladies, all of them giving him most gracious
welcome, Especially the Empress. But he fell on his knee before her, to kiss
her hand, and as she took him up, he said: Madame, among all the blessings
of heaven bestowed upon me, I esteem this one of the chiefest, to have the
means of seeing the magnificence of the Emperors Court (famous in all places
of the world) and that with such affable looks and entertainment, as I take no
little care, how, or which way my power can ever stretch it self, to
acknowledge this favor by any dutious service. And I would I could tell you in
good Greek Language, how much I am, and desire to be, wholly yours, but the
slencer power I have in this country, may excuse my ill speaking, and refer
to full effect any thing wherein you please to command me, and that shall best
witness my good will. Knight of the Green Sword, said she, the Emperor has
long time desired to have your company, and wishes with all his heart, that
your mind were answerable to his, for your continuance still here with him.

So falling out of one discourse into another, the Empress being wise, and
curious in understanding all Novelties, especially the qualities and fashions
of strange remote Countries, enquired many matters of him; whereunto he knew
how to answer, with so good a grace and discretion: that she said within her
self, it is impossible, but he must be of as great prowess as prudence. All
this while the Emperor entertained the Queen Menor^ssa, and other of the
principal Ladies, to whom he said: Can you give such welcome to our new
Knight, as may make him ours always heer^ after? It may be sweet Ladies, that
therein you should perform so famous a conquest, as never any beauties did the
like: for I have credibly heard, that infinite dangers of death can never daunt
him, to maintain all their rights that request it of him. In good faith,
answered the Duchess, mother to Gastilles, we are all then highly beholding
to him, seeing he is so ready to use his Sword, and stand as defense for all
such as are in need: no doubt, but Heaven will be his help, in defending him
from all harm, and increasing his great renown.

Then came Leonorina, the only daughter to the Emperor, with the two daughters
to Barandel, King of Hungary (...) who was so rich in beauty, and all choice
perfections, that she seemed a rare pearl among the very fairest Princesses of
the world. And that which most of all did illustrate her rarities, was her
extraordinary wisdom, and delicate carriage: in regard whereof, every one
took delight to behold her, but much more to keep her company. Having done a
gracious reverence to the Emperor, and afterward to her Mother, she sat down
at her feet. Then our Knight looking on her, remembered when Oriana was left by
King Lisuart in SCOTLAND, being then about her age, at which time, Love
deprived him of his liberty, and gave him wholly as her servant. Immediately,
all the favors of amity, and gracious entertainments, since their first
acquaintance, presented themselves to the eyes of his soul, and his affection
being no way weakened or impaired, (either by length of time, or distance of
place) but rather much more increased, threw such a sudden amorous affliction
upon him, that he was wonderfully pensive, and in this melancholy fit, he thus
spoke to himself silently.

Oh happy prison, which (by good reason) took my spirit captive, for more
admittance into greater liberty! Oh sweet death, occasion of a double life! Oh
quick remembrance, that can keep such an affectionat ^oue so covert! Poor
Amadis, far off from thy lovely felicity, what can thou hope for
hereafter? would thou hinder the issue of thy life, whereby thou may be
rid of so many miseries? Ah Oriana, the true exemplary of all virtue, thy
absence is so grievous to me, as I can never hope to recover joy.

With the conclusion of this private imparlance, he breathed forth a
loud-speaking sigh; which the Emperor perceiving, became full of marvel,
thinking some strange accident had befalne him. But instantly, they noted a
cheerful reviving of his spirits, and his looks to be as fresh and fair as
before: yet as ashamed of his souls sudden rapture in this kind, to lay his
passions so open to every eye, the new tincture in his countenance gave evident
testimony. This raised a more earnest desire in the Emperor, then before, to
know whence such a sudden unexpected mutation should proceed, urging the
opinion of Gastilles therein. Trust me Sir (quoth he) I am not able to judge in
this case, but ratherstand as one confounded, to see, that such a man as he is,
should declare so little discretion in such an assembly. Assure your self
(replied the Emperor,) this passion proceeded from some intimat affection, to
her that has the highest command over him. It may be so, answered Gastilles,
but to clear all doubt, let M. Elisabet be questioned in this case. Then was he
called, and the Emperor said to him. Elisabet my long-loued friend, I am
desirous to know one thing of you, which I charge ye (by the faith you bear to
God) to resolve me in if you can. And I swear to you upon my soul, that by
me it shall never be discovered. Sir, answered Master Elisabet, you may well
persuade your self, that I will not lie to a personage of your greatness, but
will tell you freely any thing I know. Can you (quoth the Emperor) yield a
reason, why our new-come knight both sighed and wept so lately: I desire you
not to conceal it from me; for if he stand in need of any thing whatsoever,
assure your self, he shall be supplied in such good sort, as he shall have
just cause to shake off all melancholy. Sir (replied Elisabet) herein I can
say nothing to you; for he is such a man, the very closest in such matters, as
he will not have manifested, as I never saw the like. No man can better
dissemble his private fantasies, and yet I have often seen him in such
extremities, that if a man might gather judgment by sighing, I have imagined,
that his heart must needs split in sunder, yet never was it possible for me to
know the cause. But thus much I verily conceive, that it must needs be the
controulling power of love, which torments him in such tyrannical manner, being
(perhaps) far off from her who^ he affects. I iumpe with you in opinion (said
the Emperor) and I could well wish, that his love were to some Lady of this
country; for I would be so liberal in bounty to him, as there is neither
King, Prince or Lord so potent, but might repute himself happy, to match his
daughter in marriage with him, that thereby we might be the more certain of
his company. And if you Master Elisabet, (my hearts true friend) can work
this matter out of him by your wit, rest thus resolved, that you shall well
understand my acceptance of the service, which you may do in this kind; and
therefore, let me persuade you to pursue it. Sir (quoth he) you shall perceive
that I will do my uttermost herein. So the Emperor rising, went to the
Empress, and taking her aside, said. Madame, you have lately seen (as well as
my self) what sadness our knight of the green Sword suddenly fell into, and we
cannot gatherwhat should move him thereto: therefore I entreat you, to devise
some means, whereby we may know it: and likewise, if he will consent to stay
here still with me, I will not be sparing to him in any demand whatsoever. My
Lord, said she, it were best (in my judgment) that to morrow we should attempt
this enterprise: for I will take him at such apt opportunity, as he shall have
work enough to deny me. In the mean while, I will allow such gracious favors
toward him, as both you and I will prevail in that we would have.

So they spent out the whole day, entertaining the knight, beyond all compass:
and on the morrow, after Dinner, the Emperor caused the Ladies to meet there
again, where, at the first encounter, he was charged by the Empress, who,
the better to gain her intent, smyling, and as it were by way of devising,
said. Sir Knight, since you came into this Court, I well remember, that a
mighty melancholy fit seized on you suddenly, and it is no longer since then
yesterday: let me entreat ye (fair Sir) to tell me whence it should proceed;
for if it were occasioned by any injury, either done here, or any-where else
within the Emperors command, be well assured, that you shall be righted. And
if it might stand with your good liking, to abide here with my Lord the
Emperor, no knight in all his house can find better welcome. and I would
persuade you thereto, if I might. Madam, (quoth he) if I had so much power as
to command my self, I should think it a happiness for me, to have so gracious
an offer: but being compelde to obey mine own hearts affections, (which no way
may permit it) I humbly entreat your Majesty to hold me excused.

By this the Empress well understood, that she could never compass her
intention; wherefore she gave a sign to the Emperor, that he should come to
them: which being done, she began again thus. My Lord, I hope you will make
good what I have promised to this Knight: my request to him, is, that he would
remain here in your Court, under this assurance, that he shall be respected
above any knight you have, and yet no more then his own due merit. Believe me
Madame answered the Emperor, if he grant me this one favor, I am as ready to
afford him another: for, he cannot ask me any thing that I will deny him.
Sir, (replied our knight,) you have already done me so much honor, that I
think my whole time cannot extend it self, to perform any such service, as
the very least of your liberal favors do deservedly challenge.
Nevertheless, I have bin so long a while out of mine own liberty, by being
subjected to the command of one only: as I neither can, nor willingly would
offend there, to please any-where else. For I am certainly assured, that in
doing otherwise, death would not long suffer me to be your servant, nor to
continue that duty, where I stand bound to pay it.

This answer was delivered with such vehemency of passion, as testified
sufficiently to the Emperor, that Love was sovereign Lord over his
affections: therefore he would no further iwportune him, but entered into some
other discourse. While thus they held on conference, the fair Princess
Leonorina came in, carrying two most rich Crowns, the one upon her head, and the
other between her hands; and going to the Knight of the Green Sword, spoke
thus. Sir knight, I never yet begd any gift, but of the Emperor my Father:
notwithstanding, I now presume upon such boldness, as to request one of you, if
you pleased to grant it me. How Madame? (quoth he) can any Gentleman be found
so hard-hearted, that dare refuse so fair a Lady, in any motion she shall make
unto him? As for my self, I promise to obey you, in any matter you please to
command me.

The young Princess thanked him most affectionatly, and taking the Crown from
off her head, said to him: I pray you Sir, seeing you promise to do so much
for me, to present this Crown to the very fairest Gentlewoman you know, and
saluting her on my behalf, to entreat her to afford me so kind favor, as to
acquaint me with some tidings from her, either by writing, or word of mouth.
The Knight took the Crown, and as he was about to answer, she prevented him,
continuing on her speech in this manner. And this other Crown, (not a jot
less richer then the first) shall be for the most excellent Lady that you know,
to who^, if you be so pleased, do from me the like message. Yet my lo^ging is
such, as I pray you tell me presently, what they are, to whom you mean to give
them. Madame (quoth he) by the faith I bear to God, your own self must have
the first, and none other; for you are the very fairest Gentlewoma^ that I
know. As he thus spoke, he placed the Crown again upon her head, and (looking
about him, said: If there be any knight that dare maintain the contrary, I am
ready to combat him.

Great pleasure took the Emperor, and the whole company, to behold Leonorina
use so gallant a grace to the Knight: nevertheless, because she was the maine
object of every eye, she began to blush, which made her appear much more
beautiful. Then the Empress took occasion to speak, saying: You speak your
pleasure Sir, of this Gentlewoman: but I had rather have those Knights to do
me service, whom you have conquered in Arms, then those that she has won by
her beauty. But he returned her no answer, because Leonorina presented her
self again, saying: I confess Sir, that you have done much more for me, then I
know how to deserve: and yet this cannot withold me, from coniuring you (by
the thing you most dearly affect, above all other in the world) to tell me,
why you wept yesterday, and what the Lady is, to whom your heart is most
engadged in obedience.

When our Knight saw so severe an iniunction imposed upon him, to disclose that
which he most coueted to conceal, he stood in doubt, that the Infanta was
enforced to do this by the Emperor, or else some other, that would know more
then he was willing they should. Whereupon, his color changed in such sort, as
every one did plainly perceive it: and taking a long pause before he spoke, at
last he thus proceeded. Madame, I most humbly beseech you, to accept some other
service of me, and to quit me of this request. You know Sir (quoth she) what
you have promised, and I as well know likewise, that if you break not your
word, you must tell me what I desire to know. Why then Madame (said he) I will
do it, seeing you enforce me to it. When I beheld you first, fair Princess,
I called to mind, that about the time and age wherein you are; Fortune presented
me with gracious entertainment, by loving a Lady wholly like to you. So that
my heart then being far distant from his true felicity, gave testimony (by mine
eyes) of his piercing passions, somewhat to allay the extremity of his
torments, whereof it appears you took too much notice.

Now, in regard of the advantage you took of my word, being desirous to know
what she is, to whom (at this instant) I stand most obliged: if you would
please to forbear such an unnecessary motion, I should esteem your prudence
more entire then I do, inplaying thus on the poor discretion of a silly
errant Knight, to disclose more then he would, and what he most desires to
keep concealed. Nevertheless, since I must needs pass on further in this
affliction, I swear to you Madame, by my faith, that it is she to whom you
have sent this other Crown, who is (as I think) the very fairest Lady that
ever was, or ever shall be among the most perfect. Now content your self,
fair Princess, without forcing me any further. Upon my word, replied the
Emperor, she shall not, and so far our knowledge is enlarged by your relation,
that we are even as wise now, as when we began. And yet (answered our Knight) I
have said more now, then ever I did before: whereto I was more willing, because
Madame Leonorina should well perceive, how ready I am to do any service for
her. You may well Sir, quoth the Emperor, be allowed to keep secrets, when your
greatst reuealings are mere ridls to us: and therefore seeing she has offended
you, reason requires that she make amends. Pardon me my Lord, said our knight,
in your better opinion, for if she have offended, let her be rankt among the^,
that can induce and persuade such demands to a poor knight errant, who (as
yet) is so slenderly acquainted with the Greek tongue, that, when he offers to
speak, he may well be laughed at, for his foolish babbling. Indeed Sir, (quoth
the Emperor) I only am the cause of all this contending; and therefore we
must needs make an end together. The amends, said our knight, is too much made
already my Lord: provided, that I may remain in your good conceit, and that
you will remember me hereafter. Let me tell ye Sir, answered the Emperor, that
hereof you cannot fail, nor in any satisfaction that I can make ye, although
you should stand obstinat against the permissio^.

Now, albeit the Emperor spoke these words in jest, yet followed a time, that
they fell out to good earnest, as you will find more at large in the fourth
Book following. Sir knight, said Leonorina, I know that I have done you wrong;
and seeing it is not in my power, at this present, to make you a sufficient
amends: I beseech you to accept this Ring, even with as good a heart, as I was
desirous to know of you all that I demanded. Taking it from off her finger, he
stepped forward to give it him* but in steed of the Jewel, he took her by the
hand, saying. Madame, this white and delicate hand, is more worthy to be
kissed, then any other that I have seen within this years compass: and the
Ring may well repute it self happy, to be circled with so high an honor;
therefore pardon me, I pray ye, and suffer me to kiss it. All this Sir, (quoth
she) cannot hinder the Ring to be yours, and so she presented it to him again
whereof he durst make no refusal, but in setting one knee to the ground, took
it, and sweetly kissed her hand. Assure your self Sir, said she, that you have
so excellent a stone, as I esteem it to be the only one of that kind:
albeit I have the very like in the Crown which you gave me back again, which
two stones (indeed) should be but one. So help me God, replied our knight, it
is not to be admired, that a thing so rare, should be in the power of the
worlds choycest Lady: for, like as such a precious Jewel is not easily come
by; as hardly (I think) can all the East yield another to go beyond you, either
in wisdom, knowledge, and all good graces else; therefore this Jewel is only
fit for you, before any other. With that the Emperor stepped in, saying. Let me
tell ye Sir, when you know from whence it came, you will make much greater
estimation of it: and if you observe the excellency of the Ring, you will find
it worthy of right good keeping: For it is (of an Emerauld) as fair as
possible can be: and the rest is a Rubie of two colors by nature, the one red
as blood, the other white as snow. Then know Sir, that Apolidon my
Grandfather, (whose renown has long time circled the whole earth, though I
know not whether as yet it came to your ears) holding the place that now I do,
among many other singular things given him by Filipane, King of India: he sent
him twelve Crowns, the very richest that could be seen: And although they
were of inestimable value, yet there was one to be prized above all the rest;
and that is it which my daughter presented you first, wherein the stone (being
whole was then enchased. But Apolidon finding it to be so strange, caused it to
be cut in twain, leaving one of the parts in the Crown, which he gave to his
Queen and wife Grimenesa, who^ he loved so dearly, as more loyal lovers were
never heard of: and kept the other moitie for himself, which he wore so long
as he lived in this Ring, and which, I pray you keep for her sake, that gave
it you with so good a heart. And if at any time you have occasion to part with
it, let it be to some one of your kindred, to the end, that if Fortune conduct
him into these parts, he may know and serve the Lady that gave it you, if she
stand in need thereof.

And so it came to pass after-ward; for it fell into the power of Esplandian,
who for the love of her, (some short while after) performed many deeds of
Chiualry, as you shall understand in the fifth Book. Sir, answered our knight,
I have often heard speech of that Apoliaon, who builded the Arche of loyal
Lovers in the Firm I^^and, where I my self have bin, travailing through the
country of Great Britain: there also I saw the figures of him and his fair
Grimenesa, with many other singularities, which are there at this present.

Perhaps then (quoth the Emperor,) you know the knight that conquered the
Enchanted Palace, whereof I heard so much report. Sir, said he, I have diverse
times spoken with him, and he calls himself Amadis, Son to King Perion of
Gaul, who is talked of in many places. It is he that was found floting on the
water, whereupon he was termed the Gentleman of the Sea. In a plain field of
battle, he vanquished Abies, the most potent King of Ireland, and there the
King, his father and his mother knew him to be their Son. On my soul, (said
the Emperor,) but that I am persuaded, that so great a Lord would not
undertake so long a journey, I should think it were your self that you speak
of, and I should hardly be altered otherwise.

Our knight made him no answer at all, but changing into other conference, at
length they brake off, and six whole days he remained in Constantinople,
during which time, never had man more honorable entertainment. And because the
time drew near of his promised return to Grasinda again, he purposed to take
his leave, causing his Ship to be in a readiness, and finding the Emperor at
convenient leisure, he thus closed with him. Sir, you have bestowed so much
honor and respect upon me, as I can come in no place wheresoever, but you may
boldly say, that I am your servant, ready to obey all your commands, as often
as you shall please to employ me. And because I intend shortly to be in the
marches of Romania, according to a solemn promise made, I most humbly beseech
you to license my departure. Worthy Friend (answeced the Emperor,) if it were
possible, that you could afford longer abiding here, you might do me an
infinite pleasure: but seeing your promise has so strictly engadged you, God
forbid, that I should cause you, or any other, to falsify your word.

Sir, (said our knight) I dare assure you, that my honor will be highly
wronged in doing otherwise, as it is well known to Master Elisabet; therefore I
entreat you to detain me no longer. Well then, (quoth the Emperor) I am
contented: provided, that without any contradiction, you grant me three days
longer stay. Your will be done Sir, said our knight, seeing it is your
pleasure to have it so.

The saire Princess Leonorina nor being present at this parlie, she sent for
him into her chamber, and being in the midst of her Ladies, she said unto him.
Sir, you have granted the Emperor (as I am informed) three days more to
keep him company: Fair Knight, let me entreat ye to afford me two days
beside his, during which time, you shall be daily (if you please) with me and
my Gentlewomen, because without any impeachement, we may the better govern
you. Therefore advise your self, with a good heart, we having you here among
us, will compel you thereto per^^^ce.

As she thus spoke, she made a sign to her Gentlewomen, to lay hold on him.
Seeing himself thus engirt by them all, what amiable graces, and mild forces
they seized him with, by a voluntary importunity, he promised to obey them, in
this, or what else they would command him; and smyling, he thus speak unto the
Princess Leonorina. Why Madame, being unable to escape so sharp an
imprisonment, as is here presented to my face, do you imagine that I dare any
way contradict you or yours? In good faith Sir, answered one of the
Gentlewomen, you do the wiser; for if you did the contrary, you would be in
greater danger, then when you fought with the Monster Endriagus.

Truly Ladies, (quoth he) I believe ye assuredly, considering it is certain,
that a man shall have more labor in offending such Angels, then if he
contended against twenty worse Devils then he was. Wherefore, I had much rather
attempt again such another like war as that, then fall into the peril of
your displeasure. Remember then Sir, answered Leonorina, what you have
promised, and look that you be careful in keeping it.

Thus our knight continued in Constantinople five days longer then he
purposed, during all which time, he was a good companion among the Ladies and
Gentlewomen: who never ceased to enquire of him, concerning the singularities
of the Firm Island, the Defended Chamber, the Arche of lorall Lovers, and also
the Portraitures of Apolido^ and Grimenesa. Likewise concerning the Ladies of
King Lisuarts Court, the fashion of their garments, their manner of behavior;
and a thousand other things, such as over curious women most commonly covet to
know. And as he made answer still to his best power, in cases of this nature;
he considered with himself, that if his Oriana could have made one in this
fair company, he should have thought, that all the bright beauties in the
world were there congregated together. At last, he grew so distracted in his
soul, that words began to fail him, and he stood as fallen into a trance.
Which the Queen Menoressa (Lady of the Isle Gabasta) perceiving, she held him
so strongly by the arm, that immediately he came to himself again.

Then he well perceived, that he had failed in some one kind or other;
wherefore, in excuse of himself, he said unto them. I beseech ye Ladies,
think it not strange, that having before mine eyes so many admirable beauties,
wherewith both God and Nature has bounteously enriched you all: I should find
my senses quite transported from their usual course, by remembering one, of
whom I did sometimes receive so many gracious favors, that finding my self
now to be far off from her; I endure a torment worse then death, my spirit
being rapt out of my body, and living in her, to serve and obey her as I ought
to do. Wherefore, Love being to blame, for the fault wherein I have offended
before you; should deservedly receive the punishment, and not I, whom he*
tormenteth with too much rigor.

Great compassion took all the Ladies and Gentlewomen on the affliction, which
they beheld our Knight continually to suffer, and every one strove to comfort
him so well as she could. But the day being come, when he must needs take
leave for imbarquing himself: the Queen Menoressa, (who bare him an entire
secret affection) said unto him. Sir Knight, by something that I know, your
long absence hence will scarcely be well taken: but seeing we must needs
endure your loss, I pray ye to accept a gift of me, which I am very desirous
to bestow upon you. Then she called for six Swords, the very fairest and best
tempered that ever were seen: desiring him to furnish his friends with them,
and not to be unmindful of her.

Madame, (quoth the Knight,) your gift is such, that (for your sake (they shall
come to the hands of six knights, the best (in mine opinion) this day living,
and of whom you may and shall dispose at all times, and in all affairs you
will please to command them. That is the matter, (said the Princess
Leonorina,) which we all together move unto you. By my faith, Madame, quoth
he, all my lifetime, I shall be yours, ready in obeisance, when you please to
employ me. I thank you Sir, replied the Princess, and do more-ouer entreat
you, that you would please so much to honor us, as to send hither someone of
your lineage, to remain particularly ours, and to serve us all, as need shall
require Madame (quoth he,) I make no doubt, but, before any long time, to send
you a near kinfeman of mine: who being in your service, you may well vaunt,
that you have one of the best knights in the world.

This he spoke, as thinking of his Brother Galaor, whom he intended to cause to
come and serve the (...)perour, both for the augmentation of his renown, and
the bigher honor of the Princess. But it fell out otherwise; for in steed of
Galaor, Esplandian arrived there some while after; who for the love of the
I'rin cesse Leonorina, fought many a brave fight, as you shall understand when
we come to speak thereof. Let it suffice us now, that the knight of the green
Sword was shipped as that day, and setting sail with Master Elisabet, launched
forth into the maine, bound with prosperous gales for his return to Remania.
Wherefore we will be a while silent of him to tell ye, that much about this
season, the Prince Saluste Quide, and the Queen Sardamira, with their train,
arrived in Great Britain, to conclude with King Lisuart, the marriage of the
Emperor and Oriana. And persuading themselves, that the voyage should answer
their own intention, they published in all places as they passed along, that
they should shortly return back with the Empress. But GOD, (in whose hand
all things are) declared herein, that he does oftentimes dispose matters,
quite contrary to the opinion of men, who neither love or repose any confidence
in him: but think to command both times and the stars, according as it
comes into their own brain. Wherein they find themselves both mocked and
deceived, ^euen as these Ambassadors did, who were entertained with the
greatest triumphs and honor, that the King could possibly make them.

CHAP. XII.
How the Knight of the green Sword departed from Constantinople, to satisfy
the promise which he formerly had made to the fair Grasinda: And of that
which afterward happened to him.

Our knight of the green Sword being on Shipboord, and set forth from the Port
of Constantinople; as already has been related to ye: the winds were so
favorable to him, that in less then twenty days he arrived at the place,
where the fair Grasinda lived in exspectation of him.

And albeit he was yet far off from Great Britain, yet notwithstanding,
finding himself approaching toward the place, that gave his heart best life
and encouragement, his hopes did so heighten themselves, and his spirits were
so graciously cheared, as not anything seemed now impossible to his
apprehension, though (in five years absence) he had endured a world of
afflictions. And now even as if he felt the heavenly air of Great Britain,
his foul labored with an infinity of discourse, concerning what things he was
to perform, and what means he should compass, to w^nne but a sight of his
Oriana.

Now, long before his landing, Grasinda had heard by many, what worthy deeds of
Chivalry he had done in all the Islands of Romania: wherefore, being certified
of his arrival, accompanied with many knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen of the
Country, she went to wel-come him as honorably as might be.

Then conducting him to her Palace, there wanted no entertainment that best
could express her affection toward him, and thus she spoke. Believe me Sir
Knight, if formerly I held a good opinion of you, at this present it is much
more increased, considering how faithfully you have kept promise with me, in
being returned from your long voyage, before a year is fully completed. Which
armeth me with a perfect persuasion, that having not failed in the first, you
will do the like in the next, which (according to some conference passed
between us, a little before your embarquing for Greece) I purposed to acquaint
you with all at your return.

Madame (quoth he) God forbid, that during al my lifetime, I should any way
show my self unthankful to you: for you have so far obliged me to you, that
I must in duty confess, that (next under God and Master Elisabet) who by your
command has kept me company) I merely hold my life by your means: and
therefore you may dispose of me, as she that wholly has power over me. Surely
Sir, said she, if he have done you any acceptable service, I repute it as
mine, and take it in as kind part, as if it were performed to mine own self.

Now, because Supper-time drew near, and the whole day had been somewhat
contagiously hot, she commanded the Tables to be covered in a most delightful
Arbor, where all varieties of possible pleasures were plenteously to be seen,
and all delicate viands so sumptuously served in, as it exceeded the compass
of any expression. Supper being ended, they went discoursing together so long
about the fair walks, that night ouer-took them: which caused Grasinda to
conduct him to his Chamber, where in honorable manner she took leave of him.

Our Knight being in bed, in steed of sleeping, he fell into his accustomed
melancholy; and, as if Oriana had bin there present, he thus discoursed with
himself: Alas, fair Friend, my long absence from your person, has loaded my
soul with so many dolorous passions, that, but for fear of displeasing you,
Death had long since wrapped me up in my grave, and deprived me of my only
happiness, which consists in the sight of you. Oh mine eyes, are you not
ashamed to exhauste (by throwing forth tears) the scarcity of humor, wherein
my ^ad heart nourishes it self, in exspectation of my return toward her;
for whose service only, my spirit contents it self to breathe in this toyling
body? Alas, the more hope you have of seeing her again, the higher do you
attain to happiness, by such favors as she has extended to you, far beyond
your merit. Moreover, you may well remain assured, that her loyalty is so
constant, as, (by any accident that can happen) she will never vary,
understanding my fidelity in her own soul to be such, as I had rather dye an
hundred thousand times, then to lose the least glimpse of her kind favor.

These words were so loudly delivered by our Knight, that Gandalin (who slept
soundly) awaking at the noise, started up, and asked if he would command him
any service. Alas Gandalin, quoth he, I pray thee take no heed of mine unruly
passions, but rest contented, that I must suffer them, seeing Love has brought
me into this extremity. You are a strange man, replied Gandalin, thus to
afflict your self, when you should be most comforted and cheared in heart,
considering, that we are well on-ward in the way, of returning to your Lady
Oriana, for whose sake you suffer all these torments. And me thinks you should
do well to throw off these disturbing passions, which present inevitable
peril of life, and draw on danger of sickness, when you should have most need
of health: for, grief begets ouer-hasty infirmities, which will hardly be
avoided at the largest leisure; therefore good Sir, take rest if you can. How?
quoth he, can thou talk of rest, or returning to Oriana: considering what a
promise I have made to Grasinda, which may command me further off from her,
then hitherto I have been:

I cannot think so Sir, answered Gandalin, but am rather persuaded, that her
motion may draw you nerer to her, then you can imagine. What say thou
Gandalin? replied our Knight, do thou think that Fortune can be so
favorable to me? Assure thy self, if so great a good might befall me, I
could be well content, to forgive all her former cruelties; which, since I was
cast upon the Sea, she has infinite ways imposed on me. And if ever I happen
to such a place, where I may compass any means for sending thee to Oriana,
will thou do so much for me, to carry her immediate tidings of me, and make
me once more as happy, as when thou wentst first to her, at my return from
Gaul? How say thou? do thou remember it? That do I Sir, said Gandalin,
and can as well speak to her, and make discourse of all your life, as ever I
did, if you dare repose so much trust in me; for I know both the Saint and
shrine she is devoted to; and therefore, in the mean while Sir, let me entreat
you to be of good courage.

Thus spent they out the most part of the night, devising together on such
attempts, as might happen by the way in their return to Great Britain.
Early the next morning our Knight arose, and went to find the Ladies, who
were hearing Mass; which being ended, Grasinda took him by the hand, and
leading him somewhat aside, began in this manner.

Understand Sir knight, that about a year before you came into this Country, I
happened into an assembly, procured by the Duke of Basile, whereto all the fair
Ladies and Gentle-women of these parts were summoned. As we were in the
chiefest of our good cheer, I know not by what occasion, but my Brother the
Marquess Salender (a man whom you well know, and in whose custody I then was)
spoke out aloude before all there present, that my beauty was so highly
excelling, as no one in all the company might be compared with me; and if any
Knight durst maintain the contrary, he was there ready to enter Combat with
him. Notwithstanding, either because he was valiant, and therefore much feared;
or whether the whole assembly joined with him in opinion, there was no one
would contradict him. By which means, I bare away the supreme honor, from all
the fairest Ladies in Romania, to my no small pleasure and contentment, as is
very easy for you to imagine. And now Sir, if (by your means) I might attain
to a further passage, and reach to that height, which my heart has ever since
aimed at, and desired, I should account my self the happiest Lady in the
world. Madame (quoth he) command me what you please, and if it be in my power
to perform, be well assured, you shall find me ready in obedience.

Hereupon she thus proceeded. My Lord, I have heard, that in the Court of King
Lisuart, are the only bright beauties, not to be matched: if you please to
conduct me thither, and there to au ouch as much for me, either by Arms, or
otherwise, that I may have the honor above them, as already I enjoy over those
of this Country, I shall confess my self more beholding to you, then to all
the other Knights in the world: for I have no other motion then this to make
unto you, and which most earnestly I beseech you to grant. Whereto if you
condescend, I have resolved on a speedy parting hence, and to be attended with
such a company, as shall highly honor so good a knight as you are. And this may
the more encourage you, because in the presence of the King of Great Britain,
and all the Lords and Ladies of his Court, you must maintain, that the Lady
you have brought thither, (which shall be my self) is fairer then any Maiden
there to be found, which, if any one dare gainsay, by force of Arms you will
compel him to deny it.

And for further enlarging the glory of the Conqueror, you shall wear a Crown
upon your Helmet, which I will carry along with me, and he against whom you
contend, shall have another, that the conqueror (in sign of triumph) may also
wear that of the conquered. Wherein if Fortune stand favorable to us, and
that you finish this enterprise according to my mind, then I must further
entreat you, to conduct me into the Firm Island, where (as I have heard) is
an enchanted Chamber, that no Lady or Gentlewoman can enter into, except she
excel Grimenesa in beauty, who never could be equalled by any. Then will my
chiefest desires be accomplished, and you discharged of your promise made me:
therefore, advise well with your self, whether you intend to deny me, or no.

When our Knight had heard this discourse, he suddenly changed color, and thus
replied. Alas Madame, you have undone me, in urging a matter so far out of my
power, and have even struck me dead with your words. This he spoke,
considering what wrong he should offer Oriana, in attempting a labor so highly
to her dishonor. And on the other side, he was well assured to find an
infinite number of good Knights in King Lisuarts Court, who, by any peril that
might happen, would not endure so deep an indignity: beside, this was the
readiest way, whereby he might fall into his Ladies dis-fauour, and (perhaps)
procure his own death by this means.

In consideration of all these inconveniences, he called to mind also, his
kind entertainments received by Grasinda, what a help she had been to him in
so urgent a necessity, and how he had bound himself to her by voluntary
promise: these contended so mainly with his other cogitations, that when his
service to Oriana, checked him from pursuing this enterprise, reason rerequired,
and enforced him to the contrary. Hereupon, he fell into such a perplexity,
that he wished he had never been borne, and cursed Fortune, who was so
contrary to him in all occasions.

Then suddenly he called to mind, that Oriana was no Maid, but a
troth-plighted wife, having had a child, as Mabila had sent him word: and
therefore, he that should maintain a fairer Maid, then Grasinda was a fair
wife, should receive shame, and so by good reason, he might enter the Combat
with him. Which either before, or afterward, (as he found time, place and
opportunity to favor him) he would make known to the Princess: And therefore,
as one awaked out of a serious study, or escaped from some melancholy dungeon,
he began to eleuate his spirits, and with a smyling countenance, thus he spoke
to Grasinda.

Madame, most humbly I beseech you to pardon the fault wherein I have offended,
which proceeded not from any fear, to undertake the very greatest matter that
you can command me, or the most difficult danger wherein you please to employ
me: but my heart having sole sovereignty over me, sought to make use of me
elsewhere, had not the obligation, wherein I standmost strictly bound to you
(for so many high and graceful favors done me) prevailed against him, in
craving leave to obey your disposition, which I am ready ^o perform
conditionally, that, without any regard of my indiscreete answer, you will
vouchsafe to remit this error. In good faith Sir knight, answered Grasinda, I
was much amazed, to see your sudden alteration, and hear your refusal of such
a matter, as cannot but redound to your honor, and my glory. But perceiving you
are now in so good a deliberation, I pray you to continue it: being assured,
that (by your means) I shall gain the like honor over the maids of Great
Britain, as I have already won from the Ladies of Romania, and that I may
(afterward) justly wear the two Crowns, as having gotten the prime place of
beauty by conquest.

Believe me Madame, answered our Knight, the way you purpose to pass, is
greatly to be doubted, and you must needs go through so many strange
Countries, as travail may be very offensive to you, and diminish much of that
goodly feature, and lively color, wherewith Nature has most liberally
enriched you. So that by gaining in the one, you may (perhaps) lose in the
other; wherefore, consideration is very requisite, before repentance ensue too
late.

Sir, said she, counsel is already taken, and my resolution certainly set
down: for, notwithstanding whatsoever may happen, I am not able to be altered,
without spare of gold, silver, pain or peril any way ensuing. And whereas you
say, that we must pass through many strange Lands; the Sea (in this case) can
best relieve us, as I have learned by Master Elisabet.

Well then Madame (quoth he) take order for your other affairs, and let us
part hence when you please. That shall be (said she) so soon as we may; in
the mean while, be no way injurious to your self, but pass the time as
pleasantly as you can: for I have Hawks, Hounds and Huntsmen to yield you
pleasure; and therefore I would advise you, this day to chase the Heart, Hind,
or nimble Roe, or any other game that may best delight you. Whereto he
willingly gave consent, so that after dinner, our Knight, accompanied with many
Lords and Gentlmen, rode into the Forest.

There they met with great store of wild beasts, who being well nere spent
with running, made back again upon the pursuing Hounds. But as our Knight
earnestly followed a Heart, which had escaped from the toils, both he and
Gandalin were strayed so far into the woods, as they were enforced to spend the
whole night there, by not knowing how to recover again their way of entrance.
And as they traced from one side to another, at length they came near to a
very beautiful Fountain, environed round about with trees of such height, as
it was impossible (almost) to meet with taller. There they resolved to abide
till the next morning; wherefore, alighting from their horses, they first
watered them, and after took off their bridles to let them graze.

And because our Knight could not so soon betake himself to rest, he walked
along under the faire-spreading trees, and discerned somewhat near him a white
horse lie dead, all covered with fresh-bleeding wounds, which he had l^tely
received. Moreover, he heard the voice of a man complaining very lamentably, as
one that felt intolerable pain and anguish: but being unable to discern from
whence it proceeded, by reason that the night was so dark and cloudie, he drew
as near to the clamor as he could, to listen the cause why he thus
complained. Then the voice seemed louder to his attention then before, and he
could easily understand the delivery of these speeches.

Ab miserable man, unfortunate Bruneo de bonne Me: now thou do too plainly
perceive, that thou art enforced to finish thy days, and all thy affectionate
desires, wherewith thy loyal heart has been so long time afflicted. Ah
Amadis de Gaul, my worthy Lord, never more shall thou see thy faithful
companion Bruneo: for in the quest of thee, according as thy well-beloued
Sister Melicia commanded me; I fell into the hands of Traitors, who have
wrought my death, without the aid or succor of any friend to help me. O
unkind Fortune, utter enemy to my felicity, thou have thrown me so far off
from all remedy, as I have not so much as the means, whereby I might make
known my disaster to any one, that should revenge my wrongs, which were no
mean comfort to me, in this woeful case, and the more contentedly would my
poor soul part out of this wretched world. Ah Melicia, flower and mirror of
all virtuous perfections, this night thou losest the most loyal servant that
ever Lady or Gentleman had, for my whole lifetime was devoutly dedicated,
only to obey and please you in all faithful services.

And upon my soul, if you well consider it, perhaps you will find this less
extreme for you, being assured, that you shall never meet with any other, so
constant to you, as your Bruneo: Now does the lamp of my life begin to burn
dimbe, and my afflicted heart loses all his forces, wherewith (by your
remembrance only) I have heretofore performed many manly deeds of Arms and
Chivalry.

Now therefore, I must needs recommend it to you, entreating you so to favor
and respect it, as never sinning against you in loyalty. Death, that has
seized on me, thou show thy self too sharp and rigorous to me, in robbing
me of all my happiness, all my joy and pleasure in one instant. Nor do I
expressly blame thee, for depriving me of my life: but because thou could
not permit me before my death, to accomplish the charge imposed by Melicia on
me, which was, to find out her brother Amadis.

Here he paused awhile but presently proceeded on again thus. Alas, this
command was the very first that ever she did put me in trust withal; and now
(as I too plainly perceive) must be the last also. Whereby I feel a double
torment: for, if I could have had the means to satisfy her herein, my
travail, (though ending in death) I should have esteemed happy. And that,
(dear Mistress) is my chiefest affliction, that my days are cut off, before
I had the power to acknowledge the infinity of gracious favors by you
bestowed on me: but rest you well assured, and on my soul I protest it, that I
never stood in fear of death, in whose face I have oftentimes hazarded my
fortunes; but grieve to finishe my life thus, in loving you too affectionately.

Then a heartbreaking sigh interrupted his speech, which yet again he quickly
recovered, saying: Ah my dear friend Angriote Estrauaux, where art thou now?
how have thou forsaken me? Thou have maintained this quest with me a long time
together, and now (in need) have left me, not affording me any comfort or
succor. And yet I have little reason to blame thee; because my self was the
means of our separation this day, to both our great misfortunes, that sundered
us from ever meeting any more.

Then began he to sigh extremely, and the coldness of his stomach breaking
forth many hicko^ among innumerable sighs, made a strange confusion of his
words ^ollowly uttered. In regard whereof our Knight, who had well understood
all these woeful complaints, could not refrain from tears: nevertheless*
going (at last) to the place where he lay, he thus spoke to him. My kind friend
Bruneo, what dismal mishap has thus befalne thee? I pray thee be of good
cheer, and put thy trust in our Lord God, who has done so much both for thee
and me, as to conduct me to this place, where I will compass some means to
help thee. Bruneo conceipted in himself, that these words came from his
Squire Lasinde, whom he had sent to seek some Religious man, by whom he might
be confessed before his death; wherefore he thus answered. Alas my dear Lasinde,
thou have tar^d too long, for I feel my fainting in such forwardness, that I
cannot accomplish now what I purposed. Therefore, let me entreat thee, that so
soon as my soul has forsaken this her sad habitation, thou would return
into Gaul, to fair Melicia: whom when thou have acquainted with my mischance,
present her the rightsleeue of my shirt, thus tincturde in my true heartblood,
and seven letters foulded up therein, which I have always hitherto kept as
carefully, as mine own life. And because strength fails me, do thou supply
out the rest that should be said, assuring her, that the grief she will
conceive for my misfortune, by thinking her self to be the cause thereof,
sending me in search of her Brother Amadis, did more torment me, then any
torture else could do.

Why, how now dear friend? answered our knight, do thou think me to be
Lasinde thy Squire? why man, I am thy companion Amadis, for whose sake thou art
fallen into this great danger. Therefore, take heart man, be of good comfort,
and I will bring thee to so worthy a man, as shall restore thee to health
again very speedily. Now, albeit Bruneo was so weak, by the great abundance
of blood which he had lost, as he was no longer able to speak* yet knowing
Amadis by his voice, and seeing him so near him, he ^weetly embraced him, as
he accordingly did the like to him, enter^ingling the tears together that fell
from their eyes; which was performed in such sort, as they that had beheld
them, would have thought, they had seen one soul divided, between two most
loving and intimate friends. And as they were thus compassionating each other,
Gandalin (who had all this ^le heard their resounding of their words) came
thither, to whom our Knight of the Green Sword, said. (...) come near, and
help me to unarm my kind companion Bruneo: which Gandalin did, both
per^o^ming it so gently as they could, and his Armor being (...), they (...)
him (...) the sweet herbs at more ease.

By this time the break of day began to appear, and our knight commanded
Gandalin, to go find Master Elisabet with all possible speed: beside, to
entreat Madame Grasinda, to send thither (with him) a soft horse-litter, for
conueying Bruneo to her Palace. Gandalin herein was so diligent, that he made
a very speedy return, bringing Master Elisabet thither with him: who seeing
the two friends thus disconsolate, and making much moan each to other, he
said: Good my Lords, fear not any thing; for, by the grace and help of God, I
will provide whatsoever is needful. Then visiting the wounds of Bruneo, he
found them shut and closed, by reason of the nights extreme coldness:
notwithstanding, he applied such excellent ointments to them, as before they
parted thence, his pain was well appeased, and he fell fast asleep, which gave
undoubted hope to Master Elisabet, that the worst of danger was past; whereof
when he had advertised our knight, no news could be more comfortable to him.

As thus they sat expecting their sick friends awaking, they espied a man
coming toward them, carrying the heads of two Knights at his saddle bow, and
holding an Axe in his hand all bloody. He seeing so many sit there together,
grew fearful: but our Knight of the Green Sword knowing him to be Lasinde,
the loyal Squire to Don Bruneo, arose, (accompanied only with Gandalin) to
meet him. This made the Squire much more timorous, and perceiving them thus
coming toward him, he turned bridle to fly away. After him followed our
Knight, running into a very deep bottom or vallie, where the thicknes of the
brakes and bushes, hindered him from sight of the Squire, wherefore he cried so
loud as he could. Whither fliest thou Lasinde? stay many, for I am one of thy
friends. When Lasinde heard himself named, he turned his face, and presently
knew Amadis: wherefore, alighting from his horse, most humbly he saluted him,
saying. Alas my Lord, do not you know the heavy news of my good Master, who
lies slain in this Forest?

At speaking these words, he made most pitiful lamentation, and then began
again thus. Surely Sir, you will not think what travail he has endured, only
in the search of you, so earnest was his desire to find you: which would to God
he had done, before this great misfortune befell him, by the villainous
treachery of two traitors, whose heads you may here behold, not long since
delivered me by Angriote Estrauaux. He gave me express command, to present
them to my Lord if he were living: if not, to lay them so near to his dead
body as I could, that the world might witness just revenge taken on them.
Lasinde, answered our Knight, he is living, thanks be given to God for it,
and I left him under yonder trees, in better disposition then thou imaginest.
Notwithstanding, he is yet so feeble, by his great expense of blood, as he
could not declare how, or by whom he was thus wronged: and if thou will follow
me, thou shall find him in no worse estate then I tell thee.

But beware (upon thy life) that before any whosoever, thou call me none other,
then the Knight of the Green Sword. It shall be done Sir, quoth the Squire,
seeing it is your pleasure so to command me.

Come thou then with Gandalin, replied our Knight, and I will haste thither
before, because I would have no man to know, that I have spoken with thee^,
therefore remember what thou have in charge.

Away goes our Knight, leaving Gandalin and Lasinde together, returning
toward Bruneo, where (soon after) both the Squires arrived also. Lasinde
made a low reverence to the Knight of the Green Sword; and, as if he had never
seen him, said: Blessed be the hour (my Lord) that conducted you hither so
happily, to mere with my good Master Bruneo, who in the quest of you, has
been so abused, as now your own eyes are testimonies of his extremity.
Friend Lasinde, answered our Knight, thou art wel-come, and I pray thee tell
me, what fortune drew him and thee hither, and by whom came he thus wounded?
My Lord, that you shall know presently: give me but leave first to speak to
him.

Now was Bruneo awaked from his sound sleep, and felt himself in indifferent
disposition: wherefore they admitted Lasinde to come near him, speaking thus.
Sir, your kind companion Angriote Estrauaux, has sent you the two Traitors
heads, whom he fought withal, and slew, knowing what injury they had done to
you. And he is gone to a Monastery of Ladies in this Forest, to stenche the
bleeding of a wound, which he received in his right leg, and there he will
make no long abiding, but intends to see you alive, or dead.

I pray GOD (quoth Bruneo) that he will defend him from all evil: but how
could thou find me out in this Desert place, so far estranged from all
resort? Sir, said the Squire, Angriote commanded me, to go directly to that
part of the wood, where I should discern the taulest trees: because he
understood by the Traitors themselves, that there they had wounded you to
death, which urged him to such extreme sorrow, as no man's could be more.

Before God, replied the Knight of the Green Sword, it were great pity, that
Angriote should suffer any wrong: for he is a man of especial merit, and one
that I would very gladly see. Therefore Lasinde, conduct me (if thou can)
where he is, while Gandalin, and these other, convey thy Master to such a
place, where I know he shall be most kindly welcome.

So they laid him gently in the Litter, and our Knight put on the Arms of
Bruneo, bruised and battered as they were, and he rode with the Squire into the
Forest, where they had not travailed long together, but they espied Angriote
come ryding toward them, with his looks dejected to the ground, like to a
man very sad and melancholy. Behind him they saw four knights also, making
haste after him, all well armed and mounted, pursuing amain upon the spur,
and crying out so loud as they could: Turn, turn thee Traitor, for thou must
leave thy head behind thee, in revenge of both theirs, whom thou have
treacherously slain, being men of much more desert then thy self. At this
cry, Angriote turned back, and prepared for his own defense; which our
Knight of the Green Sword perceiving, he gave his horse the spur, and,
before any blow was smitten, came among them, saying to Angriote, who had not
till then seen him* To them, my noble companion, to them, and fear not, but
heaven will defend thee in all extreamities.

Much amazed, but yet greatly comforted was Angriote, seeing the Knight of the
Green Sword, whom (by notice of his Arms) he imagined to be Bruneo; and as he
purposed to make him answer; our knight ran against his enemies, meeting
first with Brandasidel, (he that formerly would have forced him, to ride with
his face backward, to the horse tail, and compel him to come to Grasinda, who
thought him to be the most absolute Knight in all the Islands of Romania, as
already you have heard;) but his Lance gave him such a sound salutation
between his Helmet and the Cuirats, as carried him quite out of his sadle, and
there he lay entranced on the ground. The other three charged Angriote all
together, against whom he maintained his cause so stoutly, as his courage gave
perfect appearance of it self. And now began the fight between two to three,
manfully performed on either side: but in the end, our knight of the green
Sword, and Angriote had such advantage, as they were glad to turn their
backs, because the best man among them all, fell down to the ground. Which the
other two beholding, they were quite out of heart; and flying thwart the
Forest, as Fortune best guided them, the one chanced into a ma^is^e, where
he was drowned, while Angriote hewed the other in pieces.

This being done, he purposed to follow his companion, whom still he
conceived to be Bruneo: albeit his strokes and rare Chiualry urged a contrary
suspicion, and he knew not what to imagine, till he beheld Amadis returning
toward him, who had then put off his Helmet to take the air, by which means
Angriote knew him. Then, as one much amazed, he rode to him, and stretching
forth his arms, lovingly embraced him, saying. My worthy Lord, what high good
hap befell me to meet you so luckily: considering, that but by your
assistance, I had doubtless bin dead. By my faith Sir (quoth our Knight) you
owe many thanks to Lasinde, who was the cause of our happy meeting for he
persuaded me, that you were gone to a near adjoining Monastery, for cure of a
wound received in your leg. Indeed Sir, (said Angriote) such was my
determination, and thitherward I went, till these Traitors came to assail me:
But know you what is become of Brunco? I am persuaded, he is either dead, or
in very great danger. Be of good cheer man (replied our Knight) I hope his
greatest peril is past: for I lately left him, in the ca^e of one of the best
Chirurgions in the world.

Then he reported, in what manner he found him, and what complaints he made,
exspecting nothing else but death; whereby I perfectly understand (quoth he)
what tedious travails you both have endured, only in the search of me, for
which (while I live) I stand highly obliged to you. I would it were in my power
(quoth Angriote) to let you know how much more I could find in my heart to do
for you: then should you well perceive, that this which you please to term
travail, is nothing else but pleasure and delight to me.

And let me tell you, that I live not, but only by your means: for you help
me to the wife, which I have now married, without whose comfort I had no longer
breathed. Leave we this talk, said our knight, till some fitter time, and let
us go see, whether yonder dismounted varlets be dead or no, or else to put
them out of their pain.

So they returned to the place of encounter, and found one of them offering to
rise: but the Knight of the Green Sword going near him, made a proffer to
smite him, saying. Traiterous villain, how du^st thou (upon no occasion)
assault any Knight errant, that never did thee the least displeasure? Confess
the truth, or else thou die. Before God Sir, (^^swered Angriote) this is one
of them, that so cruelly wounded our friend Brunco, and to prove it true, I
left him with him, and two other Knights beside, that came to seek succor for
their Sister (as they said) that should be burned most shamefully. But
themselves (afterward) confessed the treason to me, in returning from a place,
where (at the same instant) I was desired, to deliver the Son of an ancient
Knight, who was kept prisoner by diverse villains. Which I did, setting him at
liberty, and imprisoning the other in his steed; by which occasion, I and
Bruneo were sundered, whom since I never saw. Is not this true? speak wretch:
but he answered not a word, lying still, with his eyes fast fixed on the
ground.

Hereupon, the Knight of the Green Sword called to Lasinde, saying; Alight
from thy horse, and smite off his head. Lasinde presently dismounted, and as he
lifted up his arm to strike, the other cried out. Alas Sir, for Gods sake take
pity on me, and I will tell you the truth instantly. Make haste then, (said
Angriote) or another shall be hastier with thee, then thou would have him to
be. Then (by little and little) he began to relate what had happened, saying.

Understand my Lords, I and my companions being advertised, that two Knights
errant, were newly arrived in this Country, to enquire after the knight of the
Green Sword, we resolved to kill them, as thinking by that means, to do
displeasure to him whom they desired to find, because we hate him deadly. And
in regard we feared to set on them both together, we devised to sunder them,
by misinforming them, as already you have heard. But when we came to the
Fountain of the high Beeches, he whom we conducted, in pretense of delivering
the condemned Lady, suffered his horse to water there: and as he let loose the
reins of his bridle, we ran upon him, giving him so many hurts with our Swords
and Axes, before he had the least means of defending himself) that he fell
down dead, as we supposed, for he appeared not to move any limb.

Villain, (answered Amadis) durst thou commit such detestable treason, under
color of thy hatred to me? How Sir, quoth the other, are you the Knight of the
Green Sword? Look villain, said Amadis, and see it here hanging by my side.
Then Sir, quoth the other, you may partly hold me excused, because what I have
done, was by the persuasion of a kinseman of mine, whom you have slain, and
here you may behold him lying at my feet. A year is not yet fully expired,
since he received by you, the greatest shame that any man could have, and his
name was Brandasidel, whom I know not whether you remember as yet, or no. You
made him mount upon his horse, with his face backward and to hold the tail in
steed of a bridle, with his Shield renuersed, and so presented him to Grasinda.

Heereat he conceived such displeasure, that in mere malice to you, he envied
all other knights errant, as we did the like in love to him. Thus have I
declared the whole truth to you, and humbly entreat you, (without any respect
to mine offense) to grant me mercy, beyond all merit.

Our Knight began to be compassionate, answering. The mercy thou shall have,
is not to abridge the punishment thou have justly deserved: but in hope that
thou will become an honester man hereafter, then hitherto thou have bin, in
this regard thy life is spared. But if thou fall to thine old byas, assure thy
self, time will fit me with a sharper revenge, r then now I can or will take
on thee, So leaving him, they rode directly toward the Town: and falling
from one discourse to another, our knight demanded of Angriote, what news he
had brought out of Great Britain? He resolved him all things that he could,
and told him (among other matters) that a reverend Hermit, named Nascian, had
given King Lisuart one of the very goodliest young Gentlemen, that ever was
seen: whom he recovered (in his swaddling clothes) out of the teeth of a
Lioness, carrying him for food to her young ones: Also how the Queen had
given him to the Princess Oraina, to serve her (quoth he) with my Son Ambor:
but there is very great difference between them, because Ambor is mightily
deformed, and the other an incomparable creature. You may (quoth Amadis) report
of your Son as you please, but if he carry resemblance with his Father, he
will prove a man of extraordinary merit. To women let us leave beauty and fair
feature, who are curious and inquisitiue after such nicities: and would to God
your Son were of age to follow me, then should I require him of you, and that
very earnestly, to keep company with Gandalin, on whom I purpose to bestow
knighthood, so soon as I shall return into Gaul. Trust me Sir, said
Angriote, Gandalin does well deserve much at your hands, and if my Son were
so happy as you wish him, my hopes would mount far higher, then as yet they
can do.

Falling from this, into other talk, Amadis demanded, how long since he and
Bruneo had iourneyed together? Since our departure from Great Britain,
answered Angriote, we never abandoned one another company, for any fight or
Combat whatsoever could happen, till yesterday: and yet notwithstanding, we
have ended many strange and dangerous adventures, albeit (all of them)
inferior to your high fortune, against that deuilish Monster Endriagus,
according as we have thereof bin advertised. Wherefore I beseech you to let me
understand, how, and in what manner you fought together.

We must refer that, replied Amadis, till some more apt and convenient
leisure, because we now are near to the Town, and that will require a much
larger discourse, then the shortness of the way will permit us.

By this time they were arrived at Gransidaes Palace, who having heard tidings
of their coming, came very kindly to welcome them, conducting them to the
Chamber where Bruneo lay, who began to find himself better and better, by
such good means as Master Elisabet had used to him. But when he saw them all
three so well met together, he was not a little joyful, praising God for such
a fortunate success.

And as they parled on their passed adventures, our Knight of the Green Sword,
declared to them, the promise which he had made to Grasinda, and what shipping
she prepared for passage into Great Britain: whereof they were all exceeding
joyful, in regard of their long-desired return thither. In the mean while,
Bruneo grew to able strength, and being in disposition to endure the Seas: all
things wear readily fitted for the voyage; Grasinda and they going aborde,
with such a convenient company as was thought meet.

So hoysing sail, they launched forth* into the Deep, where they were so
assisted by successful winds, as (in very few days) they lost all sight of
the Islands of Romania.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Queen Sardamira, with the other Ambassadors from the Emperor Patin,
arrived at the Court of King Lisuart, hoping (at their return) to bear thence
the Princess Oriana with them: And of that which happened to certain Roman
Knights, offering injury to a Knight errant.

THe Ambassadors from the Emperor Patin, being come to King Lisuarts Court:
they were entertained by him most honorably, having understood the occasion,
that drew them from Italy into Great Britain. After audience granted to
their Embassy, he told them, that he would call a Council of all his Lords
together, and then they should have an answer: yet he gave them this comfort,
that he made no doubt, but they should return to the Emperor their Masters
contentment. At this time was not Oriana in the Court; for, having understood
the cause of their coming, she feigned her self sick, to avoid all means of
speaking with them, and therefore was retired to Mirefleur.

The Queen Sardamira, upon this hopeful procrastination, determined to go see
the Princess, making her intention known to the King: who liked well ^of, and
for her better conuoy, gave the good old Knight Grumedan charge of her. On the
morrow following, she set forth from the Court, to let the Princess
understand, how the Emperor affected her dearly, how honorably he would
receive her, and what rare singularities she should see in Rome. But herein
she was much deceived, because her very mere remembrance of Amadis, gave her
more sweet content in soul, then any thing else in the world could do.

Now was the season of the year exceedingly hot, in which regard, the Queen
(for her better refreshing on the way) sent diverse of her servants before, to
pitch her Tents near a little River, that ran along within three miles of
Mirefleure. There she alighted, accompanied with Grumedan, and many Lords,
Ladies and Gentlewomen of her own country; among whom were five Roman
Knights, who imagined so well of themselves, as none in Great Britain could
come near them. Being within their Tents, their five Shields were hanged
without at the entrance, and their Lances likewise leaning against them: which
was a signal (according to the custom observed among Knights errant or
trauayling) that no one might pass by before them, without trial of the
Combat, and these enstructions they received from Grumedan. To whom they made
answer, that they would essay themselves against those of Great Britain, to
let them well know: that they had better skill then they, both in breaking a
Lance, and handling a Sword. We shall see (replied Grumedan) how it will go
with you: and yet I dare assure ye, there may some such pass (...), as will
find ye work enough to do.

As thus they held on their discourse, they espied (a far off) a Knight
coming, which was the gentle Prince Florestan, who (in vain) had trauayled
through many countries, to find his Brother Amadis. And now (very pensiuely)
he was riding to King Lisuarts Court, hoping to hear some better news, by the
Romans that so lately came thither, as had been told him by the way: and
seeing the Tents there erected, he rod toward them, to understand who was
within them. He happened to a Pauillion, the linen walls whereof were high
exalted, that the coolness of the fresh air, might the better be conuayed to
the Ladies within, who sat devising together on pretty and pleasing purposes.
Florestan sat leaning upon his Lance, regarding the Ladies very earnestly,
yet not delivering so much as one word because his thoughts were otherwise
busied: which caused one of the Ladies to speak somewhat roughly to him, in
this manner. Believe me, Sir Knight, me thinks you show your self very
unmannerly, to appear thus boldly before so many great Ladies as are here
present, not using any reverence at all to them. But perhaps there Shieldes
here hung up, called you hither, to declare more duty toward their Masters,
then you would seem to owe to us. In good faith, Gentlewoman (answered
Florestan) you have great reason thus to check me: and yet let me tell ye,
mine eyes were so seriously busied in behoulding such bright beauties, as quite
berest my bodies faculties, and made them fall into this offense. Therefore,
most humbly I enter at you all together, to pardon this great neglect in me,
for which I will make amends as you shall please to appoint me.

The Lady would not so give him over, but said, pardon is to be desired, after
the mends is made, and not before, with all my heart Lady (answered he)
provided, that you interdict not my iousting against your Knights, or else
command them, to hang up their Shields within your Tent. How Sir (quoth she)
do you imagine, that they hang here upon no stronger condition, but to be
taken down so lightly? Persuade your self, before their Masters can be
thereto urged, they are absolutely determined; to conquer other, from such
errant Knights as shall pass this way, to triumph over them afterward in Rome,
whether they intend to bear them, with their names upon them, to whom they
appe^^ained. (Wherefore, if you shun falling into such inevitable danger:
let me persuade you to depart hence, with so much have as possibly you can
make. In good sadness Madame, answered Florestan, although I find little
friendship, and have far less knowledge of you: yet will I not follow your
council, nor stand in fear of the shame you speak of. But in steed of my
Shield, which they may hope to bear with them to Rome: I will have all theirs,
and send them to the Firm or Enclosed Isle, to beautify the place, among many
other that are there already.

As thus he spoke, he made an humble reverence to the Ladies, and so rod
toward the other Pauillions. Grumedan had heard all this discourse between
the Knight and the Ladies, which made him suddenly presume, that he was some
kinsman to noble Amadis: and it mounted his spirits very iocondly, with a
hopeful persuasion, that he would qualify the over daring pride of the
Romans, who (upon opinion of their own worthiness) contemned all other
nations in the world. Coming forth of his Tent, he beheld him to handle the
Shildes each after the other, and that in such manner, as daring their Masters
to come to the loust: afterward he with drew thence, crossing over the little
river, in expectation of them that had any quarrel against him. The five
Roman Knights mounted on horseback, intending all together to set upon him:
but Grumedan stayed them in this manner, saying.

How Lords? would you offer to break honorable custom, and combat five
against one Knight only? you ought to go one after another, according as your
Shields have been touched: and remember your selves well, for by the Knights
outward appearance, he will not easily be put to disgrace. Lord Gramedan,
answered Gradamor, we Romans differ very far from you, because you
commend, before the deed be done, and we, after it is effected: and let me tell
ye, you will hardly find any Knight equal to us. I know not (replied
Grumedan) what they are whom you talk of, and hold in such high estimation:
but if I were to deal with any of you, that offered me the very least injury:
I should hope to loose no honor thereby. Grumedan, Grumedan, answered
Gradamor, you have a good conceit of yourselfe, and I could wish (though it
did cost me my fairest fortune) that we two were now as ready one for another:
as I shall quickly be for him, that is so boldly come hither to seek his own
shame. And yet I fear it will never fall to my turn; because he whose Shield
he first handled, will handle him with such severe chastisement, as I shall not
need to display mine arm against him.

Here at Grumedan smiled, saying. Well Sir. take heed you hap not into the
hazard, for many times it comes to pass; that they who think to vanquish
others, are disfauoured and foiled themselves by fortune, who never was friend
to the presumptuous. I understand you well (said Gradamor) and that thus we may
contest here till it be night. So, going to him whose Shield was first touched,
he said. Go my dear companion, and make it apparently known, what difference
there is between well speaking, and bad doing. Be confident in me, replied the
other, I am not made for prating enterparlaunce, and never let any account be
had of me: if (at our very first shock) I make him not measure his length on
the ground; except he deliver me his Shield, and his horse to you Lord
Grumedan, which I perceive is very fair and goodly. So crossing the river, and
placing his Lance in his rest, he ran against Florestan, and Florestan
against him, but failed of breaking their Lances: nevertheless, they met with
their Shields and bodies together so mainely, as the Roman (being less
expert then the other) was cast down from his horse, and breaking his arm in
the fall, lay all along so am azedly confounded, as he was able to move
neither hand or foot.

Hereupon, Florestan cried out to his own Squires, to stay the horse, which
ran about the field, and and to take the Shield from about the Knights neck and
hang it up upon a tree, where he poynted him. Then returning to the place
where he began his course, he attended for a second man, to succor his
companion, who very soon after presented himself. But if the first found a
cursed entertainment; this other met with one much worse, for Florestan gave
him such a wel-come with his Lance: that it entered quite through his Shield,
coat of Maile; and pierced far into the flesh, so that his girts braking, by
strength of the encounter, he tumbled over and over, with the horses saddle
between his legs, and having perfected his race, Florestan turned back
again, saying. By my faith, Knight, the Saddle shall be yours, but the horse
mine, upon condition: that (hereafter) you publish your prowess in the
Capitol of Rome, in what manner you attempted, and how you sped.

These words were so audibly delivered, as the Ladies might easily understand
them: which pleased Grumedan so highly, that he said to the other Knights. If
you speed no better then your companions have done: I am of the mind, that at
your return to Rome, they need not break down any part of the walls, to let
in the glory of your triumph. Believe it Sir, answered Gradamor, before the
sport is ended, you shall see a contrary turn of chance, to his disadvantage
that you make so much account of, who (accidentally has ouer-throwne two of
our friends. I know not (said Grumedan) what may happen, but (for ought I yet
see) he means to defend his Shield manfully, and conquer yours: for carriage of
them to the Enclosed Isle, as he said, not to be placed in rank of those
belonging to loyal loouers, but among such Knights, as left their arms more
upon compalsion, then with their own good wills. Therefore, it stands you now
upon, and that very needfully, to display the strength of your arm, that I be
not troubled to day to arm my self, to defend the honor of our knights, on
whom you have thrown such foul aspertions, and scandalous imputations.

At these words Gradamor laughed heartily, and nodding his head (as in derision)
replied Lord Grumedan, it likes you to be pleasant, and to imagine me of no
more might or courage, then to combat against your brauing speeches: bewell
assured, that (before day light shut in) I shall make you to repent them. I
hear you say so, answered Grumedan: but he that has begun to feast your
fellows will dress a better dish for you before it be night, very much
offended was the Queen Sardamira, to hear Gradamor contest thus upon no
occasion. In this time, Florestan had recovered the downe-cast Knights horse,
and hung his Shield up by the other. Then returning to his first place, and
taking a new Lance, he stayed the coming of another.

Then came forth the third knight, who, with a stearne countenance, shook his
staff so strongly, as if he would have doubled it together, and giving the
spurs to his horse, ranue against Florestan. But Florestan (who was one of
the most active Knights in the world) met him with such direct encounter on the
Helmet, that it fell off from his head; and the shocke was so violent, as, if
he had not quickly caught hold about his horse neck, he had fallen to the
ground. Then turning bridle, he took his Lance by the steel head, intending
to smite him with the great end thereof: but he turned aside from the blow,
covering himself with his Shield, whereon Florestan caught such fast hold, that
he core it from his neck, beating him so often about the pace, as he was
enforced to fall down. Where Florestan left him, crying out, that every one
might hear him. By my faith Knight, it was ill done of you, to begin so
badly, with triumphing over our Shields at Rome, when yours must keep company
with theirs, that I must send to the Enclosed Isle. The like success befell to
the fourth man, who, in falling from his horse, brake his leg.

Now, there remained none but Gradamor, who continuing still his presumptuous
speeches, said to Grumedan: See you be ready to answer me, so soon as I have
disciplinde vonder saucie companion, in whose behalf you have spoken somewhat
too liberally this day: and I if I do not make you to unsay those words, let
me never here after back a horse that may be worthy any thing. That will
appear by and by, replied Gramedan; but I dare believe nothing till I see it:
and if you come fairly off from the strange Knights entertainment, you and I
shall have leisure to talk together the better.

Gradamor would then return no answer, but in a great rage passed over the
River, and cried to the Knight, to guard himself. Then Florestan ran against
him; and the shocke was so violent between them both, that Gradamor bended his
Shield together: but Florestan took him at such apt advantage, that he threw
him quite out of his Saddle, into a quagmine, full of stinking soil and dirt.
Now I dare swear, said Gramedan (speaking then to the Queen) for ought I yet
know, I shall have leisure enough to breathe my self, wh^ Gradamor have made
clean his Armor, and recovered another bone to deal with me.

Believe me Sir (quoth she) he has but badly maintained those great words
which he spoke to you: but he did like them, to whom de^serued chastisement is
due, and therefore you may well hold him excused.

All this while, Gradamor labored very painfully, to get himself out of the
filthy bogge, wherein he feared lest he should be drowned, but at last, he
came very fowlly forth, so ashamed of his misfortune, as death could have bin
more wel-come to him. Then ^ooke he off his Helmet, for he was almost poisoned
with the smell of the puddle, as being no way able to endure it. And as he
stood to recover breath Florestan (in a mocking manner) said to him. Knight,
thou that can skill so well, of threatening men that thou know not: if thou
can handle thy Sword no better then thy Lance, thou art not the man that
must carry my Shield to Rome, as of late thou madst thy brag to do,

Before God, answered Gradamor, mine arm is yet strong, and my Sword keeue
enough, to take revenge on thee, and the very boldest Knight in all Great
Britain if he offer me any injury: as thou shall presently perceive, if
thou darste maintain the custom of this country against me.

Now, albeit Florestan was there with much better acquainted, then Gradamor
could be, yet he demanded of him what it was? It is convenient (quoth he) and
agreeing with the order of Arms, that thou should either restore me my
horse, or else alight on foot, that our manner of fight may be equal: then,
he that shall gain the better, let him deal with his enemy as likes him best
without any admission of mercy.

Trust me, replied Florestan, I will fulfill thine own desire: although I am
well assured, that thou would not show such courtesy to me, if thou had
me at the like advantage, as now I have thee. But because it were very
unreasonable, that so goodly a Roman Knight, being ^oylde with such filth
and dirt, should make his horsein as bad a case as he is himself: I will
dismounte from mine, at thine entreatie. So he alighted on foot, and couerieg
himself with his Shield, marched boldly against Gradamor, who made no doubt
now, but to revenge his injury very sufficiently.

The fight began, and continued (for some while between them) very sharply and
cruel: notwithstanding, it lasted not long; for Florestan (who was one of the
most skillful Knights then living) brought his enemy to such extremity, that
he drew him so far as to the Queens Pauilion, where he fell down, by
reason of a mighty stroke delivered on the top of his Helmet; and lay so bear
ft of al his senses, as he could stir neither hand nor foot. Then Florestan
set his foot upon him, and taking him by the leg, dragde him a long to the
miry puddle, whereinto he fell at the first: but the Laces of his Helmet
chanced to break, so that it fell off from his head, and the fresh air
driving away his trance, gave him sight of his imminent danger, which made him
crave pardon of Florestan, and cry out to the Queen for help.

By my faith (quoth she to Grumedan) this shame and peril is justly fallen
upon him: for by the same Law which he made himself, he must now receive his
enacted punishment.

Florestan looking angerly on Gradamor, said unto him. Can thou crave
mercy, considering what covenant has past between us, and on an edict
willingly set down by thy self? Look for none other favor, then what I am
bound to, by thy own conditions. Wretch that I am then, answered Gradamor,
there now remains no hope or comfort. No, (quoth Florestan) and so assure thy
self, except thou do two things that I shall command thee. Alas Sir, said
Gradamor, I am ready to obey you, and to do whatsoever you shall enjoin me.
Write then presently, replied Florestan, thy name, and those of thy companions,
with thine own blood, upon these Shieldes, and afterward, thou shall know the
rest of my will. Gradamor was in such fear, as he seemed rather dead then
alive: for Florestan stood with his Sword still over him, ready (at a word) to
smite off his head. Whereupon, he called for one of his servants, to bring him
a Penner speedily, and taking forth a pen, filled it with his own blood,
and so performed the command of Florestan.

On horseback mounted he presently, and taking a strong Lance from one of
his Squires, returned again to Gradamor, saying: Base Knight, this Lance was
never made, but for their revenge, whom thou have hitherto cowardly and
injuriously abused: thou die thereon instantly, except Grumedan entreat me
to save thy life. Alas Sir, quoth Gradamor, he will never do it.

Scarcely had he finished these words, but Florestan made a proffer to thrust
it in his throat: which made him fearfully cry out: Ah gentle Knight
Grumedan, entreat some favor for me. At this cry Grumedan came near, and
returned him this answer. Believe me knight, your great presumption has
brought you into this dangerous estate: and if he whom you so audaciously
threatened, should smite your head off from your shoulders, he did no more then
you have justly deserved. Nevertheless, for this time, I will desire him to
pardon and forgive you.

Then Florestan, turning to Grumedan, said. Lord Grumedan, you have power to
command me: and seeing it is your will that he shall live, I am contented to
remit him. And therefore, thou Roman Knight, thank him for thy life, and
remember withal, that so soon as thou art come to Rome, thou report in the
open Senate, what honor all of you have won, against the Knights of Great
Britain, whom (in your common talk) you contemn and despise. And if your
Emperor take delight to hear you speak, be not neglect, in telling him it
often. Because (for my part) I will make known to the Knights of the Enclosed
Isle, the great liberality of you Romans in this Country, by parting so
lightly with your Arms, Horses and Shieldes, to men that you know not, and
when you are no longer able to defend them.

All these words uttered by Florestan, could not procure the least answer
from Gradamor: but he held down his head in no mean rage, to see himself so
flouted and scornde. Which Florestan well perceiving, to torment him the more,
thus again he proceeded.

For ought I see (gentle Cheualier, you may carry home to your huge City,
the huger ouer-weening you brought with you hither: because we silly Knights
errant, have no other care, but of ou^ honest and courteous behavior, which
you abhor by birth and custom. Yet if thereby you would compass the
affection of your fair friends, let me persuade you, to travail to the Arch
of loyal Lovers, to make it apparently known, whether you have as much love
as valor. Perhaps you may thereby win such honor and glory, as will make
you the more esteemed of your Country men, and increase favor for ye among
your gracious Mistresses; who knowing your former approbation, if they be
women of sound judgment, they will not (all their life time) change you for
worse.

Grumedan having heard all this conference, nothing could better content him,
then to see these proud Romans thus disgraced by one Knight only. On the
other side, Gradamor was in such tormenting affliction: as (without returning
any answer to Florestan) he said to Grumedan. I pray you Sir, let me be
carried into one of the Tents: for I feel my self so ill, as it is not
possible for me to live any long while. Self do, self have, replied
Grumedan; commanding the Squires to bear him in, returning afterward to
Florestan, saying.

Sir Knight, if it agreed with your good liking, I would gladly know of whence,
and what you are, confessing my self therein the more beholding to you: and so
much the rather, because a man of your esteem and merit, ought not to conceal
his name among his friends. Lord Grumedan (quoth he) you must needs pardon me,
because I have so highly offended the Queen, and these Ladies here present
this day, as I would not by any means be known, although their excelling
beauties were the only cause thereof. For, seeing them all so fair, my senses
were so transported, as I sat gazing on them, not using any salutation to them.

Therefore, I entreat you to pray them to pardon me, or else to take such
satisfaction of me, as shall be liking to themselves: then send me answer to
the round Hermitage, where I intend to repose my self all this day.

Assure your self Sir, answered Grumedan, for your sake, I will prevail with
them so far^e as I may, and I do^bt not, but they will be easily conteuted,
when they hear how honest an offer you make them. I pray you Sir, till me,
replied Florestan, do you hear any tidings of Lord Amadis? Here you must
observe, that Grumedan loved Amadis as dearly, as any man could do, and the
mere remembrance of him, caused the tears to trickle down his reverend
beard, and thus he replied to Florestan: So God me help (gentle Knight) since
the time that he parted from Gaul, with the King his Father, we never heard
what became of him: and be you sure, that if I could have known anything of
him, I should take no small pleasure in telling it to you, or any that is a
friend to him.

In good faith, answered Florestan) I make no doubt of it; for I know you to be
so loyal, as if all men were of your mind, treason or villainy could find no
entertainment among men, as now adays they do, and that too commonly.

Thus speaking, he commended him to Gods protection, and Grumedan returned
back to the Ladies: ^ut very soon after, he espied one of Florestans Squires
coming toward him, who saluted him from his Master, in this manner.

Lord Grumedan, my Lord Florestan (with whom you conferred so lately) has sent
you this Horse, belonging ye^ while to Gradamor, which he thinks fit for your
service. And these four other horses beside, he prays you to present them
(as his gift) to the Lady, with whom he had some parlance, at his arrival
first at these Tents. Very joyful was Grumedan of this present, because it was
won from the menacing Roman, but much more io^und in soul, when he knew
him, that sent it: to whom he bare most intimat affection, as well in regard
of his love to Amadis, as for the manly valor remaining in him. So, he
conducted the Squire, where the Lady was, to whom he thus spoke. Fair Lady,
the Knight that was this day contemned by you, in too many several
disgraceful kinds, only for carrying ouergood opinion of your vanquished
Romans, have sent you their four horses, and desires you to bestow the^ on
whom you please.

The Lady shaping her answer to the Squire, replied thus. Honest Friend,
thank your Master, and tell him, he had better pleased me in sending his own
horse, then all these, conquered against my mind. Madame, I believe you,
answered the Squire: but they that covet to win any thing from him, must be
more bold and hardy Knights then these, of whom, their success makes too
pitiful mention. Squire (quoth she) think not much, that I wish their
honor and profit more, then I do your Masters, whom I know not, neither ever
saw before this day: Nevertheless, now I have beheld his manly disposition, I
grieve that I have spoken any thing to his dislyking, and will make amends for
my rashness, whenever he shall plea^e.

The Squire took his leave of her and Grumedan, returning toward his Master,
that awayted his coming, to whom he recounted all the discourse between him
and the Lady: whereat Florestan laughed heartily. And causing them to take
thence the conquered Romans Shields, he took his way to the Hermitage,
determining to stay in no place more then one night, until he arrived at the
Enclosied Isle; where he hoped to find Galuanes, who kept it during the
absence of Amadis, and there he would leave the Romans Arms, according as he
had formerly promised them.

Here you are to understand, that so soon as the Squire parted from the Lady,
Grumedan went to converse with the Queen Sardamira, to whom he made known,
that he who had vanquished her Knights, was Florestan, brother to Amadis, and
told her (beside) what tokens he had sent. How Sir? (quoth she) was this
Florestan, Son to King Perion of Gaul, and the bright Countess of Saladria?
Yes truly Madame, answered Grumedan, and one of the very worthiest Knights
that I know. I know not (said she) how he has carried himself in this
Country; but heretofore the sons of the Marquess of Ancona (among whom he
frequented in Romania, for the space of three years together) have assured
me, that they never saw a more active Knight. Nevertheless, they durst not
(for their lives) speak one word of him before the Emperor, who never loved
him, neither would endure to hear any thing in his commendation. Madame, said
Grumedan, do you know the reason of his spleen?

That I do (quoth she) it is only out of his hatred to Amad^s, who is his
Brother, and conquered the Enclosed Isle, concluding all the strange
adventures there. Which the Emperor had reserved for himself: but Amadis
prevented him; whereat he conceived such displeasure, as he would very gladly
any way contriue his death.

Grumedan smyling at these words uttered by the Queen, replied: By my faith
Madame, if the Emperor were so well advised as he* might be, he has more
reason to love and respect him, in saving him from the dishonor that he might
there have fallen into, as many more did, that essayed those adventures, yet
none but the good Knight Amadis, could have the glory of finishing them.

B^t credit me Madame, this is not the cause of his malice to Amadis; but
another matter, which I knew long since. If you be a kind Knight, (quoth she)
conceal it not from me.

Then he declared, what had happened to the Emperor, singing his supposed
Loves praises, when he found Amadis laid under the Tree in the Forest, and
what words they had together, till it drew on the Combat, as has been
rehearsed in the second Book. Why then (said the Queen) I well perceive, that
the occasion of their hatred is not small, but of much greater nature then I
took it to be.

CHAP. XIIII.
How the Queen Sardamira sent to entreat Florestan, to be her conduct to
Mirefleure, to Oriana: Because he had so curstly handled the Knights that kept
her company, as they were able to follow her no further.

AS thus the Queen and Grumedan were conferring together, of that which
happened to the Emperor Patin, who under pretense of love to her then in those
days, passed from Italy into great Britain, to approve his manhood against
all Knights errant, and to maintain withal, that her beauty far exceeded
Orianaes, and all other Princesses in the world: At last he fell into the
discourse, (whereof all this while he had been silent) how Amadis handled him
in the Forest, which the Queen had no little delight in, to hear it thus
discovered by Grumedan. Among other variety of talk; at last, he said unto
her: Madame, what message will you send to Florestan?

The Queen heereat was very pensive, but having a while well considered with
her self, she thus answered. Sir, you see in what estate my Knights are, as
they are neither able to guard themselves, nor me: therefore I do earnestly
desire, that you and Florestan would be my guides, till such time as I might
arrive at Mirefleure. Madame, replied Grumedan, Florestan is so absolute a man,
and discreetly advised, as he did never deny Lady or Gentlewoman, any thing
that they could demand of him. By much greater reason (then) will he not
forget himself to you, considering, it will be pleasure to him to do you any
service: and so much the rather now, because he craves pardon of you, for the
fault wherein (he thinks) he has offended you. Let me entreat you then good
Sir, answered the Queen, to lend me one of your Squires, for conduct of this
Gentlewoman to him, by whom I will give him to understand my will.

Heereto Grumedan condiscended, and presently they departed thence with Letters
of credence, importing the pleasure of her Mistress. So long rode she and the
Squire together, that they came to the Hermitage, where they found Florestan,
who instantly took knowledge of the Gentlewoman: for it was she that so checked
him at the Queens Pauillion; nevertheless, he welcomde her very graciously,
and she (in saluting him) used these words. Sir Knight, at a certain hour of
this day, I little thought of any command, to come and find you in this place,
as imagining then, that matters would have fallen out far otherwise then they
did, between our Knights and you. Gentlewoman (quoth he) your self does
sufficiently know, that the fault proceeded from themselves, in demanding such
a matter of me, as I could no way yield to, but with mine own deep dishonor.
But tell me I pray you, did the Queen (your Mistress) abide there all this
day, in the same place where I left her? Behold Sir (quoth the Gentlewoman) a
Letter which she has sent you: And kissing it (...) she humbly presented it
to his hand.

Now, because (as I h^^e formerly told you) crede^^e was absolutely committed
to her charge: Florestan desi^ed her, to declare ^^r m^ssage. My Lord, quoth
she, seeing you have disabled the Knights, that had the charge of her conduct,
and the way (which she must pas^e by) is not safe, as she is g^^en to
understand: the Queen my Mistress does earnestly desire you, that you would
be her guide to Mirefleure, where she hopes to find the Princess Oriana, with
whom she has especial occasion of conference.

Truly Gentlewoman (answered Florestan, I should be very sorry, to deny so
goodly a Lady as your Queen is, in any thing she pleases to command of me,
and most humbly I thank her, for the high honor she does me, in choosing me to
her conduct: but now the day is so far spent, and the Sun declining to his
rest, that I think it necessary to tarry till the break of day, and to morrow
morning we will be so early with her, as if we had rested there all night.
Do (said the Gentlewoman,) as seems best to your self.

Then food was brought them to eat, and they supt together, devising on diverse
things, until it was a fit hour for rest. Now, because, beside the place
where the old Hermit slept himself, there was but another very small Cell.
Florestan left it to the Gentlewoman, and went to repose himself under the
Trees, until the hour of dislodging thence. Being armed, he called for the
Gentlewoman, and so they took their way toward the Queen, who continually
exspected when they would come. Being arrived at the Tents, Florestan entered
that, belonging to Grumedan: who met him, with kind embraces, not a little
(...) of his presence. And after ^rs speeches passed between them, Grumedan
said unto him: My Lord Florestan, me thinks the Queen has sustained no
loss, finding so good a change of you for her own Knights: and thus much let
me assure you, that she is one of the very wisest Princesses I have ever
seen, highly deserving to be honored and served. Upon my faith Lord
Grumedan, answered Florestan, I account my self happy, if I may accomplish any
thing liking to her.

So walking up and down within the Tent; with a loving embrace, Grumedan said.
Tell me Sir, I pray you, what have you done with the Shields you carried hence
yesterday? Why Sir (quoth he) I have sent them all to your dear friend
Galuanes, who now is at the Enclosed Isle, because he may there rank them
according to their merit. And if any other Knights of Rome desire to
re-obtaine them, as in revenge of their fellows shame, they may there also
compass the means, by trial, how well they deserve at the Arch of loyal
Lovers.

In the speaking of these words, the Queen Sardamira entered into Grumedans
Tent: which caused Florestan to be silent; and meeting her with humble
reverence, fell on his knee to kiss her hand. But the Queen stayed him by the
arm, and raising him up gently from the ground, said, that he was most
heartily welcome. Madame (quoth he, I have all my life time bin a servant to
Ladies: by a much stronger obligation (then ever) do I now stand engadged, to
employ my very uttermost pains for you, whose merit reaches beyond them all.
In good faith Sir, replied the Queen, I must needs thank you, for the great
pains you have taken; and seeing you are so ready to make amends, for the
fault wherein my Knights have offended: reason requires that I should likewise
pardon you, for any error against me or my women.

Me thinks Madame (answered Florestan) that I can feel no pain or travail
by obeying you: in regard that your admired beauty does well deserve the
conduct of a far better Knight then I am. But in affording me this honor,
you bind me to ye, in more then I shall be able to satisfy.

Let us break off this talk, said the Queen, and tell me; shall we now set
forward on our journey? When you please Madame, answered Florestan. First,
quoth Grumedan, I hold it mere, to convey these wounded Knights, to a Town
not far hence, where they may be well attended, until they be able to mount
on horseback. Let it be so, said she. Then was a goodly white palfray brought
her, whereon being safely seated she set onward with her Ladies and
Gentlewomen, being guided by Florestan and Grumedan, who entertained the time
with such good discourse, as the way seemed neither long or tedious.

Here I must tell ye, that the Princess Oriana had (long before) heard of
the Queens coming to Mirefleure, only to see her, which grieved her very
greatly, knowing she would talk with her concerning the Emperor, whose very
name was hateful to her. But when she understood withal, that Grumedan and
Florestan came in her company, her sorrow was indifferently assuaged, hoping to
hear (by them) some tidings of Amadis. And as she was busied in these
thoughts, news came, that they were alighted at the gate; whereupon
shepresently went to welcome them.

The Queen Sardamira going for-most, made a low reverence to the Princess,
with a proffer of kissing her hand: but she took her by the arm, and led
her into a goodly Haule, expressly prepared for her entertainment. There they
sat down each by other, and the two Knights near unto them; and as they were
in talk together, Oriana (perceiving the Queen Sardamira lend an attentive
ear, to a private discourse between her and Grumedan) softly spoke thus to
Florestan aside.

In good sadness Lord Florestan, it is a very long time since we saw you in
this Country, to my no little coffeehouse: as well in regard of the
good will I ever bare you, as for the great loss many a poor soul has
sustained, who were wont to find help by you, your brother Amadis, and many
other of your followers. But cursed be they that caused this so long
separation, and I believe that I speak it not, but upon urgent occasion: for I
know a poor Damsel, in danger of disinheriting, because she has no man to
right the wrong offered her.

But if Amadis were here once again, and so many more as are too far off
absent: she might well assure her self, that that which is hers in justice,
should not so easily be taken from her; whereas by reason of their absence, she
has now no better hope or comfort, then only in death. Oriana continuing on
these speeches, tears issued abundantly from her fair eyes, as foreseeing
her unfortunate end, if the King should so much forget himself, to deliver her
to the Romans. And she had solemnly vowed between God and her soul, that
she should be no sooner on Ship-bord, but she would throw her self into the
Sea, and this was her final conclusion.

Very well understood Florestan, that this close-couched Enigma concerned her
self; whereupon he thus replied. Madame, God being all made of mercy, will
never be unmindful of them that put their trust in him: for (as yet) he
never did, and doubtless, he will not now begin with so desolate a Damsel.
As for my Lord Amadis, assure your self, that he is in perfect health,
continually in quest of strange adventures: so that his famous deeds in far
distant Countries, renownes his name in all parts of the world,

All these words were ouer-heard by the Queen Sardamira, and perceiving that
they spoke of Amadis, she said to Oriana. God keep him from the Emperors
fingers: for he is the only man in the world that he hates most, next to
another Knight, who soiourned some while in the Court of King Taffinor of
Bohemia. This Knight I now speak of, not much above a year since, ouer-came
(in open field) the most gentle Knight Garadan, the only man in all the
Roman Army: except the noble Prince Saluste Quide, who is now come into this
Country to the King your Father, to conclude a marriage between his Lord and
you. And he bears him this hatred, for causing the over throw of eleven other
Knights beside: whose hope was to revenge the injury done to their friend on
the day following the Combat with the first knight, being appointed so many to
so many. This misaduenture so dismayed the whole Roman Army, that the
Emperor was compelled (according to a former-made covenant) to raise his Camp,
and to render back to King Taffinor, whatsoever he had conquered from him.

Afterward, so briefly as she could, the Queen reported, the whole manner of
the several fights, and to what issue they sorted, as you have heard already
at large. So help me God, Madame, answered Florestan, although your Emperor
should never love him, yet there are many other worthy men, that wish him all
true happiness and honor: and (in my poor opinion) Lord Amadis needs not
care for his malice.

Notwithstanding, make known to us (fair Queen) if you can, the name of the
man so much commended by your self. Understand Sir, (quoth she) one while he
calls himself, the Knight with the Green Sword, and another while, the Knight
of the Dwarf: albeit I am verily persuaded, that neither the one or the other
is his true name indeed. But because he wears a Sword, that has a scabberd
of green color, and a Dwarf does ordinarily attend on him: these names have
therefore been imposed on him, and usually he makes answer to them.

When Florestan heard these words, he was very joyful, knowing for a
certainty, that it was Amadis: the like did Oriana, who had noted the same
reports before by many. And because she was now some hinderance to her, that
she could not have any longer private conference; she arose, thus speaking to
the Queen Sardamira. Madame, in regard of your tedious journey this day, you
cannot choose but be weary; wherefore a place of repose is more convenient for
you. Then she conducted her into a goodly Chamber, and there leaving her to
her own desseignes, went down into the Garden, accompanied with Mabila and
the Damsel of Denmark, to whom she declared all her former intelligence,
concerning the knight of the Green Sword, whom they knew assuredly to be Amadis.

On my faith Madame, said Mabila, if it be so, let me tell you the Dream
which I had this last night past. Me thought that we were in a Chamber close
shut up, and that we heard a great tumultuous noise without, which made us
fearful beyond measure: but your Amadis suddenly coming thither, brake the
door, calling for you out aloud. Then I showing you to him, me thought he
took you by the hand, and so brought us forth, placing us in a very strong
Tower, saying to us: Abide here, without any dread or terror, and therewithal
I happened to wake. This makes me verily believe, that he will set you at
liberty, and free you from their power, that hope to have you hence.

Dear Friend and Cousin, answered Oriana, you give me great hope and comfort;
and if I were worthy of such a happiness, I could desire our Lord to hear
your good wishes: otherwise, that we might both dye in one instant. Forbear
such words, replied Mabila; for he that is above all fortunes whatsoever, will
send you (at his good pleasure) a better issue out of all troubles, then you
can wish or imagine. But confer with Florestan, and earnestly desire him and
his friends, to do their best endeavor, to break the Kings intention, that
no such conclusion may pass for current.

Now, let me tell you, that Galaor had already done so much as was possible for
him, not by any advertisement or entreaty urged to him on the Princesses
behalf: but because he plainly perceived, what shame would ensue by
disinheriting Oriana, for the advancement of her Sister Leonora. For, some day
or two before Florestans arrival at Mirefleure, King Lisuart being returned
from hunting, took Galaor aside, as they rode on the way, thus speaking to
him. My loving friend, I have evermore found such fidelity in you, and reposed
such trust in your counsel, as I never intend to conclude any matter of
importance, without imparting it first to you. You understand what honor the
Emperor has done me, and his embassage so lately sent me, requesting to have
my daughter Oriana as his wife: wherein (as I conceive) our Lord has wrought
most graciously both for her and me, because he is the only potent and
redoubted Prince, at this day living in all Christendom.

In which respect, he being thus allied with me, I shall never have any
neighbor or enemy, that dare presume any way to offend me, and I shall be more
respected and dreaded, then ever any King of Great Britain heretofore has
been. Moreover, it is a matter almost impossible, to seek any better
provision for her; for she being wife to so mighty an Emperor, Leonora shall
afterward remain sole Lady of my Dominions, which otherwise may happen to be
divided, to our no little detriment and danger. And yet let me tell you, I
purpose not to do any thing in this case, without the advice of the Lords and
Knights of my Court: but more especially of you, whom I conjure (by the love
and affection you have always borne me) to tell me freely your opinion, and
without any dissimulation.

Much amazed was Galaor, to hear the King use such language, perceiving
apparently hereby, that he meant wholly to disinherite his eldest Daughter and
right heir, to advantage the second. For this cause, he stood a long while
very pensive, without answering so much as a word, till the King began again
thus to rouse him. Come Sir, awake your silent cogitation, and tell me truly
what you think. Sir (quoth he) I beseech you to hold me excused, for I find my
capacity over feeble, to yield you any faithful counsel in a case so
important. Moreover, you are minded to congregate the chiefest Lords of your
Land, to commune with them in so serious a business: and they (no doubt) like
loyal subjects, will direct you as becomes a King. But yet (quoth the King) I
would gladly first have your advice, else you will give me cause to
misconceite you. God shield me Sir, said Galaor, from so doing: rather I will
liberally lay my heart open to you, according to mine own poor judgment, and
the true integrity of my mind.

Sir, said he, whereas you say, that in marrying your Daughter Oriana with the
Emperor, there remains no possibility of a fairer fortune: surely, I am of a
quite contrary opinion; for, she being your principal Heir, and sent into so
remote a Country, to lose a kingdom already provided for her, you shall leave
her poor without means, and subject to a people, but slenderly agreeing with
the manners and conditions of this Nation. And whereas you conceit, that in
being wife to an Emperor, and dignified with the name of an Empress, her
authority and renown is the surer afterward: before God Sir, let me plainly
tell you, that you wrong both your judgment and reason therein. Fore-thinke
what may ensue, and say she have heirs male by her husband, which is the sole
comfort of any kingdom: she becoming a widow, the first favor her own
child shall do for her, is, to urge her retreat, to hold possession of the
Empire by himself. If he take a wife, then it falls out far worse for her,
because the new Empress will be second to none, and then it is most certain,
that your Princely Daughter lies open to a thousand inconveniences, and
unavoidable grievous extreamities. For first, she has lost this Country,
which was certain to her, as being her natural place of birth and breeding,
to live in a strange land, far from parents, subjects and servants, which is
no common kind of affliction.

And whereas you allege, that by his alliance and favor, you are sure to be
succored, and much feared. Surely Sir, I must tell you, that (thanks be given
to our Lord for it) you have so many true friends, and trusty Knights at your
command, as (without any help of the Romans) you may easily extend your
limits when you please.

And I am persuaded, that in exspectation of support from them, they will
rather seek to ruinate and destroy you, then furnish you with any such
assistance as you may imagine, scorning all equality, or any to be greater
then themselves. Moreover, it is most certain, that they can covet no better
means, then by compassing some apt occasion, to register you down in their
Chronicles, to your shame and their glory, under the shadow of some slight
favor, irregularly affoorded; then which, no greater mischief can happen to
you and yours.

And alas Sir, what reason have you to send the Princess Oriana so far from
you, being your Daughter and chiefest Heir, only to advance the Princess
Leonora, who is her younger Sister? By my soul, of a most upright and
impartial King, renowned through the wide world for the Author of Justice:
you will procure the greatest scandal to your reputation, and wound your
untainted honor so deeply, as never powerful Prince or King did the like.

But I hope that Heaven will better direct your judgment, and settle more
surer cogitations in your soul, which I (as the very meanest Knight in your
Court) do heartily desire. And believe it Sir, that I durst never have been so
bold, to tell you the free censure of my soul, but that you pleased so
expressly to command me, and I (as a loyal servant) could do no less. And
let this be your persuasion of me, that during my life time, I will keep my
promise, faith and fidelity to you, as one that stands much obliged to you, for
infinite good turns and favors done me.

Well declared King Lisuart by his countenance, that he was scarsely pleased
with Galaors remonstrance: and he likewise as quickly apprehended it:
wherefore, continuing on his speech, he said. Sir, King Perion my Father, has
commanded mine attendance on him in Gaul, so soon as possibly I can: and
because I mean to set hence to morrow morning, to the end you may not conceive,
but that I have counseled you faithfully; if you be so pleased, whatsoever I
have spoken, I will set down in writing, that you may acquaint them with it,
whom you intend to assemble together. I pray you do so, answered the King. And
at these words, they were come near unto the City, which made them alter
their discourse.

Being alighted, the King betook himself to his Chamber, where he sat down
very sad and pensive, and would not all that day be seen in any company. The
next morning, Galaor took shipping, according to his former determination: for
h^ould not be present at the resolution of this marriage, as knowing certainly,
that the King would not be altered from his purpose, notwithstanding all
advice and council to the contrary. More-ouer, he knew some part of the
priuacies between Amadis and Oriana, who all this while removed not from
Mirefleure, whither the Queen Sardamira came to see her, as you have heard
already, finding her to be the only fairest Princess in the world. What would
she then have thought, if she had seen her in her former condition, before
this continual melancholy seized her, for the absence of her Amadis, and this
new purpose for marriage, which grievously oppressed her? Being now somewhat
meagre, pale and pensive: yet she appeared, as if Nature had studied all her
lifetime, to make her the mirror of choicest perfection.

The Queen finding the day no way favorable, to acquaint Oriana with the
cause of her coming, deferred it till the next morning; when resorting again
to see her; and having first heard Mass together, they walked along the allies
of the Garden, and proceeded so far into the business, that she told her,
how dearly the Emperor affected her, what pursuit he made to enjoy her as
his wife, and what supreme felicity attended her, only by this marriage.

But the answer of Oriana was so untuneable, as the Queen durst proceed no
further with her: but in the interim, Florestan came to them, who purposing to
take his leave, that he might return to the Enclosed Isle, she took him
aside, declaring, what infinite afflictions hourly encompassed her, and how
shamefully the King her father dealt with her, by compelling her to marry into
a strange Country, and to the only man of the world, whom she least respected.

But believe it Sir, (quoth she) if he continue in this humor, the first news
he shall hear of me, after my departure hence, will be my death. For come what
may, if he sunder me from this Country, Death, and the Sea shall divide me also.

For it is my full intent, to drown all my disasters in the waves: who (for
ever) shall remain witnesses of my sorrows, and in them I exspect to find
more compassion, then in mine own kindred, country, friends and servants. And
therefore, honorable Lord Florestan, I humbly beseech you, (for Gods sake) to
employ some pains for dissuading him from his intention: otherwise (upon my
faith) it will be a great clogge of conscience to him, and the very straungest
misfortune, wherein a poor disinherited Lady can fall, being forsaken of God
and men.

Thus speaking, she wept so extremely, that Florestan (although he was one of
the greatest spirited men in the world) could not refrain from tears, having
his heart so confounded with compassion toward her, as he was not able to
utter a word. Notwithstanding, at last he got the maistrie of this oppressing
passion, and said. Madame, you shall do me great wrong, if you hold not this
conceit of me, that I am wholly yours, ready to obey you in any service till
death. But to speak to the King your father, as you would have me, it is a
matter beyond all possibility: for you your self do know, what hatred he
bears to me, only in the despite of my Lord Amadis, forgetful of so many
high and worthy services, as both he and all his lineage have evermore done to
him. And if he have received any from me, he never needs to thank me for it
considering, I never did any for his sake, but only by the command of him,
who has sovereign power over me, and whom I will not contradict at any time.
And that was the reason, for my being in the last war of the seven Kings, not
as any help to them of Great Britain: but only for preservation of your
just title and right thereto, as she that shall one day, (by Gods leave) be
Lady and Queen thereof.

Presume also Madame, that you have this interest in me, that this which you
have told to me, I will think on and make known to King Perion, and other
good friends, to procure some remedy for you in this distress. And I make no
doubt, but he will provide for you in such sort, as you shall have occasion to
rest contented. Nor purpose I to soiourne in any place, until I come to the
Enclosed Isle, where I shall find the Prince Agraies, who is very desirous to
do you any service, as your self does well know, especially for the love of
his Sister Mabila. There shall we consult together, what course is best to be
taken in this case, without spare of any thing remaining in our power. But know
you certainly, (quoth Oriana) that Agraies is, or will be there? Yes Madame,
said he, as Lord Grumedan has assured me, as he received instruction by one
of his Squires, that came thence within these few days. I beseech you then,
replied Oriana, to relate unto him amply, what confidence I do repose in him:
And if you hear any news of your Brother Amadis, fail not to acquaint me
therewith so soon as possibly you may. Thereof assure your self Madame,
answered Florestan.

With these words, he took his leave of her, kissing her lillie-white hand,
and returning to the Queen Sardamira, spoke thus. Madame, I am constrained by
force to leave you, and else where to seek after my further fortunes: but
wheresoever I shall bestow my self, be bold, that I am always your knight and
servant, and so I pray you to account of me. In good faith Sir, said she, they
that refuse so fair an offer, may well be reputed but poor in judgment:
because I am persuaded, that you are held to be one of the best and most
courteous knights this day living. And God shield me from such monstrous
ingratitude, to deny a servant of such honor and worth: rather most lovingly I
accept your kindness, and return you thanks with all my heart.

Florestan, looking on her with an affectionate eye, and beholding her to be so
amiably fair, said: Madame, I beseech our Lord, (who has enriched you with
such rare beauty) to grant your own hearts best desires: and thankefully I
take your most gracious answer, because now I can do nothing else for you,
but remain in ready willingness of service, wheresoever you shall please to
command me. So taking leave of her, Mabila, and the other Ladies, he mounted
on horseback: desiring Lord Grumedan, that if he received any tidings of
Amadis, he would let him understand thereof so soon as he could, at the
Enclosed Isle, whether he now went, to see Agraies and his other associates.

CHAP. XV.
How the Knight of the green Sword, (who afterward styled himself the Greek
Knight) Bruneo de bonne Mer, and Angriote d'Estrauaux, embarked themselves in
the company of the fair Grasinda, and of that which happened to them afterward:

MAster Elisabet having taken good order for Shipping, with all such
necessaries, answerable to the enterprise of Grasinda, the winds also sitting
fair and auspicious: she went aboard, attended by the Knight of the Green
Sword, Bruneo, Angriote, and many other Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen, as
partly has been reported already. Having weighed their Ankers, and put forth
into the large and spacious Seas, sometimes be calmed, and otherwhiles
tempestuously afflicted: at length, by favor of Heaven, and the great
diligence of Master Elisabet (an extraordinary skillful Pilot) they passed by
so many straites and Islandes, that they discovered the coaste of Great
Britain.

Then the Knight with the Green Sword, beholding the Country, where he hoped
to find his best happiness and comfort, became exceeding joyful. And because
he would by no means be discovered, he desired Grasinda, and all the rest in
his company, to entitle him no other thence-forward, but the Greek Knight.
Then he commanded Gandalin, to bring the six Swords, which the Queen
Menoressa had given him, at his departure from Coustantinople two of them he
gave to Bruneo and Angriote, and himself guirded on one, because he intended
not to be known by that which he usually woare, having a green scabbard, as
oftentimes has been before remembered.

Coming near to the place, where King Lisuart then made his aboade, Grasinda
and he being with-drawen aside, he began to her in this manner. Madame, by
gracious favor of the Heavens, we are now very near the Country, whereto
your heart has always pretended a most earnest desire: and I dare assure ye,
that without spare of life or any travail, I will endeavor to make known,
what bountiful graces you have from time to time affoorded me. Worthy Greek
knight (quoth she) such is my trust in God, that he will not take his mercies
from me, and as he has provided me of so good a knight to be my guide, so he
will bless me with the hope I aim at. But I pray you Sir, seeing we are so
near to land, let us go on shore, you, Angriote, Bruneo, and my self,
without any more; and there we may privately confer together, what is first
to be done, before I present my self to the Ladies of this Country.

Then Master Elisabet called for a Skiffe, which instantly was brought,
whereinto they entered: and as they made toward the Shore, they esspied a Ship
lying at Anchor. Hereupon our Greek Knight, being desirous to know who was in
it, commanded the Mariners to get near it, which being done, Angriote called
to them in the Ship, demanding whence they were, whether they were bound,
and who was aboard. Surely Sir, replied our Patron, our Ship is come from
the Enclosed Isle, and here are two Knights aboard, who will gladly tell ye,
what you desire to know. When our Greek Knight heard speech of the place,
whereto he was so much affected, and that two of his companions were there, his
heart leapt with joy; and Angriote continuing his questions, desired the
Patron, to cause the two Knights to come up on the Deck, and (in the mean
while) to tell him, how they were named. That may not I do, answered the
Patron, lest they should grow discontented with me; but I will call them up to
you; and performed his word accordingly.

Then they came up on the Orelop; and Angriote saluting them, demanded, if they
knew where King Lisuart lay? Trust me Sir, answered one of them, we will
gladly instruct you in any thing we can; but first we would entreat you, to
resolve us in one matter (if it consist in your power) for which we have
undertaken this voyage, and purpose not to soiourne in any place, until we
can be therein satisfied. If we know it, said Angriote, you may be well
assured, that we will not conceal it from you.

Sir Knights, (quoth the other) have you heard any news of a Knight, named
Amadis de Gaul, in search of whom, many of his friends have endured much
pains and travail, and have left few places without inquiry?

These words did so touch our Greek Knight with joy and compassion, that he
could not refrain from tears: considering, what affection so many worthy men
did bear him, and what sorrows they suffered for his sake. First tell me,
said Angriote, what, and who you are, and afterward, you shall understand so
much as I know. Then the other, who (all this while) had bin silent, stepping
forward, said: Such as know me, call me Dragonis, and this my companion is
named Enill, both resolved to ore-run the whole Ocean, and question Port by
Port, until we find the men we speak of. Gentlemen (quoth Angriote,) God be
your speed, and for your sakes, I will gladly enquire of our Ships, wherein
are strangers of many Nations, what they can say to this demand of yours. Our
Greek knight urged him to this answer, because he would not be known so
soon, Angriote then began again, saying: I pray you Sir, where may we find
King Lisuart, and what news is in his Court? Sir, answered Dragonis, he is now
in a certain City of his, called Tagades, an excellent Port of the Sea,
confronting Normandy. And there is a great assembly of his knights, sitting in
counsel, about a motion made by the Emperor of Rome, to enjoy his Daughter
Oriana in marriage, whereto no one will give consent. Already there are arrived
many Romans to convey her thence with them, among whom is the Prince Salusta
Quide, Duke of Calabria, and other the greatest Lords of the Empire, beside a
worthy train of Ladies and Gentlewomen; and she is (already) called Empress
of Rome. But she mournes incessantly; for it is much against her mind, that
this marriage should be so much as talked of.

We may well imagine, that this was more then Greek to our Greek Knight: for
never was man strooken into such an astonishment; especially, understanding the
great regrates and grieuances of the Princess. Notwithstanding, his spirits
recovering cheerful vigor, and being resolved withal, that it was quite
against her consent, and contrary to the liking of the Lords of Great
Britain: he might the more easily help her by Sea or Land, wherein he
would not fail the very meanest Gentlewoman in the world. Much greater duty
then he owed to her, without whose grace and favor he could not live one
hour, as he was verily persuaded in his soul. And highly thanked God, for
vouchsafing his arrival in a time so opportune, that he might do her any
service. As not doubting but to compass the height of his attempt, (getting
her into his power, and without any blame by her) and to overcome all his
misfortunes together. And here (in his soul) he read a lecture to his Lady,
discoursing his bitter sufferings and languishments, the pains and perils by
him endured, since the time he saw her last, and now, the catastrophe of all
contentment, after a more then Herculean labor.

Now, said Angriote to Dragonts, you are sure that the Romans are already
come about this business? On my faith (quoth he) it is yet but four days,
since we parted from the Enclosed Isle, and on the very same day, there
arrived Quedragant, Landin his Nephew, Garnate of the Dreadful Dale, Mandacian
of the Silver Bridge, and Helye the Deliberate, who came to know of Florestan
and Agraies, when they should begin the quest of Amadis de Gaul. And because
Quedragant purposed to send to the Court of King Lisuart, to understand there
some tidings by strangers: Florestan made him answer, that it would be but lost
labor, in regard, that himself had made the like question, and could know
nothing. But we heard by one of his Squires, that there happened some
difference between them, which he corrected in such sort, as he is much
commended in all places for it. I pray you Sir (quoth Angriote) tell us, what is
that Florestan? He is (answered Dragonis) one of the sons of king Perion of
Gaul, who sufficiently resembles the goodness and worth of his two other
brethren.

Hereupon, at large he recited the contention between him and the Romans, in
presence of the Queen Sardamira, and how his Squire (after-ward) came to the
Enclosed Isle with their Shields, whereon (in bloody caracters) was written each
man's name. And because they were so shreudly handled by Florestan, the Queen
sent after to entreat him to be her conduct to Mirefleure, whether she went
to see the Princess Oriana. These news were highly pleasing to the Greek
Knight and his associates, nevertheless, when he heard him name Mirefleure:
his heart began to tremble, remembering what delight and pleasure he had there
sometime received. Wherefore, withdrawing himself aside, he called Gandalin to
him, saying. My friend Gandalin, thou hear (as well as I) these tidings
concerning Oriana, and do know withal, that if they should take effect I
could not live one hour after: therefore let me prevail with thee, to do one
thing which I will advise thee, and this it is.

Go thou with Ardan, to Grasinda, and tell her, that you two, (with these
other Knights here present) will travail to find out Amadis de Gaul. Being
come to the Knights, secretly tell them, that I am here, and desire them (with
thee) to return to the Enclosed Isle. Finding there Quadragant, and Agrayes,
entreat them from me, to keep themselves there together, until the time of my
arrival, which shall be (by Gods help) within eight days, little more or
less. Say also to my Brother Florestan, and to thy father Gandales, that I
would have them to take order, for providing so many Ships, and other Vessels
in a readiness, as they can procure. For I purpose to be seen (shortly) in a
place, where (if they be so pleased) I would gladly request their company: and
thou know sufficiently Gandalin: what diligence is required in a case so
important as this is; wherefore, once more I desire thee, not to be slow or
tardie herein. Then he called the Dwarf to him, and said: Ardan, go with
Gandalin, and follow those instructions, which he shall give thee from me.

So Gandalin, according to his Masters command, went to Grasinda, in this
manner. Madame, quoth he, we two are determined to leave the Greek Knight, and
go abord this Ship, because we would travail along with these two Knights,
in the search for Amadis de Gaul. Therefore, good Madame, consider with your
self, if you have any service to command us: returning you most humble thanks,
for your manifold favors done us, without any merit at all on our behalf.
The like they said to the Greek Knight, Angriote and Brunco; and so went
aboorde the Ship to Dragonis.

Here I must tell ye, that Angriote was made acquainted with this intention:
wherefore, to palliate and conceal it the more cleanely, he called to
Dragonis, saying: Sir Knight, this Squire and Dwarf are desirous to keep you
company, in your quest of Amadis de Gaul: because (as themselves say) they
sometime served him. Dragonis and Enili knew them immediately, which made them
the more willing to accept their company, entertaining them with very kind and
loving respect: but much more welcome were they, when they understood what
Gandalin told them, which made them weigh Anchor presently, and set on toward
the Enclosed Isle. The like did our Greek Knight and his company, hoping that
day to take harbor, in the nearest Haven to Tagades, where (as then) King
Lisuart kept his Court.

Here were assembled with him, most of the worthiest Lords in his kingdom,
whom purposely he had called together, to conclude the marriage of his Daughter
Oriana with the Emperor. But they, respecting the good and welfare of the
Realm, as it became loyal and true Counselors to do, were all of a quite
contrary opinion, showing him by many sound and probable reasons, that he went
against all right and equity, committing his chief Heir, into the subjection
of a presumptuous and giddie-headed stranger, who (as they approved by
precedent examples) might as quickly grow in hatred to her, as he was
haire-brained in his ouer-sudden affection. All which notwithwanding, the King
would not listen to, but allege still such peremptory reasons, meet and
convenient for such a Prince, as will allow nor like any advice but his own.

In which regard, Count Argamont absented himself from this meeting, to a
Castle of his own, which was some two days journey from the Court:
notwithstanding, he was sent for again and again, and so much importuned, as
he was brought thither in a Litter, he being so weak and impotent by age, as
he was not able to sit on horseback.

The King being advertised of his coming near the Court, mounted on
horseback to meet him, and the next day he sat in council among his Lords,
delivering diverse considerations, for maintenance of his former opinion, till
at length (speaking to Argamont) thus he said. Honorable Uncle, you are
sufficiently acquainted with the occasion, why I have called together this
great assembly, which plainly is, for marriage of my daughter with the Emperor
of Rome, a matter by him most earnestly labored and desired. Wherefore, let me
entreat you first, to tell me what you conceit thereof: to the end, that
these Lords may the more freely afterward, acquaint me with their several
opinions. A long while the old Earl excused himself, till being urged
thereto by the Kings express command, after some alligations for his own
defense, he spoke as follows.

My Lord, seeing it is your pleasure, that I should speak my mind in this
noble assembly, concerning the Emperors marriage with the Princess Oriana: I
most humbly beseech you, to receive in good part what I shall say. I know it to
be treason in as high a degree, to dissemble with a Prince in matter of good
counsel, as otherwise to offend against his royal person: and therefore,
without any clouding or dissembling, credit what I speak in my poor advice,
albeit I have often enough told it you before. Sir, you know, that Madame
Oriana (your eldest Daughter) ought to succeed you, and by just reason, is
heir to the Countries, which God and Fortune has given to your charge;
whereto, by the right of Nature, she has more true title, then ever you had,
or could pretend. For it fell to you, only by the death of King Falaugris, who
was but your Brother, and she is your own Daughter, and the eldest.
Therefore, consider with your self, that if the like had been done to you,
which now you purpose to the Princess Oriana, you could not have bin (at this
day) so great a Lord as you are.

Why should you exile her (as it were) hence, to plant my Niece Leonora in her
place, considering, she never offended you, to our knowledge? And if you
think, that by marrying her to the Emperor Patin, you shall thereby make her
a greater Princess, and most happily provided for in your imagination: Believe
me my Lord, you come very far short of your account. For you are not
ignorant, that if they have children together, she suruiuing the Emperor,
shall but simply remain Dowager of Rome, in steed of being (after you) Lady
and Queen of this kingdom.

Nay, which is much more, do you think that your Subjects will ever agree
thereto? I am persuaded in my soul, if they should say, yea, it were against
the Religion of their souls. And therefore, Heaven fore-fend, that I should
tell you otherwise, then my conscience assures me to be true: albeit I know (to
my no little grief) that, let us allege whatsoever we can, you will be
gouernde by your own fancy. Wherefore, most humbly I desire you, to pardon what
I have said, being compeld thereto by your severe iniunction, against which may
be no gainsaying.

Then he sat silent, and the King gave order, that every man should deliver
his mind: but they all agreed with the opinion of Count Argamont, which the
King perceiving, he thus replied: My Lords, I have fully understood your
several judgments: all which notwithstanding, how can I (with mine honor)
reuocate what I have already promised to the Emperors Ambassadors? Therein
(quoth the Count and the rest) you may do as you please, for we have
discharged our duty.

By this time, the day being fair, and the Sea calm, our Greek Knight and
his company coasting along: the Mariners had descryed the mountain, whereof
the Town Tagades took his name; and where King Lisuart as then resided, as
formerly has bin related. Some of them also went to Grasinda, and assured her,
that if the wind changed not, they would land her in the Haven within an
hour, or less: and our Knights walking aloft on the Deck of the Ship,
declared themselves thankful to our Lord, for escaping such infinite perils
and ship-wrackes, as every minute was incident to them.

But whosoever had the greatest cause of contentment, was far inferior in
joy to our Greek Knight, who since he set eye on the Country, wherein lived
all his hope, happiness, and support of life, was so delighted in his soul,
as no man's felicity could be answerable to his: neither had he power to look
off that long-wished land. Notwithstanding, fearing left his folly should be
too plainly perceived, he went down into the Ship, and going to Grasinda, said.

Madame, we are now (as your self may see) at the place which you so much
desired, and where I hope (by the perfection of beauty abiding in you) to
attain the full issue of mine enterprise: so that you shall safely return
home into your Country, with such honor as is justly due to you. For right and
reason being both on my side. God (who is a most upright Judge) will wholly
maintain the cause for you and me.

Now, albeit Grasinda stood in some doubt of her success; yet perceiving she
was come so near to the point, where she must either win or lose what she
much coueted, she made a manifest show of a resolved assurance, answering the
Knight in this manner. Believe me Sir, my hope and persuasion is greater in
your manhood and good fortune, then all the beauty remaining in me.

But one thing let me most humbly entreat you, that when you are in the
chiefest heat of your business, you would fix before your eyes, that you never
attempted any conquest, but you brought it to a full and final effect. In so
doing, your renown will highly enlarge it self, and my joy likewise, whereby
I may the more justly style my self, the only happy Lady now living.

It is very expedient (replied our Greek Knight) that we now consider what is
to be done. You have a Gentlewoman attending on you, who has a quick and
apprehensiue spirit, being named Gonisesa, and she speaks French very
perfectly: we will deliver her a Letter, which she shall present to King
Lisuart, and his Queen Brisena, who do (both of them) well understand, and
speak that language. Express charge must be given to the Gentlewoman, that
she make no answer to any question demanded of her, but in French only. After
she has concluded with them, he shall return hither again to us, because we
purpose to stay in this place for her coming back.

Grasinda liked this motion exceeding well; wherefore, without any longer
delay, the Gentlewoman was called, and the Letter given her: then she entered
into a small Bark, with her father, and two other Knights, that were her
brethren. Not much differing from the same instant, the Greek knight gave
order to Lasinde, Bruneoes Squire, to follow after her, (without her knowledge
thereof) for a more certain observation of her entertainment in the Court, and
what speeches should be used to her, after her leave taken of the King.

And the better to color his presence there, he had express command, to
pretend a diligent inquisition for his Master, saying to such as demanded any
news concerning him, that he saw him not, since he left him sick in Gaul,
when he undertook the quest of Amadis, meaning to return to him again, so
soon as he could.

So departed Lasinde, hoping right well to accomplish his enterprise. Soon
after, the Gentlewoman arrived at the Town, where she was heedfully observed
by every one, as well in regard of her beauty, as for her commendable manner
of attendance. Passing from street to street, enquiring where she might
find the King: she chanced to meet Esplandian, with two Merlinson his fist,
which he was going to fly in the field. He perceiving the Gentlewoman making
toward him, went and met her, demanding if she would command him any
service. Fair youth (quoth she) I seek for the Kings lodging, whither I pray
you to be my guide. That will I Lady (quoth he) and gladly shall I show it you,
if you do not know it. A thousand thanks sweet youth, answered the
Gentlewoman.

Then Esplandian took hold on the reins of her Palfray, and served her as a
Squire, leading her Palfray to the Palace, where after she was dismounted, he
conducted her to the King, whom they found walking in a Gallerie, with the
chiefest Ambassadors of Rome, according for the marriage of his Daughter to
the Emperor.

The Gentlewoman falling on her knees before him, humbly saluted him with
these words. Sir, if it might so please you, that the Queen and all her Ladies
were here in presence, I should then deliver a message to you, from her that
has sent me hither to you. And if it so fall out, that any of them do find
her self interessed, by such matter as I am to let them all understand: she
must essay (if she think good) to find out one to defend her, against a good
knight, who purposes to be here very speedily: provided, that your Majesty do
grant him safe conduct.

Truly Damsel, answered the King, we will not hinder you in your charge.
Whereupon, immediately he sent Count Argamont, his Uncle, and Arban, king of
North Wales, for the Queen, who stayed not long but came thither with her
Ladies. Then the strange Gentlewoman, kissing her hand, and making a low
obeisance; spoke thus. Madame, if that which I have in charge to deliver, from
her who has sent me hither, shall seem any way strange to you, you have the
less reason for it, considering, that this Court is renowned all the world
over, for the very greatest m^a is, and rarietie of adventures here happening,
which my self also have known for truth, and that never any knight, Lady or
Damosel, returned hence discontented. And thereby I am resolutely persuaded,
that I shall find no less favor here, then others formerly have done:
wherefore, receive this Letter, and if you please to allow of the contents
therein set down, you shall soon see the most gentle Greek knight, and the
fairest Princess in the world, of whom he has charge. Then the King
commanded the Letter to be publicly read, that every one might hear what it
contained.

The Letter sent from Grasinda, to the Potent King Lisuart.
MOST high and magnanimous Prince, I Grasinda, fairest of all the choycest
beauties in Romania, do give you to understand, that I am newly arrived in
your land, under the guard and conduct of a Greek Knight, only upon this
occasion: that as I have already bin precisely judged, and confessed, for the
fairest woman of al them in Romania: so, for the maintenance of this glory,
which has affoorded my soul no mean contentment, I would be here in like
case reputed, above all the Maids in your Court; for otherwise my mind can
never be satisfied, because it is the thing, that (beyond all other) I most
desire. And if there be any Knight, that in his love to any particular beauty,
or in the behalf of all together, will contradict me, he must resolve
himself on two things. First, for Combat against the Greek Knight: And next,
that he bring a Crown with him from his Lady, according as I my self will
wear another, to the end, that the Conqueror (in sign of triumph and
victory) may make a present thereof to his Mistress, for whom he undertook
this trial. And if you be pleased Sir, to grant this my humble request, then
I likewise desire you to send a safe conduct by my Gentlewoman, for me, and all
my company; but especially for the Greek Knight, that he may receive no other
discourtesie or outrage, except such as may happen to him from them with whom
he shall combat. And if he chance to vanquish the first, then let a second,
yea, third, sourth, and fifth, or so many (one after another) as shall have the
courage to contend against me and my Knight.

Your Majesty's in all services else to be commanded. GRASINDA.


Before God (quoth the King) the Lady must needs be extraordinary fair, and
the knight bold and valiant, that undertakes so great an enterprise: the end
whereof will not be easy in the attayning, because such fortunes are full of
danger, and opinions (in this case) as diverse. Notwithstanding, Damsel and
fair friend, you may return when you please; and while we attend for your
Ladies arrival here: safe conduct shall be published according to her own
desire; and if she find none to gainsay her challenge for beauty, sheeshall
(in my mind) have the accomplishment of her own desires. Sir, replied the
Gentlewoman, you speak like a good and gracious King, as euer-more you have
bin esteemed. The Greek Knight has two Knights more in his company, who are
determined likewise to combat for the love of their Ladies, against all such
as dare encounter with them, and they desire also security from your Highness,
for their safe coming and returning. Fair friend, answered the King, you
shall have all that you can request, and I am well pleased that it should be
so.

Sir then (quoth she) rest your self assured, that you shall see them all here
to morrow morning, in the company of her, who thinks her self to be the only
beauty in the world. Wherefore Madame (said she to the Queen,) cause your
choycest Ladies, to put on their richest accoutrements, and not to forget any
thing that may illustrate their perfections, if they hope to gain any glory
from her.

So, taking her leave, she mounted on her Palfray, and returned directly the
same way she came; where finding the Bark awayting for her, she went aboard,
and had the wind so fitting for her, that she was quickly with Grasinda, to
whom at large she reported, all that had passed between King Lisuart and her,
who had granted all that she requested. Hereupon, the Greek knight was minded
to have their Tents and Pauilions forthwith erected so near to the Town as
might be; and therefore concluded, that both he and all his company would go
on land the day following. But here I must tell ye, that so soon as the
Damsel messenger was departed from the Court, the Prince Saluste Quide, who
had bin present at the whole conference, and heard what answer was made her,
stepped forth with other Roman Knights, and falling on his knee before the
King, said as follows.

Sir, we that are Romans, and strangers here in your Country, do most humbly
beg one boon, which we must needs crave of your Majesty, redounding highly to
your honor and benefit. Truly Sir, answered the King, there is no reason
then, that it should be denied you. All of them gave him most hearty thanks,
and then the Prince proceeded on thus. Let it then be pleasing to your
Highness, that we strangers may maintain the cause for so many fair Maids, as
are here present in your Court. And if Heaven be as favorable to us, as equity
and reason shall show themselves gracious in our attempt: we make no doubt, but
to effect this business much better, then any of your Knights can do, because
our long acquaintance with the Greeks manhood, has sufficiently instructed
us, how to deal with them, being men commonly overcome by us, as our manifold
encounters can well witness, and their very name shall more renown our
chiualry, then any effect whatsoever can ensue by them, to the men of this
Country, although they were all to grapple with them.

Don Grumedan hearing the presumption of the Roman, and with what audaciousnes
he spoke, could not endure it, but rising up, thus he said to the King. Albeit
Sir, it is very high honor to Princes, when such strange adventures happen in
their Courts, whereby their renown and magnificence may be the more augmented:
yet notwithstanding, many times they return to their scandal and disgrace, if
they be not embraced with such discretion and reverence, as is ever more
required in all potent Kings. I speak these words Sir, for the Greek Knight,
who is so lately come into your land, under hope of performing such matters as
he has acquainted you withal: wherein if he shall prevail, and conquer them
that would contend against him, though the danger will be theirs, yet the shame
and dishonor must be yours. Wherefore, if you were so pleased, all should be
deferred till the coming of Galaor and Norandell, who will be here within
four or five days, as I am credibly informed by some Knights that have seen
them. And by that time also, Guillan the Pensive will be recovered, and able to
bear Arms: which (in mine opinion) would fall out better for you, because
they are meetest men to confront any challenger, and to defend the honor and
reputation of your Court, with all the beauties therein abiding.

The King suddenly starting up, replied. This may not be granted, because my
promise is already past to the Prince Saluste Quide, and these other Gentlemen
his companions, who must be the protectours of our best beauties, and are able
to answer a more high and dangerous enterprise, then this is or can be. It
may be so, said Grumedan: but I am well assured, that none of our Ladies or
Damosells will consent thereto. Let it suffice then (quoth the King) that I
will grant to nothing else for them, then as already I have determined, and
my word past for it. Hereupon, Saluste Quide thanking the king most humbly,
addressed himself to Grumedan, saying. Lord Grumedan, you may say what please
you: nevertheless, I hope to win the honor for these Ladies, and to overcome
the Greek Knight in Combat, of whom you make so great account. And because
there are two other Knights in his company, of no less valor and prowess
then he, as I am given to understand: I am well pleased to Combat against
them, and you if you have any will to take their part: provided, that two of my
companions may join with me. By this means it will be apparently discerned,
to whom the honor of victory shall fall: the fight being equal, of three
Romans, against two Greeks and a Knight of great Britain.

Grumedan smiling at the Princes pride, returned this answer. It were shame for
me to make refusal, therefore I accept your offer I, and those two that shall
take my part. Thus speaking, he drew a Ring from off his finger, and making a
low reverence to the King, said. Behold Sir, here is my gage, which most
humbly I beseech you to receive, on the behalf of me and my companions; as in
justice you can do little less, the Prince Saluste having challenged the
combat, as you your self have heard; otherwise, he must either unsay his
words, or yield him self vanquished. By God, said Saluste, sooner shall the
Seas be dried up, then the word of a Roman be retracted, or the least injury
done to his honor. And I do much marvel Grumedan, that you dare speak words
so void of reason: but if age have made your senses fail you, your body must
justly pay the penance in combat, for speeches so indiscreetly delivered.
Surely Sir, answered Grumedan, I am yet young enough, to bring mine enterprise
to a good issue, and to gain that from you, which you imagine to get
ouer-easily from me. And let me plainly tell you, that mine age has taught me
more experience, then ever, young pride or presumption could learn, as I hope
is sufficiently seen in you, by the proud persuasion you have of your self,
who rather appears to be a Captain of Braggards^, then a man to perform any
matter indeed.

With these words arose up King Arban, and more then thirty Knights beside, to
take the cause in hand, and to maintain what Grumedan had spoken: but the King
imposed silence on them, commanding them (on peril of their lives) not to use
anymore such words in his presence. Whereupon, every man departed to his
lodging, leaving Count Argamont alone with the king, to whom he spoke in this
manner. Sir, have you not observed the audacious insolence of these Romans,
and how irreverently they dare abuse the knights of your Court? In your own
judgment, they that are so mallepert here, what will they not do in other
places? In good faith Sir, seeing they declare so little discretion, I greatly
fear their behavior to the Princosse Oriana, even so soon as you shall have
lost sight of her. And yet notwithstanding (as I hear) you have already given
them your grant for her, which makes me to marvel not a little, whence this
strange fancy in you should proceed, considering, that never did any Prince
(so wise and and judicious as you have always bin esteemed) so far forget
himself, whereby plainly appears, that you are desirous to tempt your own good
fortune, and to let loose the reins of diverse disasters, very ominous to this
whole kingdom. Have you forgotten, what especial graces our Lord has (in a
manner) heaped upon you? And do you not stand in fear of his anger? Fortune,
is not she mutable? Are you now to learn, that when she grows weary of good
turns to him whom she has exalted, she will chastise him afterward with many
stripes, ye, with such cruel tortures, as are a thousand times worse then
death? Pardon me Sir, I beseech you, if the faith I bear you, have made me
thus bold; to speak such words, as (perhaps) you like not: you are not
ignorant, how transitory the matters of this world are, and that all the
renown and glory, which by long and tedious travel can be gotten in this
life, is oftentimes quenched and quite buried, upon a very small occasion, if
Fortune do but once distaste the person. So that if any remembrance remain of
a man's former felicity, this blame will only live upon him, that he did not
make use of his precedent happiness, but rather entertained it with an idle and
negligent respect.

Pausing here a while, and hearing the King to return no answer, he began
again thus. Sir, do but think on the fault you sometime fell into, by
banishing so many good Knights far hence, as Amadis, his brethren, kindred and
friends, by whom you were feared, honored and respected euery-where. And
being scarcely freed from this mishap, will you voluntarily fall into a worse?
Undoubtedly I must needs imagine, that God and all good success has forsaken
you, because you have first forsaken him. For, if it were otherwise, you would
accept the counsel of them, that desire to live no longer, then in love and
faithful service to you. But seeing what I do, I am content to discharge the
homage and duty I owe you, and withdraw my self into mine own territories:
because I will avoid (so much as possibly I may) the just complaints and
tears of your Daughter Oriana, at such time as you deliver her, according to
your promise, and the manifold miseries that will ensue thereon, to your
dishonor, and woeful ouer-throw of this famous Realm.

Uncle, replied the King, that which is done, is done, were I to dye, I will
not falsify my word. But I pray you to abide here two or three days longer,
to see what issue these new-attempted Combats will sort unto: because I elect
you as Judge of these exploytes, with such beside as your self shall make choice
of. Herein you shall yield me great contentment, and such service as cannot
be more acceptable, because we have no one here, that understands the Greek
language better then you do. Sir (quoth Count Argamont) seeing such is your
pleasure, far be it from me to contradict it: yet under this condition, that
afterward, you will dispense with my departure; for it will be impossible for
me to abide among such grievous mournings, as must needs succeed this hea^y
fortune.

So breaking off their discourse, by reason of the Prince Saluste Quides
coming: Count Argamont withdrew himself, leaving the King and Prince in
private conference. Now, we may not be unmindful of Lasinde, the Squire to
Don Bruneo, who compassed so good means, that he attained to true
intelligence, of all matters and conference, since the Damosell-Messengers
departure. Wherefore, seeing the night fast hastening on, secretly he left the
Court, and made his speedy passage by Boat to the Greek knight, whom he
acquainted with the Prince Salustes request to the King, the answer of Don
Grumedan, and all things else in their due proceeding. This fell out to his no
little comfort; and so much the rather, because now he knew he should meddle
with none but Romans: whereas he feared before, that either his brother
Galaor, or some other as worthy a Knight of Great Britain, would step into
his place on the Ladies behalf. And then he knew too well, that never could
the fight be ended, either without his death, or some other of his dearest
friends, or (it might be) of both together. But these doubts being somewhat
assuaged, he thought the time over long, till he was at the combat; whereupon
he said to Grasinda. Madame, if you be so pleased, to morrow morning we will
early hear Mass in our Pauilions, and then take our way toward King
Lisuart, with such attendants as you shall appoint: and I make no question, but
(by the help of heaven) you shall obtain your long-wished desire. Whereto she
readily condiscended.

CHAP. XVI.
How the Greek Knight and his confederates, conducted the fair Grasinda to
the place where the Combats were to be performed; And of that which ensued
thereon.

LIttle rest took Grasinda all this night, and much less the Greek Knight,
in regard of eithers earnest longing, to have this enterprise successively
accomplished. Wherefore by break of day the next morning, they were conveyed
ashoare, with the company appointed to attend upon them: and after they had
devoutly heard Mass, they all mounted on horseback, shaping their course to
the Town of Tagades, where King Lisuart with his Lords, exspected their
arrival. Now, you need not make any doubt, but that Grasinda was most rich and
sumptuous in her attire and habit, as hoping (by the help of her Knight) to
win the like honor from the Maids and Virgins of Great Britain, as she
had done from the fairest women of Romania. And persuade your selves beside,
that if she were so respective of her own adornements, she failed not in the
like care for her followers: especially her Ladies and Gentlewomen, which gave
good testimony to all such as saw them, that their M^st^is was a most rich and
worthy Lady. And yet the more to embellish her beauty, she woare a coastly
rich Crown on her head, which had bi^ long before conquered for her, in the
manifestation of her beauty.

Close by her side rode the Greek Knight, in very honorable equipage, having
on a rich Armor covered with a coat of Arms of his own colors. Next to him
followed Brunco, bearing a Shield of Sinople, in the midst whereof was figured
a fair Damsel, with a Knight on his knees before her, as seeming to require
mercy and favor of her, his Armor being all ouerwauie with gold. By him rode
Angriose, mounted on a gallant Courser, armed likewise with a costly Armor,
all thick seamed over with flowers of gold: and he guided the Damsel, that
had bin Messenger to king Lisuart the day before. In this manner came Grasinda,
to the place appointed by the King for this business, in the midst whereof was
raised a square base of black marble, containing the height of a man; whereupon,
he that intended to enter the Combat, was to fix either his Helmet, Shield,
Gauntlet, or else some green branch. The Greek knight looking on all sides
about him, beheld the King, and many knights of Great Britain, but most he
observed the Prince Salust Quide, in an Armor thick seamed with Serpents, which
made him seem so great of stature, and being mounted also on a Horse of huge
advantage, that he appeared to be a Giant. The^ listing up his eyes, he saw the
Queen, and a fair troup of Ladies about her, each one wearing a rich Crown on
her head. But he could not see there his Oriana, which began to touch him
somewhat in soul: wherefore he turned head to Grasinda, who having her eye
fixed on the Prince Saluste Quide, he could easily gather thereby, that she was
in great doubt of her success, when smiling to him self, he thus spoke to
her. It appears to me Madame, that the huge form of this Knight makes you
fearful of my fortune: notwithstanding, before he and I part hence, I shall
let you plainly perceive, that although he is higher mounted then I am, I have
a heart as entire and able as his, and right consisting on our side, the
victory must needs be ours. Heaven stand so favorable for you, answered
Grasinda.

Then the Knight took the Crown which she woare on her head, and ryding gently
toward the square base, placed it thereon: afterward, returning to his Squire,
who had three mighty strong Lances (each having a little Penon at the point,
enriched with fair flottes of fine gold,) and taking which of them he best
liked, rode afterward to the King, speaking thus to him in the Greek tongue.
Most excellent King, I salute you as the only absolute Prince on the earth.
Know that I am a knight of a strange Nation, as my outward appearance makes
manifest to you, and I by command of the Lady (who only has power over me)
am come into this Country, to approve my fortune against the knights of your
Court, so great is their fame and renown in all places. But for ought I can
perceive, my intent is wholly frustrated, and you have granted that to
Romans, which I desired of your own.

But seeing it is so, and that it may be none otherwise: may it stand with
your Highness liking (without any further waste of time) to command him that
first intends the combat, to take the Ladies Crown, whose cause he means to
maintain, and to place it on the P^rrou, according as already I have done
mine.

Having spoken these words, he gave the spur to his Courser, and made him
bound, curuet and carriere so dexteriously before them, and with such a
commendable pleasing performance, as every eye took delight to behold him, with
no mean praises and commendations. Afterward, having attained the length of
the field, he turned with an extraordinary gallant grace, exspecting who durst
first present himself.

Now, the King knew not what all this while had been spoken to him, because he
understood not the Greek language: wherefore Count Argamont, who stood neer^st
to him, interpreted all that had been said, with this addition of his own. In
good faith Sir, quoth he, it would highly please me, to see the ouer-daring
pride of the Romans, a little qualified by this Grecian knight. Before God,
answered the king, we shall annon behold one of the stearnest encounters, that
ever was seen in this land: for I perceive the Prince Saluste Quide, already
is entered into the Lists. And to speak truly, he advanced himself very
proudly, envious and much displeased, to hear what praises were generally
given of the Greek knight, which made him rate and revile the people, crying
out against them, saying: Fie on ye foolish sottes, I diots, and beetle headed
Britains, what mooues you to this senseless admiration, of a blockish
paltrie companion, that shows all the wit and courage he has, in tormenting a
poor horse upon no occasion? Before God, if he were a man of any wisdom, he
would make more spare of him, for the better defending him self against me, or
else for his speedier flight, before he be thereto compelled. Alas poor
ignorant people, you express your great want of knowledge, concerning the name
of a Roman, who is so dreaded throughout all the East, as there is no Greek
Knight so hardy and aduenturous, that dare contend with a Knight of Rome.
Alas, I see the death of this miserable unfortunate fellow, whom I shall so
boysterously ouer-throw at the first blow, that the very reins of his back
will fly in sunder: and not only the Crown must be my boory, but the
glorious Lady also, who has taken so much pain and travail, to come hither
into this Country, here to receive perpetual shame and infamy.

Speaking thus, he rode toward the Ladies; and addressing himself to Olinda,
demanded of her, if she pleased to deliver him her Crown, that thereby he
might defend her beauty. For, in mine opinion (quoth he) any man of good
judgment will confess, that justly you ought to have that other Crown, which
the fond Greek has placed on the Perrou. Moreover, I have made choice of you,
among all the rest, to be my best beloved; wherefore I beseech you grant me
leave, that I may begin the Combat for you, as she to whom I am vowed and
dedicated. For, no sooner shall the Empress have made her entrance into the
great City of Rome: but there I mean to make you my wife, as sole Lady and
gouernesse of me, and all my greatest fortunes.

Olinda, tired and much troubled with this idle talk of Saluste Quide, made
him no answer; but turning her face another way, feigned a conference with one
of her own company: which the Prince perceiving, as half in anger, thus he
spoke to her. It seems Madame, by your manner of behavior, that I am a man
unable to execute what I have spoken: but let me never have love, or any
esteem of you, if I do not perform much more. Only this being granted, that
my first encounter with the Lance, may have but your gracious look, and that
you turn not your face till it be done. This earnest importunity did so
embellish the beauty of Olinda, by a most sweet and amiable blush: that she
knew not how to be rid of this vexation, making no account at all of his
words. Which the Queen observing, she took the Crown from her head, and sent
it to the Prince Saluste* who receiving it very thankfully, went to the base or
Perron, and set it by that belonging to Grasinda.

Afterward, taking a strong Lance, he began to shake it in such sort, as if
he meant to snap it in sunder: then ryding proudly to the King, with his Helmet
on his head, and Shield about his neck, thus he spoke. King Lisuart, I shall
soon let you see the difference, between us that are Romans, and the Knights
of your Court: for this brave presuming Greek, that thinks to combat with so
many one after another, shall presently receive the greatest shame that ever
Knight did. And then, let his other two companions come if they please, to
revenge his cause if they can: for this I dare promise you, that before I
depart from hence, I will present you with their heads, instead of Crowns.

So much offended was Grumedan, at these arrogant proud words of Sa^uste; as
he could hardly forbear to smite him. Nevertheless, in regard of the Kings
strict countermaundes before, he dissembled his anger, and went to him only
with this answer. Lord Saluste, you have not yet forgot the Combat, that must
be between you and me, if (as you say) you escape from the Greek, and come
fairly off My memory is more perfect then so, replied Prince Saluste, and
your self shall have good cause to remember it.

So closing his beauer, clasping close his Shield, and placing his Lance in
the rest, he ran mainly against the Greek Knight, who met him with such
force (neither of them failing in the attaint) that Saluste was unhorsed: and
our Greek Knight finishing his race, found a truncheon of the Lances shaft
sticking in his Shield, whereby every man thought that he had been wounded.
But he quickly declared, that there was no such matter, and snatching it out,
threw it on the ground, turning again to meet with his enemy, who moved
neither hand nor foot, he was so daunted with the fall. And not without great
cause, considering what a height he fell, and the heavy charge of his armor,
so that his right arm was broken in twain. And yet it happened far worse to
him; for in falling down, his left foot hung fast in the stirrup, and being
unable to get it forth, his horse offended at his unfashionable burden, gave
him such a blow with his foot on the Helmet, that it fell off from his head,
and he lay still as one entranced.

The Greek Knight beholding him in this pitiful condition, spoke out so
loud, as every one might hear him. Believe me gentle Roman, the Lady for
whom you have performed this rare chiualry, is wonderfully beholding to you:
notwithstanding, if you do not quit her Crown from my Mistress, (who deserves
it better then she, as excelling all in beauty) you lie fairly for the loss
of your head presently. But Saluste made him not any answer; whereupon the
Knight rode to the King, thus speaking in Greek to him: Sir, he that so lately
gave persuasions to your people, to rely confidently in his manhood, will not
now render his Ladies Crown to my Mistress, to whom (by the testimony of all
present) it justly appertains. Wherefore, may it please you (as an upright
Judge) to do me right: otherwise, I will smite off his head before this fair
assembly. Then suddenly turning bridle, and alighting from his horse, he went
to Prince Saluste, making show, as if he meant to kill him.

Which Count Argamont seeing, said to the King. Sir, you ought (in my mind to
grant the Greek Knight what he demands, and save the life of the other,
else you may hereafter be blamed for it. And why? answered Grumedan. I pray
you Lord Argamont, let Fortune deal as pleases her. Have you not yet seen
enough of these Romans sauciness? I protest to you upon my faith, that with
their peremptory audaciousnesse, they are become as malicious as old Monkies,
and you shall perceive it by experience, if the Greek Knight be hindered from
pursuing his victory. For although Saluste be so near his ending, yet I dare
give you all my lands and goods, if the King do save him: that he will justly
say hereafter, he saved him from death, that will be the greatest enemy to
his life. Therefore, I beseech you Sir, delay your sentence for a while, till
it may be certainly known, what will be the issue of the fight.

During this discourse, the Greek Knight made show of disarming Saluste, for
more easy smiting off his head from his shoulders: which the King fearing,
prayed his Uncle to urge the stay, and to grant him the Crown which he
desired. Then the old Earl arose, and told him in the Greek tongue, what the
King had commanded him. Hereupon, the Knight stepped back, and putting his
Sword up into the sheath, spoke to the Count in this manner. In honor of so
good a King, and you, for once I will save the life of this presumptuous
Roman. Nevertheless, if any of his companions fall into the like danger, let
them be well assured, that they must make amends for him. For I never heard of
any vainglory like to theirs, wherein they have gotten an habit and custom,
to condemn any Knight errant, in respect of their own worthiness.

Moreover Sir, I pray you tell the King, that for the much good I have heard of
him, I shall never be willing to yield him any discontent, or enter into any
service hurtful to him. But withal, I humbly entreat him, to favor me in
the prosecution of my victory, if others shall present themselves for the
Combat: to the end, that hereafter they may not be forward in despising other
men, after the manner of the Emperor Patin; who has great delight in
threatening others, and yet bears away the blows shamefully himself, like to
these Bragadochiaes of his band.

So mounting on horseback, he rode to the square Perrou, whence he took the
two Crowns, and carried them to Grasinda, who (you must needs presume) was
extraordinarily pleased; and thanking the Knight heartily, prayed him to
proceed on, since he had begun so well.

Then calling for a new Lance, which speedily was brought him, he returned to
the end of the Lists, attending when another should come offer himself. And
seeing no man stir, being weary of so long waiting, he called for the
Damsel Messenger, that brought the Letter to Court, saying thus to her. Fair
friend, I pray you go to the King, and tell him, that I most humbly desire
him, if the Romans will combat no more, that he suffer not any of his Court
to supply their defect: for, over and beside the small honor they shall gain,
by vanquishing so silly a Knight as I am, yet at this time, I am not willing to
meddle with them. But, if any of the other will revenge their companions
disgrace, I am here ready to receive them all, one after another; yea, or two
of the very best of them both together. The Damsel rode presently to the
King, and delivered all that the Greek Knight had committed to her trust,
where-to he answered: That he was well pleased with his motion, considering
the great imposition laid upon him by his Lady. And if he liked to love him,
and be one of his followers, he would honor him as highly as any Knight of his
Court. Moreover (quoth the King) assure him from me, that he shall suffer
injury by Combat, against none other then the Romans, who earnestly craved
it at my hands. And he had great reason for this answer, because he had then no
Knight able to contend with the Grecian: For all were absent from the Court, in
regard of the tempestuous troubles, except Guillan le Pensif, who was then
sick, and Cendile de Ganote, who the day before (by an unlucky accident) was
shot through both his legs with an arrow, as the King came to the fall of a
Heart.

This answer being understood by the Damosel like a wise and discreet
Gentlewoman, humbly thanked the King, saying further, thus. Sir, if the Greek
knight could so easily have been entreated, the Emperor of Constantinople had
not so soon lost him: but he will never subject himself to any, as having
more affected liberty, then all the goods and treasures of the world. And thus
assure yourselfe, that his only desire and felicity, is, to defend the right
of Ladies and Gentlewomen, in preserving them from wrong or abuse offered to
them: in which honorable employment, he has won such immortal fame and
renown, in manifold difficult and dangerous attempts, as the several reports
would seem incredible. So, with your answer I will return to him, or any
service else you please to command me: giving you further to understand, that,
till it be midday, he will attend them that dare adventure the Combat, but
afterward he shall hardly stay, or admit any such leisure.

Then she returned to the Greek knight, who having heard the Kings answer,
went to Grasinda, saying. For ought I can perceive, Madame, the Crown is your
own frank and free, and I cleared from all further danger of the Romans:
nevertheless, in expression of my duty to you, I will tarry yet a little
longer, to see if any of them have the heart to adventure his fortune. Having
thus spoken, he called one of his Squires, and said to him. Carry my Shield,
and set it on the Perrou; then proclaim aloude, that if there be any other
Roman, who is willing to enter the Combat, let him come and advance his
Shield by mine.

The Squire did as he was commanded, yet (for all this) not a man of them
would stir, but stood looking one upon another: especially Maganill, who
(among the Romans) was reputed for one of the best Knights in the world, yet
being very fearful of the Greek, and willing to excuse himself, he thus
spoke to his other companions.

You know, my friends, that yesterday the Prince Saluste Quide undertook the
Combat against Grumedan, and I made him promise, that if he were vanquished by
him, that I and my two brethren would revenge his cause: therefore (of
necessity) I may not now adventure. But I am much amazed at you all, to see
you so void of heart and courage, as to stand like men confounded in soul, at
one only encounter of the Lance performed by the Greek.

Then he called to Gradamor and Lazanor, two young Roman Knights, of spirit
enough, and said to them. Me thinks you are too slow in aduenturing your
fortunes. You see, the Greek make proffer of combatting with any two among us,
and I am very certain, that if you two will accept his challenge, he shall
find it no easy matter to deal with you; let me therefore persuade you to
undertake him.

These words did so puff them up with a vain conceit of themselves, as they
called immediately for their Arms, and entering into the Lists very boldly,
depending more upon presumption, then any mannerly education, passed by before
the king, without any offer of salutation, or seeming so much as to see him.
Then ryding to the Perrou, Gradamor (in very despightfull manner) having his
Sword drawn in his hand, smote with all his force at the Greek knights Shield
advanced thereon, and brake it in pieces, crying so loud as he could. Ill may
be thrive, that suffers any longer this saucie mates Arms to stand here so
proudly.

When the Greek Knight both heard and saw this injury, he grew so highly
offended, that, without staying to call for another Shield, he took a new
Lance, and giving the spuries to his horse, met the two Roman Knights so
courageously, that one of them was thrown to the ground so amazedly, as he
knew not whether it was day or night, and every man thought that his neck was
broken, he lay so quietly.

Now, because our Greeks Lance was shiuered in many pieces, he drew his
Sword, and turning his face to Lazanor, loaded him with such mighty strokes,
as, if he had not caught fast hold on the maine of his horse, he had fallen to
the earth. But as he lay thus bowing, the Greek seized on his body, and by
mere strength of arm (tearing the Shield from about his neck) he threw him
against the ground. Nevertheless, quickly he received footing, and went to
help up his brother: In this time the Greek was dismounted from his horse,
which he feared to loose, because he ran about the field: but minding more his
present business, he ran pell mell upon his enemies, laying so stearnely
about him on every side, as they were no way able to endure him. Now gave he
good testimony of his valor, and that he was no learner in such extremities:
but as one of the Romans was running about the Perrou, and the other following
speedily after him, only to avoid the Greeks keen edged Sword, he gave
Lazanor such a stroke on the right leg, as it was well near cut in twain, so
that mere pain and anguish made him fall down, and piteously he craved mercy.

But the Greek Knight pretending, that either he heard or understood him not,
he set his foot on his breast, and so left him stretched out along on the ground,
returning to Gradamor, who fled to the king for warrantie of his life. All
which would not serve his turn; for with his Sword, he did beat him back
again to the Perrou, where being quite out of breath, he fell down all along:
where the Greek setting foot on him, smote so many blows on his Helmet, that
it fell off from his head, which having now at so apt advantage, he purposed to
smite from his shoulders, but that the other cried out to him. Ah gentle
knight, for Gods sake mercy, I am ready to do whatsoever you shall command me.

Remoouing his foot from off him, he suddenly looked back, and espied Lazanor
creeping on his knees to steal away: but he quickly caught hold on his arm,
and dragd him along to the Perrou, laying him close by his brother Gradamor,
which made every one imagine, that there he would smite off their heads
together. Whereupon Don Grumedan, who hated them to the death, spoke out so
loud, as every man might easily hear him. Me thinks the Greek has so well
revenged the wrong done to his Shield, as Gradamor has good cause to remember
it while he^ lives.

As he spoke these words, Esplandian came to him, and the Greek demanded what
he would have. Sir, answered Esplandian, I beseech you (for my sake) spare the
lives of these two Knights, seeing they yield themselves as vanquished. But he
feigned as if he understood him not: wherefore Esplandian prayed Count
Argamont, to interpret for him, which he did. Truly Sir, (quoth the Greek) I
will gladly bestow their lives on this sweet youth, provided, that you will
tell me of whence, and what he is. Believe me Sir, replied the Count, I know
not any man in this Court, that herein can resolve you, for he was brought
hither almost by miracle. Then briefly he reported, how, and in what manner the
aged Hermit found him.

I have often heard of him, said the Greek, in Romania, and that he is named
Esplandian, by reason of certain natural letters or carracters under his
breasts. You say true, answered the Count, and you shall see them presently, if
you please. So he commanded Esplandian to show his breasts, as accordingly he
did: whereat the Knight not a little meruayling, said. Fair youth, I pray God
to bless thee, and send thee good fortune in the highest degree.

So mounting on horseback again, he left the Romans with young Esplandian,
and returned to Grasinda, saying. Believe me Madame, I have been
ouer-troublesome to you, but I was compelled thereto (as your self has seen)
and could make no speedier dispatch.

Upon my faith, answered she, you can never do any thing, but I shall very
thankfully accept it, let us now then go on-ward, if you please. So getting
forth of the crowd, they took the way to their Ships, in so high content on
all sides, as possibly could be. Being come aboard, they commanded the
Mariners, to set sail for the Enclosed Isle. But because the Greek Knight had
some suspicion, that Don Grumedan would stand in need of Knights help, to
maintain the Combat, which he had undertaken, if so be it should go forward,
he desired Angriote and Bruneo, to stay behind, and succor him, and in the
mean while to understand some tidings of Oriana, if any way they could attain
thereto.

CHAP. XVII.
How King Lisuart sent for his Daughter Oriana to the Court, that he might
deliver her to the Romans. And of that which happened to a Knight of the
Enclosed Isle: But more especially, of the Combat which Don Grumedan had
against them that defied him.

ALready has been declared to you, that the Princess Oriana being at
Mirefleure, the Queen Sardamira (by the consent of King Lisuart) went thither
to see her, and to acquaint her with the Emperors affection toward her, as
also with what magnificence she should be wel-comed to Rome. Now, in the
prosecution of our History, you must understand, that after full conclusion was
past with the Romans, concerning her: the King would have her come to the
Court, commanding his Nephew Giontes, to take two Knights more with him, and
bring her thence away with all convenient speed. But he gave him charge (upon
peril of his life) that none, but they of her own company, should have any
conference with her.

For execution of the Kings command, Giontes took Sadoce and Lazanor with him;
who being come to Mirefleure, after they had acquainted her with her fathers
purpose, they made ready a Litter for her, because otherwise she was unable to
travail, she was so weak and sickly, by reason of her continual mourning; yet
on she needs must, accompanied with the Queen Sardamira, and other Ladies.
Between Mirefleure and Tagades, where the King soiourned, approaching nere to
a goodly Fountain, environed with diverse young spreading trees, they espied in
a little grove, a Knight, ready prepared for Combat, bearing a Shield of
Sinople, and a Lance, with a Banderole or Pennon of the same color: who
calling to one of his Squires, said. Go, and tell them that guard Madame
Oriana, that (in courtesy) I entreat them, to let me speak a word with her;
else, I will strive to do it, whether they will or no. The Squire going to
Giontes, told him as his Master had commanded him: whereat he began to laugh
heartily, that he (being alone) should send them such a threatening brave;
wherefore he gave them this answer: Friend, return to the Knight, and tell
him, that he cannot (at this time) speak with Madame Oriana: moreover, that if
he contend violently to do it, he will not find it easy for him.

When Oriana heard these words, she took them very unkindly, and said to
Giontes: Fair Sir, why should you be offended at any man's speaking with me?
Perhaps he brings me such good news, as may be very pleasing to me. Madame,
(quoth he) the King has commanded us on our lives, that no one may come near
your person, much less speak with you, until you come to him.

The Squire returned his answer to his Master; in the mean while Giontes,
misdoubting that he must needs try the Combat, made him ready for it. As
readily came the Knight (who styled himself the Green Knight) into the
field, and both giving the spur to their horses, met together so furiously,
that their Lances flew in pieces, and Giontes his horse being shouldered, fell
to the ground with his Master under him, so that he could not readily recover
himself. Whereupon the Green Knight trotting to him, desired him once more,
that he would permit him to speak with Oriana. By my faith Sir, answered
Giontes, if you do, it is much against my will, and by this misfortune of my
horse.

Hardly had he concluded these words, but the Green knight heard Sadoce
crying, that he should stand upon his guard. Wherefore, leaving Giontes, he
ran against the other, and failed in the attaint: which Sadoce did not, but
met him so manfully, that his Lance flew in infinite pieces. The Green knight,
angry at his miss, took another Lance, and giving his horse the spur, met
Sadoce so powerfully, that he cast him quite out of his saddle. Which Lazanor
seeing, and hoping to be revenged for his two companions, couched his Lance
against the Green Knight, with full persuasion to unhorse him: but they
encountered so furiously with their bodies, that Lazanors arm was broken, and
he sat so amazedly on his horse, as he had not the power to stay him, till
he had run out his whole race, because the Green Knight (in his passage by
him) had plucked the bridle off his head, and seeing him run in that confused
manner, he fell a laughing at him.

Then came he to Oriana, and humbly saluting her, she imagined him to be
Amadis: wherefore, raising her self in the Litter, she welcomde him very
graciously. Then the Knight gave her a Letter, speaking thus to her. Madame,
Agrais and Florestan, do duteously commend themselves to your acceptance; and
have expressly sent me to you, to bring you their minds, contained in that
writ. Wherefore, consider with your self, if you will command me any service
to them: for I must return to them with all possible speed, being well
assured, that although I am a man of slender valor, yet they may stand in
need of my help, before their enterprise will be ended.

Now trust me Sir, quoth she, they may well fail of meeting with a better
Knight then you are, witness the pains you have taken to speak with me. But
good Sir, seeing you have done so much for me, vouchsafe to let me know who
you are, to the end, that I the more thankefully remember you heere-after, when
better I may perform it.

Madame, they that know me, said he, do term me Garnate of the Dreadful
Dale, whose grief is not a little, for your fathers unkindness and cruelty to
you. Notwithstanding, hardly will he bring his purpose to pass, it will first
cost the lives of many good Knights, who (for your sake) will defend you to
their uttermost power. Ah my dear friend Garnate, quoth she, I pray GOD give
me the means, whereby I may acknowledge this wonderful loyalty. Madame,
said he, I have all my lifetime desired to do you some service, as one that
is your most humble servant, and now I must needs take my leave of you. For he
saw the Queen Sardamira coming near, who beholding Oriana advisedly,
imagined her looks to be more cheerful, and her present disposition much
altered from the former, whereupon she said.

Madame, I do not know the Knight that spoke with you, but he has handled
your guards as roughly, as Florestan did them that had the charge of me, so
that now they need not mock one another. I know not, whether it be the
misfortune of the way, or through their own want of courage: but well I wot,
that I never saw two worthier knights, then this and Florestan.

Oriana faintly smyling, answered. I saw not how yours were dealt withal: but
as for these here, it seems that they met with one, who knew well enough how
to chastise their harshnesse. As they held on this merry mocking, Giontes, and
the two other came toward them, so much ashamed of themselves, as they durst
not hold up their heads, to look them in the faces. But setting on toward
Tagades, Oriana called Mabila into the Litter to her, as desirous to have her
company. So being together, they closely read the Letter, whereby Florestan
advertised the Princess, that Gandalin, and Ardan, the Dwarf to Amadis, were
both arrived at the Enclosed Isle, where they exspected their Master within
eight days following, according as he had sent word thither; and Galuanes,
Agraies, beside many more good Knights, were all purposely there met together;
only to lend her succor, so soon as they should have intelligence of her
shipping away, to be sent for Rome; wherefore, in the mean time, she should
comfort her self, and be of good courage, as now she had no other cause.

These news were so welcome to both the Ladies, as nothing else possibly could
be more; and they imagined, that either they were newly revived from death to
life, or delivered out of a dark dungeon, into an incompatable glorious light.
And all the way as they rode along, they could find no other argument of
talk, neither so much as think on any thing else, but only to read and
re-reade the Letter over and over, which questionless they did an hundred
times. But being come to the Court, new sorrow over mastered this iocund
solace; fearing, lest the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, should not be able to
execute their enterprise. Now, so soon as Oriana was alighted; she went to her
own lodgings, never going to the Queens her Mother, according as she was wont
to do, making an excuse, that she was not well. Whereof the King receiving
knowledge, he went to see her, accompanied only with Arban, King of North
wales. No sooner was he entered the chamber: but she thr^w her self at ^is
feet, and (even as it were) ^wning her self in tears, with a trembling voice,
thus she spoke.

Alas my King and Father, for Gods sake remember your defolate daughter in
compassion, and be not less favorable to her, then (al your lifetime) you
have been to mean Ladies and Gentlewomen, in requiring your aid and
assistance: Ah my worthy Lord and Father, when Archalaus led you away prisoner,
it was for the fame of your great goodness, in helping her, that thereto urged
you. And can it be possible, that now you should forget so rare a virtue, that
evermore was most familiar with you? will you deal worse with me, then ever
you did with any living body? I have heard that you will send me to the Emperor
of Rome, with intent that I should be his wife: But if you compel me thereto,
you shall commit a most heinous sin; for it must be done in despite of my
self; and I am certain, that I shall sooner consent to mine own death. Dear
Daughter, answered the King, think you that I respect not your good and honor,
as I ought to do? Father, quoth she, I know not how you understand my good and
honor, but this I can assure you, that if you separate me from you, you will be
an homicide to your own blood. Then she fell into such sighs and tears, as
the King was enforced to forsake the Chamber, and leave her, she moned so much
pity in him.

Then Arban King of Northwales stepped to her, and hoping to comfort her, said.
Madame, you have always hitherto bin esteemed wise, and it appears, that now
you will wander from that good reputation. Do not you know that there is due
remedy for all things? It may be the King w^ll better advise himself, if you
knew which way he might be won thereto. Ah my royal Cousin, answered she,
seeing Fortune is so adverse to me, and determines to work her uttermost
malice on me, depriving you and many more of al means of succouring me by force
of arms, wherein you have past through infinite dangers, to deliver afflicted
Ladies and Damsels from tribulations: let me then (at least) entreat you, to
help me with your good word, in counselling the King from doing me such shame,
except he intends to tempt God, and constrain that happiness, (which always
to this instant has attended on him) utterly to forsake and abandon him,
leaving (in steed thereof) all mischief and misery. For Gods sake therefore,
return again to him, and find some means to bring him hither once more, with
mine old noble Uncle Count Argamont, and Don Grumedan, to the end, that you
three together may the better prevail with him.

In uttering these words, the woeful Princess was so grievously afflicted,
that she seemed rather dead then alive, for she fell down on the ground in a
swoune: which King Arban seeing, he departed out of the Chamber, while Mabila
and other Ladies (who were then about her) might minister some help to her in
this extremity. He went to the King, and told him all that Oriana had said to
him: which moved him to such compassion, as his inward distraction might be
very easily discerned. Notwithstanding, for all the persuasions he could urge
unto him, he would not go to her: until Count Argamont and old Grumedan were
so earnest with him, that at last he yielded. And as they entered into her
Chamber, they be held her former trance as yet to continue: wherefore he went
nearer to her, and taking her in his arms, said: Dear Daughter speak to me;
but she moved neither hand nor foot, but lay as if she had bin dead.

At length, by the help of Vinegar and cold water, her spirits came to her
again, and she, breathing forth a vehement sigh, able to break a strong heart
in sunder, seeing her Father so nere, said unto him. An my dear father, take
pity on me. Sweet child (quoth he) what would thou have me do? Sir, said she,
before you send me away from you, I beseech you consider what harms will
ensue. For never will I see Rome, rather shall the Sea deliver me from that
hell, and so shall you be the cause of two evils together. First, of my
disobedience to you, only by your self enforced Next, of the dismal
homicide, which your daughter must and will act upon her self. By which
means, in thinking to combine alliance and love with the Emperor, (he knowing
my destruction wrought in the mere despite of him: she shall receive just
occasion of eternal hatred to you, and not he alone, but all such as shall
hear of so lamentable a disaster. So that, look how much you have been
renowned through the world, for a benign, merciful, and upright Prince: so
much the more will you then be condemned, for the most cruel* p^lesse and
iron hearted man that ever ^ed. Pardon me, dear Sir, the extremity of my
a^^^ction, makes me speak what I do, which if you conceit to be uttered too
irreverently, take such due vengeance on my indiscretion, as best shall like
your self: for you can inflict no pain or torment on me so grievous, as that
which already you have prepared for me, in depriving me of your fatherly
presence.

Daughter (quoth he) I understand you very well, your mother shall tell you
what I am determined to do* therefore, do not thus discomfort your self, but be
of good cheer, and (perhaps) you shall have your own desire. The King made her
this promise, because his heart was oppress^d with sorrow, as he could not
speak any longer. And indeed, the Queen then came in; who beholding her
Daughter in such woeful condition, was much amazed thereat: for Oriana no
sooner saw her Mother, but she fell into a swoun again. In which time, the
King left the Chamber, committing her to the care of women, who were not a
little busy about her. After the was somewhat recovered, as the Queen
demanded how she fared: the woeful Oriana opening her eyes, which (in a
manner) were quite drowned in tears, began to look upon her very ruefully,
and with a voice merely forced, said. Alas dear Mother, my present estate is
much better then it should be, or I (in heart) could wish it: for Death now is
my only desire, and thereto my spirit soly inclines, seeing my self utterly
forsaken of the King and you. Your intent is, to send me to Rome, but the
voyage I shall make, will not be half so far: because I will leave you my body
(whereof you have disposed against all reason) and render my spirit to God, who
wholly has souerainge power over it.

The Queen being moved with much compassion, replied thus. Sweet Daughter, the
King loves you so dearly, as he thinks on nothing else, but what may be for
your good and best advantage: wherefore should you then thus torment your
self? Why Madame Mother, answered Oriana, do you think this banishment of
mine, so aduantageous for me? Why do you say, that the King my Father loves
me, showing himself more mercil^ to me, then euerany father did to his child?

Here you must understand, that during this woeful conference, between the
Queen and her Daughter* the King was walking in his Garden, accompanied with
very few. Count Argom^nt seeing him very pensive and melancholy, considering on
what the Princess had said unto him: conceited with himself, that now he was
become better advised; whereupon he went to him, saying. My Lord, I think my
self a most happy man, that I can compass any occasion* to tell you that,
which duty binds me to do: knowing you a wise and virtuous Prince, easy to
understand what good is got by evil means. Nevertheless, my late
commiseration of your Princely Daughters present estate, constrayneth me now to
remember you, of that which I heretofore have said concerning her. And I
humbly beseech you, so much as a man may do, that before you send her so far
hence; you would maturely consider it, and judge thereof without any partial
affection. For, as we commonly see, that a wise man seldom falls into any
error, when he is guided and led by reason: even so we discern the contrary,
when he p^esumeth so much upon himself, that he will allow of no counsel, but
out of his own brain, then he falls into greater dangers, then all his
afterwit can recover, as (by woeful experience) has bin observed in many
Princes.

You see my Lord, what extremity your Daughter Oriana is in, and if you well
consider thereon, you may easily judge, what inconvenience may happen to her
person, by an inward violent-conceiued despair, which afterward (all your
lifetime) you may at leisure repent.

Beyond all this, you will run into an unavoidable blame, not only of
strangers; but even of your own subjects, and thereby grow hateful to them,
whereon must needs ensue many misfortunes. Therefore believe the counsel of
them, that solie desire the good, benefit and honor of you and your kingdom,
whereby no peril what-soeuer can happen to you in so doing: but if it should
fall out otherwise, yet you stand clearly excused, and they bound to prepare
all possible remedies. These considerations (my royal Master) do importune my
soul, with endless imprecations, that you would use a fatherly pity, and
please these Ambassadors by some other means, then the precious price of your
daughters blood. Uncle (quoth the King,) these words have moved too much;
therefore, if you mean to please me, use no more of them. So, turning from
him, he espied the Prince Saluste Quide, and Brandaiell enter the Garden; who
being come nearer, called them to him, saying. Lords, my daughter is now come
to court, and she is somewhat sickly, but I trust she will be better amended to
morrow. Sir, answered Brandatell, we gladly would have her delivered to us, so
soon as may stand with your liking, because the Emperor our Master, exspects
her day by day, according as he has written to you. You know, replied the
King, that I have conse^ted to his request, against the whole opinion of the
knights of my Court, yea, and contrary to her will too. Notwithstanding, I have
done it, in regard of the Emperors virtues; and the hope I have, of her
honorable respect and entertainment. In the mean while, forbear a little,
that she may forget what she must forsake, and provide your shipping in a
readiness; for this next week ensuing, I will deliver her to you fully
furnished. My Lord, answered the Prince Saluste Quide, it is not to be wondered
at, if at the first she mou^ne for parting from you: but I am well assured,
that so soon as she shall be arrived at Rome (beholding so many great Lords to
give her obeisance, the triumphs prepared to welcome her, and (above all) the
choice love and respect of the Emperor to her) her ancient breeding will
easily be forgotten. Moreover, if you please, to grace Olinda with her
company, I mean to make her my wife so soon as she comes there, because I
find her to be a wise and virtuous Lady. Believe me (quoth the King) I wish
it might be so: And then he entered into a large discourse, of such especial
virtues remaining in her, as more could not be found in any Lady.

By this time the Tables were covered for dinner, in the midst whereof, they
that intended to combat with Grumedan, came and presented themselves, speaking
thus to King Lisuart. Sir, you know what words were used some few days past,
by Lord Grumedan, to the great disgrace of the Romans, so that Prince Saluste,
and we with him, do come to challenge him the combat. Because he shall well
know, that it ill becomes such an old dotard as he is, to make comparison with
knights of Rome: therefore, if you be so pleased, it shall be performed
tomorrow, for it grieves us, that he should remain so long unpunished.

Don Grumedan hearing himself thus abused, began to change color, and as
he was about to make answer, the king seeing him in choler, arose, and said
to him. Grumedan, you have evermore hitherto been wise and temperate,
especially in speech: let me then request you, to conceal your displeasure,
and only answer to the combat, which these Knights do urge you to. Sir, said
Grumedan, seeing it is your will, it shall be so, and to morrow I will not
fail to meet them in the field, according to my promise, where I hope to
revenge the wrong they have done me in your presence.

So the King rose from the Table, and went into his Chamber with Grumedan,
demanding there of him, where were they whom he had chosen to take his part?
Sir, said he, first I know the right on my side, and if Galaor come to morrow
(as I think he will) I am well assured, that he will bear me company: but if
he come not, then will I fight with them all three, one after another. That
may not be, answered the king, for you have consented to three against three,
and so the oath remains before me recorded, which makes me stand in great
doubt of you, because they are young and strong, you aged and weak, and
without any to help you. Sir, said Grumedan, God who hates pride and
presumption (wherewith they are too much enflated) can provide help, when it
is least looked for. But if the worst should happen, I know two of mine own
kinsemen, that will not deny to aid me against them, were they far^e better
knights then they are.

The King pausing a while, suddenly said. I have considered otherwise for you,
I will disguise my self, and second you in the cause: for, assure your self,
you and I shall well hold out against them all three. God forbid Sir, answered
Grumedan, that you should so endanger your royal person for me. Why? said the
King, in better place I can never do it, and never else can I justly
acknowledge the manifold services you have done for me, hazarding your life in
so many several dangers, only for the defense of me, and my Realm. Sir
(quoth he) the present demonstration of your gracious goodness toward me, has
so far enlarged the obligation of my duty to you: that if I could dye a
thousand deaths in your service, I should yet confess my self more indebted
to you. ^ut, never fear man, replied the king, my heart has yet courage
enough, and this arm is endued with sufficient strength, to maintain a
quarrel of greater moment. Pardon me Sir, said Grumedan, never will I give
consent thereto, considering what wrong you shall do to your self, you being
a king of upright justice, should deal as truly with a stranger, as him that
is your familiar friend. Well (quoth the King) seeing you are so earnest, I
will urge it no further, although it goes much against my mind: go then, and
provide for your business; for you have no time now of trif^ing delaying.

Grumedan gave him the good night, and went to his own lodging, whether he
sent for two knights his kinsmen, speaking thus to them. You know the Combat,
which I have undertaken to morrow against three Romans, and because you are
they in whom I have most confidence: I would make choice of no other Knights
then you, to second me in so good an action. They accepted this offer very
joyfully, and reputed themselves highly honored thereby: so they departed to
make ready their Arms; and Grumedan entered into a Chapel, where he remained
in prayer till the next morning, and then went to make all things fit for him.

As he began to arm himself, the Damsel belonging to Grasinda, (of whom you
have formerly heard) suddenly came thither, bearing one of the goodliest Swords
that ever was seen; and saluting Grumedan, spoke thus. Sir, the Greek knight,
who dearly loves and respects you, for the manly spirit always known to be
in you, has sent you this Sword, which he frankely gives you, as being one of
the best knights in the world: and it is the very same, wherewith (not long
since) he chastised the Romans in your presence.

By me he tells you further, that he has heard of your urgent necessity, for
two Knights to assist you in this fight: wherefore, he has left two of his own
associats, whom he reputes no way inferior to himself, and prays you (for
his sake) to make use of them, and not to employ any other in this business.
Fair Damsel, (quoth he) I humbly thank both the Knight, and you, for the
great pains you have taken to bring me these tidings, which are not a little
welcome to me.

So receiving the Sword, it seemed to him one of the best that ever he had
seen; and guirding it on his thigh, he said to the Damsel. Truly, the Greek
knight has done much for me, considering the small knowledge we have together;
and God give me grace, that I may make amends for this favor one way or other.
His two friendly companions (quoth she) do attend you, and are ready to enter
Combat so soon as you shall please: therefore slack you no time, for I saw
the three Romans as I came hither, in good forwardnes to their own dishonor.
Then the horse was brought, which Florestan had given him, the very same which
he conquered before the Queen Sardamira: and being mounted thereon, he rode
softly to the place where the Combat should be performed. There he found the
two knights, that were come to help him; and they saluting one another,
Grumedan said unto them. Gentlemen, I know not who you are, but that which you
come to do for me, gives apparent testimony, that all my lifetime I must
acknowledge you for my dearest friends.

As he ended these words, they saw the three Romans enter the field, with
Trumpets and Clarions sounding before them, and making such a noise in the
air, as it ecchoed round about in every place. Instantly was the King mounted
on his Scaffold, who casting his eye euery-where, as exspecting Grumedan, he
saw him between the two knights and the Damsel, whom he knew so soon as he
beheld her. But he could not devise, who they were that took part with
Grumedan: wherefore he called to the Damsel, and demanded of her, if she had
brought them. Sir, said she, the good are evermore supported by such as
themselves are, and that is the reason, why the Greek knight, understanding the
loyalty of Lord Grumedan, and the Combat he had undertaken against the
Romans; also, what slender means he had of help at this present, all the
best knights being now absent from your Court: He has therefore sent two of
his own companions, whom you may esteem little inferior to himself, in all
those good parts belonging to manhood. And thus Sir, you may also assure your
self, that Grumedan never exspected any supply: for he never knew thereof,
till such time as he was ready to mount on horseback, and that I my self
presented them to him. Trust me Damsel, answered the King, the Greek knight
has done much for him, especially, in such a necessity.

Scarcely were these words ended, but the three Romans came before the Kings
Scaffold, speaking to him (so loud as all might hear them) in this manner.
Sir, in regard that we have resolved with our selves, to carry the heads of
three Knights to Rome, that dare presume to combat with us. We humbly desire,
that you will not be displeased therewith, although Don Grumedans head be one
of them, which yet you may help, by sending word to him, that if he will deny
his former words here before your Majesty, and freely confess, that we
Romans are the best knights in the world, we are contented to forgive all.
Do (quoth the King) that which you come to do, and he that remains
conqueror, let him deal with his enemy as best pleases himself.

By this time, the Queen and her Ladies had taken their seats, accompanied
with Guillan le Pensif, and Cendill de Ganote, both yet so weak, by reason of
their sickness, as they could hardly support themselves: For Guillan was
newly delivered from a continual Fever, and Ganote had both his legs shot
through with an arrow, as the King was hunting in the Forest. Now, the Queen
much mis-doubted, that Fortune would deal frowardly with the good old
Grumedan, and therefore calling Guillan to her, demanded his opinion in this
case. Madame (quoth he) the hazards of fights, are evermore in the will of
heaven, and the good right of the Combatants: but not in the arms strength,
nor in the presumption of men.

Wherefore Madame, we all knowing Grumedan to be wise, a virtuous Knight, and as
honest a man as the world can yield (far differing from the ouer-weining pride,
of those men that he has to deal withal:) it makes me verily think, that
(weak as I am) if I were in his place, I should easily win the honor of the
day. This answer did highly content the Queen, yea, and in such sort, that
she conceived better hope of Grumedans victory, then formerly she had done.

Now, the Knights on either side, encountered together so furiously, as their
Lances flew up in many shiuers: but there befell such an accident, as never
happened in King Lisuarts Court before, for the three Romans were all
unhorsed, and none of the other lost so much as a stirrup, wherefore, turning
their faces readily, they saw them lie on a heap together.

Hereupon Bruneo de bonne Mer, one of them which the Damsel brought to help
Grumedan, said to him. Seeing we have let the Romans perceive, that we know
how to break our Lances, it were very unreasonable, that we should assail
them any longer on horseback; for they being down, let us descend also. Be it
as you please, answered Grumedan, and dismounting from their horses, being
covered with their Shields, manly they marched against the Romans, to whom
Angriote spoke so loud as he could, thus.

Believe me, Gentlemen of Rome, I think you make little, or no account at all
of us, or else, being willing to bestow your horses on us, you are content to
dismount so readily, as (for your ^^kes) we will do the like.

The Romans, whose hearts (before) were so highly advanced, as none could
reach a loftier pitch. finding their proud hopes to be thus frustrated, were
so confounded with shame, as they would not answer so much as a word, but
holding down their heads, ran upon their enemies with such swiftnes, as
easily might their inward malice be discerned.

But if they showed themselves rough and sharp assayling, the other were not
negligent in defending, especially Grumedan, who in his earnest desire to be
revenged, entered among them, laying blows hardly to be endured, wounding
others, and receiving some himself. Notwithstanding, in the end, he and his
two companions (laying aside all care of peril) laid such heavy load upon
the other, that they were compelled to recoyle, and Maganil fell down
backward. Then Brunco de bonne Mer, who sharply pursued him, stepped upon him,
and violently plucking the helmet from his head, threw him against the
Scaffold, whereon the Queen and Ladies sat. Where Maganil, seeing him self
in danger of death, cried out for pity and compassion: but Bruneo, pretending
not to hear him, bade him yield himself, or else he would smite off his
head. Sir (quoth he) I will do whatsoever you command me, and here I am
ready to confess, that I have lied falsely: for the Roman Knights are not
such as I have boasted them to be nor any way comparable to them of Great
Britain.

This acknowledgement was heard by the Queen, and Guillan, who pitying him
that so earnestly sued for pardon, said to Brunco. Worthy Grecian Knight, me
thinks you should have little desire to that head, which is full of nothing
else but pride and vainglory: wherefore, leave it to himself, as a matter of
no value, to the end, that when he is returned to Rome, he may there make
report, what benefit he got here by his insolence and presumption; the Queen
and her Ladies join with me in this suite to you.

Since so virtuous a Princess, answered he, does command me, and you (whom as
yet I know not) do also desire it, far be it from me to deny it. So taking
his foot off from Maganil, he returned to Grumedan, who had beaten down the
second, and he likewise fearing the loss of his head, made the like amends as
his fellow did.

Now there remained none but the third, who had lost so much blood, that he
fell down dead at the feet of Angriote: wherefore he took him by one leg,
and dragde him out of the field. In which while, Grumedan remounted on
horseback, and imaging that his two new friends would follow him, withdrew
thence to his own lodging, that his wounds might be looked unto.

But so soon as he was gone, Bruneo and Angriote, without putting off their
Helmets, as fearing to be known, presented themselves before the King, and
said unto him. Sir, we must now take our leave of you, and return to our
worthy friend the Greek Knight, with whom we are so much honored and esteemed,
as in no place else we can devise to find the like. Wherefore, if you please
to command us any service to him, we are ready to do it with most willing
minds. God be your guide, answered the King; for certainly, both he and you
have made it sufficiently known, that you are no new learners to deal in such
combats.

Then the Damsel, who had bin their conduct thither, said to the king, that
she desired to speak in private with him, concerning a matter much importing
him. That shall you fair Damsel, said he. So, all being commanded thence,
she ascended the Scaffold, to afford Bruneo and Angriote the better means of
departure, ^^turning the same way, as they came; and she being come to the
King, began thus. Sir, quoth she, you have hitherto bin held for the most
esteemed King of Christen ^ome, a lover of all honor and virtue: but (above
all the rest) the only protector of Ladies and Damsels, bestowing on them
infinite favors and graces, whereby they have received just occasion, ^o love
you more then any living ^^an beside. But now, by losing all the hope they had
in you, they find themselves utterly defeated of your wonted great and
gracious goodness, by too evident a testimony, of cruel unkindness to your
own Daughter, the fair Princess Oriana, di^eriting her, of that happiness,
which (in right) belongs to her, after you. Whereat, how impossible a thing
it is in their opinion, that your wonted, royal, affable, and beni^^e nature,
should be so suddenly ^^nuer^ed into cruelty, almost the like never heard of.

Never more (...) they exspect any kindness toward them from you, using such
strange behavior to her, whom love and fatherly pity binds you near unto,
beside your royal title of King, whereby you ought to be an ^right Iusticer,
and see that all are truly dealt withal. Think not, Sir, ^ut much evil will
ensue heereon, b^ the wretched example you give to your people, and the
ceaselesse tea^es, and bitter lamentations of Madame Oriana: all which are
before God, calling for due vengeance; so that if you take not good heed, the
end of your reign will ensue but the beginning of these miseries, wherein you
will be more pitied, then any other Prince that I know. More I may not say to
you, because I am to follow the two knights, who (I fear) have long ere this
exspected me. Damosel, said the King, heaven be your conducter, you have
spoke very wisely, and like a woman of good spirit.

So the Damsel descended, and departed, and arriving where the two knights
were, they rode on to the Sea, finding a Brigandine there attending, which
Grasinda had appointed for them. And because they knew for certainty, that king
Lisuart had set down his determination, to deliver his Daughter the first day
of the week ensuing, they made what haste possibly they could to be with the
Greek knight, that he might also be acquainted therewith.

And they stayed not above two days and two nights. but they took haven in the
Enclosed Isle, where the other were landed but a little before. Whereof
Agraies, Plorestan, and others, being advertised, they went to meet them with
no mean joy. There might you have seen mutual love and am^ on all sides,
congratulations, embraces, and all the ceremonious offices of courtesy, all
done in honor of Lord Amadis: whereat Grasinda being amazed, knew not what to
say, until he came unto her, saying,

Madame, I pray you be no way discontented, that thus long I have concealed my
name from you, which is Amadis de Gaul, of whom your self have often spoken.
These other are my kindred and companions, friends and followers, all resolved
to do you any service what-soeuer.

Lord Amadis, answered she, you need not desire any pardon of me, considering,
you have never offended me: but rather I am highly to be condemned, that have
had you so long time in my house, not like a great Prince and Lord, as you are,
but rather in the nature of a mean Knight errant.

And you had reason to conceal your self from me; for if I had so well known
you then, as now I do: I should have strouen with my best endeavor, to do
such honor, as you justly deserve. Sweet Madame, said he, never use such
words, in regard you have done so much for me, as I remain obliged unto you
while I live.

Walking on in this conference, they entered into the Palace of Apolidon, where
they found the Tables covered for dinner, and the meat already served in:
Scarcely were they set down, but Angriote, Bruneo and the Damsel came in
before them, where we need make no doubt of their hearty welcome. And as Amadis
had questioned them, what issue Grumedans Combat had against the Romans: they
related to him, that the King was fully minded, to deliver his Daughter to the
Emper ours Ambassadors, and that within three or four days at the uttermost.

Heereat Amadis was so moved, that his color presently changed, as being
doubtful, that either they should not have time enough for her rescue, or that
they of the Enclosed Isle, would not partake with him in such an enterprise
against King Lisuart. Therefore to feel how they stood affected to his
purpose, so soon as the dinner was ended, falling into much variety of
discourse, and growing into some reportarie of his long voyage, at last thus he
began with them.

My worthy and honorable friends, for ought I can perceive, matters are much
altered in Great Britain, since we have bin out of it, and the King has got
him another kind of humor, then he was wont to have in precedent times. For I
have seen and known, that he would readily more regard the affairs of poor
distressed Ladies, then matters of most moment concerning himself.
Notwithstanding, to my no little amazement, he is bent to the destruction of
his own natural daughter, that peerless Princess, Madame Oriana, then whom,
never was child more diligent and respective of her parents, then from time to
time she has always declared her self. And yet, as Angriote and Bruneo do
plainly tell me, without regard of all this duty and obedience, even in the
mere despite of her, and contrary to the judgment of all the Lords of Great
Britain, he has relegated and confined her, to the only man in the world,
whom she most hates; which moves me so much to commiserate her case, as, if
you would both believe me, and lend me your assistance, we would free her from
this thraldom, and set her at liberty.

Sighing and pausing a while, he began again in this manner. What-soeuer I
have said (my deare-esteemed kinsmen and friends,) assure your selves, that I
will not undertake any thing, without your counsel and furtherance. And yet
we should all remember the solemn oath we made to the Queen Brisena, at the
very last Court held in the City of London: where we then swear, never to
suffer wrong to be done to any Lady or Damsel, if she required help of us.
Shall we now then endure, that she shall be captined, and vyllie entreated, of
whom (heretofore) we have received so many honorable favors? Shall the Ladies
and Virgins of her company, be carried away perforce, and (for ever) banished
from their own country? Before God, I speak it, if we do suffer this heinous
indignity, we are well worthy of eternal blame, without any excuse or pretense
to shield us: nay, we shall fall into the base reputation, of recreant and
unworthy knights, regardlesse both of honor and Arms.

Let us then advise here together, what you think meetest to be done. For, as
concerning my self, I determine to defer a voyage, long since by me
intended: as, not many days since, I made known to my Cousin Agraies,
Florestan, and others, by Gandalin, and now with such Ships as I should find
here, labor so much as lies in me, to break the purpose of King Lisuart, and
rescue so many wronged Ladies. Among whom, next to the most woeful Princess
Oriana, is virtuous Olinda, whom the King (in this new-deuised tyranny) will
compel to marry Saluste Quide, albeit utterly against his own liking.

And now Lords, let me move one matter to you: I would gladly know, by what
authority he can warrant this cruelty, to them that are none of his subjects,
neither borne within any of his Dominions? There is my Cousin Mabila, sent by
the King her father into Great Britain, not to be confined for Rome, but to
remain with the Queen, and keep the Princess Oriana company, to whom her
love has always bin such, as never could bed greater between two Princesses.
And I much maruall, that his whole kingdom does not revolt against him, or (at
least) some bold and hardy Knight undertake the cause, to counter check his
folly honorably by Arms.

We see (dear friends) that no one (as yet) steps forth in the action; and
therefore I would entreat you, that, according to the ancient commendable
custom, diligently observed among alknights errant: you would be careful,
that such a shameful and dishonorable deed may not be done. In so doing, we
shall win more fame and true renown, then ever hitherto we have done,
without any evil imputation, or sinister misconstruction. Tell me then, what
you think here-of, to the end, that according to some resolved conclusion, we
may take order for the most expedient execution.

Then Agraies, whom it nearest concerned, as well for his Sister, as for the
honorable affection he bare to Olinda, as has bin declared to you in the first
book: answered before them all, in this manner. I know not where the man is,
that would be dull or slow in so acceptable an enterprise; considering, that
before you (my Lord and Cousin) arrived here: we were all assembled in this
place, to make provision for this in conuenience. And now, that you find us so
conformable to your will, I am certain, that no man among us, is of any other
mind; but that Fortune merely calls us, to undertake the business, and
promises us an undoubted victory. For she seems weary, that she has favored
King Lisuart so long a time, and he makes no acknowledgment thereof any manner
of way. Why should he send my Sister (against her will) into a strange
country? Did my Father give her him, to dispose of at his pleasure? You all
know, that soon after our departure from Great Britain, I demanded her of
the Queen: but she denied me, sending me word by Gandales, that she would
keep and respect her as her own person. Is this then kindship, or courtesy,
to keep her in such sort, as to ouer-throw all her fortunes in the end?
Mabila, has she no other place of retirement, but to the Court of the
Emperor? Is not the kingdom of SCOTLAND of sufficient opulencie, for her
breeding and education?

Striking his hand on his breast, with a very small pause, he brake forth again
thus. I protest before God, this dealing of King Lisuart, is both vile and
dishonorable; yea, and so far off from common reason, that I had rather die
a thousand deaths (if it were possible for me) then not to be revenged; and
already I have acquainted the King my Father herewith, that he may provide some
remedy for it. In the mean while, let me entreat you al, my honorable Lords
and friends, to lend me your assistance, especially you, whom this injury
touches as nearly as my self, it being offered, not only to the person of my
Sister, your Cousin and near kindred: but also to Olinda and others, for whom,
according to our solemn oath and promise (as my Lord Amadis has well
remembered) we ought in duty to step forth, and stand as their protectors and
defenders.

Lords, said Quedragant, as for my self, I am ready to depart, when it shall
please the company, and if I make any spare of my pains, let me be excluded
from all good opinion: and I believe there is no man here among us, but he
will say as much as I have done. For, if we hazard our lives often, and upon
little or slight occasion: we have great reason now to adventure further, and
not to be sparing of our very uttermost endeavor. How say ye, my friends, have
I not spoken the truth?

Then every one answered, that no danger, or death should cause any deferring,
but it required quick and speedy diligence, to keep the Romans, from passing
through the straites of the Mediterranean Sea, before any fight were made upon
them. Easily, quoth Amadis, shall we make this provision, for to morrow morning
we will be all well shipped, and win the way before them; which was set down
for a full resolve.

Now Grasinda was present at all this conference; and she to give them the more
encouragement, said. Before God, Gentlemen, your enterprise is high, and worthy
of the greatest commendation, considering, that beside the good you shall do
to her, whose help and rescue you intend, you shall give example to many other
worthy Knights (either of this, or any other strange Country) that hereafter
by your imitation) they suffer no shame or wrong to be done, to any Lady or
Gentlewoman whatsoever. Wherein you will make your selves so memoratiue to
them, that she, or they that now live, or shall many hundreds of years
hereafter, will sing rare Peans of your praises.

Madame, answered Amadis, God enable us to effect our enterprise, according as
(I know) you heartily wish it. In the mean while, if you be so pleased, you
shall remain here, in the company of Ysanie, the good old Governor of this
Island, who shall be as obedient to you, as to my self. Master Elisabet must
go with me, because I repose great trust in him. My Lord (quoth she) you may
dispose of me and mine, according as to you seems best. Amadis humbly thanked
her, and gave command, that every man should be prepared, to go aboard those
Ships, by break of day, which Agraies and Florestan had there readily
furnished, according as they had order sent them by Gandalin. Then, the next
day, being all embarked, they set sail directly for Great Britain, hoping
to meet with the Romans, as afterward they did.

CHAP. XVIII.
How King Lisuart delivered his Daughter Oriana, to the Ambassadors of the
Emperor, and other Ladies with her, to be conveyed to Rome: And how they were
(soon after) rescued by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle.

THe day being come, according to King Lisuarts promise, that he would deliver
his Daughter to the Romans, to be conducted to the Emperor, he continuing
constant in his wilful opinion, without any possibility of alteration, either
of pity to her, importunity used by the Queen, and all the grave advice of
his Lords to the contrary. To effect the full issue of his own humor, he went
to her Chamber, where sitting down by her, and taking her by the hand, thus he
spoke. Daughter, you have evermore shown your self obedient to my will, never
using any contradiction: will you now hold on in the same mind, according as
Reason does require? You have put on a sad and melancholy disposition, at the
marriage which I have determined for you, whereat I am not a little amazed. Do
you imagine, that I would do any thing, but for your benefit and honor? or
can you conceit any evil in clination in me toward you? I swear to you upon
my faith, that the love I bear you is so certain, as I do no less grieve for
your far absence from me, then you can do your self. But you do well know,
that it is impossible, to provide such an happiness for you nearer home.
Wherefore I pray you, that in using your wonted wisdom and discretion, you
would show a more cheerful countenance, and rejoice in the great fortune
ordained for you, being wife to the greatest Prince in the world. If you do,
(besides the high estimation generally to be made of you) you shall glad your
fathers soul, who grieves at your strange alteration, as no man possibly can
do more.

During all these speeches, Oriana had her spirits so contracted, that she was
not able to shed a tear; and therefore, as a woman, out of sense of her own
sorrow, seeing there was now no further remedy for her, with a bold and
steadfast resolution, thus she replied. My Lord, you have then (for ought I can
otherwise perceive) resolved on my marriage to the Emperor: but therein
(happily) you have committed one of the greatest errors, that any Prince alive
can do. For first, so long as my life lasts, I shall never love the husband
you have chosen for me; and next, I am very certain, (as oftentimes I have
told you already) that I shall never see Rome: rather shall the fishes use
their mercy to me, then I will go to a home that is my hell, or dwell where I
can have no affection or desire. And I am of the mind, that you could not be
heereto induced or persuaded, but only in the love you bear to my Sister,
being desirous to leave your inheritance to her, and make me heir to all the
miseries in the world. Nevertheless, God, who is just, will never suffer this
your unreasonable purpose to take effect; sooner he will marry me to my death.

When the King heard Oriana answer in this manner, pity and anger mixing
themselves together, made him likewise change his former language, and thinking
to win her by menaces, said. You play the fool with me, and you will not
yield, for all the entreaties I can make: but if you dally thus with me any
longer, instead of wiuing you to the Emperor, I will wed you to the Tower, and
where you shall see neither Sun nor Moon. My Lord, quoth she, you can not
commit me to a more hateful prison, then Rome, and you shall do me a great
grace, to make me an everlasting dweller in your Tower. Then arose the King,
very highly displeased, and leaving her, went to the Queen, saying to her. I
pray you go to your daughter; for, notwithstanding all the means I can use to
her, she will not be sent to the Emperor, and I cannot revoke my promise to
the Ambassadors.

Now, you must observe, that the Queen had practiced all possible ways, to
break off this intended marriage, till such time, as at her last moving the
matter, the King grew so offended, that he charged her to motion it no more,
except she meant to endure his heavy displeasure. Wherefore, as not daring to
incense him any further, without returning him any answer, she went to Oriana,
whom she found so full of sorrow, as none could be more. Oriana, leaned on her
left arm, beating her other hand against her breast; when the Queen said to
her. Daughter, the king is wonderfully offended with you: I pray you be
obedient to him, seeing all that he does, is for your good and honor. Ah
Mother, (quoth she) I see now that I am lost for ever; for I feel death so nere
approaching, as it is impossible for me to live any longer. Speaking these
words, she fell down in a swoun, and the Queen likewise hard by her, which
made the Ladies cry out so loud, that the King heard it, and came thither,
imagining that Oriana was dead indeed. But finding it no otherwise then a
trance, he would needs have her carried so aboard the Ship, notwithstanding all
the Ladies tears, and mourneful entreaties.

Being thus brought into the Cabine appointed for her, the Ladies were likewise
led thither, that should go with her, among whom was Olinda, struggling and
striving with all her might, and crying to the King, that she might not be so
violently forced and abused. Notwithstanding, he would not lend her any
attention, but suffered her so to be hurried thence, so great was his
distraction of spirit. Before they weighed ankers, he called to the Prince
Saluste Quide, and other the choicest of the Ambassadors, to whom he
recommended his daughter: praying them to entreat her in all honorable
manner. Which they promised to do; and taking a solemn farewell each of
other, the King returned to his Court, and the Romans launching forth into the
Maine, soon lost the Coaste of Tagades, Oriana not knowing or perceiving any
thing, such was her rapture quite from her self.

The Ambassadors to the Emperor, had bequeathed Mabila only, to keep company
with her in her Cabine; and the Queen Sardamira, with the rest of the women,
were bestowed in another Ship, and so (in no little joy) sail on the Romans,
till at length they descryed on the Sea, a great Fleet of Ships, making
directly toward them.

But, at the first sight, taking them to be either Merchants, or some such
other peaceable people, they made no further reckoning of them. By and by they
beheld them to divide into three several bands, and make fast on them, by the
help of oars: which gave them good cause to prepare for defense, if they
should assail them. But I am sure you perceive, that this was the succor for
Oriana, led by noble Amadis, and a great number of worthy Knights, as well of
the Enclosed Isle, as diverse other of his friends thus met together, all
determining to dye, rather then to permit the Ladies to be thus forcibly
carried away.

When they perceived so many sails together, and in such martial manner
prepared, especially for so great a conuoy, there grew a jealous doubt among
some of them; which Amadis perceiving, and fearing, lest their suspicion might
disharten the rest, he spoke to them in this manner. My honorable friends and
companions, were I not fully assured of the virtue and magnanimity remaining in
you, I should (doubtless) be slow enough, in hazarding the fight against the
enemy, that comes so strongly prepared for us. Nevertheless, knowing you to be
such as you are, and always have been; especially, the just occasion that
has called us all hither: it appears to me, that we should not insist on the
least delay, but, setting aside all servile fear, go courageously to the
business. The captivity of so many desolate Ladies, stand as inciting objects to
our eyes, and honor calls us to their rescue, by our solemn oaths taken for
their freedom. Wherefore, I earnestly entreat you, that we may bravely board
their Ships, and make such expression of our duty, that setting the Ladies at
liberty, the conductors of them may carry no tidings to the Emperor.

No sooner were these words thus spoken, but Drums and Trumpets sounded
chearefully: for the two Fleetes were so near each to other, as there could be
no shrinking back from fight. Now, Darts, Slings, Arrows, wild fire balls,
and other offensive engines, flew liberally ^^^oad; and the fight (in the
beginn^) was so fierce, as no judgment could be given, which side had the
better or worse. Notwithstanding, they of the Enclosed Isle, (by the means of
that exquisite Pilot, Master Elisabet) got before the wind, and sunk two or
three of the Ships of the enemy. At the very same instant, the Ship wherein
Agrates and Quedragant were, by the means of grapling yrons, caught hold on
that of the Prince Saluste Quide, and the men entered into her. But if Agraies
and Quedragant made ample proof of their manhood: Florestan, and Garnate of
the Dreadful Dale did no less, having boarded another Ship hard by. For they
assailed the Marquess of Ancona, and the Archbishop of Tarente, while Amadis
fought with the Ship wherein Brandaiell was; whereto he had most mind,
because it seemed the best disposed, and had a goodly Lantern, with great
store of Flags and Streamers, bearing the arms of the Emperor, even as
Admiral of the whole Fleet, which made him imagine, that the Princess was
there.

Great and stout resistance was a long while made, but Amadis and his followers
plied them so hotly, that they cut so many in pieces, as they met withal,
crying out aloud, Amadis, Amadis, Gaul, Gaul. As he pursued on in this good
success, he met with Brandaiell, to whom he gave such a stroke on the helmet,
as he overthrew him; and tearing it from his head, made show, as if he would
smite it off. Alas Sir (cried out Brandaiel) take such ransom of me as you
please, and save my life.

Tell me then, said Amadis, what have thou done with Oriana? You shall find
her (quoth (...) in this Cabine, accompanied ^ly with Mabila. As he was going
thither, Angriote stepped in, to whom he gave the charge of his prisoner, and
going near the door, he found it strongly barde with an iron chain: but
running with his foot against it, he made it violently fly open.

Mabila being in the Cabine with the Princess, had formerly heard the voice of
Amadis, and Gaul, and said to Oriana, being laid (much trobled in mind) upon
a rich Couch, and had heard nothing all this while of the fight: Madame,
believe, that heaven has sent us help; for me thinks I hear your Amadis,
enquiring for you, therefore raise up your spirits, and rejoice. At the very
word Amadis, the Princess seemed to rise (as with a sudden start) demanding,
where is Amadis?

Madame, quoth she, I heard him (I am certain) even now both speak and fight
in the same Ship where we now are. Do not you yet hear the noise among the
other Ships? Undoubtedly, the fight is hot and fierce. Come, come, dear
Mabila, answered Oriana, questionless you are in a dream. No, upon my soul,
replied Mabila, I heard the slashes of Swords, and the noise of a very potent
Fleet.

At this very word, Amadis entered, and seeing Oriana, he fell on his knee
before her. But she (overcome with extremity of joy) held him by the arm,
and glewed her lips so fast to his, as if she meant they should never be
parted, and thus she stood a long while, robde of all power for speech, till at
length she said. Ah my dearest Love, seeing I am now in your custody, I fear
not them that would take me from you, or going any further with them, for Death
it self shall now never more divide us. Madame, said he, one of the greatest
favors that ever heaven affoorded me, is this, in giving me so good an
occasion of return into this country, only to do such needful service.

As they meant to continue longer this kind of discourse, Mabila said unto
them. Why stand you musing in this manner? Do you not see Sir, what need there
is of your help in yonder other Ships, where the fight is fiercer and fiercer?
Good Cousin, go and succor your dear friends, you may afterward converse at
more leisure with the Princess. Go then, dear heart, said Oriana, and return
again so soon as you can to me. Then he departed out of the Cabin, leaving
Oriana and Mabila to the charge of Angriote, and entering his own Ship, beheld
Landin de Faiarque, and his associats, assailed by a Roman Vessel, that
pressed very furiously upon them. But he made in with such a strength, as they
were soon sunk: And now remained no more to be fought withal, but that Ship
wherein the Prince Saluste Quide was, which resisted stoutly against Agraies
and Quedragant. Nevertheless, at the arrival of Amadis the Prince by no
means could avoid, but that he was smitten down upon the Orelope.

Agraies, who hated him to the death, because he carried away his beloved Olinda
forcibly; caught the Helmet from off his head, and (at one blow) parted it from
his body. Now, the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, seeing Fortune had bin so
favorable to them, placed guardes upon the conquered Ships, while Amadis, went
to enquire for the Queen Sardamira, and the other Ladies (whom he found in the
Ship, where the Prince Salust Quide lay slain) quaking like leaves upon a tree.

When Olinda espied Agraies, she (more joyful then ever) ran and embraced
him, before he had a sight of her: but afterward, overcome with the same
extremity of delight, making a low reverence to her, he said. Madame, I pray
you pardon what I have done to the Prince Saluste Quide, who in seeking to make
you his wife and mistress, has received the reward of his presumption by my
Sword.

Sir, quoth she, I know not what might move him to affect me so much,
considering, I never showed less love to any man living: therefore, what he
sought to compass by extremity, has returned upon him condign punishment,
and now I need mourn the less for a whole year. But I pray you tell me, how
you happened to succor us in such a need? Madame, said he, that must be
related at more leisure, when all this tumult is blown over.

While Agraies and Olinda were thus in talk together, Amadis conferred with
the Queen Sardamira, (who knew not him) and comforted her, desiring her, not
to be grieved, for the disaster happening to her company: but she wept so
extremely, as that it would have moved any heart to pity, which made him
leave her, and go to the Damsel of Denmark.

Then the Queen demanded of Florestan, what he was that had spoken to her?
Madame, quoth he, it is Lord Amadis, that worthy Knight. Nay then, said she, I
am of better comfort then ever, and cannot fail of good entertainment in his
company: for all my life time I have heard, that all Ladies and Damsels
received from him nothing but honor.

Amadis ouer-hearing her, left the Damsel of Denmark, and returning to her
again, said. Madame, you may think your self as safe, and welcome into this
company, as when you were with the Prince Saluste Quide; and therefore be no
longer disconsolate. Lord Amadis, answered she, I have heard every where
reported, what honorable favors you have extended to women, which gives me
some persuasion, that you will deal with me no worsse, but better if you can.
And reason good, Madame, said he, for you being a Queen, deserve to have the
very best entertainment. And as for my self, I promise you on my faith, that
I will endeavor what I can for you: and to begin my word with you, if you be so
pleased, I will conduct you to Madame Oriana, to the end, that you being both
together, may enjoy consolation one with another, equal to your own
contentments and liking.

Then Amadis commanding the two Ships to be united together, and entering into
that where the Princess was, leading the Queen Sardamira by the hand, he
presented her to Oriana, saying. Madam, here is the Queen Sardamira, and all
the Ladies and Gentlewomen that should attend you, who desire, that you would
accept of their company. Amadis (quoth she) I am your prisoner, and therefore
you may and must command me, well knew Amadis, that she spoke these words,
only to palliate their close affections, wherefore he would not answer her
one word: but Oriana shaping her course to the Queen, spoke thus. For ought I
can perceive Madam, we must take another way now, then going to Rome, and
endure our fortunes patiently, because there is no other remedy. Further on
she would have thus proceeded, but that Agraies entered the Cabine, leading
Olinda by the hand, which Oriana perceiving, she left the Queen Sardamira, and
came and embraced them, as one that had not in a longtime seen them. The like
she did to Florestan, Quedragant, and many more, thanking them perticularly,
for their several favors done unto her: especially Garnate, to whom she
said. My worthy friend Garnate, but for you, I had been dead: but the letter
you brought me from Florestan, did presently revive me. Madame, said he, I did
but my duty as very glady I would do, in all occasions else, you please to
command me.

After these courtesies, to all that came and presented themselves before her;
she called Amadis aside, and said unto him. Believe me (sweet friend) if I had
gone on but a little further, all your right had been lost with me: but our
Lord has provided better for us both, and now I am where willingly I would be.
Madam (quoth he) I have not done any thing for you, equal to the infinite of
your gracious favors toward me: and I desire pardon for your grievous fear,
which this rude encounter could not but put upon you. I heard none at all, said
she, I was so overcome with extreme melancholy and if Mabila had not told me
of it, I had bin as utterly ignorant of any fight, as they that dwell in Great
Britain. But tell me I pray you, whether are you minded to carry me? Let me
conjure you (dear sweet) by all the love you have ever borne me, that seeing
we are now met together, and in so good company: you would speak nothing to
me in any place, that may return to our prejudice, but when you are willing to
command any thing, your Cousine Mabila may easily enterpret between us. My
further intent is, to be conuayed to the Enclosed Isle, where I would gladly
be: till heaven afford more favor for me, and my Father may understand what
wrong he has done me. Let me live no longer Madame (answered Amadis, then to
do you my uttermost service; wherefore you may well persuade your self, that
your will shall any way be accomplished. And I hold it very expedient, that you
should make your mind known to Agraies, Quedragant and Florestan, who covet
nothing more, then to please you with their uttermost pains. Well (quoth
Oriana) when you meet in counsel together, I will send your Cousin to them,
to know how they will dispose of me.

So Amadis departed from her, and called all the Knights of the Enclosed Isle
in counsel, to understand which way they would take. Many contrary opinions
passed among them, some thought it meet, that Oriana should be conveyed to the
Enclosed Isle; others would have her into Gaul, to king Perion: but the most
part agreed for SCOTLAND; till Mabila coming to them, said. My Lords, Madame
Oriana entreates you, that she may be conducted to the Enclosed Isle, until
her reconciliation with her father King Lisuart. And seeing you have already so
well begun this business, that, proceeding on from good to better, you would
still stand fast for her, as always you have done for distressed Ladies and
Damsels requiring your help, with due consideration had to the quality of her
person. Madame, answered Quedragant, I am sure, that my Lord Amadis, and al we
of his company, are determinately resolved, to serve her till death, without
spare of coin, friends, or any thing else remaining in our power, yea, were
it against the King her father, the Emperor, or any other that dare offend
her, not doubting, but by the help of God, and the justice of our cause in
doing her service, we may lawfully make resistance against them. Considering
also, that there is not a man among us, but has solemnly sworn, never to
depart from this association, until she be at perfect liberty. And so you may
safely assure her from us, concerning all which has bin said, as not to be
denied by any one in this company.

Mabila thanking them most affectionatly, departed from them, and coming to
Oriana, declared what the Knight had said unto her, whereof she was not a little
joyful, and instantly, all betook themselves to their several Ships. And
according to their former conclusion, they set sail for the Enclosed Isle;
where in their voyage we will leave them, to make an end of this Third Book.

The end of the Third Book.
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this Third Book of Amadis de Gaul.
Chapter 1. OF the discords and wars which befell in Great Britain, and
thereabout, occasioned by the bad counsel which King Lisuart, received from
Gandandell and Brocadan, against Amadis and his followers, whereby many good
Knights (afterward on either side) cruelly concluded their lives. Fol. 2.
Chapter 2 How Amadis being in the Enclosed Island, enquired of Gandales,
tidings concerning the Court of King Lisuart, determining to pass into Gaul
with Bruneo, to shake off his melancholy. And of those adventures which
happened to him by a tempest, that threw him upon the Sad Island. Fol. 12.
Chapter 3. How King Cildadan and Galaor, in travailing toward the Court of
King Lisuart, met with twelve Knights and a Lady, wh^ conducted a young
Gentleman, that entreated the King to make him Knight. Fol. 21. Chapter 4. How
King Lisuart fought a Battle against the Knights of the Enclosed Island, whom
he vanquished. And of the great liberality be used toward Galuanes, in
restoring him to all the lands and Seigneuries belonging to Madasima. Fol. 34.
Chapter 5. How Amadis being with his Father King Perion, found himself subject
to overmuch melancholy, to be so far sundred from his Oriana. And
contrariwise, Bruneo (...) highly contented, having so apt occasion, to see and
confer with his Melicia, at what time himself pleased: And of their
several enterprises, to satisfy their own humors. Fol. 41. Chapter 6. How
the three Knights of the Serpents, returning (...) ward into Gaul, were (by
contray fortune) cast on the place where Archalaus the Enchanter dwelt, who
resolved on their death, and what afterward befell them. Fol. 53. Chapter 7.
How Esplandian was nourished by the old He^^i^e Na^n. And what adventure
happened to Am^ (...) the ^ne ^ile, changing his known ^e, and c^g himself
the Knight with the Green Sword. Fol. 69. Chapter 8. How King Lisuart hunting
in the Forest, where he had left the Ladies, accidentally met with a young
Damsel, who showed him the way to the Hermitage, where the good Hermit
Na^cian made his abiding: And how the Infant (long time after) was known to be
the Some of Amadis and Oriana. Fol. 83. Chapter 9. How the Knight of the Green
Sword, being departed from King Tafinor of Bohemia, came into the marches of
Romania, where he met with Grasinda (...) the fields, accompanied with many
Gentlemen, Ladies and Damsels: Especially with a Knight named Brandasidell,
who would compel him (by force of Arms) to come speak with ^he Lady
Grasinda, and of the Combat they fought together. Fol. 87. Chapter 10. How
within short while after, the Knight of the Green Sword had hoysed sail into
the maine Sea, and had quite left the Islands of Romania: By hard fortune he
was cast upon the Devils Island, where he fought with a Monster named Endriagus
Fol. 97. Chapter 11. How the Knight of the Green Sword, made known to the
Emperor of Constantinople (to whom the Island appertained, where he slew the
Endriagus) the great fortune and victory he there obtained: And of matters
happening to him afterward. Fol. 105. Chapter 12. How the Knight of the Green
Sword departed from Constantinople, to satisfy the promise which he had made
to the fair Grasinda: And of that which afterward happened to him. Fol. 117.
Chapter 13. How the Queen Sardamira, with the other Ambassadors from the
Emperor Patin, arrived at the Court of King Lisuart, hoping (at their return)
to bear thence the Princess Oriana with them: And of that which happened to
certain Roman Knights, offering injury to a Knight errant. Fol. 129.
Chapter 14. How the Queen Sardamira sent to entreat Florestan to be her
conduct to Mirefleure to Oriana: Because he had so curstly handled the Knights
that kept her company, as they were able to follow her no further. Fol. 138.
Chapter 15. How the Knight of the Green Sword (who afterward styled himself
the Grecke Knight) Bruneo de bonne Mer, and Angriote Estrauaux, embarked
themselves in the company of the fair Grafinda, and of that which happened to
them afterward. Fol. 147. Chapter 16. How the Greek Knight and his
confederates, conducted the fair Grasinda to the place where the Combats were
to be performed. And of that which ensued there^^. Fol. 159. Chapter 17. How
King Lisuart sent for his Daughter Oriana to Court, that he might deliver her
to the Romans. And of that which happened to a Knight of the Enclosed Isle:
But more especially, of the Combat which Don Grumedan had with them that
defied him. Fol. 166. Chapter 18. How King Lisuart delivered his Daughter
Oriana, to the Ambassadors of the Emperor, and other Ladies with her, to be
conuayed to Rome: And how they were (soon after) resiued by the Knights of the
Enclosed Isle. Fol. 181.
FINIS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK Of Amadis de Gaul.

WHEREIN IS AMPLY DECLAred, what end and success the War had, begun between
King Lisuart, and the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: With the Marriages and
aliances, there-upon ensuing, to the high contentment of many Lovers and their
fair Friends.

Written in French by the Lord of Essars, Nicholas de Herberay, Commissarie in
Ordinary for the Kings Artillery, and his Lieutenant in the Country and
Government of Picardie, under Monsieur de Brissac: Great Master and Captain
General of the said Artillery.

Translated into English by A. M.



LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OAKS, dwelling in Foster-lane. 1618.

TO THE TR VLY NOBLE AND VIRTUOUS GENTLEMAN, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight, Earl
of Montgomerie, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, etc.
WIth the same devotion, and integrity of unspotted affection (most Noble Lord)
I present to your gracious acceptance this fourth Book of Amadis de Gaul,
encouraged thereto by that truly virtuous Lady, who has promised, to stand
between me and your dis-fauour, in presuming so boldly as herein I have done.
The fifth and sixth Books are shortly to succeed, upon your Honorable
acceptance of these: and whatsoever else remains in my poor power, either
in these or the like employments, are dedicated soly to your Noble service.

Your Honors in all duty, A. M.

The Printer to the Reader.
Having finished these two Books of Amadis de Gaul (the third and fourth,
somewhat longer delayed, then was at the first intended) I am to entreat thy
gentle favor (courteous Reader) for such slips and errors, as have escaped me
in the Printing, and where Sense shall seem lame or defective in any place, to
help it with thy better understanding; as considering, that not wilfully: but
rather unwillingly, those faults have escaped the Press. By Michaelmasse
Term next ensuing, I have made promise, of the first and second Books of
Amadis and so consequently the following parts, as God and thy kind favor
shall therein further me. Till when, accept these; a speedy spur to hasten
on the other.

Thine to be commanded, N. O.

THE FOVRTH BOOK OF AMADIS DE GAVLE.
Wherein is amply discoursed, what end the war had, begun between King
Lisuart, and the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: with the alliances and marriages
thereupon ensuing, to the no little contentment of many Lovers, and their fair
friends.

Of the great sorrow made by the Queen Sardamira, after she understood the
death of the Prince Saluste Quide: And of the arrival of Oriana in the
Enclosed Isle.

CHAP. 1.
BY the discourse of our Third Book, it has been declared to you, how King
Lisuart delivered his daughter Oriaana to the Emperors Ambassadors, contrary
to the opinion of all the Princes and Lords of his Kingdom; and that she (with
the other Ladies and Damsels that kept her company) were rescued by Amadis
and his friends; the navy of the Romans vanquished, Brandaiell de Rocque
taken prisoner, the Marquis of Ancona, the Archbishop of Tarente, and many more
beside. Great was this overthrow, wherein none of them escaped, but was eithen
slain, or taken prisoner. After the conflict was fully ended, and all the
Ladies brought together; Amadis (evermore to conceal discreetly his love and
Orianaes) went into her Ship, leaving Angriot and some other Knights to keep
company with the women. I Passing from Ship to Ship, to make such provision as
was thought necessary: he came near to that wherein Agraies was, and there
he heard the most woeful noise that could be: demanding what might be the
reason thereof, answer was made him, that the Romans bewailed the death of
the Prince Saluste Quide, without any means of pacification.

Hereupon, Amadis gave command, that the body (lying still upon the Orelope)
should be put into a Coffin, till they might give it burial when they came to
land. Then they that before made such ruefull lamentation, being now bereaved
of the body: increased their cries and clamours so loud, that they were heard
by the Queen Sardamira, who sat close by the Princess Oriana. When she
understood the cause of their complaining, she was suddenly surprised with such
extreme sorrow: as she fell down on the ground, and weeping bitterly, said.
Alas! Fortune has now apparently declared, that her malice extends, not
only to the ruin of us miserable captives; but also to destroy the Emperor
and his whole Empire. Ah poor Prince, mishap has had too much domination over
thee! Alas, what loss, and what sorrow (for ever) will they endure, that
dearly loved thee, when they shall hear of thine unfortunate end? I know not
how thy master himself is able to support this grief, I rather believe, that
he shall no sooner hear of these sad news, but he will immediately die with
extremity of impatience: and surely, not without great reason, having lost so
many goodly Ships, such a power of worthy men, and a Prince of such admirable
expectation.

Then turning to the Princess Oriana, she thus proceeded. Nay Madame, his
loss of you, is the the greatest matter of all other, whom he more desires,
then any thing else in the world, and for whom, he will raise such rough and
strange wars, as will cost the dear lives of infinite famous and renowned
Knights, which cannot be long delayed, except thou (O Emperor) do show thy
self the most childish and cowardly minded Prince, that ever any mother
brought into the world.

During these lamentations, she lay still upon the ground, her arms foulded
one within another, and merely drowning her self in tears* which moved
Oriana to such compassion, as, being overcome with weeping, she was feign to
withdraw thence. Whereupon, Mabila, being more strong and constant then any of
the rest, came to the Queen, and said. In good faith Madame, in mine opinion,
it ill becomes a Princess, so wise and well quallified, as you have always
been reputed, to fall into these ^ties: for the virtue of a discreet soul,
does never so well express it self, as in the tempestuous times of
preturbations. (...) that bear the title of a Queen, ^reason, ought to be
much more settled and constant, then a weak Gentlewoman, or any other person,
unworthy to hold the place and rank that you do. Do not you know, that
fortune is mutable, affording her favors to whom she pleases, and reuoaking
them again upon her least distemper? Consider then, that the Emperors Navy
being thus vanquished, and you in the power of the Knights of the Enclosed
Isle: it ensues upon mere necessity, that you should have patience, and
suport this accident with womanly discretion, when you can have no help to the
contrary. Especially being assured, that you are in the power of them, who will
do you all honor, service, and the very best entertainment that can be
devised. And though Prince (...) be dead, what remedy? you cannot recall him
again with your (...) such chances are but (...) guerra, and common to all
that follow such affairs. Wherefore Madame, never make your (...) then needs:
but, in using your ^ted virtue and fortitude, take (...)* according as they
happen, (...) is inevitable.

The Queen returned her this answer. Lady, it is easy for him that is in
joy, to comfort (as you do) one down cast with grief. Nevertheless, if you
felt the woe that ouer-maistereth me: you would complain (pehaps) much more
then I do. And yet I well know, that you tell me truth, although it is
impossible for me, so much to command over mine own passions, as (instantly)
to follow your council. Wherefore (for Gods sake) let me entreat you, that in
excusing my imperfections, you, and all the Ladies here would rather help me,
in the due complaint of mine unrecoverable unhappiness. Madame, answered
Mabila, if this grief, which you entreat of us, would do you any good, I dare
swear to you upon my faith, that in this company there is no one Lady (as I
think) but willingly would do it withal her heart. But then you know withal
that when it is so don; there must be (of necessity) an end of your mourning,
either by the compulsion of time, or as wisdom commands.

Continuing in these remonstrances, Oriana returned to them again, and found
the Queen in more moderation of her sorrow. During this time, Amadis had given
order, to hoise sails, and make for the Enclosed-Isle, which they discovered
the third day following: in regard whereof Gandalin was sent before in a
Skiffe, to advertise Grasinda of their coming, which being understood by her,
she was so highly pleased, as none could be more: especially when she heard of
their victory, and conquest made of so many Ladies and Damosells, but chiefly
of Oriana, whom she desired to see more then any other. For which cause, she
prepared her self (in the best manner she could devise) to entertain her,
presuming so much on her self, that (without all doubt) she should accomplish
the adventure of Apolidons Palace, and attain to (in her presence) the very
highest degree of honor, that ever Lady or Damsel might do.

Seeing them approach somewhat near, she entered into a Barge to meet them:
when Oriana demanded of Bruneo, of whence, and what she was. Madame, quoth
he, I believe it is Grasinda, she that so lately obtained (by the means of
Lord Amadis) the prize for beauty, against all the fairest maids and Virgins
in the King your fathers Court, and surely, I take her to be one of the wisest
Ladies, that ever I have seen. Then he related at large, the honor, gracious
entertainment, and favors she had affoorded them, during their soiourning in
her Country. Believe me Sir, said the Princess, you shall show your self
very ungrateful to her, if you do not make due acknowledgement of such
courtesy, when she has occasion to employ you.

As thus she concluded, Gransinda came aboard their Ship, Angriote stepping
forth to help her up, and presenting her to Oriana, said. Behold Madame, this
is the Lady, to whom my Lord Amadis, Bruneo and I are beholding for our lives.
At these words, the Princess and Grasinda made reverence to each other, and so
passing on into the port, they went a shore, many goodly palfrayes (very
richly trapt and harnessed) there waiting to receive them, whereon they all
mounted. Then, being conducted by the Knights, they rode on toward the Palace
of Apolidon, and (by the way) discoursing, what honor Amadis had won in King
Lisuarts Court, under the name of the Greek Knight: Oriana said to Grasinda, I
promise you Madame, if I had known it, you should not have had such
contentment without me: but I never heard of any thing, until it was ended.
That was my only joy, answered Grasinda, and the highest favor Fortune could
do me, for if you had been present (considering your rare and admirable
beauty) I hardly think, that my Lord Amadis (how good a Knight soever he is)
would have finished his enterprise, to his honor and mine: for the Crown had
been due to you, beyond all other in reason, but you being absent, the
Conquest only was made for me.

As she ended these words, she perceived Amadis to be very nere, and fearing
least her liberality of speech had offended him; in excusing her self, she
prayed him to pardon her. For never (quoth she) did mine eyes hope to behold,
so absolute a beauty as this of Madame Oriana, therefore I cannot but confess
her right above all other. Amadis being not a little pleased, to hear her so
highly commended, whom (beyond all things else) he most esteemed, smiling, thus
replied. By my faith, I should confess my self void of all good judgment,
if I should think ill of the honor you do to Madame Oriana, she deserving
the title of the most virtuous Princess that I know. Oriana, something abashed
at such great praises: could not so well contain her self, but that a
vermillion blush lept up into her face, which made her appear ten times more
perfect. Nevertheless, thinking more on her instant happy Fortune, then the
due merit of her beauty, she said to Grasinda. I will not now contradict the
good opinion, which it has pleased you to conceive of me, for then I should
contest with a person of most pregnant judgment: it suffiseth me, I dare
assure you, that (such as I am) all my life time, I shall wish your welfare and
advancement, so much as lies in the power of a poor disinherited Lady to do,
for now you see me in no better condition.

So long lasted this kind of discoursing, that they arrived at the Palace of
Apolidon, where they all alighted with the Princess Oriana. Now, because it
was one of the most sumptuous buildings in all the world: I thought it not a
miss, to describe it by writing.

CHAP. II.
A description of the Lignographi^, and foundation of the Palace, which
Apohdon had caused to be builded in the Enclosed Isle.

THE foundation of this most magnificent Palace, with the Park and Garden
together, was quadrangle, and contained in length, six hundred, twenty five
fadomes, and in breadth, three hundred, three score and fifteen: allowing six
foot to the (...), the foot to consist of twelve inches, and every inch six
Barlie comes in length, walled about with a high wall of black-marble, with
Dorick Colomnes of white-marble. At the front of this foundation, was planted
the Palace, which had in his square, an hundred, forty and one fadomes, and
at the four corners, was exalted four huge Towers, one of Azure stone; the
second of Iris or Opall-stone; the third of Chrisolite; and the fourth of
Jasper; which had in the Diameter of their circumference, eight fadomes, two
foot, and three inches. In each of them was two Chambers, four warderobes,
and as many Cabinets: comprehending in these, the Defended Chamber, which was
in the Tower of Azurestone.

Now, in regard it was the most excellent of the rest, I will describe the
singularities thereof severally to you. It was wainscotted about with unicorns
horn, fashioned like to the feet of Lamps, frettized with Lignum, Aloes,
Balm and Cedar, all wrought in antique engrauerie with fine gold, thickly
embellished with enamelled flourets. The pauement was of Chrisolite, carved in
love knots, enriched with Coral and Cipres, cut in little scales, and fastened
with threads of gold. The door and window work was of Ebonie, enchased with
silver mouldes, and the glass all Crystal. All the chinks and crannies of
the Warderobes and Cabinets, were stuffed with Agats, cut in Lozenges, wherein
(even as it were naturally) infinite figures of all kind of creatures were
plainly to be seen. In the roof of this Chamber hung two Lamps of gold, at
the bottomes whereof were enchased two Carbuncles, which gave so bright a
solendour round about the room, that there was no need of any other light.

But all this riches was of slender value, in regard of a Mirror or
Looking-glass of white Sapphire, the only oriental that ever was seen, which
had three feet in square, standing upon a plate of gold, so bordered and
garnished with great Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies and Pearls, as never was seen
a thing more to be admired. Between those four Towers, whereof I have told
you, were seated four fair great Halls, all of equal largeness, the work
being throughout of Porphirie-stone, with Dorick pillars, containing thirty
foot in height, fixed upon bases of brass, covered with Chapeans of gold,
under Architranes of Porseline, upon which were Frizes of Iuorie, with diverse
devises in all languages: and above those Frizes, were Cornishes of Topaze,
enriched with Turkesses. Directly facing the portall of this Palace, had
Apolidon formerly placed those Perrons, whereof we have spoken in the first and
second Books, and next to them, the Arc of loyal Lovers, as already you had
heard.

Passing on further, you should enter into a very goodly Court, containing
three and fifty fadomes in square, Orthogonally cornered by just level of
line, being paued with Iasper-stone, wrought in works after the Mosa^call
manner: under which was a dungeon in the middle square, being one and fifty
fadoms and an half in depth, and in the midst thereof was a double vice, for
letting down and mounting again, containing nine fadomes. In the Diameter
round about were four other sumptuous Halls, of twenty fadomes in height,
divided by other Towers, of no less beauty then the former. The winding
stairs conducting to them, were of gilded copper, made in the form of a
lantern, retained by bowing pillars, and sustained with Atticque Collomnes of
Crateritestone (very hard to cut) after the ancient manner, and the mounting of
these stairs met not together, neither by line Orthogonall, or Ambligonall in
angle.

This dungeon had four stages or rooms upon one platform, wherein were
sixteen great lodgings, and in the midst rose up the gyring staire, and four
Pauillions, beside the four Towers we spoke of before, which with the said
Pauillions, surmounted the platform of two stages under couerture. Now, to
tell you whereof this dungeon was made, you must understand, that the first
stage was of Chalcidonie-stone, enriched with Dorick collomnes of very white
Alablaster, with mouldes and appurtenances answereable to the others height.
The second stage or room, was of green Marble, brought from Alexandria,
enriched with Ionick collomnes of five Topas, mouldings, heads, bases and
seatings like to the other. The third stage was of red Marble, with speckled
Corinthian collomnes of Iuorie. And the fourth was of Iacinthe, with Proesme
Tuscane collomnes of Emerald.

Easily might these repeated platformes beseene, under which were the four
stages, paued with Poiseline, as also those of the four Pauillions, and all
the rest surmounting the chief plat forms, made of wood of Cypres, Codar and
Cethin, which cannot be touched by any corruption, covered with mother of
Pearl, and the rest of them with glass of fine transparant steel, knit
together with fillets of gold. All the portalls of the Palace were of pure
Alablaster, wrought in the form of damask work, with mouldings, tympaines
and frontissons of Amber, and Vermillion Agath: whereon were curiously engraven
in antique shapes (evidently to be known) many battles and redoubted
services, as well of the Greeks and Romans, as of the Gauls: and underneath
them, the Images of Prapus Mars and Apollo, with those other of Venus, Ceres
and Miaerua of the best pollished white marble that ever was seen. And
Apolidon caused the moulding works and portalls, to be expressly made of
Diamonds, to the end, that as they were opened, they might shut again of
themselves, even by the mere virtue of that stone. The Pauillions and Towers
were severally garnished, with six and fifty Chambers, foure-score Warderobes,
and as many double Cabinets, the best gilded and adorned that possibly might
be.

Passing through this second Court, entrance was into a Garden, where,
according to the described measure of the buildings quarter, it was naturally
planted withal kinds of sluores and good herbs that could be desired. In
the midst thereof stood a goodly fountain, the water issuing from the two
dugges of a Venus, mode of Agath (mounted on a great pillar of Emerald proesme)
and falling into an huge Basen of Azure stone. This Image was so ingeniously
cut and shaped, as nothing but speech wanted: because the Agath did so truly
agree and come near to nature, as Venus (in her (...)) was not more
beautiful. She held in her right hand (somewhat higher advanced then the
other) the self same golden Apple, which Paris adjudged to her, when he was
made the arbi rator for the three gaddesses in Ida Forest, whereon followed
that unfortunate war, between the Greeks and the Troyans. This Apple was
afterward stolen from Venus by Juno through the means of jealous Vulcane, and
then in following time (going from hand to hand) happened to Apolidon, who
found it among the invaluable treasures of the King his father: with the Pearl
(otherwise termed the Vnton) which Cleopatra long time had in her possession,
after the had quaft off the other in the company of Mark Anthony. And this
Peasle also hung at the left care of the same Goddess, and was so ordered by
Art; as it could by no means be taken away, till the fair creature that
entered the Defended Chamber, had drunk of the water of that clear Fountain.
And then the Image would present the Pearl and Apple to her, as worthy to
have the chiefest honor for perfect beauty.

In her other ear hung the Ring of Pyrrhus, wherein was an Agate enchased,
whereon (by most wounderfull admiration, and variety of nature) the nine Muses
were figured according to life, with Apollo holding his Harp: whereof
Pespasian made so high account, that he esteemed (...) I well (...) whereof we
have formerly (...) was enclosed with double Ga^eries, of ten sad^ and an
half in breadth supported with Arches and great D^ and (...)ca^e collomnes, or
Ca^ and Amust, thirty foot in height. At two corners, which directly
confronted the Patke, they had win in building, a Chamber, a Warderobe and a
Cabinet double staged. The nether part or floor of these Galleries, was
painted (by most exquisite Painters) with all the several kinds of hunting
and fowling: for there might be discerned (to the life) what delight Lords,
Ladies and Gentlemen take, being so assembled together, sitting or lying on the
fresh green herbs, to hear the Huntsmans pleasing report, who soon after
might be seen, seeking all about with his hound in a line, questyning after
the stricken Heart. And by the countenance of the man, he seemed to wind his
horn a long while, to give notice, that he had found the fall of the dear.

Beside, in embossing or molded works, were the other hounds to be seen,
that gave report of his defeature, or death, with the horsemen galloping after
them, mainly on the bridle, with their Bugles at their mouths (and swollen
big cheeks) appearing so pleasing to the eye, as it almost gave evident
persuasion, that the air made reuerberation of the noise, even as if it had
been performed indeed. But above all, what is he, that would not be
extraordinarily delighted, beholding the Stagge in the full honor of his head,
running strongly, breaking through the brakes and bushes, crossing one the
lands, holding his head aloft, and his tongue their (...), laboriously to win
the nearest water: while the hounds are at defcult, by the Deares diversity of
leapes, shifts and other escapes? All which yet is nothing, to see him forced
from the soil, and compelled to the bay when the hounds swiftly running, hang
upon his haunches, loudly proclayming his death, and then have their reward for
their labor.

A little further off, was the hunting of the wild Boar or Swine, whom the
Lime-hound had forced to forsake the bushes, and driven to pass along by
Grey-hou^ds; whereupon, the beast being fierce and furious, at the winding of
the horns, ran among the hounds and hunters, grunting, snoring and
overthrowing whatsoever he met withal. And that which was worst of all, with
his long and sharp Tushes, he bit and kilde the boldest Gray hounds that durst
encounter him, notwithstanding the best contrived Iacks, made for defense of
their bodies. But the Huntsmen, being quick and ready, making at him with their
Boarespeares, and wounding him deeply, laid him all along. Then, being able
to contend no longer with the hounds, flocking round about him, some tugging
him by the coddes, others by the ears and thighs, would never cease until he
was dead. Assuredly, it would require much length of time, to describe (in due
order) the several kinds of hunting, and the like sportes, painted all along
this pleasant Gallerie. And the Painter deserved no mean commendation, for the
extraordinary excellency of his work: especially, his admirable perspectiue,
in the description of Hawking, which was figured merely to the life. Among
others, the flight at the Heron, followed by three Sacres toward the
mountains, where she soared so high, as she might be discerned within the
clouds. Then suddenly she began to descend, and being fiercely pursued, fell
down to the ground, where the hounds were ready to receive her.

If these paintings affoorded such pleasing contentment, much more then did
they in the higher Gallerie, where was figured the most part of the battles
between Semiramis and Ninus; the overthrow of Astiages by the Persians; the
death of Marchesia, Queen of the Amazones, in the Country of Asia; the
discomfiture of Cyrus by Queen Thomiris; the assaults of Hercules against
Androgeus and Otreus; the flight of Vexores, King of Egypt, assailed by the
Scythians, and infinite other fights, well descruing eternal memory. The
pauements of these Galleries were thus singularly beautified, being of
Iarecote, blacker then any Moore, and the seeling formed in Oualls, made of
Zedrosus, the bone of a fish, which the Kings of Arabia hold in high esteem.
The walls were of pure silver, wrought with curious Antiques, and enammelled
beasts: the gutters and water passages of Alablaster, extending long out from
the walls, between arteficiall Crosselets, enriched with golden leaves, and
other works cut after damasking manner. The doors and windows (in their wood
work) were of Ebonie, and the glass wholly of bastard Diamond.

Going from hence, they entered into the Park, containing three hundred Acres
of woods, environed and planted with Pines, Cipres trees, Laurells, Holmes,
Palms and Terebinthine trees. Therein were diverse delectable and pleasant
Arbours, appearing, as if Nature had contended with her own skill, not only
to make them singular, but admirable also: for there were an infinite number of
Orange trees, Date trees, Citron trees, and Myrtle trees, all justly planted by
the line, with other the very sweetest fruitages, that possibly in the world
could be wished for. On the other side was a meadow, watered by a great many
little Rivers, by means whereof, the ground brought forth store of delectable
herbs, with Violets, Daisies, Paunsies, and other most odorifferous flowers.

Yearly, in the month of May, came the Phoenix (as a Gardener) thither, and
for the amenitie of the place, took such pleasure to be there: that there she
cast her feathers, so soon as Apolidon had perfected the enchantments of his
Palace, which was most ssumptuous and magnificent. Wherefore, causing her
feathers to be dilligently gathered, he made them up in a ^^nne, with a rich
diamond in the ^^dst and of such largeness, that it easily served for a
looking-glass, annexed with the very goodliest Emerauld, and the greatest
Rubie, that ever had been seen. And Apolidon appointed (when he departed
thence for Constantinople) that this precious Fan, should be kept among the
other singularities of the Isle, as the most excellent thing of all other:
wherefore Amadis presented it to Oriana, on the same day when she landed there.

And to the end, that this pleasant place might continue embellished, with all
things that possibly could be had: Apolidon lest there two Unicorns, which
the Prince of Quinsay had sent him, and there they lived so long, that King
Lisuart found them there, after the marriage was sollemnized, between the
Princess Oriana and Amadis. Moreover, there were many Ciuet and Maske-cattes,
which made the air so extraordinarily sweet, as nothing could be therewith
compared: and sometimes the Pellicane also made her sent there. Great store of
other worthy creatures lived there also, as Hearts, Hindes, Roes, Goats, Hares,
Connies etc. withal diversity of Birds and Fowls, as it was wonderful to
hear the variety of their noates, especially the Nightingale, and the
solitary Owsell, affecting always to be alone.

From forth of a nere neighboring high Rock, descended a great water, which
filled the Lake, whereof you have heard i^ the second Book, where the Heart
lost his life, narrowly pursued by the hounds, as has been already related.
And thither usually resorted the Beuer to bathe himself, with an infinite
number of Swannes, Cignets, Cranes, Storkes, Cormorants, Heronnes, with a
plentiful store of all other Birds. But all these made not this Lake so
singular, as the frequent resort of a Maremaide, which was heard there (were
near) continually singing, as never was heard more delectable hermony. From
this Lake issued many Rivers and Currents, which made diverse little Islands in
this Meadow. In one of them was a Dedalus or Labyrinth, containing only four
Acres in square, planted with the most precious Balm, that ever grew in
Engadia. And it was continually kept by two Serpents, bred of his kind, that
watched the golden Apples in the Garden of Hesperides day and night.

Directly in the midst of this Dedalus, was a Colossus of gilded Brass,
containing the height of six score Cubits, holding in his left hand (raised
up on his head) a Lantern of Crystal, and in it, the rod yet burning,
wherewith Prometheus kept the fire which he stole from heaven: yielding such a
bright splendor day and night (without diminishing) that for the space of an
hundred miles, round in compass, the Mariners made their resort thither, as
they did to Pharos near Alexandria.

This flaming Rod, Apolidon had gotten (by great industry) from the Priests
and Magitians of Chaldea: And whosoever could look on this vnextinguishable
fire, in his true nature, and without covering in this manner, he should
attain to most mighty providence. But the Serpents kept the place very
strongly, without doing any harm, to them that took delight in the Park:
provided, that they presumed not to enter the Dedalus, for then they would
belch forth such fire and flames, as was able to daunt the boldest spirit. And
all this was thus ordained by Apolidon who was (as you have formerly heard) one
of the very greatest Enchanters in all the world: yet, when the matchless
beauty, entering into the Defended Chamber, should come near to this Colossus,
the Enchantments must cease, and easily might this admired fire be looked on.

Now, gentle Readers, consider seriously with your selves, if the like Palace
can now a days be easily found, accompanied with such plenty of
singularities, as Oriana saw there? To proceed on now in our History, the
Ladies and Gentlewomen being brought to their several lodgings: the Knights of
the Enclosed Isle departed from them, committing them to their good rest,
because (in deed) it was somewhat late. Nevertheless, the Princess Oriana
(all that night) could not sleep, partly through weariness on the Sea, and
partly by her fearful conceit, of harm that might ensue to Amadis, upon
this bold and hardy adventure, which gave her some reason to fore-thinke, of
an intestine war between him and King Lisuart. And now she began to
consider with her self, that to palliate the earnest affection between them,
there was necessarily required: that she should govern her self much more
discreetly, then formerly she had done to kill all occasion of ill conceiving
of her.

Hereupon, the next morning, she sent to Amadis and the other Knights,
requesting to have a little conference with them, and they, who desired nothing
more, then to serve and honor her: came immediately upon her command, and
after courtesies past on either side, Quedragant, who had charge from the whole
company, to understand her will, said. Madame, as we are enfourmed, you have
sent to speak with us, let us know what you will please to command us? In good
faith Sir, answered the Princess, commands are no matters for me, especially
to them, in whose power I am as a prisoner, you may speak your pleasure.
Madame, quoth he, but there is not a man among us, who is not willing to do
you any service. Oriana returned him many thanks, and then replied thus. Let
me entreat you then to be so pleased, that during the time of my residing in
this place, my women and I may be severed from all other company, and also to
promise us, that none of you (whosoever it be) may come to see us, without our
leave and permission: for you well know, that the surprizall you have made of
us, and of the Emperors people, being once divulged abroad, it will be hard,
to comprehend the end of your intention, and our innocence, but speeches may
pass to disadvantage. But when they shall hear the religion, wherein we
desire to live, till such time as the King my father recall me into his good
opinion: I am persuaded, that easily they will convert their harsh language,
into honest excuses for us all, who (together) make this request so reasonable
to you wherein (we hope) you will yield us no de^ll, being the first that ever
we made to you.

M^, answered Quedragant, we are h^ to ^o other end, but to obey you, and
believe, that in this, and all things else you shall please to command us, no
one of us dare or will gainesay you. Every man among them affirmed as much,
allowing highly of her wisdom and providence. And albeit Amadis imagined this
their separation a little too rigorous (having no other felicity in the world,
then to be in her presence) yet he was feign to dissemble it: being a matter
so reasonable, and for the conservation of her honor, whom he affected as his
life. Hoping notwithandsting, that though the day time denied him such an
happiness, yet the night would bless him somewhat better, albeit not so often
as he could wish it.

CHAP III.
Of the Council held among the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, touching the
business for the Princess Oriana, and what they further determined to do.

YOU have formerly heard the victory, which Amadis had against the Romans, by
means whereof, he got Oriana into his possession, and the other Ladies that
bare her company, which he accounted the happiest of all his other fortunes:
albeit he foresaw in his soul, that very hardly he should appease the
injury, which he had done not only to King Lisuart, but also to the Emperor.
In regard where-of, questioning with his own thoughts, that it would require
no mean might, to withstand such potent Armies, as from either side would be
made against him: yet notwithstanding, hope, conducted by the power of love,
gave him this resolution, rather to die a thousand deaths, then redeliuer her
to Patin, without whom he could not live an hour. He made no doubt of
compassing some means, to regaine her the former grace of the King her father,
and to break the alliance elsewhere intended; which that he might the better
attain unto, he gave the Prince Agrates and Quedragant to understand, that
the Princess had sent to pray this favor. For otherwise (quoth he) she
intends rather to make a Sacrifice of her self, then to fall into his power,
whom she more hates then any man living: Beside, it shall no way redound to
our honor, to suffer such a monstrous shame, having made so great and good a
beginning for her deliverance.

Quedragant returned him this answer. I swear unto you Sir, at our first and
giddie-headed eyesight, we see so great a fire already kindled, as (we may
easily presume) is impossible to be quenched without a hard and dangerous
war, which we may not well maintain and endure for any long time, without
the aid and succor of our dear friends and companions, wherefore, I think
it expedient, that all the rest which are here, should be made acquainted
therewith, to know their opinions; to the end, that they may be the better
inclined to sustain the business, if they shall conclude on war. I pray you
then, said Amadis, that we may all meet together tomorrow, and take the charge
(if you please) to summon them, whereto Quedragant gladly condiscended.

Hereupon, the day following, they met together, and Amadis, sitting in the
midst of them, began in this manner. Honorable Lords, yesterday, Madame
Oriana sent to pray me, that we all would consider one some good means, to
win again the lost grace and favor for her, with the offended King her
father, qualifying in him (if it be possible) that strange conceit of his, to
marry her with the only Prince in the world, to whom she bears the least
affection; otherwise, death will be much more welcome to her. And therefore I
thought it good (after I had spoken with some of this company particularly) to
understand from you all in general, what you think thereof: For, seeing we
have been friends and companions, in the procuring of her liberty; it is much
more reasonable, that we should all agree to maintain it.

But before I enter into further speech, I humbly desire you, to fix before
your eyes, that (already) your fame and renown is so known through the world,
by reason of the rare actions of Chiualry by you performed: that (at this day)
there is neither King, Prince nor State, but stand in fear of your high
valor. For they all well know, that to win immortal honor, you have
contemned, not only the sumptuous treasures and kind entertainments, inherent
to you in your own houses: but the dear blood of your own bodies, where-of
you have made no spare, in giving the boldest spirits to know, the sharp and
keen edges of your swords, to the mighty peril of your own persons. And, as
marks and testemonies of your prowess, the wounds received in many parts of
your bodies, may render such apparent faith, as Fortune thinks her self much
obliged to you: being willing to show you, how much her own self is in debted
to you. And being desirous to recompense your former high deseruings, she made
plain proof thereof by delivering this glorious victory into your hands,
which you have had against the two chiefest Princes of Christendom, King
Lisuart and the Roman Emperor.

Nor do I speak, concerning the overthrow of their men only, being far
inferior to you in merit: but of the worthy succor you have given, to the
most wise, debonnaire, and virtuous Lady this day living. Wherein you have done
a very acceptable service to God, by executing that duty, whereunto you are
expressly called: namely to succor the a^ted, when they are to endure wrongs
beyond all reason. Now, if the King and Emperor think it good to be angry,
yet, seeing right is on our side, and God (who is just) will stand for us also:
let us give them to understand, that if their own experience cannot teach them
justice, but by might and power they mean to assail us; we are able to meet
them with such resistance, as shall remain in memory while the world endures.
Therefore, let every man speak his mind in this case, what he conceiueth
meetest to be done, either to finish the war begun: or else to motion peace, by
restoring Madame Oriana to the King her father, according to her own desire.
For, as concerning my self, know, that I will never yield thereto, except you
be so pleased, nor shall fond opinion ouersway me in this matter, beyond the
compass so your liking. I know you to be men indeed, and your virtues of
apparent: as nothing can withdraw you from true valor and magnanimity,
neither to adventure on any action, whereby your honor (in how small a degree
soever) may receive any base imputation.

So he ceased, leaving the minds of all the company highly contented and
satisfied, by such an humble and graceful remonstrance, as he had made unto
them. Then Quedragant (commanded thereto by all the assistants) stood up, and
answered Amadis in this manner. Lord Amadis, it is most certain, that our
attempt made upon the Emperor, was not for any hatred we bare to him: but
only to keep the faith, whereto every good Knight stands obliged, in
maintayning and defending afflicted persons from wrong, especially all virtuous
Ladies, of whom it is our duty to be protectours. And therefore I would
advise, that before we undertake any further war; we should send to King
Lisuart, to let him fully understand, upon what occasion we dealt with the
Romans. And if he be found discontented; then, in the very mildest manner can
be devised, to show him withal gracious demeanor) what shameful injury he
offered to Madame Oriana, under color of marrying her to a foreign Prince,
utterly to disinherit her at home, a matter every way offensive to God, and not
to be suffered by his own Subjects.

Pausing a very little while, and clapping his fist upon the boorde, thus he
proceeded* If therefore it may stand with his good pleasure, to forget his
conceived anger against her (if there be any entered into his royal breast) then
we to offer delivery of her again, on this condition, and not else. If he
refuse or disdain the duty, wherein we send unto him: then to tell him
resolutely, we fear him not a jot, but if he will make war upon us, we are
as ready to defend our selves. In the mean while, I hold it very necessary,
that we strengthen our selves with all such things, as an action of such
importance does require, as this is. At least, that he may not come upon us
unprovided, whenever he determines to assail us (if he be so minded)
albeit, in mine opinion, peace were much better then war. But this conclusion
is not to be tardied by any means, rather we must put our selves in due
preparation, dispatching hence messengers to our kindred and friends, to supply
us with their best succor, when we shall require it.

Such was the answer of Quedragant, and approved by all the Knights there
present: whereupon it was concluded, that Amadis should send a messenger to his
father King Perion of Gaul, also Agraies into Scotland, Brunco to the
Marquess his father, and Quedragant to the Queen of Ireland, of whom he
should have many able men, if her husband King Cildadan brought no worse, then
he did to the aid of King Lisuart. This was made known to the Princess
Oriana, and their final deliberation for procurement of peace.

As thus they continued in these conferences, some of them standing in the
gazing windows, which had full view upon the fields: they espied coming from
the coast, that gave entrance into the Isle, a Knight all armed, with five
Squires attending on him, who when he drew nearer, they knew him to be Briande
Moniaste, son to Lazadan, King of Spain, of whose arrival they were all
right joyful for he was an amiable, bold and hardy Knight, and as courteous
as any whatsoever. He espying so great a company there together, upon their
coming forth to meet him: began to grow doubtful, that they had heard some
evil tyding of Amadis, for whose sake and search he had expressly left the
King his fathers Court. But perceiving, that their intention was to salute him,
and seeing Amadis there among them: he instantly alighted, and running to
embrace him, said. Trust me, my Lord, the quest I undertook to hear news of
you, is sooner ended then I expected: for I was given to understand, that you
were so closely hid, as it was a matter impossible to find you, but God be
praised for it, me thinks I see you in very sound health. Cousine, quoth
Amadis, you are most kindly welcome hither, assuring you, that as Fortune has
released you from one toil and travail: so now she has as readily fitted you
with an other, answerable both to to the time and place, where your presence
and employment may much avail us, as you hereafter shall hear more at large.
In the mean while, I think it convenient, that you should be disarmed, and
then we will tell you our minds afterward.

So taking him by the hand, he conducted him to his lodging, where, as they
were taking off his Arms, seeing such store of Knights flock more and more
about him, he said to Amadis. My Lord, I am verily persuaded, that so fair an
assembly of worthy and valiant men, could never be thus met together, but upon
some extreme urgent cause: therefore, I pray you tell me what it is. Hereupon,
Amadis amply related to him, how, and in what manner all things had past,
especially the churllish ingratitude, which King Lisuart used, not only to the
Knights that had done him infinite services: but also to his own children,
enforcing one of them (through ouergreedie and great avarice) to be
disinherited from her right, and (merely against her will) sent to Rome, to be
wife to the Emperor, and that is Madame Oriana. And this is the cause, that so
many of us are here assembled together? quoth Brian, is the Princess Oriana at
Rome? No, replied Amadis, we have forcibly taken her from the Romans, that had
the charge of her conuoy: And now at this present, she is here in this
Palace, with all the Ladies, and Gentlewomen that were in her company. Now
shall we easily redeliuer the^, except King Lisuart determine more respect of
them, then hitherto he has done.

Afterward, he told him what was resolved on by them all, which Brian liked as
well as they: albeit he conceived, that the injuries of two such potent
Princes (by this defeature) would not be suddenly appeased. Notwithstanding,
seeing that which was done, could not be recalled: he dissembled his
cogitations, and only answered thus. I know King Lisuart, to be one of the
most reuengefullest Princes this day living, and very hard to endure an
injury, therefore, you must quickly consider on some resistance, if he shall
offer to assail you: and I hold it more requisite, to take order for all
inconveniences which may ensue by his means, then to consume time in frivolous
words. Of one thing I am highly glad, that Madame Oriana and her women have so
happy a retirement, and I would gladly see her, if you please. Let me tell you
Sir, answered Amadis, my Cousine Agraies, and my Brother Florestan are
appointed, to make her acquainted with our deliberation, and you may go along
with them: being well assured, that it will be no mean ease to her, to
confer with you on her misfortunes in private.

No time was delayed in going to her, but before they would presume to enter
her lodgings; they sent her word, that they came to her from the whole company.
Hereupon, their entrance was admitted, and she went to meet them: especially
Brian, whom she had not seen in a long time, and therefore as he did her
reverence, she said unto him. Cousine, you are come hither in a very good time,
to defend the liberty of a Lady, who stands in great need of such help as
yours. Madame, said he, I had not so long delayed my coming hither, but that
presently, after the seven Kings overthrow in Great Britain: the King my
father commanded my home return, to with-stand the war, which the people of
Africa made upon him. And scarsely was it ended, but I understood, my Cousine
Amadis was so far distant from his friends, through some conceived grief or
displeasure; as no tidings could be heard of him. Wherefore, fearing least he
was lost for ever, I resolved to enter upon his quest, both in the love and
reverence I bear unto him. This was the occasion that drew me from Spain,
being fully persuaded, that I should sooner have notice of him here, then in
any other place else whatsooner. And Fortune (I thank her) has guided me
hither, where I have met with apt occasion, not only to do him service, but
also for you, royal Princess; for which great kindness, Oriana returned him
infinite thanks.

But now, before I pass on any further, I think it very necessary to tell
you, what was the principal motive and reason, why so many good Knights and
worthy men, should bear such honor and good will to this Princess. Asiure
your selves, it was not for any gifts or presents she had bestowed on them,
she being (as yet) void of all means to that effect. Much less, for any
favor by Amadis borne to her, the love between them both being kept so
secret, as you have heard at large in the precedent Books. But indeed, she was
so humble, wise and debonnaire, that by her mere humility and courtesy, she
knew how to steal the hearty affections of every one. A matter so apt and
proper to heroyick persons, and them derived from great place: as they have no
other powers or faculties, but such as make them to be more honored, praised
and esteemed.

Consider then, in what reputation they ought to be held, who (by ouer-strange
persumpsion) have delight in all immodest behavior, when all is duly weighed,
they beget the peoples disfavor, a secret contempt among all good minds; yea,
and distaste of many of their own appearing wel-willers, that particularly
desire their ruin, to abate the ouer-weening pride, they take in such
wickedness. Gracious language, apprehensiue gravity, and humble modesty, are
so proper and peculiar to Princes and great persons, that whenever they but
speak: it begets their subjects cordial love, absolute obedience, with a
general foare of offending; And the contrary is so deadly dangerous, as
nothing can be more harmfull to them. Let us conceive then, how well it agrees
with a knot of such base minded companions, to put on a boasting spirit of
bravery: as thinking by their outward glorious appearance, to make themselves
respected and feared. Before God, me thinks they should consider, both what
they are, and what they shall be: then they may easily know of themselves,
that they are full of shame and all disgrace, and for such, I am content to
leave them, returning again to our former purpose.

Understand now, that after Oriana had a long while conuersed with Brian: she
called for the Queen Sardamira, and said unto her. See Madame, here is the
son to the King of Spain, I am sure you know him yet. Then the Queen going
nearer to him, after she had very graciously saluted Brian; entered into so
serious a discourse with him, that Oriana found the means of leaving them
together. So, with drawing her self aside, she called Agrates and Florestan to
her: entreating them earnestly, to acquaint her with the cause of their
coming. Agraies wholly related to her, whatsoever had passed among them in
council, what true and honorable affection all the Knights did bear her: and
lastly, what resolution they had agreed on, concerning her cause, desiring her
withal, to send back her mind, whether she liked their intention, or no.
Alas Sir, quoth she, they are all so wise and virtuous, as no bad thought can
prevail among them. One thing I would most humbly request of them, that (even
for Gods sake) to seek some means, if possibly they may, and agreeing with
their honor; to work my peace with the displeased King my father.

Then, pretending to whisper some thing in the ear of Agraies, Florestan (as
one not to learn ciuility) retired thence, leaving them both together. When
Oriana perceived she might speak at liberty: she began her womed ^onings to
him, in this manner. Dear Cousine, although I have great hope in the
providence of your kinsman Amadis, and in the loyal affection which all these
Knights do bear me: yet (me thinks, reason requires, that I should most of
all rely on your fidelity, in regard of my bounden duty to the King your
father, and the Queen your mother, affording me such princely entertainment in
Scotland; as also for gracing me with the company of your sister Mabila, of
whom only (next unto God) I hold my life. For, without the comforts, which she
has many times given me (...) the very strongest (...) tunes: a long time
since, I had been buried, and deprived of any joy in this world, And albeit I
have now no means or power, to acknowledge, either toward them or you, so
many obligations of due debt: yet my hope is, that time hereafter will better
(...)

In the (...) think it not amis^e, that familiarlie I let you understand, what
heavy burdens of grief I bear. And for my first beginning (sparing to
speak, what wrongs the King my father has done me) let me entreat you, to
procure (even to your uttermost power) an honorable peace, between him and
your Cousine Amadis. For I make no doubt, considering the ancient comitie
between them, and the just occasion you all have, of scarce wishing him well:
that hardly will these matters (begun) grow to any other end, then most heavy
misfortune, nay, (...) ruin on both sides; except such (...) as you shall
make, be well qualified with good coun^ providence, which I know is (...)
abounding in you. Wherefore, once more I desire you, as well to anoyde such a
maine inconvenience, as also to protect me from suspicion of foreign nations,
who may hereafter make doubt of my innocence, and maculate my good reputation,
which is more precious to me then life: that you would all consider what I have
said to you.

Madame, answered Agraies, as concerning the good entertainment you received
in Scotland, the King my father and the Queen, did no more therein then they
ought to do: and such (I am sure) was their affection toward you: that in all
things, which their understanding could reach unto, there wanted no love or
kindness in them to you, as their best respected allie and k^^fewomen. Now, as
concerning my sister and my self, our actions shall daily make known to you,
in what unfeigned respect we hold you: desyring you to believe, thet you may
command us, as they that covet nothing more, then your good and honor,
preferring them before our own lives. And whereas you wish me, to forget the
injury, which the King your father has done, not only to me, but to all my
kindred and friends: assure your self Madame, the wound was made so wide and
deep, as it will never be healed while I live. It was no little ingratitude to
us, denying my Lord Amadis, my self, and many other good Knights, the humble
request we made unto him, to give the Isle of Mongaza to mine uncle Galuanes,
who dearly deserved it, and much more: considering, that it was conquered by
his ^a^our and virtue, that became an humble suter for it. Nevertheless, for
your love and honou, I am content to dissemble my distaste, and defer (for
some time) my just occasion of wishing him ill especially, for banishing us
from his Court so strangely, even as if we had been his deadly enemies, and
never minding or respecting, how many great services we had done for him.

And to let you know, that I will wholly employ my self to please you: I
promise you Madame, I will essay (to my uttermost) to do as you have desired
me. But it would hardly agree with reason, that it should be ouer-rashly
undertaken, because, if I should be cool in speech now, matters being
altogether disposed for war: in stead of edging the courages of so many
worthy Knights, as are now met together in this Isle, I should intimidate the
greater part of them, by hearing me preach of peace, and raise in them an
apprehension, that I use such language, as being the man first affrighted.
Wherein I must fall into two evils together, which hereafter will redound to
the great damage of us all, but especially mine unrecoverable shame. But some
being sent to the King your father, and having heard his answer: I will
entreat my worthy friends, to do according as you have advised. In the mean
while, me thinks you should grieve so little as possibly you may, supporting
both Time and Fortune, with a womanly, constant and invincible patience. Cousin
(quoth she) I acknowledge it very requisite, not to daunt their manly spirits,
that are assembled here about my business; but rather, to maintain their
height of mind, committing all things to their care and discretion.

During all this conference, Agrates continually observed Olinda, whom he
affected with all his heart, as he had made good proof of, in passing (for her
love) under the Arch of loyal Lovers: notwithstanding, preferring virtue
before his passions, he knew so wisely to co^ceale them, that leaving her
there shut up with Ortana, he departed without speaking to her, and never
frequented the place, albeit it was an insupportable pain to him.

So, at parting from the Princess, he said: Madame, I will effectually
perform what you have enjoined me. Return then, said she, and commend me
most kindly to the whole company. The like she did to Florestan and Brian,
who taking leave of her, went to seek Amadis and the rest, who awaited their
coming, and declared to them all her answer. Whereupon was concluded, that
some should be sent to King Lisuart, so soon as possibly might be; wherefore
Brian and Quedragant were entreated by all the company, to take that charge
upon them, which they could not well refuse, because the other were so
importunate.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the discourse which Amadis had with Grasinda, and the answer she made him:
Also, what Letters were directed by Amadis, to diverse great Princes.

NOW did not Amadis know, what order he should take concerning Grasinda;
either for sending her home into her own Country, or to determine on her
abiding there, until this contention were better appeased. Wherefore, being
desirous to sound her own ^on, he went to visit her in her lodging: and
after some few other speeches passed between them, Amadis thus spoke unto her.
Madame, I am much discontented with my self, that I have no better
opportunity, of doing you honor, in this place, and giving you wel-come equal
to your deserts: but time being contrary to my desires, robs me of all due
occasion. Therefore I humbly entreat you, that (in excusing me) you will
conceive no offense, or impute it to any want of good will: for you have so
much bound me to you by your passed favors, as I cannot enjoy one day of my
life, that I may not grant but to be only yours, in any service whatsoever I
can do for you. And because it is now a long while, since you departed from
your Country, and (perhaps) this long abode of yours here, may be more
displeasing to you, then I could wish: I am desirous, to understand your own
deliberation, to the end, that I may endeavor all possible means, to obey you
in whatsoever you shall please to command me.

Lord Amadis, answered Grasinda, I might well be reputed poor in judgment, if
I knew not certainly; that both the company, and favors you have done for me
has sorted to the very highest honor, that ever could befall me. As for the
good entertainment, which you allege to have received in my Country, if it
could deserve the name of goodness: has it not already been more then five
fold recompensed, to your great same, and partly my reproach? Nevertheless, to
put you out of doubt of my determination; I will boldly disclose my mind unto
you. I see so many good Knights here met together, for assistance of that
peerless Princess Oriana, and they wholly relying upon your virtues, both in
hope and persuasion of good success, for the love and high esteem they hold
you in; it is impossible for you to forsake them, but to your eternal blame
and infamy. And therefore, seeing such a weighty charge is put upon you, it
must be your care and labor, to send to all coasts, for recovery of men to
give you succor: that the honor of so great an enterprise may remain to you,
by means of your good friends, among whom, I account my self not to be the
least. And that you may have effectual proof, of deeds to make good words: I
am resolved, to dispatch hence Master Elizabet tomorrow morning, sending him
for Romania, there to muster up (both of my subjects, and others) so many as
conveniently he may, and shipping them with all speed, to convey them hither.
In the mean (...) be no distaste to you, I me, of what consequ with the other
Laat conclusion is reso^ so much to hono Knights: to imploys, never to
for^^kinred for some power^ see this war ^ithstand the forces of other end.
(...) adventure to set

Before God, Madame ((...), I Amadis) for ought I can perceive, you have such
an excellent inclination, to make me acknowledge, how deeply I shall run
into your de^^, beyond all ability of satisfaction; that I stand merely as a
man confounded, at such extraordinary love and kindness. And seeing you are
so free in bounty toward me, I were unwise to refuse it; but (with all
humility) most thankefully accept it. And if you please to require Master
Elizabet, to pass from thence to Constantinople with Letters of credence from
me to the Emperor: I make no doubt, but (according to his promise heretofore
made me, and hatred he bears to the Emperor of Rome) that he will lovingly
send us aid. I am persuaded, replied Grasinda, that Master Elisabet will hold
himself right happy, in doing you any acceptable service: for his desires
only aim thereat, as often times he has assured me. Now Sir, there remains
nothing else, but your entreatie to Oriana, that I may make one in her gracious
company. Madame, said Amadis, seeing it is so well lyking to you, I will
presently send to know her mind; and do verily believe, that it will be as
pleasing to her, as to your self, that you will vouchsafe to keep her company.

Then he called for Gandales, to whom he gave that charge, and he tarried not
long, but returned again to them, saying: That Oriana thanked Grasinda most
affectionatly, and gave attendance (...) Constantinople, where having done what
Amadis appointed: he should return to Romania with all possible speed, and
shipping such forces as he found prepared, to bring them away to the Enclosed
Isle.

This done, Amadis conducted her to the Princess, where leaving her: he went
to dispatch away Master Elisabet, to whom he gave a Letter, directed to the
Emperor, the contents whereof follow.

The letter of Amadis, sent to the Emperor of Constantinople.
MOst High and excellent Prince, the Knight of the Green Sword (whose right
name indeed is Amadis de Gaul) sends you most humble salutations. And whereas
(after the foil of the Endriagus) coming to your Court, you pleased to give
me most royal entertainment, and (beside your manifold favors) out of your
own benign bounty, offered me a^de and assistance when need should require,
in favor of my services done you, by the reduction of that Country, which you
pleased to name the (...) of Saint Mary: I am bold to acquaint you, that
occasion now does minister such matter, as you have apt means (if you please)
to accomplish your promise, and upon so just a quarrel, as possibly can be
offered. According as Master Elisabet shall further impart unto you: whom I
humbly entreat you to credit, on the behalf of him, that (in all duty)
kisseth the hand of your Imperial Majesty.

Your Highness loyal Knight and servant, Amadis de Gaul.


Such was the dispatch of Master Elisabet, who going aboard his Ship, setting
sail, very soon after, arrived in Greece. The very same day, Amadis gave
order to Tantiles, Master of the household to Queen Briolania, to depart for
the Realm of Sobradisa toward his Mis^resse, saying thus to him. My de^^e
friend Tantiles, thou know (as well as we our selves) how we stand bound
for the maintenance of war, and how highly mine honor will be endamaged, if
the end of this beginning fall not out to our intention: go therefore to thy
royal Queen, to whom (after thou have done my humble duty) say, I desire her
to send me such a supply of soldiers, as possibly she may. Thou may at
large acquaint her, with all matters past, the condition wherein we now are,
and into what danger we may fall. Moreover, tell her, and bid her well
remember it, that this matter touching me, concerns her self as nearly,
being hers, as she does very well know.

My Lord, answered Tantiles, the Queen my Mistress will conceive more delight
then you can imagine, that she may compass any means to let you know, how
desirous she is to do any thing worthy your acceptance. And believe it
assuredly, that so soon as she shall hear these tidings: she will take such
order in the matter you send for, as you shall quickly see me returned with a
sufficient power of men. Deliver her then (quoth Amadis) this Letter, and make
what dilligent speed thou can. So he gave him the Letter, containing these
lives.

The Letter sent from Amadis, to Briolania, Queen of Sobradisa.
I Am persuaded Madame, after you have heard by Tantiles, Master of your
Household, the cause that mooues me to send to you in such haste: that you will
allow much favor, to what he shall tell you on my behalf. Assure your self,
that in making use of your gentle breeding, you will not now sail me: no more
then you think I should do, being always ready to set foot in stirrup for
you, where any necessity can offer it self. And because he has been
evermore present, at all such occurrences as have happened to me, since my
return into this Country, and I have given him charge, to let you know them at
large; I will not be troublesome to you, in reading over a tedious long Letter.
But earnestly entreat you, that (crediting him) you will always contain me
in your gracious favor, whereof I desire to partake so long as I live.

That Amadis, who is yours.


So Tantiles departed, and without soiourning in any place, travailed so
devoutly, that he soon arrived in the Kingdom of Sobradisa. On the otherside,
Gandalin was appointed to go for Gaul; for which cause, Amadis, taking him
aside, thus spoke to him. Gandalin, thou art he, who always has been the
guardian of my most intimate occasions, by the love which our youngest years
bred in us, even as if nature had invited us to a perfect brotherhood. Thou
know, that my honor is thine, and that thine concerns me as much as mine
own. Thou see what a business is begun upon me, of what consequence it
is, and what conclusion is resolved on, by all the Knights: to employ our
friends and kindred for some powerful aid, to withstand the forces of King
Lisuart, if he adventure to set upon us. And for this cause, I have sent
Messengers to diverse Princes, from whom I hope to receive such bands of men, as
shall make up an able Army.

Now, albeit thine absence will be somewhat grievous to me, yet
notwithstanding, relying more upon thy diligence, then any other service now to
be done me: I am determined, to send thee to King Perion my father, who of
long time has known thee, and to whom (better then any other) thou can
disclose, of what importance this war will prove to me, if King Lisuart do
begin it. For, as thou may truly tell him, in part it concerns him, the
ungrateful King having done so many high disfavors, to all them that are of
our lineage, excluding them from his Court, after such an infinity of great good
services, by them done to him: what thou know, spare not fully to acquaint
him withal, both what thou have seen, and in what necessity thou did leave
us. And yet nevertheless, boldly say unto him, and assure him thereof, in the
loyal duty of a son, that I fear not any power whatsoever; having right
and justice on my side, and so many worthy Knights to assist me in my cause.

Tell him moreover, Gandalin, that I had never attempted so great an
enterprise, had it not been, that seeing God had called me to the order of
Knighthood, I never minded any thing more: but to perform the duty of a
Knight, defending (to my power) the wrongful disgraces offered by many,
especially to Ladies and Gentlewomen, who ought to be preferred before all
other persons, and for whom I have often put my life in peril, without hope of
any other recompense from them, then pleasing God by so well a done deed, and
augmenting mine own renown through the world. And this was the only cause
that moved me to forsake mine own Country to seek (among strange nations)
for such as stood in need of my help: where I have met with many perilous
adventures, as thou thy self have seen, and can at large recount. Namely,
that arriving in this Isle, I was advertised, how King Lisuart (forgetting the
glory of God, right toward men, council of his Lords, and the very natural
instinct, which every good father commonly bears to his child) would needs,
even in a manner of extreme cruelty, banish from his Kingdom, Madame Oriana,
his own daughter and principal heir, to give her (against her will) as wife
to the Emperor Patin of Rome, whom she hates to the death.

Hereof she made complaint, not only to them of the Realm of Great Britain,
but require ^^yde and ^uccour of all Knights bearing Arms, as well by letters
and messages as otherwise: desiring them, with heaued up (...), and fountains
of tears flowing (...) her eyes, to take pity and compassion upon her
misery. And so much her prayers and oppressions prevailed, that the Lord and
ruler of all things, locked on her with a merciful eye, inspiring the hearts
of many good Knights, to meet here in this place, even by miracle as it were:
where I found them, as thou know, resolved to adventure their lives, for
setting her at liberty by force, and other Ladies keeping her company.
Considering, that in doing otherwise, they should justly deserve blame in
following times, giving (many) occasion to presume: that cowardice only kept
them from this commendable aid, being persons of so great quality as they all
are, and the case so important. In which respect the conflict happened between
us and the Romans, according as thou saw it: wherein we took many
prisoners, and re^^ued he Ladies from their hands.

But to mediate the matter with King Lisuart, and my Cousin (...), shall
speedily part hence, with express order from us all, to work by humble
intercession, that he would take in good part what we have done, and receive
Madame Oriana, with all her attendants, into his favor again. And yet we
stand resolved, that if he will not accept our honest offer, but proudely
despise it: to stand upon our guarde against him, our good friends and kindred
backing us; among whom, Gandalin, thou may assure him, that we reckon him as
the chiefest, and therefore do humbly entreat him, to help us in so
reasonable a necessity. See also the Queen my mother, and kiss her hand on
my behalf. Pray her, to send hither my sister Melicia, to keep company with
these other Ladies, among whom she may learn many singular qualities. But
before thou go hence, know of my Cousine Mabila, if she will command thee
any service thither: and make some means, to speak with the Princess Oriana,
who will not show her self so strange to thee; but that thou may perceive
the estate of her good health, and how her affection continues toward me.

If Amadis was thus seriously busied, about the procuration of good aid,
Agraies slept not on the otherside: for he instantly sent Gandales into
Scotland, with express charge to the King his father, in what need they stood
of his assistance. Already Landin was gone for Ireland, by whom Quadragant
entreated the Queen his Niece, to send such a sufficient power, as possibly
she might. And yet not to let King Cildadan, her husband, know thereof: for it
was against all reason, that he should meddle in the matter, considering the
covenants and alliances, between him and King Lisuart. Moreover he had
command, to provide so many ships for war, as he could, and to bring them
along with him. Brunco de bonne Mer (who dearly affected Melicia, sister to
Amadis) wrote to the Marquess his father, and to Branfill his brother, about
the same busmesse, and delivering his Letters to his Squire Lasinde, spoke in
this manner.

My honest friend Lasinde, thou see what a number of Knights are here
assembled, notwithstanding, thou must conceive, that the greater part of this
business, concerns Amadis principally, whom (beside the unfeigned love I
bear him) I would gladly aid to my uttermost power, for his sister Meliciaes
sake, to whom I stand obliged in service, and to none other. For should I do
any otherwise, I am well assured, I should procure his great coffeehouse,
which were worse to me then any death. And therefore thou must wisely persuade
my father, to give us his best succor: showing him discreetly, that this
matter is as important to me, as to any other, and yet not use one word of
Melicia. Only tell him, my obligation and duty to Amadis, who has honored
me with his company in so many places, is the only motive that commands me:
And my brother Branfill shall hereby win more honor, then so to sleep in the
cinders of negligence, as he does. My Lord (answered Lasinde) I hope so well to
accomplish your command, that my voyage shall have effect equal to your
desire. And so taking leave, he went away.

Nor was Amadis unmindful, concerning the offers made him by King Taffinor of
Bohemia, at such time as he undertook his cause in Combat, against Garadan,
whom he slew, and afterward foiled eleven other Knights, belonging to the
Emperor Patin. Hereupon, consulting with his own cogitatio^s, he determined
to send thither Ysanis, the ancient Governor of the Enclosed Isle: a worthy
wise Knight, to request aid of him. And pursuing this purpose, he called for
the good old man, to whom he said Ysanio, knowing the fidelity remaining in
you, and your euerreadie good will to do me any service: I would entreat
you, to undertake a journey for me, about a matter of great consequence, not
knowing any Gentleman (beside your self) more apt and answerable for the
business. I would have you go to King Taffinor of Bohemia, to whom you shall
bear Letters of credence from me: giving him (beside) to understand our
occasions, and what trust we repose in his assistance. He is a Prince
magnanimous and bountiful, and (I trust) will not fail me, having formerly
made me such liberal offers. My Lord, answered Ysanio, I promise you I will
do my duty. Well then, said Amadis, to morrow morning you shall set on-ward:
but above all things (Ysanio^, my dear friend) I pray you use diligence. Then
he gave him the Letter, which spoke thus,

The Letter from Amadis, to Taffinor, King of Bohemia.
SIR, if ever I did any service, worthy your liking and acceptance, the
honorable and kind entertainment, which I received of you and yours, all the
while I remained in your Court, has made me much more ready (so long as I
live) to make no spare of my person, but always to be in due preparation, for
your continual obedience and service. Wherefore I humbly entreat you, not to
imagine, that the sending of this present messenger to you, is in expectation
of any recompense: but rather, remembering the honest offers you made me at my
departure from Bohemia, it drew me on to so much boldness, as, by this means
of sending to you, earnestly to desire you, to give me aid in abusinesse,
which nerely concerns me, and wherewith this bearer will further acquaint
you. I beseech you Sir to credit him, even as my self, and to command his
dispatch with all possible speed: to rid him out of all dread, that is ready
to sacrifice his life for you. And that is Amadis de Gaul, surnamed in many
places, The Knight of the green Sword, evermore by you and yours to be
commanded.


CHAP. V.
Of the private talk, which Oriana and Mabila had with Gandalin, and what he
gave Amadis to understand, concerning them.

Ambassadors being dispatched to all parts, as you have formerly heard,
Gandalin, being ready to depart for Gaul: came to the lodgings of the
Princess Oriana, according as his Master before had appointed him. And
because no man might enter, without command and permission from the Princess,
the gate being always kept by one of the auncientest women: he sent word to
Mabila, to know from her, if she pleased to write to the Queen her Aunte, or
to her Cousine Melicia. Mabila being acquainted by the Gentlewoman, concerning
the motion made by Gandalin, went and told Oriana thereof, so loud as every
one might hear her, saying. Madame, Gandalin is going for Gaul toward King
Perion: may it please you command him any thing to the Queen, or to my
Cousin? Yes mary will I, answered Oriana, cause him come in, that I may speak
with him. Then Gandalin was addmitted into the Princess Chamber, when seeing
him, she presently arose, and taking him aside (as pretending to give him some
private enstructions; she began to sigh, and spoke in this manner.

Gandalin, my dear friend, what think thou that Fortune is so contrarrie to
me, bereauing me of the only man in the world, whose company I most affect, he
being so nere me, and I altogether in his power? Nevertheless, we cannot have
the means for the least private conference, without great taxation to mine
honor, whereby my heart endures such affliction: as, if thou knew it, I am
certainly persuaded, that thou would take more pity on me then thou do.
And so I pray thee tell him, to the end, that though I have just cause to
complain: yet he may rejoice, by the augmentation (daily more and more) of
mine unfeigned love and loyalty to him. And I would have him devise the
means, by some pretty stratagem among his associates; that yet we may see one
an other, under color of thy voyage, and to comfort me.

Madame, answered Gandalin, you have great reason to bear him such loyal
affection, and to remember also some remedy, whereto (above all things else)
he would gladly aspire: for if you knew the extremity, wherein I have seen
him an hundred times, you might very well believe, that love is a Lordly tyrant
over him. I have seen him half dead (as it were) a thousand times, thinking
on the passed favors you have affoorded him, and as many times to recover
life again, only by the mere remembrance of them. I have likewise seen him
(among the deadliest dangers in the world) perform such incomparable actions
of Arms, calling only upon you to be his comfort: that it can hardly be
credited, any Knight should have so much valor in him. Therefore sweet
Madame, I pray you take pity on him, and use him answerable to his high
deserts. For this I dare assure you, never was any Knight more loyal, or more
yours, then he is: neither ever had any Lady such power over a man, as you have
over him; in your hands only lies his life and death, and you may dispose of
him as you please.

Gandalin, replied Oriana, I believe thee undoubtedly, feeling in mine own
self, that which thou relatest in him, and his life is mine, for I have no
other breathing, but by him, and in the company of others, he only makes me
live. But I pray thee, make me not die, as sometimes thou did, when thou
broughtest me tidings, of his return from Gaul into Great Britain: for, in
being deprived now of all means, to do what willingly I would for him, I may
do wrong to him, and to myself also, by declaring my desires ouer-earnest and
affectionate. Therefore, I pray thee speak no more, but return to him, and
will him to work some way, that I may see him so soon as possible he can. So
Gandalin took his leave, and as he was parting out of the Chamber, she spoke
somewhat audibly: fail not to come for my letters, before you go hence.

Amadis attended his return in sound devotion, and no sooner saw him, but said
unto him. Well, Gandalin, have thou seen my Lady? I pray thee tell me, what
has she said to thee? Then he declared (word by word) what had passed
between them, how desirous she was to see him: and (for a final resolution)
wished him, to come with some other of the Knights, under color of comforting
her. But when he came to those words of kindness, which (in the zeal of
affection) she had spoken: he stood as one entranced, till recovering spirit
again, he thus spoke. Alas, Gandalin, how shall I do what thou say? Having
apprehended a conceit suddenly, thus he proceeded. Thou must needs go to
Agraies, and tell him, that because I send thee into Gaul, thou was desirous
to know of my Cousin Mabila, whether she would write to my sister Melicia, or
no. And after some few speeches past between you, she told thee, she held it
very convenient, that we should oftener visit Madame Oriana, then we use to
do, and make means, to cause her forget the extreme melancholy, whereto
(overmuch) she addicteth her self, least, being so continually sad, she
fall into some dangerous disease. And be very circumspect, he discover not,
that thou have spoken with me, or that I know any thing of this matter. And
once more I pray thee tell me, did thou not find her very sad?

You know well enough Sir, answered Gandalin, and for no little length of time,
that she is one of the most wise and virtuous Ladies, as ever was borne, and
knows so discreetly to dissemble her passions: as the cunningst censure cannot
reach them, or gather by her looks, whether she be inwardly afflicted or no.
And yet I am verily persuaded, that she is too much given to melancholy.
Heaven afford me so much favor (quoth Amadis) for her, that her desires may
sort to some good effect: never then shall I fear either life or death, or any
thing else that Fortune can impose upon me. Doubt nothing Sir, replied
Gandalin, I hope, that as our Lord has euer-more preserved you, and preferred
you before any other Knight: he will not now forget you, and in a time of such
urgent necessity. Go thy way then, said Amadis, to my Cousine, and bring me
news again so soon as thou can.

So Gandalin departed, and finding Agraies at leisure, discharged his message
so effectually: that the Prince (imagining all to be true he had said) thus
answered. Trust me, my sister shows her self to be very well advised, and
what she requires, shall be done. And although her visitation has hitherto
been deferred; it was for no other reason, but in fear of discontenting
Madame Oriana. Wherefore, I will confer hereon with the company, whom I shall
find (I make no doubt) as ready as my self to obey her. So, without any
further tarrying, he went to Lord Amadis, to whom he declared all that
Gandalin had told him, as from his sister. Amadis appearing, as if he had
never heard thereof, replied, that he referred to him and the rest, whatsoever
they thought fit to be done in this case. Whereupon, Agraies imparted it to
them all, yet without any notice, that it proceeded from the opinion of Mabila:
but rather from an apprehension in himself, as accounting it very convenient,
to go comfort the Princess Oriana, whom Gandalin found to be mightily
overcome with melancholy.

And believe it (quoth he) if in such extremities, the strongest and most
magnanimous spirits stand in need of consolation: by much more reason then,
does the weak constitution of young Ladies command it, who being feeble of
themselves, should therefore the oftener be visited and comforted. Hereunto all
the Knights of the Enclosed Isle condiscended, and (for a beginning) the very
same day they sent to the Princess, to know if she would allow thereof, or
no: And she returned them answer, that they should be most respectively
welcome. Whereupon they presently went thither, and as they fell from one
discourse to another, Quedragant and Brian said. Madame, if you please to
command any thing to the King your father, or to your mother the Queen, we are
appointed from this company, to depart for Great Britain about your
business.

Now was Amadis withdrawn aside with Mabila, while Agraies co^ferred with
Olinda, and Florestan, and Angriote with Grasinda. And well we may conceive,
that Amadis was in a strange perplexity, seeing her so near him, whom he
loved above all creatures in the world, and yet he durst not so much as speak
to her: but regarded her with a steadfast eye, whereto her eye also seemed to
make answer, even as if an imparlance had passed between them, which made his
words to Mabila, to savor of idle and fond imperfection. But she, well
knowing the Saint of his devotion; to cure him of his ouer-awing fit: bethought
herself of the most honest means that could be, both to quicken him, and
recover some spirit likewise in Oriana, saying soddenly, Madame, you promised
Gandalin yester day, that you would write to Queen Elisena, and to Melicia,
and (for ought I hear to the contrary) he is presently to depart, and you have
forgot your letters.

Oriana, who understood well enough at what mark she aimed, answered: Let him
come hither, and by word of mouth, I will as well satisfy him, as if I had
troubled him with my Letters. Then one of the Damsels arose, and going forth
of the Chamber, called for Gandalin, who presently entered with her. Well had
he been instructed by Amadis, concerning what he was to do, if the
Princess would speak with him before this company: wherefore being come
where she was, he made her an humble reverence, and then to his Master, who
talked all this while (as I formerly told you) with Mabila. It was not long,
before Oriana (who sat between Quedragant and Brian) arose, and taking Brian
by the hand, said to him. I pray you Cosen, to witness with me, what message
I shall send by Gandalin, to the Queen of Gaul and her daughter Melicia: to
the end, that you may report it to the King my father, if he inquire any such
matter of you. In the mean while, Lord Quedragant (if so he be pleased) shall
abide with the Queen Sardimira, who knows well enough how to entertain him.

But Brian, who was one of the most gentle and courteous Knights living: would
not follow her, but, with an amiable smile, thus answered. Madame, you must
pardon me, for, being appointed (as I have told you) to go to the King about
your business: my friends here may grow suspicious of me, and stand in doubt,
that I may be so subborned by your gracious speech, as I shall show my self
more mild and tractable to him, then consists in my commission, and the charge
I have received from them. Nay Sir, replied Oriana, hear but the reason, why I
would have you acquainted with this message. It is to no other end, but by
hearing mine own tongue to relate my hearts tribulations (which I desire should
be known, not only in Great Britain, but likewise in all countries of the
world:) you would be the more indulgent, to mediate my peace, and to deliver
al these Ladies from imprisonment. And if you were affected to any one amongst
them; her virtue might prevail against any stern deliberation.

Oriana delivered these words with such a gracious demeanor, as they all
took delight to hear and and behold her. Especially Brian, who although he
was young, fair, and of goodly form: yet was he more addicted to follow
Arms, then love; and few Knights were more active then he, to handle his
lance and sword, for the defense of injured Ladies, whenever they stood in
need of his help. Whereby he became a friend to all in general, and did them
infinite particular services, which being desirous that Oriana should take
knowledge of, (thus he answered.

By my faith Madame, you may esteem of me as you please, but if I should long
tarry in so good company: I greatly fear, I should soon lose that, which I
have always held as mine own, since first I had knowledge of my self.
Therefore, I had need to get me further off, and leave my room to Lord Amadis,
and your Cosen: they may serve you for witnesses, if they be so pl^^^sed.

At these words every one (...)led for he retired with such a grace as
declared some bashfulnesse of what he had spoken: leaving Oriana close by
Amadis, who never had any private conference with her, since his departure from
King Lisuarts service.

But now, seeing opportunity so graciously favor him, as he might freely
speak what he would he was so utterly lost in joy, that ^^e stood
trembling, as one unable to utter a word.

But Oriana, laying her right hand upon his arm, caught hold with her other
upon his hand, and locking it fast in hers (to testify the vigor of her
affection) said: Deer friend, though no greater happiness in this world can
befall me, then continually to enjoy your ^ed presence: yet it has been no
mean discomfort to me, that being so near one to another, ^^e houe bin
barred from such a blessing. Nevertheless, I accoumpt my self highly
beholding to fortune, for delivering me into your power, as all my life time I
have desired, and wherewith I hope also never to part, so long as my soul
shall live in this body: for it had as I think) never been created, but only
to be dedicated in service and obedience unto you: yet I know very well, that
we frequenting one with another, as sometimes we did in Great Britain, mine
honor may receive endamagement: for the news of my surprizall is already so
di^ulged, that if we dissemble not our private passions, (...) thereby may
ensue unto us. Therefore I hold it better, to govern our selves rather by
discretion, then the lavish power of fond affection: which if we do, we may
may always presume, that the charitable deed you have done, is no more, than
the commendable custom among all good Knights, that make no spare of their
lives, to succor afflicted persons, especially women, so badly used as I have
been. And believe me (sweet friend) if herein you will not follow my
counsel, by weening to borrow some stolen delight and contentment: we shall
but formalize an imag^e happiness, and lose that utterly, which the wise
attending for time will undoubtedly bring us.

Madame, answered Amadis, I never had any other thought, but how I might best
be obedient to y^^, neither shall have any other so (...) as I live, because I
have no other maintenance for this poor life of (...). But let me be
regarded in your pity, for if you thus (...) ^p your self, and suffer me to
see you no oftener then I do: it is impossible, but that the melancholy which
ouer-masters me, will hasten my death very suddenly. I do not urge those
priu^, which your gracious favors afford^^ me in Great Britain, or that
every eye s^^uld discern then: but (...) ^ght may sometime befrend us ^th,
especially by the means of my Cosen.

Now trust me Sir, said Oriana, I am not a little amazed, that you, having such
assurance of the unfeigned love I bear you, should now seem doubtful thereof:
do you imagine, that I desire not your ease as much as mine own? Before God I
speak it, I have no pleasure but by you, neither any ease but to see you
satisfied. But, consider the tumultuous estate wherein we are, and that if we
were (never so little) discovered, it would be to the utter ruin of us both.
So many eyes observe our behavior here, as never did the like, when we were
in company with the Queen my mother. And here our actions are so narrowly
pursued, as (without exterme danger) no such adventure may be made as you
speak of. Excuse me therefore I entreat you, and let this remain for your
settled contentment, that I am so faithfully yours, as both my oath and promise
have strictly bound me. Madame, answered Amadis I will practice how I may best
please you, and to bring my thoughts to your obedience: albeit I much misdoubt,
that this compulsion will hardly hold out, if it be not the better backed by
your favor, from which it appears you seek to exclude me, without offending
either in word or thought, and that I dare maintain on the peril of my soul

With these words, the tears gushed out of his eyes, where at Oriana
grieuing, said. Exclude my best comfort! Sooner let me die ten thousand deaths.
I know the truth of your loyalty, and can desire no better testimony thereof,
then the just apprehension of mine own conscience. And take not in ill part
what I have said to you, for the fear of your so long absence from me, as in
these lauer years you have been, was the only motive of this language. What
more advantage then can you require of me? Let the King my father make peace or
war with you, he can make me neither less nor more yours, then resolvedly I
am.

As she would have continued on these speeches, Mabila, who served to the^ but
as a shadow, perceiving many eyes fixed upon them, spoke thus closely. Enough
for this time, every eye notes you. Sweet friend (quoth Oriana) dry up your
tears, and sit by your Cousin, who will tell you some things, that yet you
never heard of, and wherein I think) you will take a little delight. So she
left them together, returning again to the Queen Sardamira and Brian. In
which time, Mabila told him at large, how Esplandian was borne, and by what
mishap he was lost in the Forest, as Durin and the Damsoll of Denmark carried
him to Nurse. And last, ^ll adventures happening to him, till he came into his
mothers protection again, as you have heard more at large declared in the
third Book.

Amadis here at was to joyful, as no man could be more, and answered Mibila
thus. Believe me Cousin, I was continually full of doubt, for at my return from
Constantinople, by chance, I met with Angriote d'Estre^^aus, who reported all
that to me which you have told me concerning (...): but he knew not whose son
he was, nevertheless, my heart was suddenly inspired with a persuasion, that
Madame Oriana and I together had some right in him. And so much the father,
(...) bring the letter I received from you by (...), being as then in the (...)
whereby you gave me to understand, that my lynage was increased, yet durst I
not presume in what manner. But now (heaven be praised) we are both well
assured, and better satisfied then ever before, especially my self more
contented, then if I had conquered the greater part of the world: not only for
being father to Esplandian, but because I begot him on her, whom fortune has
preferred before all other, both in virtue, beauty, and all other good graces.
Yet have I suffered so much for her sake, as if I were able, to express but
only a half part of those cares, that kept me company during her absenc, your
self would complain much more then I have done.

Here, fetching a deep sigh, he breathed a while, and afterward thus went on.
But fortune made me a most honorable recompense, sending me in such a
convenient season, to deliver her from her enemies hand: for, if it had fallen
out otherwise questionless it had been the death of us both. But that which
now does most offend me, only is fear of her sickness, by her conti^all
grief and melancholy: she being not in the company of the Queen her mother,
and in the King her fathers disgrace. Wherefore I beseech you good Cousin,
comfort her so much as possibly you can, by cherishing her hopes, that heaven
will give furtherance to these affairs: beside, so (...) good Knights are
here assembled together, who will all be (...) in the smallest pieces, rather
then she shall suffer any shame or (...). And for this cause we have ^ded
(before any war shall be att^d) to send to King (...), and (...) to appe^
his (...), and to (...) again his gracious favor for her: provided* that all
alliance with the Emperor be quite broken off, otherwise, we are resolved,
never to deliver her: Mean while, we have dispatched Ambassadors to all
parts, to procure aid and succor among our friends, to the end: that if he
refuse our honest offer, and will needs enter the field against us, we may be
able (like good men) to make him answer.

Cousin, answered Mabila, I will do all that I can for you, and never credit
me, but Madame Oriana does highly applaud this her good fortune: assuring you,
that we all endured such greivance by her in your absence, but especially, when
she heard of her intended marriage to the Emperor, as you would have stood
amazed, to behold the sorrows which I have seen her suffer. But because you
understand sufficiently, both the reason of the cause, and what just right you
have in her, I will loose no more time, to remember you of that which needs
not. Let it suffice you, that you have brought her so far into loves
extremity, as possibly more cannot be.

Now, in regard that the hour was come for Quedragant and the rest to depart
thence, and had-already taken leave of Oriana* Amadis and Mabila gave over
talking. So the Knights went forth of the chamber, and giving the goodnight to
the Ladies, returned to their own lodgings. Where now (for a while) we mean
to leave them, to the end that we may tell you, how King Lisuart came
acquainted with the death of the Prince Saluste Quide, and ouerhrowe of the
Emperors men.

CHAP. VI.
How news was brought to King Lisuart, of the Romans foil and ouer-throwe,
and how his daughter Oriana was taken from them; where at he grieved greatly.

THE end of the third Book related to you, how King Lisuart delivered his
daughter to the Romans, against the opinion of all his Council. And she being
on Shipboard, well appointed with Ships for the conuoy; set on to Sea.
Afterward, being returned to his Chamber, more sad in soul, than appeared by
his outward behavior: his melancholy increased more and more upon him, to see
himself so meanly accompained, and in worse manner then he was were
especially, when (...) came and told him, that the (...) was very ill, through
grief and sorrow mightily seazing on her. Hereupon, he went to see her, where
not finding his daughter, nor the other Ladies and Gentlewomen, that usually
kept her company: his secret conceit of grief began more plainly to express
it self, so that the tears trickled down his reverend beard.

No sooner was he entered the Chamber, but the Queen beholding him, fell down
in a swoone: yet having good help about her, quickly she came to her self
again. Then the King embraced her in his arms, and to comfort her, spoke in
this manner. Madame, I was persuaded, that your virtue and wisdom would
prevail against this womanish weakness: especially, those matters (about
which you thus afflict your self) being brought to so good an end, that our
daughter may justly style her self, one of the greatest Princess in all
Europe. Wherefore I pray you be better comforted, and if you will not do it
for your own sake: yet let it be done for mine, otherwise, you will give me
occasion to misconster worse than I do. The Queen, well understanding all that
he said, would express no outward appearance thereof, but sighed without any
intermission: which moved the King to such compassion, as he could not
refrain from weeping. But because he would not be noted he went down into
the garden, where he walked sadly alone by himself: till such time as King
Arban came unto him, who not seeming to perceive the Kings sorrow, said. Sir,
your huntsmen willed me to tell you, that they have found (in this near
neighboring Forest) the greatest Heart that ever was seen: may it please you
(to morrow) to go see the pastime? yes, with all my heart answered the King.

As thus they continued talking, diverse Knights came thither, who to alter him
from his melancholy disposition: fell into diversity of discourse, some of
hunting, others of hawking, so that all the rest of the day, they talked of
nothing else. But the next morning, as they were ready to mount on horseback,
fortune, who is seldom satisfied with any passed misfortunes, brought a new
occasion of much greater sorrow. For, some of the Romans which had escaped
from the prisons in the Enclosed Isle: presented themselves before the King, in
very sorry and base garments, declaring at large all their disaster, his
daughters surprisal, and death of the Prince Saluste Quide.

You may now imagine, whether these bad tidings amazed him, or no,
notwithstanding, declaring constancy, and unconquerable wisdom: he made show
of little or no distaste at all, but answered, as if the matter concerned him a
great way off. Friends (quoth he) I am sorry for the death of the Prince
Saluste Quide, and the mishap befallen to you: but for the wrong done me by
them of the Enclosed Isle, I have been used to receive (and oftentimes to
return also) the like Alarums, knowing well enough how to revenge greater
injuries. Be of good cheer, and at my return from hunting, I will further
consider on your business. Then calling for one of the masters of the
house-holde, he commanded them to give them good entertainment.

Away rode King Lisuart and his train, declaring a iocond spirit all the way,
even till he was well entered into the Forest: where he continued three whole
days, pulling down many a goodly Dear. On the fourth day, he returned to the
city, and coming to the Queens lodgings, showed himself much more
cheerful, then ever he was since his daughters departure. So soon as he
was entered his Chamber, he commanded every one to avoid: and sitting down in
a chair by her, thus he began. Madame, in matters of slender consequence,
which ensue by accident, men may have some cause, to express passion and
melancholy: but as they proceed from ^iall grounds, so ought they to be
forgotte with as (...) remedy. But when a man shall be offended by some one,
not only in his person and goods, but in his honor and reputation: then it
agrees with good reason, not only to declare passion and melancholy, but also
to practice all means of provision, to take vengeance on him that committed
the offense, and to let the world understand beside, how highly the greatness
of the case has moved him to impatience.

I speak not this to you without cause: you have declared a sorrow too
apparent, for the absence of your daughter, according to the natural
inclination of mothers: and yet notwithstanding, I should account my self
happy, by a conceived hope, of soon forgetting such grief. But in the tail
(as we use to say) is the venomous sting hidden, and the end of actions do
approve their good, or evil: and therefore I must tell you, that such an
injury has lately been done me, and touches me so near, as I shall never
take rest, till I have satisfaction answerable to my desire. The Romans that
had the conducting of your daughter, are discomfited, the Prince Saluste Quide
slain, Oriana, and all the other Ladies in her company, taken prisoners, by
the knights of the Enclosed Isle: who imagine themselves not meanly happy by
such a victory, having done (as they think) more than ever any men did in
great Britain. And because the same thereof will soon spread it self through
the world, it is very requisite, that you should dissemble sorrow, and use more
prudence than passion. In so doing, you shall remain highly commended, our
enemies daunted, and I extraordinarily contented, hoping to provide so well in
this case, as your honor and mine shall be sufficiently defended.

When the Queen had heard these news, she sat very pensive, not speaking a
word. And as she was one of the wisest, and best advised Ladies in the world,
and dearly loving to her husband: so could she suddenly consider, that it was
more necessary, to procure peace between the King, and the Knights of the
Enclosed Isle, then to sharpen his fierce spleen against them, theirs being
also as hot toward him, whereupon she returned him this answer.

My Lord, you have conceited (as best pleased your self) of my inward
affliction, for the separation of me and my daughter. But as concerning the
favor done her by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, if you do but well
consider the time, when you were a Knight errant, like unto them, and what you
your self have done in the like cases: you would gently excuse them, in the
greater part of their enterprise. Do you think, that having heard the
lamentable moanes she made, even commonly noised in every country, how (in
mere despite of her) you would marry her to the Emperor: that this would not
move them to lend her aid? No man better than your self does know, that
nothing is more commended by God and man, then help and succor given to
wronged Ladies, especially when it is so vrgently required: by very strong
reason then, ought they to afforde it your daughter, whom they have known and
well thought on so long a time. Believe it my Lord, they can receive no shame
by the deed, and your self will confess in the end, that their attempt should
not be displeasing to you: they presuming (it may be) that you have been
greatly importuned to this marriage, and yielded thereto against your liking.

I well perceive (quoth the King) that you are not much offended with the
matter, but rather you can both like and allow thereof: but I swear by God, I
will make them dearly repent it. So, rising in a great rage, he flung out of
the chamber, and entering into his own, sound there King Arban, Grumedan, and
Guillan le Pensif, who went not from him, till he had told them all the
conference between him and the Queen, and what an answer she made him. Now,
because they saw him much incensed, they thought good, to conceal what the
meant to say, and mildely (by little and little) brake off these speeches. But
it chanced on the morrow following, that as the Queen came from hearing
Mass, Durin, brother to the damsel of Denmark, fell on his knee before her,
and presented her a Letter, which Oriana had written to her, as follows.

CHAP. VII.
A Letter sent by the Princes Oriana, being in the Enclosed Isle, to the
Queen her Mother.
MAdame, although you cannot but be (already) advertised of my misfortune,
such as it is: yet I thought it ^ient to let you know part of my mournings.
And as a beginning to this Let^er, I beseech you most humbly to consider, how
mishap has continually followed me, since my banishment from your Country,
from the King my father, and you also, than which nothing could be more ^^^some
to me. Nevertheless, not so satisfied, I was burried by such a tempest, that
the Romans (which conducted me) being overcome: we were brought to the
Enclosed Isle, by them, who (knowing the wrong done unto us) hazarded their
lives, to stay our passage any further. And because I stand in doubt, that such
a matter will not be pacified between my father and them, without great
effusion of blood, except you Madame, have some respect thereto: I thought fit
to send this bearer to you, entreating you (for the honor of God) to take
compassion on your poor desolate daughter, and work so much with the King,
that I may return again to him, and reobtaine his ^ed favor, having no way
offended him, except he be displeased, that I have been too obedient to him,
for therein only I confess my self culpable, and not otherwise. For the
rest, to tell you, how they (in whose power I am and the Ladies with me) are
minded: they have sent Ambassadors to my father, as well to know, how he
likes their succor given me, as also, to mediate his pity toward me.
Herein Madame, according as I have given charge to Durin, he will further
instruct you at his arrival, and lend a helping hand, to plant peace (if you
can) to such a dangerous war begun by misfortune; for her sake, who remains:

Your most humble and obedient Daughter, Oriana.


After the Queen had advisedly read, and re-read over this Letter, but not
without tears: she said to Durin, that she would speak with the King, and
afterward give him an answer. And as she was enquiring of him, what
entertainment Oriana and her company had in the Enclosed Isle: the King came,
whom she withdrawing into her Cabinet, and casting her self down at his
feet, weeping bitterly, she thus spoke to him. Alas Sir, for the honor of God
take compassion on your daughter, and read (if you please) this Letter which
she has sent me. The King seeing the Queen so drowned in tears, took her up
from the ground, and receiving the Letter from her, read the contents thereof:
then to appease the extreamitie of her passions, he thus answered, Madame, the
Ambassadors will soon be here, that are sent from thence, have patience till
I have heard them speak. They may (perhaps) give me such satisfaction, as the
injury which I have received will be forgotten: And they may bring such a
message, as I will rather consent to mine own ruin, and desolation of all
mine estates, than to peace. Much better do I affect to die with honor, poor
and disinherited; than to live amighty King, miserably wretched and
faint-hearted, clowded with the tears of you and your daughter. Wherefore,
speak no more hereof to me, except you purpose to offend me; And so leaving
her, he departed out of the chamber.

Afterward, she called for Durin, and said unto him. Friend Durin, return to
my daughter Oriana, and tell her, that I can send her no answer, until the
Ambassadors shall be arrived here, for the King (till then) knows not how to
determine on his business. But assure her, I will essay all possible means,
to do what she has desired me. And say, I entreat her, always to fix her
own honor before her eyes, without which, I shall desire her death. Bid her
remember, that a wise and discreet soul, is best discerned in adversity, and
not in the flattering times of prosperity. And seeing our Lord has suffered
her, to be borne a Princess, and the daughter of so great a King; reason does
require, that virtue should be more familier with her, than with a body of
baser condition, in all adversities (whatsoever) that can happen to her.
Always committing the managing of her chiefest affairs to God: whom I heartily
pray to bless her, and preserve her in his ^ase protection, until such time
as we shall meet again together.

Durin being thus dispatched by the Queen, took his way toward the Enclosed
Isle, and some few days after his departure, as the King was sitting down to
dinner in the great Hall: an Esquire suddenly entered, who gave him a Letter of
credence, which when he had read, he demanded of the Squire, of whence, and
what he was. Sir, answered the Squire, I am servant to Quedragant of Ireland,
who has sent me to you about such a business, as I will relate, if you please
to hear me. Honest friend, said the King, speak your pleasure. S^ (quoth the
Squire) my Master, and Brian de Moniaste, being sent from the Enclosed Isle,
are landed in your country, to acquaint you with some especial matters, from
Lord Amadis de Gaul, and other Knights that are in his company, But before they
pass any further, or come near your Court, they send you word by me (under
your gracious favor) that they require safe conduct for their coming.
Otherwise, they are determined, to publish their message in all parts of your
Land, and in other kingdoms beside, before they make return to them that sent
the^. Wherefore Sir, advise your self, and send them your intention.

Well knew the King whereat the message aimed, and therefore he thought it not
convenient, that they should proclaim their cause thorough his kingdom, a
matter not to be done, but to his high dishonor. Considering, all Ambassadors
ought to have security, as being a case sacred and inviolable, and the Prince
that should offer them injury, were far unworthy the name and office he
bears: wherefore very graciously, thus he answered the Squire. My friend, say
to them that sent you hither, they may safely come to my Court, and I will
gladly hear their message to me. The Squire having this answer, returned
presently to his Master, who (with Brian de Moniaste, being advertised of the
Kings mind) forthwith went a shore, and iourneyed so expeditiously, that on
the third day following, they arrived at King Lisuarts Court, before whom they
presented themselves, as he was newly risen from dinner.

He knew them so soon as he beheld them, being men whom he had often seen,
wherefore he welcomed them graciously: and all pressed about the King, to hear
their embassy, when Quedragant, setting his knee to the ground, began thus.
Sir it is a very laudable virtue, and worthy the highest commendations among
Kings and Princes, patiently to hear and understand, such matters as strange
Ambassadors have in charge to deliver them, being wholly dispossessed of
passion: because, if the Embassy fall out to their contentment, they will
receive the more joy thereby, and the Ambassadors shall be the better favored
and entertained. Contrariwise, if they speak matters displeasing to them, yet
so to palliate and conceal their anger: that their answer may come graciously
from them, in regard of the condition and office they bear.

At these words he arose, and sitting down by his fellow before the King,
proceeded thus. Sir, I pray you pardon me, that I have used this induction to
you, which I swear upon my faith was not done, in any doubt of the assurance
you pleased to grant us: but in due and just commendation, of the virtue of so
good a Prince, that so freely gave us entrance into his kingdom.

Now Sir, the occasion of our coming to your Maiestic, is, by command of the
best Knight that ever yet was known, Amadis de Gaul, and generally, on the
behalf of all them, that are with him in the Enclosed Isle, who thus (by us)
acquaint you with their minds. Traversing starnge and far remote countries, in
search of adventures, according as all other Knights errant use to do,
especially to succor the weak and distressed, when outrage (against all
reason) is offered them: they were advertised by many, that you Sir, being
guided by a light and inordinate will, rather then upright justice and equity,
was desirous (contrary to the counsel of all your best friends) to disinherit
(with the greatest shame in the world) Madame Oriana, your eldest daughter, and
give her as wife (against her will) to the Emperor Patin. So that, neither
taking compassion on her, nor her incessant tears and moanes, much less
regarding the end of such an enterprise, and manifest dislike of all your
subjects: you violently delivered her to them, that had no reason to request
her of you.

And because such matters of fact and injustice, are not only displeasing to
God, but to all such as hear thereof: it pleased the hand of heaven, to make
us instruments of redress in such a deep necesity, and that the Romans, who
had the conduct of her and the other Ladies, should fall into our hands, and
standing on their defense against us, be vanquished, some ^^aine, and others
taken prisoners. Now Sir, for her and the Ladies, I must tell you, that (at
this instant) they are in the Enclosed Isle, with a good and sufficient company
of Knights, determined to honor them so much as they possible may. For their
intent never was to offend you, or them: but to maintain equity, and keep
them from force or violence, according as your self (sometime) made them
swear at Vindolisore.

Let me therefore entreat you, that preferring virtue and reason, before
choler and passion, you would be pleased, to receive home again your daughter
Oriana, and hereafter to entreat her, not as a stranger, but as a father
should his child, without sending her far from you, or your country:
where-of, if God be so pleased, she is to be Lady and Queen after you. If you
think your self injured, and will not grant to their request: that yet you
would not deny her your gracious favor, but accepting her into your Court, as
she was wont to be; to take such revenge on them afterward (if you think it
meet) as you can. For thus much Sir, I must assure you, that if you purpose to
assail them; they will defend themselves as best they may. Be therefore well
advised on your answer, for in your hands you have both war and peace.

The King, being mightily insensed, thus replied. Gentlemen, because virtue
does seldom keep company, with temerarious Orations, nor audacious answers,
both the one and the other being far insufficient, to whet on or animate
cowardly minds: I will not hold you with any long delay, or use many words,
when few may suffice. But my patience being greater toward you, than it needs
to be, let me tell you, that this attempt done by them of the Enclosed Isle: I
know to be executed more upon presumption, than any magnanimity of courage,
^standing (...) the brave words by you delivered. So that what height of
honor you imagine to be won thereby: any man of good judgment and
discretion, will rather check and foully condemn it. For, it is a matter of no
great difficulty, to put in disorder, or to overcome such persons, as travail
by Land or Sea without all dread or suspicion, especially, when men repute
themselves to be among their friends. As for your proposed remonstrance, for
recalling home my daughter Oriana, and never more to send her far from me:
this is no matter, whereof I am not to yield any account to you, but to God
only, who (next to himself) has constituted me Sovereign in this kingdom,
to govern both it and the people. Therefore I do not mean, to allow o^ any
peace with them, until they have made due reparation, of the injury I have
received by them: then I will consider on their motion, and not before.

Sir, said Brian, we have no further commission to you, or to enquire after
any other business; what else is to be done, let each side consider thereon
as they think good. But God only knows the occasion, that made us enterprise
what we have done, for the fredome of your virtuous daughter: and upon that
point we rest, and crave leave for our departure. Go in Gods name, said the
King. Thus were the Ambassadors dispacht, Grumedan bringing them above a mile
out of the City, said unto them. Before God Gentlemen, I am much grieved at
this new disaster, I always did hope, to see you (one day) as welcome again
to this Court, as ever you have been: but now I am verily persuaded, that our
long expected peace will come too late (except our Lord help it) considering
the mind of Amadis. Nor did I imagine him to be in the Enclosed Isle, because
we heard news, that he was utterly lost four years ago: and now it amazeth
me not a little, that he should be so suddenly found again, and give such
succor to Madame Oriana.

Lord Grumedan, answered Brian, the King (it may be) will know in time, both
what we are, and what services we have done him: And if he attempt any thing
against us, he will find the issue to be more sharp and sower, than the
entrance was pleasing or delightsome. As for Lord Amadis, you saw him not long
since in this Court, when he conquered the Crown from the Romans, that
maintained the beauty of the maids of Great Britain, to be more excellent
than the Ladies that came with him. Saint Mary! said Grumedan, what do you
tell me? Is it possible, that Amadis was the Greek Knight? Believe it, answered
Brian, it was he, and none other. By my soul, said Grumedan, I now well
perceive, that I am a man of very poor judgment, seeing I might then have well
assured my self, that it was hard for any man to do what he did; I may doubt
whether I have eyes and understanding. But fair Sir, seeing you have already
done so much for me, let me further entreat you to tell me: who they were
that lent assistance on my day of Combat? Who? answered Brian, smiling, why two
of your very dearest friends: Angriote d' Estrauaus, and Brunco de bonne Mer.
In good sadness (quoth Grumedan) if I had known them, I should have warranted
my victory more certain than I did: and am well content to confess now, that
the honor of the day is more justly due to them, than to me, and all my life
time, I am a friend and servant to Amadis, and to you likewise, mine honor
reserved.

As thus they rode on devising together, they met with Esplandian, newly
returned from hawking, with Ambor, son to Angriote d' Estra: uaus, carrying a
Spar-hawke on his fist: and coming somewhat near them, Brian de Moniaste,
demanded what he was. This is (answered Grumedan) the young Gentleman
Esplandian, of whom the wise Vrganda has spoken so many maruailes. I have
heard of him, said Brian, heretofore. I pray you cause him to stay a while,
that we may the better behold him. Which Grumedan did, for, as he was
passing by them, he called to him, saying. Come hither Sir, see here the
friends of the Greek Knight, who (at your request) pardoned the Emperors
Knights: at least wise, send him some commendations, from your self. My Lord,
answered Esplandian, I humbly entreat them to pardon me, I knew them not: but
for my love to that good Knight, I would gladly have the means to do him any
service, and if they please to kiss his hand on my behalf, they shall bind
me to them all my life time.

Fair Sir, said Brian, that office shall be mine, and I will do it with a
glad soul: albeit he has changed his name since you last saw him, for now
he is called Amadis de Gaul: Amadis de Gaul answered Esplandian, surely I
cannot think it, because I heard that he was dead: whereat I conceived no
little grief, for the renowned prowess reported to be in him. It is he
doubtless, said Quedragant. Then Sir I dare assure you. replied Esplandian, I
am not so forie for the loss of my hawke this day (though I loved her dearly)
as I am joyful to hear what you have told me: because, if I may live to grow
great, I will beg so earnestly of the Queen, that she shall not deny me to
go see him, and to receive my Knighthood from his hand, if he shall please
so much to honor me. Sweet youth, said Brian, God bless and prosper you. And
so they took leave each of other: Brian and Quedragant following their way to
the Enclosed Isle, and Grumedan and Esplandian returning to the Court.

CHAP. VIII.
How King Lisuart called a Council, concerning what he intended to do against
the Knights of the Enclosed Isle. And what resolution was agreed upon.

After that Quedragant and Brian were departed from the Court, King Lisuart
found himself wonderfully disco^tented, seeing such weighty occasions to grow
more and more upon him: he intended on the morrow to call a Council, only of
Arban, King of Norwales, Grum den, and Guillan le Pensit; who being met
together, the King began in this manner. Honorable friends, you know what
injury I have received by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and what shame I
should do to my self, in suffering them to pass unpunished. Nevertheless,
not to shun the way which all Princes should take, doing nothing without
counsel and deliberation: I would first be advised by you, in what manner I
should shape my revenge, that hereafter they may remain an example to such as
dare enter into the like attempts against me. Full well you know, how
dangerous it is to use delay in such actions, and of what consequence my
occasion is: therefore I pray you, let us consider together on some redress,
and every man freely speak his mind.

Arban King of Norwales, was the first that answered, speaking thus. Sir,
seeing you are resolved to make war against Amadis and those of his league,
accounting it unmeet, to accept the offer made you by them: it is expedient to
consider, that the managing of the matter may be so ordered, as the glory must
remain to you. For although we hold it undoubtedly, that victory consists
in the hand of heaven only, God giving it when, where, and how he pleases,
and commonly, agreeing with the justice of the cause: yet diligent providence
is not to be neglected, in all such cases, as are required, before any
enterprise be attempted, or any contempt made of the enemy. It is good to
imagine, that he may prove able enough to find you play sufficient, if
fortune look favorably on his cause: considering, that when men are too
confident, either of their own right, or trusting to their own strength: it
procures their ruin and total destruction, through ouer-bolde presumption,
albeit the victory were their due.

Favor me Sir to tell you, that if you well consider, with whom you have to
deal: me thinks, an aduantageable peace were more honorable for you, than a
hazardous and doubtful war, falling out more strangely then can be
imagined. You know Amadis, and the rest (by whom he is backed and supported) to
be all good Knights, men of great spirit, and all of them nearely alyed to
Kings and potent Princes, who will not fail them for any disaster, or death it
self. You know also, on the other side, that the most part of your subjects,
never liked or thought well of the deliberation (merely made by your self) for
marrying your daughter to the Emperor, the only motive and occasion of this
war. And therefore, you may be well assured, that how soever they bear it
with a smooth brow, and rankerous spleen inwardly: they can be easily
contented, that all should go but badly on your side, by not following their
liking; howbeit, I make no doubt, but that they will serve you in all loyalty.

You have said well, answered the King, but we are not now to stand upon these
terms. I do not crave your counsel, whether I should determine peace or
war: but only would know of you, by what means I may be best revenged. Sir
(quoth he) by my former speeches, you may easily know that. Assemble your
forces and send to your friends for assistance: especially to the Emperor of
Rome, because this case concerns him, as nearely as you. Afterward, your Army
being ready, march on (without any dallying) toward them whom you mean to
assault. But before you do this, it were good (in mine oppinion) to practice
some means, whereby you may call home some that are far off from your
service, partly through coffeehouse, and partly by wrongs offered. I urge
this motion, because if they be not willing to aid you; they should not
resolve to offend you. For, being forth of your Land, it would fall out
dangerous, if they should conspire and bend themselves against you, if Fortune
do lowre that day upon you. For, many times it comes to pass, that distastes
and dissents led by length of time, do soonest make their outward appearance,
when his power (against whom the conspiracy is meant) grows weak and decayed.
Wherefore Sir, this is one of the chiefest points, whereof you are maturely to
consider.

Truly, said the King, I know that you have spoken to the purpose, and will do
therein what I can. Sir, said Grumedan, Amadis has bin (here-tofore) so well
accepted in your Court, as no man posibly could be more: and I could heartily
wish, that those villains which caused this so long separation, had never been
borne into the world. And although I am his friend entirely, so shall I be no
enemy to you, if you desist from being his. Wherefore, according to the advice
given you by King Arban: it were good, that (above all other things) you
reconcile them to you that partake with him, winning their hearts and wills by
little and little: as easily you may do, giving them good looks and gracious
language. Then having the help of Rome, and other your allies, as the Kings of
Ireland Suetia, I make no question, but you may (with little ease) attain to
your intention, even according to your own mind.

But my good Lord, said Guillan, before any matter at all be attempted, it were
good to know, if those men may be resolved on, whom you have named. Are you
sure that the Emperor will meddle in the cause? He is a man of very slender
faith, and as ill affected of his own people, as can be. Are you certain
also, that the King of Suctia will do as you say? If his Majesty were so
pleased. Ambassadors should be sent to them speedily, to entreat their favor
in this case, showing them apparently: that if revenge for such a wrong were
justly inflicted, it would withdraw any from attempting the like. In good
sadness, said the King, you have very well advised, and because you (Lord
Guillan) do sufficiently understand the business: I pray you take the charge
upon you to the Emperor, for I know no Knight more able to prevail with him,
then you are. Sir, said Guillan, I was not borne but for your service, when,
and where you shall please to command me. Make ready then (quoth the King) to
morrow you shall have Letters of credence only, and the rest remain to your
own report.

So they arose from Council, and each man returned to his lodging, till the
next morning: when the King sending for Guillan, said unto him. Lord Guillan,
according to our conclusion yester-day, you must depart toward the Emperor,
and with as much expedition as may be. To him make known, how matters have
come to pass, that having delivered my daughter to his Ambassadors: she was
afterward surprised from them, and forcibly carried to the Enclosed Isle, his
men all slain, or taken prisoners, whereof he ought to have respect, this
injury redounding as much to him as me. If he offer aid, and will leuy an Army
to be revenged: say, that on my part shall be no defailance, in any thing my
power can stretch unto. If you find him willing to proceed effectually, return
again with all possible diligence: that our enemies may have no leisure to
fortify themselves, as I am certain they intend to do.

Sir, answered Guillan, God give me grace to accomplish your will in this, and
any thing else you shall please to employ me in. Worthy friend said the King,
there are your Letters of credence, and if it be possible, set away to morrow
morning early, for one of my best Ships is made ready for you, and waits your
coming in the haven. Sir, replied Guillan, there shall be no want of duty in
me. And so taking his leave, and giving order for his further affairs, he went
aboard, and set away. The very same day Brandoynas also was dispatched for
Galuanes, in the Isle of Mongaza, and from thence into Ireland, to King
Cildadan, to make ready so many men as he could. Philipinell was sent to
Gasquilan,, King of Suetia, who sometime came into Great Britain, to approve
his manhood against Amadis. King Lasuart sent him word, that if his spleen as
yet continued: he should now have better means then ever, because the war
was intended against him.

So far did these news fly abroad, that they came to the understanding of
Archalaus the Enchanter, to his no little joy and comfort; intending (by this
occasion) the utter ruin of King Lisuart, and likewise, of Amadis. And for his
speedier attaining thereto, he went presently to King Aramyne: who hearing of
his ariuall, gave him most royal entertainment, presuming peremptorily, that
he would not come into his country, but upon some very urgent occasion.
Being privately seated together, Archalaus thus began.

Sir, some few days since, I received credible information, that King Lisuart
and Amadis de Gaul (two of the deadliest enemies you have) are fallen upon
such a quarrel: as, without any hope of peace ever to come between them, they
muster men for a maine battle, out of which they cannot escape, but with the
final destruction of the one, or other, and (perhaps) of them both together.
And because occasion does expressly call you, as well to revenge your former
losses in times past, as also to extend your limits, by peaceable making your
self King of Great Britain: me thinks you should not delay the mustering of
your men, and summoning all your friends together, that while they cavil, and
maintain their quarrel so far off, you may take so apt an advantage, and
make an easy entrance into Britain. If they chance to meet, and fight the
field; then, without giving the least leisure to the conqueror, to breath or
refresh his followers: you may set upon him so opportunately, and bid him so
hot an unexpected battle, as none of them can escape with life.

Now Sir, to acquaint you with the cause of their enmity, you must understand,
that King Lisuart sending his eldest daughter for Rome, having given her as
wife to the Emperor: Amadis de Gaul (one of them, who in your last lost
battle, termed himself Knight of the Serpent, and then wore (as you well
remember) a golden helmet) with a great many more, met the Romans on the Sea,
set upon them, and ouercomming them, slew the Prince Saluste Quide, a near
kinsman to the Emperor. The rest were taken prisoners, with the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, whom they conveyed to the Enclosed Isle, where as yet they keep
them. Now indeed I cannot certainly resolve you, what matter moved them to
begin this war, but I am well assured, that King Lisuart in revenge of this
injury, gathers as great an Army together as he can. And Amadis has sent into
all parts for succor, purposing to stand upon his own defense, if he shall be
assailed.

During these busy troubles, Sir, you have an excellent occasion (if you
please) to show them as subtle a slight as ever was done, setting upon them
as I have directed you. And because (at the very first sight) you may discern
your victory to be certain: I will work so much, that Barsinan, Lord of
Sansuegna, son to him whom the King burned at London, and likewise all they
of the lineage of Dardan the Proud, whom Amadis foiled at Vindolisore, shall
come to your aid, with the King of the Profound Isle. Wherefore, persuade your
self, that being assisted with so great a number of good Knights: there is no
doubt to be made, but you shall reach the height of your desire.

My worthy good friend Archalaus, answered the King Aranigne, you tell me
great matters, and although I was fully determined, never more to tempt
fortune, she having shown me such slender favor in times past, yet me thinks
it were a great folly, to foreslowe such occasions, as freely come to offer
themselves, for the augmentation of my honor and profit. For, if in such
cases, attempts managed by reason, have as happy issue as men can wish: the
fruit of such a labor is well gathered, when desert holds up the lap to
receive it. But if it should fall out otherwise, yet (at least) that must be
performed, whereto all men stand bound by virtue, for maintenance of their
authority, which is not to be valued by passed misfortunes, as (when a happy
hour presents it self) they should refuse to embrace it, as declaring
themselves to be dastardly minded, and void of all courage and magnanimity.
Seeing then we are so forward in terms, let it suffice, that I faithfully
credit you, and desire you (while I am providing mine Army) to take order for
the rest, sending to Barsinan and our other friends, for their effectual
joining with us.

Archalans having heard this resolution, made no long stay with King Aranigne:
but taking leave of him, iournied so diligently, that he arrived in the
country of Sansuegna, where he found Barsinan. To him he told all the passed
conference, setting before his judgment, what an execrable injury King
Lisuart had done to his father, suffering to be burned alive by a tower, from
the top where-of (afterward) he caused his brother Gandandell to be thrown
down, whom Guillan le Pensif had taken prisoner. And do you think (quoth he)
that had it not been for this Amadis de Gaul, but Barsinan your father, had
peaceably been King of Great Britain? But that villain came, and after he
had rescued Oriana from me, caused all the rest of my enterprise to be
utterly void. But now you have time convenient to be revenged, therefore,
except you will show your self dull and base minded; delay no longer,
considering, that King Aranigne is ready to assist you.

Easily did Barsinan believe all that he had said, and promised to appear in
field, so soon as any need required. So Archalaus departed thence, to the King
of the Profound Isle, and gave to him the very same instructions. Having
obtained what he desired, he returned homeward, and crossing the country,
advised all the kindred of Dardan the Proud, to be in a readiness, to depart
away when they should be commanded. But at this instant; our History speaks no
more thereof: but returns to the fortunes of Quedragant and Brian, being
under sail for the Enclosed Isle.

CHAP. XI.
How Quedragant and Brian, sailing on the Sea, by a sudden and unexpected
tempest, were cast so far out of their course, that having lost all knowledge
of land; they met (accidentally) with Queen Briolania: And what happened to
them.

QVedragant and Brian being on the maine Seas, shaped their compass for the
Enclosed Isle: but upon a sudden, the winds began to blow so stearnely, and
such a violent tempest arose, as the best man of courage among them, made
little account of escaping, seeing their sail yardes and tacklings broken in
pieces, and with such impetuous gusts of contrary winds, as trusting neither
to stearne, or any hope else, but the mercy of God only, and the waves, they
expected sinking every minute. So long they ran this disasterous fortune, that
the dead dark night ouer-tooke them, with extreme thunders, and flashes of
lightning, which was their best means for seeing one another: till day-breake
appeared, the winds grew appeased, and the Sea (by little and little)
indifferently calmed.

Now they could plainly perceive, that they were cast far enough out of
their course, for they discovered the coast of Sobradisa: and as they were
preparing thither, they espied a goodly great Ship sailing toward them,
which they determined to call to, to know who was aboard her. Coming more
near, they beheld upon the deck, diverse Ladies and Gentle-women, and some
Knights among them, discoursing together: where-upon, before they would presume
any further, they put forth a Frigate, commanding one of their Squires, to go
know of whence, and what they were. The Squire performed his charge, and going
aboard the Ship, humbly saluted such as he saw there, saying. Lords and Ladies,
there are Gentlemen in yonder ship, who (in courtesy) desire to understand,
what you are, and whither you are bound. Honest friend answered one of them,
say, that the Queen of Sobradisa is here, and longs to be at the Enclosed Isle.

These news Sir, answered the Squire, will be very welcome to two Knights,
that sent me to you, who are also bound for the self same place. Honest
Squire, said the Queen, tell us then their names, if you may do it. Indeed
Madame (quoth he) I stand charged to the contrary. But thus much I dare tell
you, that they took shipping in Great Britain, to return to the Palace of
Apolidon; where they had been before now, if fortune had not hindered their
voyage. But I am very certain, that their joy (for meeting with you) will make
them forget all their passed danger: wherefore I will return again to them,
and tell them what I have heard of you. So saying, he went back to the Ship
from whence he came, and declared to Quedragant and Brian his answer,
where-of they were not a little joyful. And drawing nearer, joined their
vessel with the Queens, and going aboard, humbly saluted her.

Here I must tell you, that she many times (formerly) had seen them at
London, and in diverse other places, which made her the sooner take knowledge
of them: and entertayning them with all honorable respect, she spoke thus
unto them. Before God, Gentlemen, next to Amadis de Gaul, to whom I stand
very much obliged, it were hard for me to meet with more welcome men, and I
pray you tell me, what fortune has conducted you hither: because Tantiles
Master of my household, assured me that he saw you set sail for Great
Britain, about business for the Princess Oriana. Madame, answered
Quedragant, Tantiles told you true, and we have been with King Lisuart, and
used our best endeavor to make peace between him, and our friends in the
Enclosed Isle: but he misliking so fair a conclusion, we are the more onward
for terms of war.

Then he reported at large, what speeches had past between King Lisuart and
him, and in what manner they parted. But (quoth he) we were no sooner put to
Sea, but so violent a tempest ouertooke us, as we expected nothing but
drowning: and by these means, have we run so far from our right course.
In good faith, said she, we have had our part of the tempest too, and greatly
feared the sinking of our Ship, considering what dangers she has endured.
And let me tell you, two whole days are already past, since we set forth from
Sobradisa: expressly to go see Amadis and Madame Oriana, and all the good
company there with them. Our hope was to make more haste thither, than we have
done, as fearing, least King Lisuart had already se^, his forces, in refusing
the honest offers you made him. But for ought I can perceive, he greatly
forgets himself, whereat I much marvel, and it seems, that he is wearied
with his long continued good fortune: beginning war so rashly, with them that
have done him so many great services, whereof he may repent him at leisure.
For Lord Amadis will find so many sure friends, and all ready at his command:
that King Lisuart (it may be) will see himself deceived in his expectation.

As for my self (quoth she) upon this only, and no other cause, have I left
Tantiles behind, with express charge, to leuy in my territories, twelve
hundred able men for war, and to bring them away with all possible speed. But
if it might so please you we would be very glad of your company, seeing we are
thus so well met together. Madame, said Brian, seeing your Ship is much
crazed, may it please you to go aboard ours, and yours shall follow, whereto
all agreed. And so they set on, devising together, on many matters: till at
length, they espied two men of war under sail, which Tiron had purposely
sent forth, to disappoint and surprise the Queen.

Now, concerning this Tiron, whereof I now make mention to you, he was the
son to Abiseos, whom Amadis and Agraies contended withal, in the city of
Sobradisa: according as you have already heard, in the first book of this
History. By whose death, and likewise of his two eldest sons, Briolania
remained peaceably Queen of the whole country: except of one Castle only,
wherein, this Tiron (third son to the said Abiseos) was saved by an ancient
Knight, who had the charge of him, and therefore there nourished him, till he
came to able age of bearing Arms, and to receive knighthood. Then he began to
work wonders, so that he was reputed, for one of the best and boldest Knights
then living. Which the aged Knight perceiving, he put him in mind to compass
the recovery of his lost country again, pressing him so importunatly, to
revenge the death of his father, and brethren: that he resoluedly determined,
to adventure the taking of Queen Briolania, and afterward, to make him self an
absolute King, if he could.

Hereupon, he being informed, that she embarked her self for the Enclosed
Isle, and but with a small company: made ready two Ships, and with an hundred
hardy Knights, lay hulling on the Sea before, to execute the full of his
intent. The sun grew to declining, and night not far off, wherefore Brian
and Quedragant, doubting to be assaulted: stood on their guard, because they
saw the other make a pace toward them, by help of their Oars. Being come
near unto them, they heard the voice of a man, calling out aloud to them, in
this manner. Knights, you that accompany Queen Briolania, tell her, that her
Cosen Tiron is here, and would speak with her: commanding you her people, not
to stand upon any defense against us, least we hew you in pieces, and bestow
no better fortune on her.

When the Queen heard these words, she was surprised with a wonderful
fear, and trembled exceedingly, saying to Brian. Alas Sir, we are all undone,
this is the greatest enemy that I have in the world: and believe, that he would
never come in this manner, but to deal with us as cruelly as he can. Madame,
answered Quedragant, fear not any thing, if he assault us, he will (perhaps
be better welcomed, then he looks for. For my companion and ten of your
Knights, shall take charge for resisting one of their Ships: and I and the rest
will deal with Tiron, unto whom he spoke thus. Knight, thou that desire to
see the Queen: come hither aboard her Ship, and she will gladly hear thee,
otherwise, not. Come aboard? quoth Tiron, why, that is my meaning; in the
despite of her and thee, or any else whatsoever.

So turning instanstly the prow of his Ship, and siding the Queens, the
grappling irons were cast forth, to fasten them together: and making a sign to
his other Ship, to fight courageously, the assault began very sharp and
dangerous. Wherein he used but silly providence, making small account of the
Queens strength, which he found greater than he was aware of. And Tiron,
scuffling over negligently in his own quarrel, would needs step into the
Queens ship: but his tarrying there was longer then he looked for, for
Quedragant meeting there with him, found him such tough play, as Tiron was
beaten down, and committed to safe custody, albeit his Knights did their
uttermost endeavor to rescue him. Nevertheless, in the conclusion, not one of
them all escaped in their ressistance, but was either slain, or taken
prisoner. This so daunted their courages, that (by little and little) getting
up alost on the deck, they began to cut the cords of the grappling irons, which
fastened the two Ships together. But Quedragant perceived it, and seeing
fortune was only for him, in the despite of Tirons Knights: he entered their
Ship, where he made such a massacre, as he quickly became master thereof.

In the mean while, Brian kept head with them in the other Ship, and although
he was grievously wounded, yet could they gain nothing against him: but,
seeing their companions lost, gave over fight, and labored to get away by
all means they could use, and so the Knights of the Enclosed Isle were Lords
of the victory. Hereupon, Quedragant appointed guards for the Ship which he
had conquered, then he entered into that where Queen Briolania was, who
(during all the fight) sat closely in her cabin, more dead than alive, only
through her extreme fear. But when she saw Quedragant, her heart was
cheered, and then she questioned the success of her enemies.

Madame, quoth he, the most part of them are slain, drowned and fled, and the
rest (I hope) will give you no ill language: especially Tiron, whom he
commanded (by his guardes) to be brought thither, as accordingly they did, and
he fearing some cruel death to be inflicted on him, fell down at the Queens
feet, saying. Alas Madame, for the honor of God take pity on me, and
without observing my foolish enterprise, excuse my youth. I am of your blood,
and may hereafter do you some service, if it will please you to save my life.
Tiron said she, not for any love we bear you, but for some other reason
moving us thereto: you shall not die now, nor till I shall be better advised,
how to deal with you. So he was sent back to his prison, and Brian came sore
wounded with an arrow, which pierced quite thorough his shield, and sun a
great way into his arm. The Queen was so grieved thereat, as nothing could more
displease her, fearing the harm to be far worse then it was indeed.
Nevertheless, concealing her own thoughts, she (being very skillful in
Surgery) said, it was a matter of nothing, and doubted not, but within few
dates, he should be safe and sound again.

With her own hands she instantly unarmed him, and applied such medicines to
the hurts, as were most expedient. Afterward, setting sail, they held on
their course to the Enclosed Isle, where they arrived, even as Amadis and some
other Knights were walking on the sands. Seeing these Ships making in thither,
they went on, to be further resolved of the^: when presently they knew the
Squires of Quedragant and Brian, as the were coming first to Land. Being
minded, to question some news of their Masters, they saw them entering into
the port: wherefore, every one strove, who should be foremost to welcome them;
but they were much amazed, to see the other Ships which they brought with
them.

Brian perceiving their doubt in this kind, said unto them pleasantly smiling.
You know Gentlemen, when we parted from this place, we went away with one Ship
only, and now you see how our store is increased, merely by conquest, and with
a greater booty than you imagine, wherein you are to have no part or advantage.
For, seeing fortune has been so favorable to us, her blessings must remain
to us: and not to you, that loyter here in idleness, while we labor and
travail. Well Sir, answered Amadis, it shall suffice us, to partake in the
pleasure you have had: provided, you must tell us, if the booty be so great as
you would make us believe. Nay, much greater said Brian, and to approve my
words, is it not a fair conquest, to win a Queen, and such a one, as she of
Sobradisa, with many beautiful Ladies, and Gentlewomen beside, as you shall
see immediately? By my faith, said Amadis, your booty cannot be termed small.

As thus they passed on their pleasant talk, the Queen and her women were
landed, and every man was ready and dutiful, to welcome them with all possible
honor, and goodly Palfrayes, were presently brought, whereupon they all
mounted, and so rode on to the Palace of Apolidon. On the way, Amadis giving
gracious entertainment to Briolania, spoke thus. Madme, it is to me no little
joy, to see you in these parts safe and well, accounting my self more beholden
to you then ever, that you would take so much pains, as come and see us:
especially, in such a time of no mean tribulation, and when you may best
comfort Madame Oriana, whom you shall see so ouer-gone with grief, as no one
possible can suffer more. But I hope your presence will be so pleasing to her,
as she will learn to forget a great part of her melancholy.

My Lord (quoth she) for this cause only have I left my country, and God does
best know, what grief I have endured in your absence, never hearing any
tidings of you. Yet I received some comfort by the ariuall of Tantiles, whom I
have left at home in my country, to leauy men for war, according as you have
sent me word by him: and I my self had taken the matter in hand, but for my
earnest desire to see you and Madame Oriana. Nevertheless, without the help of
Quedragant and Brian, mine enterprise was in danger to be disapointed, as at
more leisure I shall let you fully understand.

Here I must tell you, that Amadis (so soon as he saw Queen Briolania there
arrived) sent to advertise the Princess Oriana thereof, to entreat the
acceptance of her company, which accordingly she did, because she loved and
esteemed her extraordinarily, in so much, as she said to the Queen Sardamira.
Madame, you shall see annon, one the most fair and gracious Princess that
ever you beheld, and one that deserves our very best entertainment. Wherefore
let me so much prevail with you, that you Mabila and Olinda, will go welcome
her at the Park gate, where she is to allight, and give her all kind and
gracious welcome. Hereupon they three (without any tarying) went along, and as
they opened the gate, Briolania came thither, accompanied as you have formerly
heard: where Amadis took her from her horse, and beholding them that stayed
for her, he said. I perceive Madame, that we must leave you, for I see my
Cosen Mabila, is come to deprive us of your company.

She had understood before, that Oriana was retired by her self, only
accompanied with her women, and none else: wherefore (smiling) she thus
answered Amadis. Be you Sir then hence forth religiou^^ honest: And yet I fear
you would feign be my confessor. (...) Madame, quoth he) I would I were able
to appoint you sufficient ^enance, for the harm you have done with that
piercing eye, you should be sure of punishment enough. As he spoke these
words, he would have stepped into the Park: but Mabila arested him, saying.
Cosen, our order forbids you, to pass any further: therefore go back, or else
we have power to excommunicate you. Marry God forbid said he, I had rather
bid you and your company good night, than run into such an heinous danger. So,
taking leave of them, the gate was made fast again, and Briolania conducted to
Orianaes chamber, where she attended her coming, with all her other Ladies
and Gentle-women, and gave her very worthy welcome: and being much affected to
her, she was the more willing to let her know how glad she was of her ariuall
there, saying. Madame, you have taken extraordinary pains, to come and see me
in so remote a country, and at a time of such affliction: whereby I well
perceive, that good will and affection so long time borne me, merely brought
you hither, and caused your kind voyage.

Madame, answered Briolania, so soon as I was advertised of your estate, I
could not forbear, but come my self in person to see you, with whatsoever
remains in my power to do for you. For, over and besides the good I heartily
wish you, it is generally known, by how many several duties Lord Amadis has
bound me to him: and therefore such matters as concern him, I account as much
or more mine own. And for this reason I have lest Tanti^^s (whom you well know)
behind me, to leauie Knights and bold soldiers in my countries, and very
speedily he will be here with them, according to the trust I have always
reposed in him. In the mean while, so it may be no offense to you, I will keep
you company, till your affairs have a happy and successful ending.

Very graciously did Oriana thank her declaring, how she expected the return
of Quedragant and Brian, who were gone to her father King Lisuart, to procure
peace, if possibly it might be. Now although Briolania knew what answer they
had received, yet would she not speak thereof: because Grasinda came to them,
whom Briolania having never seen before, demanded of Oriana, what she was. I
promise you Madame (quoth she) this is the only woman in the world, of a
stranger, to whom Lord Amadis stands most beholding: for, but by her means,
you had never seen him here. then she related, what succor she had given
him, by the care and pains of Master Elisabet, his honorable entertainements
in her dominions, and finally, all that has been already declared. And to
the end, said Oriana, that you may come the better acquainted with her, and
hear her report her own courtesies: if you please, we will sup together,
without any other company, but only we three, and my Cosen Mabila.

Oriana did this, not only to pleasure and delight Queen Briolania, but her
self also: who never could be satisfied, with hearing those passed fortunes
repeated, almost numberless times in a day, whereupon she called to Mabila,
saying. Cosen, Queen Briolania finds her self not half well, being wearied
with long traveling on the Sea: give order therefore, to cover for supper here
in my chamber, where we will admit none else with us, but Madame Grafinda.
Mabila gave present enstructions hereof to the rest, so that all left the
lodging, but only the four Ladies together, who (very soon after) sat down
at the table, and as they were in the midst of their service: Oriana (minding
nothing more, than to hear Grasinda talk of Amadis) said unto her as
follows.

Madame, no longer ago then yer-while, I reported to Queen Briolania, the
battle between Amadis, and the Monster Endriagus: but she will not believe
me, except you give her further assurance thereof. Therefore I humbly entreat
you, that you would make discourse thereof to her, according as Master Elisabet
affirmed it to you, and likewise, how it was your fortune (at first) to meet
him in the fields. Then Grasinda, to please them all, declared, how coming
from Sadina (the principal City of her Land) accompanied with diverse
Knights, especially Brandasidel espied Amadis ryding along the Sea shore,
showing a countenance of much grief and sadness. For, so soon as he beheld
us, he turned out of he way, even as he would have avoided the combat from
his professed enemy. Which Brandasidell observing, and bearing me then some
inward affection: See (quoth he) I pray you, the manhood of these knights,
that term themselves Knights errant, so soon as he saw one, fearing the sight
he was glad to turn bridle. By God, let me never more put Armor on my back,
if I bring him not back again to you, with more haste then he makes away, and
then I will make him to serve as your slave.

Then, though I labored to my very uttermost, to turn him from this frivolous
intention: yet would he needs ride on till he ouertooke him, and then he would
have constrained him to come back. But Amadis, neither caring for him, nor his
greatest threatenings, entered the sight with him: wherein Brandasidell found
such harsh entertainment, as at length he was punished with his own
appointed penalty, which was this, that the vanquished should ride backwarde
mounted on his horse, and hold the tail instead of a bridle. It did not a
little please me, to see him come riding in such hansome order, and so
confounded with shame, that it was worse than death to him, as well appeared by
his countenance. Then I demanded of him, what he had done with the Knight,
whom he swear and promised to bring to me. But he not answering me one word, I
sent one of my women to Amadis, and entreated him (in courtesy) to come speak
with me, which he refused not to do.

In our conference together, he breathed forth many a vehement sigh, which
caused me instantly to imagine, that the power of love ouer-awed him, and
affecting some Lady, by whom (perhaps) he saw himself so slenderly regarded;
as he was enforced to be absent, without letting her know his purposed
travails, and I judged withal, that he was a man of more note, than
outwardly he seemed to be. Here-upon, I so earnestly importuned him, as he
vouchsafed to accept a lodging in my Castle, and there he soiourned some few
days: during which time, keeping him company, and observing his youth and
fair disposition, it seemed to me, that she might well repute her self most
happy, that could enjoy him as a friend or husband.

Now, although before his ariual, I found my self no way inclined to any such
humor, being nevertheless newly widdowed: yet affection then prevailed so
far with me, as I was never more amorous of a man, then of him. So that,
without taking any rest, either day or night, my thoughts continually travailed
to him, urging me so far: that I must needs discover my disease to Gandalin,
who seemed an honest and discreet Squire, as after-ward I well perceived by his
answers. For, without telling me any of his Masters affairs, he gave me
plainly to understand, that he had so little command over himself, as all
hope (on my behalf) might well be spared. And I believing him, resolved with
my self, that it were better to quench the sparks but newely kindling, then
suffer them break forth into a flame.

Wherefore I practiced to find the means (but not without pain enough) to
set a stay upon my rash affection, and bring it again to the former byas: and
so much the rather, because he was to depart for Constantinople, accordingly
as formerly he had determined. And because I had an aspiring intention, to
compas^e that (which afterward I did) by his means: I made him promise me, to
be with me again in the space of a year, which accordingly he performed,
but not without most mighty danger. Then she declared his conquest of the
monster Endriagus, and lastly, all the other adventures in their due order.

By my faith Madame (said Briolania to Oriana, upon this discourse of Grasinda)
I now call to mind, how when I came first to see you at Mirefleure, Lord
Amadis passed by the Tents and Pauillions, there raised on the way, while I
took the fresh air. Diverse Knights were then in my company, who fell into
the like fortune, as her Brandasidell did: for they thinking to cause him come
speak with me upon compulsion, were all disgraced, and sore wounded. You have
told me that oftentimes, answered Oriana: who received all these reports to
her own advantage, as being well assured, that this melancholy humor of Amadis
had no other ground, but only by his ardent affection to her. So, instantly
they went all to rest, because it grew to be very late.

CHAP. X.
Of the report delivered by Quedragant and Brian, to the Knights of the
Enclosed Isle, concerning their Embassy to King Lisuart; And of that which
thereupon was resoluedly determined.

QVearagant and Brian, Ambassadors sent to King Lisuart, being returned back
again to the Enclosed Isle, as has already been amply declared: being
desirous to render a reason of that they had done, met on the morrow at
Council, purposely so appointed by Amadis and the other Knights. Whereupon,
Quedragant, being to speak for himself and his companion; began at large to
rehearse his speeches to the King, and the answer thereon made him. Which
(quoth Quedragant) was so short, as we can conceive no otherwise, but that he
will deal with us as hardly as he can: considering, his providing of men for
all parts, making full account to show us no mercy. And we have no great cause
to be agreeued thereat, because our honor and chivalry will thereby be more
renowned, more then at any other time we can attain unto: for if we bear away
the victory, it will be spoken of through the world, to our fame, and his
reproach.

Now, as oftentimes (in the like attempts) men declare themselves to be of
diverse opinions: so here it fell out, for some allowed of war, and others were
more leaning to peace. But Agraies, who bare but little love to King Lisuart,
for those reasons before alleged, undertaking to speak for them all, began
thus. Honorable Lords, I know not how (with any honesty) we can give over our
intention of war, considering what just occasion we have, and beside, our
enemy is in some forwardness to come against us. Notwithstanding, it is no
wisdom in us so to suffer him; but rather to muster our forces speedily, and
march directly into his country, to let him well understand what we are. For,
if we permit him to come seek us here, believe it undoubtedly, it will so
puff him up with pride: that he (who of his own nature is presumptuous
enough) will think he has won the day at the very first landing. Besides,
we shall run into our own dis-reputation many ways, in giving occasion to
the ill-iudging world, not only to msconster the justice of our cause; but
also, to throw some sinister opinions on Madame Orianaes injuries, for which
we are thus entered into Arms.

For my self, I swear to you upon mine honor, had not her earnest and
incessant entreaties to me, not to speak against peace been so vehement: I had
never consented that any Embassy should have bin sent to Great Britain,
being so much abused as we are. But, seeing our enemy makes such manifest
show of his malice toward us: I am now discharged of my promise, and
absolutely resolved, never to enter league of love or friendship with him;
until he have felt, how well we can stand upon our own defense, being
enabled by as warlike powers, as any he can bring against us. Therefore my
Lords, I am on the mind, that we should conclude on war, and without any
further deferring, so soon as our supplies are come: to set away directly for
London, and there bid him battle, if he dare come forth to resist us.

This resolution was wonderfully pleasing to Amadis, who (til then) was in a
continual perplexity, as fearing, that war would be deferred, and he
enforced to render back his Oriana, than which, no greater misery could befall
him. Wherefore, seeing the greater part joined with Agraies; to advantage
farther this opinion, thus he spoke. Noble Cosen, as yet I never noted any man
in this company but he was always as forward to these affairs, as any one
could be. If any man have questioned those inconueniencies, which commonly do
happen in war: he is not therefore to be taxed, as one that would exempt
himself from the business, but uses rather such provident speeches, as in
these cases are fit and just. And whereas you think it convenient, that we
should enter into King Lisuarts country, rather then give him the least
leisure to seek us here: that deliberation has always dwelt on my thoughts,
if the rest of you my Lords and worthy friends, will have it so. For by these
means (perceiving us to come so near him) he may suddenly alter his former
opinion, and yield to that which we have requested. There was not a man in the
whole assembly, but freely gave his voice to this conclusion: And war being
fully agreed on, men were sent forth, and scouts appointed to all places, as
well to hear news from Great Britain, as also for mustering men together.

CHAP. XI.
How Master Elisabet arrived in the country belonging to Grasinda, and passed
from thence (for Constantinople) to the Emperor, according to the charge given
him by Amadis.

AFter that Master Elisabet was embarked, he had so good a gale of wind, as
(in few days) he landed in Romania: where sending for the chiefest lords of
the country, he gave them to understand his charge, expressly commanding
them to make ready a sufficient number of horse and foot, for passing thence to
the Enclosed Isle, so soon as he should be returned from the Emperor, to whom
he was going for the same cause. Which they promised effectually to perform,
and he leaft a Nephew of his named Libeo, a young Knight and of good spirit,
still to solicet them in the business: and he set sail for Constantinople,
where he arrived without any impeachment. Being landed, he went to the
Emperor, whom he found accompanied with many Princes and great Lords, and
doing him humble reverence, he presented him a Letter from Amadis de Gaul.

The Emperor, who had known him a long time, welcomde him very graciously, and
demanded of him, where he had met with Amadis de Gaul, of whom he had
heard so many great speeches? Sir answered Master Elisabet, I deal plainly
with you, I never knew his name to be Amadis, until we were arrived in the
Enclosed Isle, and then he declared it himself unto us. For, before that time,
he called himself the Greek Knight, as fearing to be known by his other
borrowed name of the green Sword, after his departure from you. And that was in
regard of his promise to my Lady Grasinda, for conducting her to the Court of
King Lisuart, and there to maintain against all comers, that she was a fairer
woman, than the choicest Virgin in all that country.

Then he related (at large) how all things had past, especially, his Combat
(about that cause) against the Romans, who merely in presumption undertook
the fight, but spedde according to their deserts. And indeed Sir (quoth he)
they thought that they co^tended against a Greek Knight, so that, before they
entered the Combat, they made little account of him, speaking it publicly,
that never Greek durst be so bold as to deal with a Roman, man to man, but
easily should vanquish him, as they had done many other before. But the
success fell out contrary to their expectation: for they were foiled one after
another, and (indeed) with no more then resistance of common course. Believe
me said the Emperor, I rejoice in all his happy fortunes, and credit it
assuredly, that if I had means, whereby to do him any pleasure, he should
well know that I am his friend to my uttermost power. Sir, answered Master
Elisabet, your gracious offer can never show it self in a more needful
season, and now he does most humbly require it. Say you so? said the Emperor,
let me know how?

Then Master Elisabet proceeded thus. Sir after he had abated the Ramanes
daring pride, he withdrew himself to the Enclosed Isle, which is his own by
just title: and there he found a great number of Knights ready bound for the
Sea, in succor of Madame Oriana, eldest daughter to King Lisuart, whom
(against her will) he would have married to the Emperor of Rome, and quite
dis-inherited her, to advance his youngest daughter Leonara, contrary to all
advice and opinion, not only of the Princes and Lords of his land, but also of
his subjects in general. Whereof Lord Amadis being advertised, he highly
commended their enterprise, so that on the day ensuing, they put forth to Sea,
and hulled about the straites, for them that had the Princess in charge.
Manfully were they assailed, and (after a long and fierce conflict) vanquished,
taken prisoners, and the Ladies thus rescued, conuayed to the Enclosed Isle,
where now they abide at this present.

Nevertheless, they sent Ambasdours to King Lisuart, as well to let him
understand, upon what occasion they had thus rescued his daughter: as also to
entreat her home acceptance again, without sending her any more so far
from him, considering the great wrong he did therein to him self. But, as
they doubted, so it came to pass, for without any regard to their honest
offer: he stood mainely on his own strength, and would have that by force,
which they tendered him freely. For this cause Sir, my Lord Amadis, and all his
worthy band of Knights with him, do humbly entreat you, holding the prime
place among Christian Princes, and being Gods deputy and minister, to
maintain right and justice (especially, when such a virtuous Princess is so
highly wronged) that you would be pleased, to send them some succor; wherein
you shall bind them all to you while they live, or can be employed any way in
your service, with their uttermost pains.

All this while, the Emperor lending an attentive care to Master Elisabets
words, sat very pensive: as considering, that hardly would this enterprise be
ended, without a long and doubtful war. For he well knew, that King Lisuart
was a Prince of vndauntable spirit, and the Emperor of Rome was a man
immeasurably proud, and too much opinionate of his own fortune. On the other
side, knowing what just occasion the Knights of the Enclosed Isle had, to
rescue Oriana in so deep distress, and how highly him self stood obliged to
Amadis, not only for the monster Endriagus death, but also for taking such
pains as to come see him in Constantinople, and what bountiful offers he had
made him beside; he resolved to send him succor with all speed, speaking thus
to Master Elisabet. My worthy good friend, Lord Amadis shall have of me his
own desire, and such an Army will I send him, as both Patin and King Lisuart
shall well know, how dearly I respect and esteem him.

These royal words were so pleasing to all the Knights there present,
especially to Gastilles: as presently he fell upon his knees, saying. Sir, if
ever I did you any acceptable service, I most humbly entreat you, that (in
recompense of all) you would please to permit me, that I may be one in the
number of them, appointed for this honorable succor, for I never undertook
any voyage, that could be more welcome to me than this. Nephew, answered the
Emperor, you and the Marquess Saluder shall go together in my steed, and
therefore give order, that such shipping be made ready, as is needful, for
passage to the Enclosed Isle, with tenthousand approved warriors, which shall
go with you. Sir, said Master Elisabet, I must needs return speedily into
Romania, where Grasinda (my Mistress) has already taken order, for an Army of
men leauied in this cause, and them to pass along with me thither. Wherefore,
may it please you to license my departure, to the end, that in due time I may
cross the Seas, and embarke our forces to join with theirs. Friend, replied
the Emperor, rest your self here some two or three days, and afterward
depart at your own pleasure.

CHAP. XII.
How Gandalin arrived in Gaul; And of the speeches between him and King Perion.

GGandalin, being parted from the Enclosed Isle, prevailed so well by his
diligence, that in few days he arrived in Gaul, even at the place where King
Perion (as then) soiourned: who was not a little joyful to see him, as being
assured, that he brought some tidings of his son, whom he had not seen in
six years and more. Hereupon, he sent immediately for him, and he having done
such duty as became him, delivered his Letters from Amadis, declaring, that he
had left him in the Enclosed Island. Now, in regard other matters of moment
were referred to his report: the King demanded of him, what news he had to
impart to him. Sir, said Gandalin, my Lord and all his honorable companions,
stand in great need of succor from you. What is the matter? replied the King.

Then Gandalin (without omitting any thing) revealed the whole business, as
you have heard before discoursed. Hereat the King was much amazed, howbeit, he
made no outward show thereof, and gave command beside, not to use any speech of
these news, especially to Galaor; because (as yet) he was very weak, by
reason of a disease hanging long upon him. But (quoth he) if he demand
wherefore thou art come hither; tell him it was to understand of my health: and
to morrow I will take order, according as thy Master has required.

Galaor had immediate intelligence, that Gandalin was come to Court: wherefore
he sent to request the King, that Gandalin might come to him, to tell him some
tidings of his brother Amadis. And although he was in such weak estate, that
he could hardly support himself: yet he arose and embraced him, demanding
how his Master fared. My Lord (quoth he) I left him at the Enclosed Isle in
very sound health, God be thanked for it, and in good hope to see you shortly:
assuring you, it will be no little grief to him, when he shall hear of your
long sickness. As thus they discoursed, Norandell entered the Chamber, who
knowing Ga^dalin, asked if Amadis were come thither. No my good Lord, said he,
I left him at the palace of Apolidon, where he refreshes him self after his
many travails, in Almaigne, Romania, and Constantinople. My dear friend
Gandalin (quoth Galaor) I pray thee tell me what thou may.

Gandalin declared all his Masters travails at large, to the no little
marvel of the hearers: especially, when he told all the manner of the fight
with the monster Endriagus. Alas, said Galaor, when shall I see him? Soon
enough (answered Norandell) if you would take some pains to recover your
health. Believe it (quoth Galaor) I will do my utmost endeavor, not only for
my health, but to ease my longing desire to see him. My Lord, said Gandalin,
the King gave me charge not to hold you with any long discourse, in regard of
your feeble condition: wherefore, I pray you to spare my absence now, and to
morrow I will keep you longer company.

So Gandalin left them, and returned to the King, whom he found studying on
the business for his son Amadis, and because he would keep his purpose
secret: he determined to send Norandell into Great Britain, although he was
but newly come to his friend, hearing what a long sickness he had. Hereupon,
the next morning he sent for him, and even as if instantly he had heard some
novel advertisement, he said unto him. Worthy friend, this day I have
received news, whereby (for ought I can perceive) the King your father has an
enterprise in hand, wherein your service may much avail him, and therefore I
would advise you to go to him. But let me entreat you, not to talk hereof to
Galaor, considering in what weak estate he is, and it may be greatly
offensive to him. Sir, answered Norandell, I would be loath to do any thing
hurtful to him, and humbly thank your Highness for your good counsel: to
morrow (with your leave) I mean to part hence, and this day I mean to keep
him company.

Changing this kind of discourse, they fell to talk of other matters: till
Norandel withdrew to his friend Galaor, speaking to him in this manner. My
honorable companion, I promised King Lisuart when I parted from him, to see
him again within a month after: wherefore, let not my departure so soon be
displeasing to you, because I am thereto enforced; and so much the rather, in
regard I see that the worst is already past with you, and you are much better
amended then before. Moreover, the small time of my Knighthoods employment,
many others may highly misinterpret, by my so long remaining idle, and hurl
diverse blamefull aspertions on me: which I am sure will be but little pleasing
to you, knowing, that you love mine honor as dear as your own.
Nevertheless, if your sickness should hold on in any long continuance (which
heaven forefend) I promise to see you again so soon as possibly I can.

Galaor was much disconted at Norandels words, because he took great delight
in his company: notwithstanding, thus he answered. upon my faith, albeit you
have great occasion to do as you say: yet your absence from me will cause no
mean grief. Nevertheless, preferring your honor before my pleasure, I am
content to let you go when you will, desiring you most earnestly to do my
humble duty to the King, assuring him, that so long as life remains in this
body, he shall find me his loyal and faithful servant. So, embracing each
other very affectionately, they parted, but not without wette eyes. Norandels
Ship lying ready for him, and having taken leave of King Perion and his Queen:
the winds and Seas were so favorable to him, as in few days he landed in the
port of Vindilisore, where King Lisuart was preparing his Army, for the
Enclosed Isle. No sooner had Norandell set sail, but King Perion mustered men
from all parts, and made shipping likewise ready, for their passage to the
Enclosed Isle, so speedily as might be.

In the mean while, Lasinde, the Squire to Bruneo, being come to the
Marquess, diligently executed his commission, and by pleasing persuasions,
compassed his intention also with Branfill: who seeing his father somewhat
slow and tardie in the business cast himself at his feet, saying. My Lord, I
would I had been with my brother, to have fought with the Romans: surely, I
should have reputed it for one of the fairest fortunes, that ever (in this
life) can befall me. But seeing my best stars have failed me therein, most
humbly I entreat you, in recompense of that loss: to give me leave to go
thither, with such succor as you shall please to send. I dare assure you
father, that it will be both for your honor and your sons: who (as you well
know) have long time been much bounden to Amadis and his friends. Son (quoth
he) I am well contented, and seeing you have such desire to war; you shall
have Knights good store to bear you company. As indeed he had, for while
Branfill was fitting all things in due order for him self, his father gave
charge for the other expedition of Soldiers.

Here you must likewise observe, that the good old Governor Ysanio, who was
sent to King Taffinor of Bohemia: found ^here very gracious entertainment,
knowing that he came from the Knight of the green Sword. For, after he had
delivered his Letters, and his further message fully understood; the King said
unto him. I promise you Sir upon my faith, I will not fail him in so serious a
business, but he shall have all that he can require. Then he called his son
Grasandor, to whom he declared all that Ysanio had told him, and the cause of
his coming, demanding of him, if he would undertake the voyage for the aid
of Amadis, who had called him self Knight of the green Sword.

My Lord (quoth he) the greatest desire I have in this world, is, to enjoy the
company of so good a Knight, and I desire it of you most entirely. But because
I cannot leauy your army so soon, may it please you to let me go on before,
accompanied only with Twenty Knights: then Count Galtines may follow me, and
bring the rest with him. Believe me, answered the King, I am well contented,
and do allow of your advice, for being in so worthy a company, your virtues
will be greatly increased. And I confess my self so highly beholding to him,
that he may well rest assured, he shall wholly dispose of me and mine. For
which kindness ^sanio humbly thankt him, and concluded to attend on Galtines,
to cause him make the more haste. In the mean while, Grasander embarked
himself, accompanied only with twenty Knights, and parting from the port, put
on to Sea.

On the other side, Landin, who was secretly sent by Quedragant into Ireland,
found means to speak with the Queen, who having understood the cause of his
coming to her: called some of her trustiest servants, and commanded them, that
(in the closest manner they could devise) they should gather a power of men, to
go to her Uncle in the Enclosed Isle. And although she bare but little love
to Amadis, having always in memory, the death of King Abies her father: yet
much more did she hate King Lisuart, for the yearly tribute he compelled her
husband King Cildadan to pay. Wherefore she resolved help the one, in hope to
confound the other. But now our History speaks no more concerning her, but
leads you to another matter touching King Lisuart, who had sent Guillan le
Fensif to the ^rour, and other messengers to other friends, to be supplied in
his purposed war.

CHAP. XIII.
How Guillan le Pensif, arrived at the Emperors Court of Rome: Philipinell in
Su^tia, and Brandoynas in Ireland.

GVillan le Pensif, being dispatched from King Lisuart, had such speedy
sailing and taruaile; as (in less than three weeks) he landed in the nearest
port to Rome. Then taking horse, according to the custom of the Knights of
Great Britain, he rode on to the Emperor, who was then accompanied with a
great number of Princes and Lords, purposely sommoned to Court, for the
entertainment of Madame Oriana, whose ariuall he expected every day. For the
Prince Saluste Quide, and Brandaiell de Reque had written to him, that King
Lisuart had delivered her to them, and that they were continually upon their
parting toward him. When the Emperor beheld Guillan, he knew him immediately,
because he had seen him many times before, and thinking he brought him some
news of his long expected wish: demanded where he had left the Prince Saluste
Quide, and the rest of the train. Sir, quoth he, King Lisuart (my Master)
has sent this Letter to you; command that it may be read to you, and then you
shall be further satisfied in your demand. then the Emperor took the Letter,
and although it contained some particular private credence: yet he would needs
have it publicly read, and that he (in like manner) should deliver what he
had to say. Sir, said Guillan, my Master King Lisuart greets you thus, that in
regard of your perpetual love and alliance, he was well content (according
to the request made to him by your Ambassadors) to give you as wife, Madame
Oriana, his eldest daughter and principal hear. And thereupon, after many
difficulties debated among the Princes, Lords and Subjects of his Realm: he
delivered her to their hands, who had power to receive her on your behalf. but
it came to pass, that Lord Amadis de Gaul, and diverse others his accomplices,
well provided with shipping: lay as scouts in the way, assailed them in their
passage, and after a long fight the Prince Saluste Quide was slame, and most of
the rest of your people, led as prisoners to the Enclosed Isle, where (as yet)
they detain Madame Oriana, the Queen Sardamira, and same others that were in
their company. Notwithstanding, after-ward, to make amends for the offense
committed, they sent Ambassadors to his Majesty, offering him diverse good
conditions: which he would not accept before he understood your mind, because
the injury concerns you as much or rather more than him. Wherefore he
commanded me to tell you, that if you mean to revenge this wrong, he will
bring a good and sufficient Army into the field: provided, that you (for your
part) will do the like. And so your powers being joined together, he and you
shall easily draw them to such reason, as shall be best liking to your selves.

When the Emperor had heard this, never was man in greater choler, and very
apparently he did declare it: for, like one improuident, and unfurnished of all
foresight, he began to swear, and (even) enter into a mere lunacy, saying to
Guillan, You know what is done, return to your Master, and tell him: I shall
never enjoy any rest, until I be joined with him, and with such a power, as
those Rake-hells of the Enclosed Isle shall well know, how highly they have
offended me. Sir, answered Guillan you cannot come so soon as you shall find
the King my Master and his Army ready. Haste home then (answered the Emperor)
and make no longer tarying here.

Thus was Guillan constrained to get him gone, without (almost) the leisure of
receiving any sustenance: whereat he was not a little offended, especially for
his slender entertainment, and he made no long tarrying from Great Britain,
to make his complaint thereof to King Lisuart. Being embarked on the Sea, he
sailed directly to Vindilisore, where he landed not long after, finding the
King there, expecting his ariuall, to whom he declared all that the Emperor
had said, and what small discretion he bewrayed, before so many Princes and
Lords. And believe it Sir (quoth he) undoubtedly, that if they which come in
his company, have as slender brains as he: never were seen men more unmeet
for war, nor worse governed then they will be.

If they will be advised by me, said the King, I hope we shall not be beaten
for want of good guiding: for they being mingled among us, we shall both help
them, and they us. It shall suffice me, that they be speedy in their coming;
because I have this day received advertisement, that the Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Kings of Gaul, Scotland, Bohemia and Spain, do enter
Arms for the aid of Amadis. I hear also, that King Aranigne, with Archalaus
and Barsinan, do muster men from all parts: but what their intent is I know
not, and therefore I hold it conuentent, that we should first bid our enemy
battle, before he win time to come upon us. Which we may easily do, if
they proceed not against the Romans: for Brandoynas is newly arrived from
Ireland who assures me, that he left King Cildadan mustring his forces, and
in forwardness to join with us. Philipinell likewise, is coming home from
Suetia, and has certified me by his Letters, that King Gasquilan will not
fail to be here within fifteen days, with such a band of worthy Knights, as
are soundly settled in resolution.

As for the rest, leauied here at home in mine own countries, you may see
(all-ready) more than five thousand, trouping together in the next meddowe: so
that before a month be expired, we shall be fully ready for marching hence.
But what of Galuanes? said Guillan, is he for you, or no? No, answered the
King, he has entreated me by Brandonynas, that he may (at this time) stand
exempted: Desiring rather, to redeliuer up the Isle of Mongoza into my hands,
then to go against Amadis and his Nephew. And knowing that in other occasions
he may do me good service, I am content to hold him excused.

So, three weeks and more were passed over, yet no news heard, either of the
Emperor, or of his Army. Whereat the King was not a little moved, and
fearing that he would not keep promise with him: a Brigandine was presently
prepared, and his Nephew Giontes sent in all haste to Rome, to know the cause
of this delay, and so he parted from Vindilisore.

CHAP. XIII.
How Grasandor, Son to the King of Bohemia, sailing upon the Sea met with
Giontes: and of that which happened to them.

YOu have already heard that Grasandor having taken leave of the King his
father, was shipped to Sea, accompanied only with twenty Knights, sailing
toward the Enclosed Isle. Early in a morning, about sun rising, he
discovered the Brigandine wherein Giontes was; which forthwith he boarded,
having the wind more at will than the other had. Then Grasandor, being
desirous to know whether he went, commanded (...) should come before him: for
he had no power of contradiction, because he had none but Manners aboard with
him. Wherefore he gave him to understand, that his voyage was to Rome, thereto
enjoined by King Lisuart: entreating that he might be no longer stayed,
because his business required expedition.

Grasandor replied thus. Before God (quoth he) he that has sent you, is no
well-wisher to Lord Amadis, to whom I am an eternal vowed friend: therefore
you must reli me your name, and what commission you have to Rome, otherwise
you cannot easily pass from me. If by concealing what you demand, answered
Giontes, the least jot of the King my masters honor might be deminished; death
could not compel me to disclose it. But redounding to his fame, with no mean
advantage, and being a matter of no great secrecy: know Sir, that my name is
Giontes, a Knight of Great Britain, and Nephew to the King of whom I spoke,
who has sent me to the Emperor, to hasten those forces formerly promised him,
for his intended war, against them that have wrongfully surprised his
daughter Oriana, and diverse other in her company, under conduct of the Prince
Saluste Quide, and other Romans, whereof some were slain, and others taken
prisoners. Now Sir. having thus satisfied you, I pray you let me be stayed no
longer. Go a Gods name, answered Grasandor, and remember, that your King and
his Emperor, shall sinde with whom they have to deal, if they adventure to
assail Amadis, and them that will be in his company.

So they parted, Grasandor hastening toward the Enclosed Isle (...) being
arrived, he was most joy fulle welcomed, Amadis (and the rest) entertayning him
in most (...) manner. Then he reforted to them, how he met with G^tes at Sea,
who went to hasten the Emperor of Romes Army, and what other speeches had
passed between them. Also, how the King his father was leuying men in his
Kingdom, to follow after him with all possible speed, and very shortly they
were to be expected, with Count Galtines and Ysario, who stayed behind only
for their conduct. In the mean while (quoth he) I, as one entirely affected
to you, am come before, to offer you both my love and service. You are most
heartily welcome, answered Amadis, the King your father binds me more and
more, both to him and you, in all I can.

Now observe how (from that very instant) the Army for the Enclosed Isle
gathered strength, and grew complete within fifteen days after. For, King
Perion arrived there with three thousand Gauls, all well experienced and hardy
warriors: Galtines with fifteen hundred: Tantiles for Queen Briolanis, with
12 hundred: Branfill, brother to Brunes, with six hundred. Two thousand were
sent by Ladasin, King of Spain, to his son; and other fifteen hundred came
from Scotland, sent to Agraies: besides two thousand which Libeo, Nephew to
Master Elisabet, brought from Grasindaes Provinces, all carrying Turkey Bows.
Eight thousand likewise came under the conduct of Gastiles, sent from the
Emperor of Constantinople; all these being encamped on a goodly plain, hard
by the maine Rock of the Enclosed Isle, courageously expected the enemies
coming. And you must think, that it was a goodly sight to behold so fair an
assembly, for there was not a man among them, but his very looks expressed the
resolution of his soul, and that he was a warrior indeed which pleased
Amadis so highly, as nothing could more content him.

But the Princess Oriana, thinking continually on such mischances as might
ensue in such cases, had evermore her eyes filled with tears, refusing all
comfort that came from the women: wherewith Mabila acquainted Amadis, who was
not a little grieved thereat. And seeing he had no better means to delight
her, then to present before her eyes, how many valiant men had undertaken
Arms in her defense: he sent to entreat her, that she would be pleased to
behold them on the morrow, all ordered in the form of a maine battle, and
therefore secretly gave the alarm, which she and the other Ladies accepted
very pleasingly. For, from their windows, they could discern all the field,
and Amadis (in the night time) had closely ambushed an hundred men, and three
hundred Harquebuziers to confront them, sailing all along the Sea shore, and
about ten of the clock the next morning, they entered into skirmish, the Allarum
being given on either side.

The morning (after sunne-rising) proved very foggie and mistie, so that the
Ladies could not discern any of the sport: but after that the sun had
scattered the mists, then the warriors ranged their battalions, and the
Harquebuziers played hotly with their shot, so that the Scouts and Centinells
(fearing to be surprised on either side) made their escapes queint and
cunning. Then was the whole camp so moved, even as if the heavens had
thu^dered, by the noise of Drums, Trumpets, and Clarions, cheerfully sounding
on every side. And as they labored for winning of Ensines, the men appeared
like Ants, very properly stealing abroad forth of their earth, where all summer
they made their provision for winter* In the mean while, the Ladies were (on
all sides) at their gazing windows, beholding this military controversy;
which served as a pleasing passe-time to them, by reason of the intelligence
Amadis had given them thereof the day before.

As thus they were pell mell together, Mabila with a very gracious respect,
came to Oriana, speaking thus. By my faith Madame, there are many great Princes
and Potentates, who have not such plenty of men at command, as you have: I
refer my self to this instant spectacle before your eyes. What say you
yourselfe? Is it not true? How happy then were you, in making due consideration
hereof, and how much you can command in him, to whom this whole Army affords
obedience? I am persuaded that if King Lisuart, and the Emperor (which never
shall be your husband) did but behold what you now do: they would consider
twice on their enterprise, before they ventured any further forth of their
countries. Wherefore it is no more then necessary, that hence-forward you
should refrain your sighs and tears, and show a much more cheerful
disposition, then hitherto you have done.

Dear Cosen, answered Orania, it is impossible for me to be pleasantly
humoured, when I consider mine own instant misery. For well you know, that if
the King my fathers power, and this belonging to your kinsman, do but once
join or meet together: it will prove to the ruin of the one or other, or
(perhaps) of both together. Which were an unrecoverable mischief to me, as
well for the duty which nature commands in me to my father, as also the
affection I bear to Amadis. How then can I any way have co^tentment? would God
I were dead, rather than I should live to see such mighty inconveniences. With
these words, the tears streamed abundantly from her fair eyes. Why how now
Madame? said Mabila, do you think that our Lord has forgotten you? I dare
promise you, he will no more leave you now, then hitherto he has done, if
you repose your trust in him. For your innocence is generally known, and that
(against your will) this great a do has been begun: therefore, never grieve
your self so much, because it may fall out the worse for you, and be offensive
likewise to my noble Cosen, and all the other worthy Knights, who desire
nothing more than to do you service.

All this while, King Perion (since his ariuall) had not seen the Princess
Oriana; wherefore, after this pleasant battle was ended, he demanded of
Agraies, if he could compass the means to speak with her, because he would
gladly do her reverence. Agraies made him answer, that he would work the
way for him: and presently went to the Princess, acquainting her with King
Perions desire. He shall be most graciously welcome (quoth she) whenever it
pleases him to come. But dear Cosen, what is your opinion of my misfortunes.
Am not I the most unhappy creature in the world, to see so many great Princes
and good Knights troubled, and all about my business? Madame, said he, we are
all yours, and there is not a man among us, that will not gladly (and with a
good heart) be employed in your service, and all account their pains
sufficiently rewarded, if you but vouchsafe to accept it. Alas Sir, answered
she, I know not how I shall any way be thankful to you all, for this great
grace: but I will entreat our Lord to requite it. Madame, replied Agraies, if
you dislike not what we do, and would be a little more cheerfully humorous
then hitherto you have been; you should bind us all in much more duty to you.
Believe it Cosen (quoth she) I will (...) with my pa^ much as possibly I can.
And because I understand, that the (...) to the King of (...) is also (...)
^riued: I pray you to let him come along with King Perion.

So Agraies took leave of her, and went to seek the King of Gaul and
Grassandor, to whom he declared; that Oriana attended their coming, and that
they should be most kindly welcome. Wherefore, without any further delaying,
they went unto her, accompanied with Amadis, Florestan, and diverse others.
Entering into the Princess chamber, she attended on by the other Ladies and
Gontlewomen, went to entertain them: And then King Perion, who had not seen
or spoken to her, since she abode with the Queen of Scots, demanded of her,
whether she knew him, or no. My Lord (quoth she) although I never saw you more
then once, yet I do well remember the request you granted me, when you made
your son Amadis Knight. It is true, answered the King, and seeing you were
the cause of the first honor that ever he received: I hold it reasonable that
he should be thankful therefore to you, so long as he enjoys life.

While thus they talked together, Grassandor conferred with Mabila, whom he
found so discreetly wise, and endued with such singular graces: as (thence
forward) he grew enamoured of her, so that he married her, as you shall read
hereafter. In the mean space, Queen Briolania discoursing with Quedragant,
she said unto him. Sir, but for our former intelligence of your mornings
battle, never had women been in the like terror and amazement. How Madame?
answered Quedragant, was it more dreadful, then the late attempt of your Cosen
Tiron? No by my faith, said she, for then I expected nothing else but death,
and but for you, I had been in the greatest danger, that ever could happen to
any Lady or Gentlewoman: but thanks be to God, and your good succor. I now have
time to be fully revenged. Madame, said Brian, your beauty and virtue do
plainly deliver, that you have no power to take any such revenge as you speak
of: but rather speaks pardon in the fairest language, and presumes of more
loyalty in him hereafter, then precedent times have warranted from him. Truly
Sir (quoth she) I could well like of so good an inclination in him, and if you
think it meet, we will send for him immediately, to understand how his mind
is affected: assuring you, that it would be no little joy to me, if I could
kindly reconcile him; in regard he is young, my very near kinsman, and of
better spirit (as I think) then ever was in his father, or other brethren.
Madame, replied Brian, you could never speak more virtuously, then now you do:
I pray you send for him, to the end (if he stand so addicted) he may promise
fidelity to you, in the presence of so many good Knights as now are here. It
likes me well, answered she, for he is prisoner to you two, and none of mine,
and therefore dispose of him as you please.

Instantly was Tiron sent for, who being come before so great a company,
expected no other arrest then death: and therefore was not a little amazed,
when he heard Briolania thus speak to him. Tiron these two Gentlemen (whom
you know well enough) have entreated me to show you mercy, and I am well
inclined thereto, never minding the treason of your deceased father against me:
provided, that you deliberate, and promise me, hence-forward to follow virtue
as zealously, as your life hither to has been lewd and wicked. Also to make
amends for the wrong you have done me, and endeavor to become a loyal and
faithful servant: and doing so, I will not use you as a prisoner, but as my
Cosen and nearest kinsman. Therefore tell me presently (without any
dissimulation) how you stand resolved: for, being issued from the royal blood
of a King, you should highly shame your self, to deliver now such words, as
hereafter should not be effectually performed.

Alas Madame, quoth he, if you please to take pity on me, while I live I will
never more offend you: and therefore I most humbly entreat you, even (for Gods
sake) to forgive me. As for my fathers transgressions, I cannot yield you any
reason for them: considering I was then so young, as all remembrance of him is
quite bereft me. But for mine own particular, I protest and promis to you
Madam that I will be just and faithful to you, if you please to forget my
former error toward you, which rather was the guilt of my youth, then any
other willing sin. If you do as you say, answered she, it will prove the
better for you. What I promise Madame, replied Tiron, I solemnly swear unto.
Nor did he ever fail therein, and therefore it fell out to both their great
honors.

Briolania extending such mercy to her enemy, and he no less manhood to her,
may serve for an example to many; in being less prompt and forward to
revenge, then their cruel nature does provoke them. And now returning to our
former purpose, Tiron being thus reconciled to the Queen, and and she
desirous to declare, what trust she would repose in him, upon this new
agreement, said unto him. Cosen it is my mind, that you take charge and
conduct of those forces which Tantiles has caused to come hither from my
countries: you shall be their chief commander, and they as obedient to you, as
to my self. Tiron refused not this honorable (...), but accepted it in most
humble manner.

As thus they resolved, King Perion and the rest took leave of the Ladies,
returning back to the camp, where they met with Balays de Carsanta, who was
newly there arrived, accompanied with twenty Knights all his kinsemen, whom he
had brought to do service to Amadis, as having heard before of his urgent
necessity. Here you must observe, that this Balays was he who parted him and
his brother Galaor, when first they fought together, by the means of the
Damsel, who needs would have the head of Arda^ the Dwarf, and formerly had
delivered him out of prison from Archalaus, as has been declared in the first
book of this History. He also passed by Vindilisore, to note King Lisuarts
Army, giving assurance, that the Romans were there arrived, and Gasquilan King
of Suetia, with a great number of Knights. Report likewise was credibly
informed, that the camp would dislodge thence within fifteen days at the
uttermost, and then march directly toward the Enclosed Isle: wherefore king
Perion determined, to prevent him by the way, and bid him battle first.

CHAP. XV.
How Patin, Emperor of Rome, landed with his Army at Vindilisore, where King
Lisuart lay in expectation of his coming, and of that which happened unto them.

SOme few days after Giontes had parted with Grasandor at Sea, he arrived at
Rome, where he found the Emperor embarking his Army, for passage into Great
Britain: and he gave him to understand, what he had received in charge from
King Lisuart. Hereupon without any (...) delay, he commanded set sails, and
weigh ^to the maine (...), for ariuall in the haven of (...), where King (...)
then (...) his (...), in (...) of this (...) all the (...) ready come to him.

Great honor (...) at his ariuall, and his ^ged in the most commodious places,
for their refreshing and health: for they were so weary with long being on the
Seas, as eight days were fully expired, before they could march any further.
In which time, King Lisuart feasted the Emperor (...), not without much
conference together, concerning the bold attempt of Amadis, in rescue of the
princes Orania: but they intended to take such sharp revenge, a^ should for
ever after be daily talked of, and the Emperor (...) to the King. Brother, let
me (...) you to grieve no more for your daughter, because I will assure you,
that if I live but the space of six whole months; your Pirates and Prowlers on
the Seas, shall feel what injury they have done to me, for I will have them
all hanged and strangled on the very masts of their ships: but they did cast
up their account without their Host, as you shall well perceive hereafter.

Now it came to pass, that a day or two before their setting forward, as the
two Princes were visiting their Camp: they espied En^ll, Nephew to G^,
accompanied only with one Squire, who carried his shield. Coming ne^re to the
Sent^^ells, he demanded, if a Knight named A^ was there with the Emp^ Pat^^,
or no: And answer was (...), that he was there, whereupon he desired to speak
with him. ^^en two soldiers were appointed to conduct him to the Emperor, who
asked of him what he would have with his Nephew. Sir (quoth E^^ll) I come from
the Enclosed (...), to do a mes* sage to him, from my Lord Amadis de Gaul,
who has sent me to him.

At these (...), Arq^^sill stepped forth, and said unto him. See Knight, I am
the man thou come to, boldly deliver thy message. Lord Arqu^sill, answered
E^ill, my Lord Amadis de Gaul, remembers you by me, that at such time as he
arrived in the Court of the King of Bo^emia, calling himself (then) the Knight
of the (...) Sword: he combated (...) named G^, (...) eleven other (...)
pa^takers, and of which^u were on^* (...) full w^ll you (...) on the (...)
agreement y^ ^ to (...) ri^ r^, to whom y^ prisoner. Nevertheless, that you
might well know, his gentle and ve^tuous inclination: upon your own requests,
he granted you liberty, under condition that you should return to him (at all
times) when he gave you (...), and now by me he cha^.

Believe Span^, answered Ar^, (...) de G^ (...) ^ed by some of (...) (w^ was
(...) fa^le therein, n^ enforce ^ee: the^ bly I entreat you, that (...) ture
here may not be o^ to you, for if I s^ I must not be taken for the (...) I
am. Then the (...) very (...) regard of the (...) his estate) beg^, saying to
E^^^. K^ that ^ent t^ eth near, to punish (...) for his many (...) the D^ is,
shall not (...) c^ from me. A^ you A^, hi^ pr^ ^ o^.

When E^^ll heard t^ rours a^ dread (...) you have expe^ kn^w h^ ^ ^d if now
(...) deal with him as (...) he will appear before y^ Prince and potent
Lord, as he is, and from him (perhaps) you will part again with as little
honor as you did before.

Well knew King Lisuart, that the Emperor could not command his passions, but
would offer outrage to Enill, except he prevented it, whereat he was not a
little offended: and therefore to break off their further difference, he said
to the Emperor. My Lord, let us sit down to dinner, and leave this messenger
to enjoy his privilege. So departed both the Princes, (...), who brought him
to his Tent, where he made him the best cheer could be (...): and the next
morning mounting on horseback, they made such haste by their iourneys, as they
quickly arrived at the Enclosed Isle. Where Arquisil found himself not a little
amazed, to see such an host of men assembled together: nevertheless, he
concealed his cogitations, and alighted at the Pauillion of Amadis, who, after
he had demanded tidings of the Emperors Camp, and his intentions, spoke unto
him. Lord Arquisill, your Master is a great Prince and powerful: yet he may
find (if he come to assail us) that he will be more manly answered, than he
persuades King Lisuart he shall be. And because you may the better believe my
words: before we (...), I will cause you to take a full view of our Army.

Hereupon, two Knights were commanded to conduct him through the Army (...)
named so many friends: that Arquisil began to (...) doubtful of the Romans
victory, accounting his own fortune none of the best, that he could do his
Master no service in so great a necessity. But then he began to consider in
the instant, that (perhaps) if he desired Amadis to set him at liberty, until
the business was passed over: he would not de^^^^ him, knowing him to be one
of the (...) and gentle Knight^ in the world. Whereupon, (...), being in the
lodging of King Perion who had then the very chiesest of his Camp in his
company, setting his knees to the ground thus he spoke.

Sir, I most humbly beseech you to permit me, that I may ^^eake one word to
you, in (...) Lord Amadis, and these other Knights here. Speak (quoth the
King) whatsoever pleases you. Then Arquisil rising, began to relate at large,
the manner of the Combat between Garadan and Amadis, and afterward of the
eleven Romans, against as many other Knights belonging to King Tassinor, and
all that, which you have formerly heard. Moreover, that himself being in the
greatest danger of death, that ever he had been before that time: Amadis saved
his life, by taking him prisoner, sending him safely away, upon condition, he
should appear again before him at all times, and as often as he should
receive summons from him in which respect, and to (...) it pleased my Lord
Amadis (using but his wonted gentleness and (...)) (...) he may (...) whereby
he shall bind me all my life time to be wholly his, because there can no
greater cross befall me, then the loss of such an honor. And to the end he
may judge. that I speak for no other reason; I swear to come and yield my
self again unto him on the morrow after, if I be left among them that l^ue.

Amadis being very desirous to let all men perceive, how little he stood in
doubt of the Emperor, or any help that Arquisill could give him, returned him
this answer. Arquisill, although the Emperor your Master is too lavish of his
tongue, and over* glorious and presumptuous without any occasion: yet
notwithstanding, being not willing (at this time) to revenge my self on him by
any means of yours, I am content to give you liberty, and that you shall be
with him on the day of battle. Upon condition, if you escape with life: you
shall come again to me on the tenth day following, in any place wheresoever I
am, to do such service as I shall command you. For which favor Arquisill most
humbly thanked him, swearing on the Kings hand, that he would keep his
promise faithfully: and being very earnest in desire for his return, taking
leave of all the company, he mounted on horseback, and without any stay in
any place, came to the Emperors Camp, who was not a little joyful of his
return, demanding by what means he thus escaped.

Then Arquisill reported to him all that which you have all-ready heard, what
powerful strength Amadis had for sight, and lastly, the gracious courtesy and
l^ ^ee had used toward him. But believe me Sir (quoth he) he will be ready to
meet you, as soon as (...) shall set sooting in his country. Whereat the
Emperor was much amazed, for he imagined till then (according to the trust he
reposed in King Lisuarts persuasions) that Amadis was void of all means for
recovering of men, whereby to resist so great a power, and made full account to
bes^^ge him in the Enclosed Isle, and to regaine it by force or famine. But
understanding now the coutrary, ^ee concluded on other provisions, and (...)
King L^, ^dge thence (...) break of day: (...) muster made of (...) ^orse as
foot, where^ ded.

Upon view of the Army, they found of the (...) three thousand horse, and
seven thousand foot, whereof two thousand were Harquebuziers. Of King Lisuarts
country, two thousand horse, and four thousand foot, five hundred whereof
were good Archers. The rest, amounting to the number of a thousand
(co^prehending two hundred from King Cild^d^^) were brought by Gasquilan King
of S^cti^, and the whole were ordered in this manner. To the Emperor was
appointed the auantgard, which he accepted: and because his troops were
ouer-gr^^^, in regard of the rest; he le^t five hundred horse, and as many
foot, referring them to the rereguard. King Lis^^rt led the maine battle,
accompanied with the men of his own country: (...) Noran^, (...) goodly show
in marching, ^ir parting the Coro^all of the foot in the) had ordered his (...)
square, the first ^hereof were very richly armed,, and all of them excellent
Soldiers. In the midst of the Army, the Ensigns waued pleasingly with the
wind, well guarded with Halbardiers, and on the flanks were two thousand
Harquebuziers, couducted by Arquisill, well fitted with Casks and Gorgets. On
the sides were the wings of the Emperors forces, and himself in person, and
in them were so many Ensigns, Guydo^s and Banderoles, as it was impossible to
behold a brauer troop: because the most part of them had their horses barbed,
and the Archers (who never separated from the rest) all so well mounted, as
there appeared but little difference.

Between the men on horseback and foot, marched a band of Artillery, with a
great number of Pioners, and the Carriage, bearing powder and bullets only. The
rest, wherein were the Cordages, Cables, Lanternes, Cressets, Iauelins, P^kes,
Shouels, Spades, Bills, Axes, Hammers, Axeltrees, Tents, and all other things
needful for carriage: came in the end of all the Army, sided by the bagadge.
The battle proceeded on in very good order, and the rereguard following,
coming to encampe three miles from thence.

CHAP. XVI.
How King Perion was advertised of the dis-lodging of his enemies: And what
order ^ee took to march before, and fight with them.

AFter that the Army for the Knights of the Enclosed Isle had met together,
and were well refreshed: by general consent, the good King Person was appointed
chief head and conducter of this enterprise, and each man swore obedience to
him. He was a gentle Prince, wise and well foreiudging, whereupon he
considered in his own thoughts: with whom he had to deal, and of what
importance such a battles loss would be, if fortune should not speak fa^ely
to him. Hereupon, some few days after, he dispatched scouts and spies to all
parts, to understand the day of setting forward, and other tidings of his
enemies: receiving certain intelligence, that (without all doubt) they bent
their course for the Isle. Whereupon he resolved, to meet them before, and to
fight with them by the way, if he should find occasion convenient: which that
he might the better do, he ordered his Army in such manner as shall be
related to you.

First of all, the charge of the auantgard was committed to Amadis, accompanied
with Agraies, Bruneo, and two thousand three hundred hardy bold warriors on
horse back, the most of them being Gauls. Q^edragant had the charge of four
thousand foot, of the like nation, but mingled with some Scots among them, and
six hundred light horse, to sallie forth and skirmish, under the Ensign of
B^an^^ll. For the battle, Gast^les was Coronall of five hundred foot, almost
all Greeks, making a battalion separately of seauenteene hundred Archers, who
were so industrious in use of the Turkey bow, that at each loose they could
deliver five Arrows together: over whom, Libe^, ^^phew to Ma^ter Elisabet, was
Captain and Commander. King ^^rion with Gaudales, followed the^, attended with
eighteen hundred horse, accoasted by Brian, with the re^eguard of 15 hundred
Knights, for the more part, of Spain: sustained by three thousand foot, of
whom Sadamon had the conduct. Then, as appointed to supply and ^uccour, as also
to re-enforce and help (at all needful occasions) such as were most oppressed:
Tiron, with seven hundred horse, and Madaran, for guarding the bagage, followed
with five hundred foot. This being thus ordained, every man was commanded to
attend his Colors, and make ready for departure early the next morning.

But now, not to swer^e far from our purpose, and from that which Arch^la^^
(all this while) labored to compass, you must understand, that so soon as he
received credible information, that the Kings, P^rion and Lisu^rt, marched one
against the other: he suddenly sent away Garin, son to Grumell (who wa^
^lame by Amadis when he help Ori^^^, as you have heard in the first Book of
this History) giving him express charge, to stay in no place by day or night,
until ^ee had advertised King Aranigne, and others of his league and
combination, of this their proceeding, and that (with all possible speed) they
should set forward their Army, and enter into the kingdom of Great ^rittaine,
where he would attend them with his troops.

Garin obeying the command of Archalaus, travailed so expeditiously, that he
arrived in the great City of Ara^ig^e, of which place, all the Kings ruling
that country took their names, and there he found the man he was directed
unto. He acquainted him with the cause of his coming thither, and did the like
to others, to whom he had the same employment: and they having their Armies in
readiness, concluded, to make their general meeting before the town of
Califan, in the country of Sansuega, and there they encamped together, to take
shipping from thence: as accordingly they did, so that upon the day appointed,
they found their power to consist of twelve thousand and more. Setting sail
away they prepared directly for Great Britain, where they landed near unto a
Castle, which appertained to Archalans: who there waited their coming with six
hundred Knights, all deadly enemies to King Lisuart and Amadis.

After they had refreshed themselves some two or three days, having received
advertisement, what haste King Lisuart made against them of the Enclosed Isle:
they dislodged away, marching on forward, by easy days iourneyes. The
a^antguard was conducted by the King of the Profound Isle, with six hundred
horse, and three thousand five hundred foot: the charge whereof was given to
Barsiuan, a young Knight as yet, and very aduenterous. King Aranigne, led the
main battle, accompanied with fifteen hundred horse, and three thousand five
hundred bold voluntaries: v^der conduct of six Knights, near kinsmen to
Br^n^ayer who^ Amadis vanquished in the battle of the seven Kings, and came
now expressly from the Isle Sag^^arie, as hoping to revenge the death of their
ki^sman. To Archala^s was given charge, of the rereguard, with 5 hundred horse,
and fifteen hundred foot. And because the young Duke of B^stro^e arived there
with the latest, with some number of light horse: he was appointed for
discovery, and prevention gf way-layings.

In this order they entered upon King Lisu^^ts Land, by the clos^^^ and most
hidden ways they could choose: as fearing to be seen, until they had brought
their enterprise to conclusion.

CHAP. XVII.
How Gandalin, Squire to Amadis, and Lafinde, Squire to Bruneo de bone Mer,
were made Knights: And of the battle between the two Kings, Lisuart and
Perion.

WE have declared here-tofore, that Gandalin had order given him by Amadis
(passing into Gaul) to entreat the Queen his mother, to send Melitia, to
keep company with Oriana, which King Perion well allowed of: but beholding
Galaor still so sickly, she was loath she should depart* until he were a
little stronger. Wherefore Gandalin remained there for her conduct, so soon as
Galaors danger were past, which happened within a short while after. Hereupon,
the Queen caused her to be embarked, well accompanied with Ladies and
Gentlewomen, hoping she should (as yet) find King Perion in the Enclosed
Isle. But he was departed thence before her ariuall, to the no little grief of
Gandalin, because he hoped to receive his Knighthood before the battle should
be fought: and therefore, because he might the sooner attain thereto, he departed
thence, and (without staying in any place) ceased not til^ he came to the camp.
When Amadis saw him he demanded what was become of his S^ster? My Lord, quoth
he, she is at this instan^ in the Enclosed Isle, with the fair Princess
Oriana, and humbly commends her self to your gracious favor. And my brother
Galaor, said Amadis, is he yet recovered? He finds himself (answered
Gandalin) in much better estate, then formerly he did: but yet continues so
weak, as he is not able to leave his Chamber, and come into the open air.

Afterward, he reported all that to him, which you have heard already, and
said. Believe me Gandalin, thy rydings do not please me a little, and I am
glad thou art returned in so apt a season, in regard (I hope) we shall have
the battle, before three days be fully expired. That made me make such
haste, replied Gandalin; for you know my earnest desire to be knighted, and I
can never receive it at a more convenient time, nor ever show my self worthy
of so great an honor as now. And credit me my Lord, that but for the knowledge
I now have, of your easre sparing me, having Madame Oriana in your own power:
I would not have used these speeches. Wherefore, most humbly I desire you to
grant me, that this battle may not be fought, until I may be comprehended
therein, and that I may reach my longing expectation.

Amadis sitting silent a while, at length thus answered. Gandalin, the
fulfilling of thy request is so irksome to me, that it pi^^ceth my very (...);
and therefore (if it were possible) I would acquit my self thereof.
Notwithstanding, finding it to be very reasonable, I will so^ aside all
passion to please thee: only being sorry, that we are in such a place, where I
can get no Arms to give thee, and to do (beside) what else is requisite, and
answerable to thy deserving. My Lord, said Gandalin, your brother (has out of
his especial grace) herein furnished me, for at my parting from him, (he
knowing my determination) gave me his own Armor, and the very best horse he
had: moreover, he would have bestowed his Sword on me, but I told him, that
you had promised to give me one of those, which you received in Greece from
Queen Menoressa. well then, said Amadis, seeing it is so, it shall be fittest
for you, that the night before you go to the battle: you perform the watch in
the King my fathers Chapel, and in the morning, I will present you Armed to
him, according as to order appertains, because I hold it impossible, to
receive your knighthoode from a wortheir man. Upon my faith my Lord (quoth
Gandalin) I never had any other desire, but to receive it from your self. Be
it, said Amadis as you please. Lasiuda, Squire to Brun^^, replied Gandalin, not
long since told me, that his Master had likewise yielded to his knighth^od,
and that he and I should perform our watch together, and so be companions in
the battle.

A^adis answered him not a word, but went into the Kings Tent, who had given
order, that the Camp should march on early the next morning: because his
scou^es and spies had assured him, that the enemy approached near. So marched
the two Armies each against other, and on the third day following, they came in
sight half a mile off: and there encamped, performing many aduenterous
skirmishes, as well on horseback, as on foot: especially the Romans, who
still pressed them of the Enclosed Isle to fight, because they found the place
aduantageable for them. But King Perion understood their meaning well enough,
fortefying his Camp with great trenches, and defending all passages with his
artilery Thus they maintained themselves three days together, skirmishing
(well-neare) from morning to night: and longer time they had thus temporised,
but that they received information, how Archalaus had induced King Aranigne, to
the leuying of a powerful Army, and marched on speedily to encounter with them.

Hereupon, the two Camps grew jealous of one another, not knowing to whether
side they inclined: for King Lisuart imagined they came in aid of Amadis, and
Amadis presumed the like for King Lisuart, and this was their only motive of
their falling to fight, according as you shall hear hereafter. But before it
came so to pass, Gasquilan, King of Swetia, who had expressly left his
courtrie to fight with Amadis: sent a Trompet to him, who being come into his
presence, spoke in this manner. Lord Amadis, the King of Swetia my Master,
sends you word by me, that at such time as King Lisuart undertook the war,
against Galuaues in the Isle of Mongoza: he then departed from his kingdom,
with intention only, to approve his manhood against you; not for any hatred or
malice he bears you, but only in regard of your great fame and renown. And
being no way able to meet with you, he was enforced (being then wounded) to
return home again, frustrated of his expectation. And he had not now left
his own land again, but that he was advertised by King Lisuart, of your
undertaking this hardy enterprise. And continuing still in his former
deliberation, he entreates you (in mere courtesy) that to morrow you would
break three Lances with him: for if you delay it till the day of battle,
hardly shall you approve your selves each against other, according to his
honorable desire.

Trompet answered Amadis, I have long since heard of this which thou tellest
me, and of thy Masters earnest desire, and do also verily believe, that it
proceeds from true magnanimity of spirit in him. Now although there is great
difference between my actions, and the fame noysed abroad of me: yet I am
well contented, that he should hold such reputation of me, as he does, and
knowing him to be no less then he is, I could rather wish, that his proof of
me might be in some such place, where he might receive more service by me. My
Lord, said the Trompet, he well remembers, how matters past between you and
Madraque, the Giant of the Sad Island, and albeit they concerned him somewhat
near as a son to a father: yet being advertised of the courtesy you extended
toward him, he reputeth you rather worthy of commendation, then any manner
of revenge. So this desire in him, of trial with you, is not for any enui^ he
bears to your just reputation: but only thus, that if he happen to prevail,
he shall win that which by no means else he could attain unto. If he
s^staine the ^oyl^, ye^ h^^ will hold his e^ the less; the world being so
(...)ently informed of your mani^od^ victories, not only against the ^ery
^toutest and strongest Giants, but likewise, against most cruel and
supernatural beasts. Depart then, replied Amadis, and to morrow morning, thy
Master shall fi^de me here ready on this plain, to accomplish his pleasure,
and so the Tromper returned thence.

before we pass any further, I will report the principal cause, which moved
this great Prince Gasquilan, to travail through so many countries, only to
approve him self against Amadis. In the third Book of our History has been
related to you, that he was the son of Madraque, and of the sister to
Laucine, King of Swetia, which Laucine dying without heirs: Cosquilan being
known in many places, to be one of the most gentle Knights that the world
yielded: was called by them of Swetia, and elected to be their King.
Afterward, he fell in love with a young and beautiful Princess, named Pinela,
who was both an heir and orphane, by death of her father and mother, and many
lands and Seigneuries, bordering and adjoining to them of Gasquilin, belonged
to her as her right and inheritance.

His extremity in affection to her, provoked him to undertake many bold
adventures, which he worthily effected, not without great peril to his
person: neuerth^l^sse, kindness in her was but cool to him, in regard he
was derived from a Giant so proud and cruel, as by no means thee would
accept him for her husband, notwithstanding his most earnest and honest
pursu^e. Whereat Gasq^il^^ growing discontented, threatened entire ^ine and
detestation, both of her and hers: which one of her faithful subjects fearing,
advised her to use a little dissimulation, and to temporise hereon so well as
she could. She lent such liking to this persuasion, that at one time (among
many other) Gasquilan using his wonted opportunities, with goodly discourse and
protestations, as lovers in like afflictions can easily perform: she as a Lady
discreet and quick of apprehension, answered him in this manner.

My Lord, seeing Heaven has endowed me with such riches as I now enjoy; no
dread of danger, or of death it self, can make me falsify the promise I made
to my deceased father: which was, never to marry, but upon one especial
condition. What was that? said Gasquilan. I solemnly swore (quoth she) to him
before he died, never to join in marriage, but with the best Knight in the
world, if it lay in my power to win him; and although he were never so poor,
yet I would have no other husband. Hereupon I made diligent inquisition, who
might be this only man of men, and have received credible intelligence, that
Amadis de Gaul cannot be seconded: wherefore, if you dare make hazard of your
manhood, and vanquish him, you shall enjoy your earnest desire. This only
occasion incited Gasquilan, to undertake those two voyages, which he made into
Great Britain, presuming so much upon his valor, that he should have the
upper hand of Amadis.

The Trompet being come back to Gasquilan, declared unto him the whole answer
of his message: whereat Gasquilan was so joyful, that he delivered these words
so loud, as all by might easily hear him. Before God, Trompet, I would not
now wish to be master of the fairest City in Gaul, in exchange of this long
looked for happiness: for I hope to make it apparently known, that I am a
little more worthy then he. So, imagining the time too ouer-long, the next
morning, by break of day, he put on a gray Armor, covered with golden
Griffons, holding a bleeding heart in their tallons, as testimony of the
torments he endured in love. Then coming before the Emperor and King Lisuart,
he earnestly entreated them to come see how he could abate the glory of
Amadis. And if (quoth he) I vn-horse him not at the first encounter, I am
content to bear no Arms for a whole year together. But the Emperor who had
sufficient experience of Amadis, was of another mind, and therefore ordered the
greater part of his power in form of battle, as well for his own security:
as doubting some sudden surprisall, under the color of this particular
Combat; and the like did Agraies on the other side.

The two auantguards being thus each before other, Amadis having put on a green
Armor, thickely powdered with Lions of gold (even such another as he wore when
he came to his Oriana at Mirefleure, at his return from the poor Rock, when
he slew the two Giants, Famongomad and Basigant his son) called for
Gandalin, and said unto him. Gandalin, seeing thou will not have thy
knighthood from a Kings hand: go Arm thy self, and before I enter into this
Combat, I will perform what I have promised thee. So Gandalin departed, and
soon after returned again to Amadis, who attended there for him, and taking
him by the hand, conducted him to King Perion, speaking thus. Sir, here is
Gandalin, who desires to have his order of knighthood. wherefore most humbly I
desire you, in regard he will needs receive it of me; you would be pleased to
gird on his sword, that he may remember (so long as he lives) the honor you
gave him. With these words, he presented him one of those Swords, which
Queen Menoressa had given him at Constintinople, and had remained in the
custody of Durin, brother to the Damsel of Denmark. Then giving him the
accolade, and putting on his right spur: the King next came, and girded on
his Sword, and so he received this high honor, by the hands of the two best
Knights in the world. At which time likewise, Bruneo did as much for Lasinde,
whose Sword was girded on by Agraies.

This being thus done, Amadis went forth of his troops, because Gasquilan was
attending for him upon the plain, and each of them having a mighty strong
lance placed in his rest: gave the spur to their horses, and met together
with such violence, that their staves flew in shi^ers, and their heads and
bodies encountered so mainely, as Gasquilan was thrown forth of his saddle,
lying along on the ground entraunced, with the pain he felt of his left arm,
which was quite broken by his fall. And albeit Amadis was shrewdly shaken, in
the shock, and his horse shouldred: yet he made means to allight before his
fall, and drawing forth his Sword, marched therewith against Gasquilan, who
continued (as yet) so amazed, as he appeared not to move a joint.

Hereupon, the Emperor misdoubting that he would have smitten off his head;
caused (...) Harquebuziers to be discha^ged at him, and two bold horsemen
issued forth, with intent to surprise him: which Agraies well observing,
suddenly rushed forth of his troop, followed by diverse of his friends, and
while a little skirmish lasted, found means to remount Amadis again. Then it
fell to them that could do best on both sides, for the vaun^guards marched
against each other, and the great Ordenance played without any intermission. In
the mean space, Amadis hastened on the maine battle, and the rereguarde, and
caused Bruneo, to issue forth with three hundred horse, to charge a troop of
the Romans, who defended six great Culuerins, which King Lisuart had placed
near at hand, and did much harm to the footmen. But he carried himself with
such undaunted courage, that having put the enemy in route, he became Master of
that Artillery.

By this time the two Armies had paced very near, and being upon the point of
sight, Drums and Trumpets sounded cheerfully, and the footmen performing
their office of service, marched on with their Pikes crossed, to resist the
horse-mens entrance: while the Harquebuziers and Archers made two sharp
charges, wherein Quedragant was wounded in the left arm. But coming all to
join, the noise exceeded admiration, to hear the breaking of Lances, Pikes
and Halbardes, sounding like a great tempest of hail, falling on a house
covered with tile or smooth slate. There might you have seen many brave men
overthrown on the ground, some deadly wounded, others wallowing in their
blood, dismembered of legs and arms: the fight continued long in this
dreadful manner, before it could any way be discerned, whether side had the
better or worse: for Floran rushing in upon the Gauls, made such a slaughter
among them, as he let not a stroke fall, but valued a life.

While this bloody fury endured, Amadis and his troops, charged the Emperors
vauntguard, and when it came to the Lances breaking, Gandalin, who was one of
the foremost, met the brother to Arquisill, and brake their Lances each on
other, but the Roman was dismounted. Now they entered pell mell, and they that
had seen Agraies follow his business, would have thought him to be one of the
best Knights in the world: for, before he lost his Lance, he unhorsed four
of the Emperors best knights. And here was the fierce heat of the conflict,
because the Emperors Harquebuziers, who were conducted by Arquisill thwarted
the horsemen of Amadis: and but for Branful and Tiron, who came and accosted
them with their light horse, they had done them much more harm than they did.
But they brake so violently upon them, as they could no way charge them, but
fell into disorder; albeeit Arquisill found means to rallie them again in
good manner.

Agraies Landin, and Angriote d'Estreueus being joined together, resisted the
Romans with wonderful boldness, each man pretending victory to his side: and
Amadis with some other Gauls, entered the midst of the press, making such
havoc among them, as no man durst abide before them. There they met with ^an,
bastard brother to the Queen Sar^amira, and Constant de R^qu^, who having yet
their Lances who^e and ^ound, encountered Amadis and Landin: but Landin was
vn-horsed by Constant, and Flamyan by Amadis, for he gave him such a powerful
stroke, which piercing quite through him, made him tumble from his horse dead
on the ground. Then met together the Romans and Gauls, to succor and help
such as were overthrown, and believe it for a certainty, that many lost their
lives in this hot charge, by reason the Emperor came in upon them,
accompanied with many noble Knights. But he found his purpose soon
disapointed, and before his face, the Governor of Calabria was slain by
Amadis, who perceiving Agraies and Angriote to be on foot in the throng, and
in very great danger: labored so manfully, as he quickly gave them succor, by
the help of Gandalin, Lasinde, Granate of the Dreadful Dale, and Bruneo.

Hereupon, the Gauls, who were half spent and tired, took heart again, and
then began the Romans to dismay, falling into disorder, and flying directly
toward King Lisuart, who followed the maine battalion: and but for Floyan, and
some other of the nobler spirits, who maintained the assault (holding out
courageously every way, while the footmen returned again to battle) not a
man had escaped alive. For Quedragant and his squadron charged them so
violently, as they had not so much leisure as to bethink themselves what to
do. But when they saw the power of King Lisuart so near, they held out the
battle: against the forces of King Perion, the troops of Gastiles, and the
Archers of Libeo, playing hottly still on them.

Now began night to draw near, and King Lisuart well peceiued, that retrait
was more commodious for him, then enduring the fight any further, especially
that day, wherefore, without attending the other powers, he withdrew the head
of his Army into his fort, and King Perion continued impalled in his camp,
even where the conflict had been maintained, the watch and guardes on either
side well appointed, intending the next day to fight for victory. But about two
hours within night, a Trompet belonging to the Emperor and King Lisuart, was
taken by the scoutes, as he came to crave truce for four and twenty hours
only, which was yielded unto.

CHAP. XVIII.
What order was taken by both the Armies, for further proceeding in the fight,
the time of truce being ended.

AFter that the truce was expired, the two Camps, began to march each
against the other; and because both the vantguardes had endured much trouble on
the day of battle, they were appointed to the re^eguard, and the maine
battle went in their place. Thus both the Kings, Perion and Lisuart, were
before, and after that the Artillery had long time played, and done great harm
on either side, the band of foot, conducted by Norandell, came to encounter
them led by Gastiles. Here now began a wonderful conflict, and so many
worthy men were slain, as it was most lamentable to behold. For, as King
Lisuart marched on the one side, with intent to enclose the battle of
Gastiles: he met with the Archers led by Libeo, who making no spare of their
cunning, their arrows flew so thick in the air, that they seemed like a
swarm of Bees, fled from their hi^e, to seek their abiding some where else.
By means where-of, many of their enemies were sore wounded, and their horses
shrewdly endangered, King Perion following after them with his troops.

Now began the Drums and Trumpets to sound chearefully on each side, and the
noise was so terrible, as if they had heard the heavens thunder: for some cried
Gaul, Gaul, others Spain, Scotland, Ireland, Bohemia, and so every man
extolling his own country, as the usually do in such warlike actions. But
when they came to fight with their Swords, never was seeene so many horses
wounded as then, because every one strove who should most flank and hough
them, and the dust rose so abundantly, as the air became to be darkened
thereby. Then Amadis, who led the battle, set onward, because he was
advertised, that the Emperor proceeded on mainely with his troops: whereupon
he sent to tell Quedragant, that he should divide his foot, and to Brian and
Sadomon, to march near with their supplies, if the other should be distressed,
and that Branfill, with his light horse, should charge on the baggage belonging
to King Lisuart.

On the other side, the Emperor, who had received intelligence, what mighty
harm the Archers did in the vantguarde, to King Lisuarts men, and fearing
least they could not long hold out, against the sharp charges of King Perion:
sent to Arquisill, that he should accoste them, and that Constant with his
Harquebuziers, should come upon the rere of their enemies. Notwithstanding,
they were much deceived in their hope, because instantly they saw the maine
battle, conducted now by Amadis, so near upon them: that they were
constrained to flock together, only to maintain the present fight, and joined
soon after with the two rereguardes. For Madacan, who had executed his
enterprise so far as he could, gave out publicly, that the Romans were in
flight: and this he spoke, because he saw a troop, of horse issue forth of
the rereguarde, which Cildadan had sent out, for the rescue of their baggage.
Madacan observing this, and that his troop was not strong enough: they all
retired with a maine gallop, so that the very terror thereof, brake the foot
which was led by Brandoynas. And now both the Armies entered fight pell mell,
performing such admirable deeds of arms, as no men possible could do more,
and fury on both sides so mightily increased, that thereon ensued an
inincredible slaughter.

During this conflict, Brian, who was followed by his Spaniards, met with
Arban, King of Norwales, and they charged one another so violently, as they
little failed from being unhorsed. Then came King Lisuart with Grumedan, who
carried his Ensign, and other Knights of Great Britain seconded them, who
brought Brian into such a strait: as if he had not speedily been supplied by
Agraies and Florestan, he had been taken, but their succor came so
conveniently, as their enemies were glad to recoile. Nevertheless K. Lisuart
had ouer-thrown Dragonis, and would have slain him: but that Agraies steping
between the^, cried out aloud. Dishonorable King, turn thy face to me, for
thou shall die by the hand of Agraies, who hates thee more, then any man
living. Thus speaking, he gave him such a powerful stroke on the helmet, as
made fire to sparkle in his eyes, and leaving his sword hanging at a chain
fastened about his arm; caught him fast by the middle, and so strictly, as he
had almost borne him down to the ground. But King Lisuart likewise got as fast
hold on him, and each strove manfully against the other, who should have the
best advantage of his enemy, by clean strength.

As thus they contended together, King Perion chanced to spy them, and being
followed by Landin, Florestan, and a great troop of his people: drew near to
help Agraies, and to take King Lisuart, if he could. Pursuing his enterprise,
he met with Giontes, Grumedan, and a great many more, who charged him very
fiercely. And here you may be well assured, that there was not only sharp
assailing, but likewise as manfull defending: some being grievously wounded,
others slain outright, and many trodden to death among the horses feet. For
King Cildadan came freshly in upon them, with a great number of his Irishmen,
and Gastiles also so well accompanied, as here now was the maine violence of
the battle, because both the horse and foot were mingled together.
Nevertheless, King Lisuarts side found themselves sorely oppressed, by reason
that Amadis, Lasinde, Gandalin, Balays, Landin, and diverse others their
followers, charged them in the rere, and had driven them to flight; but for
Floyan, who shouldred up the re-enforce of the Romans, by him freshly
rallied together again.

Notwithstanding, this hot resistance lasted not long, for Amadis meeting
with Floyan, slew him in the Emperors presence: who hoping to revenge his
death, ran in upon Amadis, who knowing him well enough, and redoubling his
strength, only in the hateful spleen he bore him, as the Emperor lifted up
his arm, with intent to smite him on the head: Amadis aimed at him so
directly, that hitting just in the shoulder joint, he parted it quite from his
body, and the grief thereof was so violent to him, that instantly he fell
down dead to the ground. By means whereof, the Romans growing into great
terror and dismay, began to turn their backs, flying away so confusedly, as
neither King Arban, or any other, beside, had power to stay them, what-soeuer
good words they spoke unto them.

Now did King Lisuart apparently perceive, that Fortune stood not favorable
for him and his that day, and the loss of the battle could not be avoided:
yet notwithstanding, desiring rather to die with his sword in his fist, than to
save life by a shameful flight, he would needs enter in among the prease,
but King Arban staying him, spoke thus. Alas Sir, lose not your life
desperately, and with your own consent: Will you fight alone against a whole
Army? do you not see the Romans in a confused disorder, and the most part
of our own men discomfited? Oh let it please you to retire, and save the rest,
with whom we may (at some other time) better deal with the enemy, then now we
can do. Well knew King Lisuart that he spoke no otherwise then true, wherefore,
while his people retired, he and such as he could best assure: remained still
upon the rere, defending themselves against all pursuit.

Slender warrant of safety had this been to him, or them, but for Amadis, who
foreseeing what discontent it would be to Oriana, if the King her father
should be vnterly foiled: said to King Perion. My Lord, our enemies fly, I
pray you (without arther hazarding our own fortune) let us content our selves
with the honor we have already this day received: for if we pursue on after
him, dark night will overtake us, and it may be, like desperate men in
revenging their great loss, we may fall into no mean danger. Leave them then
to their own shame, and let us retreat our own men, that are over spent and
weary. Be it so answered King Perion. How? said Agrates, now that victory
sweetly presents herself unto us, shall we wilfully refuse her? By God,
dear Cosen, you are well worthy to be no better accounted of, then as filly
Knight errant. Would you (replied Amadis) have your men murder one another, for
lack of others to fight withal? Is not the Sun set, and night so near, as
if we should hold on any further in fight, we shall not know our enemies
from our friends: I pray you Sir, let us rest thus satisfied.

Well knew Agraies, to what end Amadis made this excuse: wherefore, without
urging any further reply, in great choler he turned bridle, and gallopt on
the other side, because Amadis had caused retreat to be sounded. Then every
man fell back and King Perions Army encamped in the same place where they had
fought, as a signal of victory, hoping the next day to finish finally what
they had begun. But soon after, an Heralde came to demanded the the Emperors
body, and another truce for four days, during which time they might bury
their dead. It was consented unto, contrary to the opinion of many, but only
by the means of Amadis.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the conference which King Lisuart had with the Romans, after the fought
battle. And how the holy man Nascian, who had nourished Esplandian in his
younger years, hearing of this war, departed from his Hermitage, to come to
the two Kings to make peace between them.

THe truce confirmed, as formerly has been said, King Lisuart gave command,
that the Emperors body should be brought, with the greatest magnificence that
could be devised, and so to be placed in his own Tent. Now because he stood
in some fear, that the Romans would fight no more, because their chief
commander was dead: he resolved to speak unto them, as well to encourage
them, as to understand how they were affected. Hereupon, the day following, he
sent to entreat Arquisill, that he would conduct them in order of battle,
for their better apprehending what he had to say unto them. Whereunto
Arquisill gladly condiscended, and having assembled them in a goodly meadow,
King Lisuart came unto them, and placing himself in the middle squadron, spoke
as follows.

Honorable and worthy friends, you have seen and experimented in these two
encounters, how Fortune has showen herself our heavy enemy: so that in
bestowing her frowns on us, she triumphs in the death of my kind brother,
and your royal Master, besides many other valiant Knights, who by effects (in
seeking revenge on his enemies) were willing to find what they sought for,
because it was the very fairest experience they could make of their virtue, for
gaining the glory they have aspired unto. And for their better attaining
thereto, the hazard of their lives seemed as a matter of no moment unto them:
but that it was much more honorable, to die in defending themselves valiantly,
the^ to escape by a shameful recoile. So that, to avoid falling into such a
high dishonor, they rather gladly desired, by expressing the very greatest
magnanimity of courage, to endure Fortune, then yield to fear. Nor do I
hereby urge any taxation against them that have escaped with life, knowing
well, how worthily they have all carried themselves: but rather to entreat
them, that in preferring honor, before sorrow, for the loss of your friends
and companions; you would essay (the truce being ended) to revenge their
misfortune, fighting courageously against them, who swell in heart too proudly
of their victory.

I am verily persuaded, that we ought no less expose our selves to hazards
and dangers, then if we had prevailed against them, as they have done against
us; nor to declare any abatement of courage, either in assayling them, or
defending our selves, if fortune should continue her disfavor to us.
Considering, that if we all die here, it is an immortal glory to us, and a
more honorable burial then any man can wish for. For the whole earth in
general is the rightful grave, wherein to interre the bodies of men
illustrious and famous, whose memories are not so well preserved by private
inscriptions and epitaphes: as by their own legittimate renown, which
extends and publishes it self in the remotest nations, who do more
discreetly consider in their souls, the height and advancement of their
courage, then the disaster which has befallen them. For it has bin
universally observed, that negligence, the fittest attendant for shame, is much
more irksome and distastefull to a man, that has a found and entire mind:
then any death whatsoever, happening to him by valor, with unconquerable hope
of public glory.

All this confirms my belief (dear and worthy friends) that scorning to
degenerate from your famous predecessors, you will perform so much: that the
world shall witness your great virtue and constancy, and that the death of
your Prince, is not the stroke that strikes you all dead. Wherefore I desire
you, to let me understand how you are addicted, to the end, that according to
your resolution: I may set in order such affairs, as are needful for my
self. Assuring you in the word of a King, that were I sure to die a thousand
deaths: yet will I not depart from hence, till I see the end of mine enemies,
or they of me.

These words so exalted the hearts of the hearers, that they answered as with a
common consent; they were now more willing to fight then ever, for which King
Lisuart thanked them most heartily. All this being done, he gave order, that
the Emperors body should be carried to the Monastarie of Lubania, until
better opportunity should serve, to perform such sollemne obsequies and
funeral pomp, as in like cases is required. Then he sent his Chirurgions, to
have dilligent care of the wounded, to whom he gave great gifts, and promises;
as also to many Captains of the Army. And this he did not without great
cause, for every man's hope (next to the favor of his Prince) of honest
^ee^mpence for his pains, makes hin N^oft-times) fight and adventure (...)*
life the more boldly, as now all these men were resolved to do, at their next
encounter. But God in whose hands all things do consist, ordered matters far
otherwise, as forthwith shall be declared amply to you.

The fame of the marriage of Oriana, with the Emperor of Rome, had spread it
self in so many places: that the good old Hermit, who nourished Esplandian in
his infant days, had intelligence thereof, especially of the Kings subjects
dislike, in compelling his daughter against her will, to undergo a business
so displeasing to her, and lastly, what succor was sent to Amadis in the
Enclosed Isle, whereupon, two great Armies were met in field together. Here I
must also tell you, that he well knew the success of their love, the estate
and conscience of Oriana, how she and Amadis had promised marriage each to
other, under which contracted covenant, Esplandian was begotten, and therefore
she could not be given in marriage to any other but our Lord would be highly
displeased therewith. For this cause, he concluded to travail to the Enclosed
Isle, to obtain leave and license of her, to acquaint King Lisuart with so
much as he knew. Here-upon, so ouer-spent with years, as he was, he mounted
on his Asle, and accompanied only with another good man, bequeathed himself
to travail, and arrived at the Palace of Apolidon, immediately after King
Perions departure: wherewith he was not a little discontented, fearing he
should not execute his enterprise so speedily, but that the two Armies would
prevent him.

Oriana was quickelod* quainted with his coming, a^ee entertained most
humanely: but she was much amazed, why he should vndetake so long a journey,
and at a time so unbefitting, he being aged above three score years: wherein
she being desirous to be resolved, and taking him alone with her into her
Cabinet, falling into tears, thus she spoke. Ah my good father, it is much
worse with menow, then when I first saw you, yet heaven (I hope) will send me
comfort. Madame, answered Nascian, for this cause only did I leave my small
Hermitage, having heard, that the Emperor of Rome, and the King your father,
marched toward these limits, to bid battle to Amadis and others with him.
Now, fo^ing what inconveniences will ensue, if their intent grow to execution,
as well by the slaughter of many, who must needs perish in such a purpose, as
also by the ha^^ous offense to heaven, because, as I am informed, this cruel
war began about your marriage to Patin: I travailed hither to you, to
understand the truth of all, and to es^ay ^f it be possible) to pacify these
troubles, to the glory of God, and to the honor and profit of his people. For
you know Madame, that I a^ not ignorant in some secrets of your conscience, and
what sin you shall commit, in being given as wife to any other, then to him
who already is your own, as heretofore you have disclosed to me.

Pawsing a while, and giving a great sigh, thus he proceeded again. But dear
Madame, because I received this secret in confession: it is not lawful for me
to reveal it, without your own good will and consent. Wherefore matters
standing on such terms as they do: me thinks you ought to be well advised,
and to compass some means, whereby the King your father may be acquainted,
with the promise past between you and Amadis, to the end that he may no
further sin thorough ignorance. And so much the rather, because you are now
in such a place, where he is not able to do you any harm. But if you should
happen into his power, as heretofore you have bin: yet you ought to prefer
the fear of God, before any other respect whatsoever, although it extend to
his displeasure, which I hope well to moderate, if you will permit me to speak
with him. Alas father, said Oriana, in you only lies my remedy and comfort:
do therefore what shall please you, and enti^ate our Lord to respect me in
pity. Madame, replied Nascian, I am assured he will help you, for he
listeneth to any sinner, that turns to him with a contrite heart, and is
sorrowful for offending him. And by his favor also, grace will be granted me,
to finish the task I have undertaken, both to his service, and your
contentment.

And because the two Armies are near to one another, and I fear their
meeting, before I shall be come to them: may it please you to let me part
hence this day, least some inconvenience may happen by my negligence, and the
fruit I expect by my labor, perish not through slothfulness. Father said
Oriana, no doubt but God will be your guide, and I earnestly entreat you, that
if you see young Esplandian: to prevail so much by your endeavor, as to bring
him hither at your return. Then she commanded dinner for him, and after he
had refreshed himself: he mounted on his Ass, ryding directly toward King
Lisuart. His aged travail was not so speedy, but that the two Armies had
fought twice together, according as you have already heard, and he came
thither on the day, before the second truce was finished.

As he passed by the Camp, he saw (on every side) the interment of many
slaughtered bodies, whereat he was so grieved, that falling into tears, and
lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, he said. O my Lord God, for the
honor of thine own great name, I humbly beseech thee, to take pity on this
people, and grant me grace, that I may pacify this great disorder. Passing on
further, he came near to the Tent of King Lisuart, who quickly espied him,
and immediately knew him: whereupon he went to welcome him, for he held this
man of holy life in high esteem, and well considered, that (but upon some great
occasion) he would not have left his Hermitage; and take so great journey to
him, whereupon as he embraced him, he said. Good father, you are welcome,
then taking him by the hand, he led him into his pauillion, and seating him by
himself in a chair of velvet, he commanded all to depart, and leave them two
alone together, and afterward fell into this discourse.

Holy father, I know you have not undertaken so tedious a travail, and ill
agreeing with your age, but upon some urgent necessity, wherein I humbly desire
you to resolve me. You have great reason Sir, answered Nascian, to conceive so
of me, for undoubtedly extremity of years, and the condition whereunto it
has pleased our Lord to call me, may well excuse me from being seen among
men of blood. Nevertheless, considering the harm that may ensue, I have not
feared the danger of my person, as hoping to perform a service acceptable to
God, and wholesome to your soul. Let me then tell you Sir, that being (some
few days since) in the Hermitage, whereunto happy chance was your guide, when
you and I conferred together, concerning the most strange nourishing of
Esplandian: I understood the occasion of this war, attempted by you against
Amadis and his friends. Yet am I well assured, that you cannot accomplish what
you would do, namely, marry my Lady your daughter to the Emperor of Rome:
by which enterprise, many grievous mischances have already happened, not only
because it is not agreeable, to the greatest and meanest of your kingdom, as
many times already has been told you: but for some other reason Sir beside,
concealed from you, yet manifest to me, and against which (by Gods law) you
cannot contrary. Know then Sir, that Madame Oriana your daughter, is already
united in marriage to another, as heaven has appointed, and stands well
pleased to have it so.

The King being much amazed, to hear the old man speak in this manner:
coniectured immediately, that weakness of brain begot this kind of
language, and that he was troubled in his understanding, or else had been
misinformed of that which he spoke, where-upon he said unto him. How father?
my daughter was never married to my knowledge, neither did I ever purpose to
give her to any other, then to the Roman Emperor, to whom I promised her,
accounting it for her honor and benefit. And God is my witness, that I never
intended to dis-inherit her, as many have inconsiderately immagined: but only
to combine alliance with so great a Lord, by means whereof, he and I so united
together, Christian faith might be the more augmented. And therefore my
intention being just, me thinks I should not be therein blamed.

Sir, answered the Hermit, that which I have told you, concerning some
matters hidden from you, yet to me apparent: I will presently declare unto
you, for from none other then my self can you know them. Understand then, my
Lord, that the self same day, when (by your command) I came to the Forest,
where, for more delight of the Ladies then present with you, your Tents were
erected for view of the sport (I know not whether you remember it, or no:) I
brought you young Esplandian, who presented you the Lioness, that gave him
suck at the first: The same day, the Princsse Oriana your daughter was
confessed by me, and told me in her confession, that she had promised marriage
to Amadis de Gaul, at such time as he delivered her from the Enchanter
Archalaus, to whom you had given her, a little before that the Damsel (by
whom you were enchanted) had brought your state and person into the greatest
danger that could be possible, from which Galaor freed you. And believe it to
be very likely, that our Lord himself, gave consent to the marriage, for
Esplandian is the issue thereof, and of him, Vrganda the Unknown, foretold
many maruailes, as you your self do very well know.

Now, in my poor judgment, you should not be displeased therewith,
considering, that Amadis is the son of a King, and accounted (in all places)
to be one of the best and most gracious Knights in all the world. I would
advise you Sir, that in showing your self to be such as you ever have been:
you should defend the honor and conscience of your daughter, and making an end
of this war, call her home again to you, and use her hereafter as reason
requires. In so doing, our Lord will be well pleased with you, who else will
(doubtless) be offended with you, for the effusion of so much blood, which
you have caused to be shed upon no occasion.

When the King had all this while listened to this discourse, he showed himself
to be very pensive, and at last said. Good father, is it possible that my
daughter should be married to Amadis? Yes truly replied Nascian, he is her
husband, and Esplandian is your grandchilde. O God (quoth the King) how ill
has it been for me, that I could not know this matter till now? upon my
faith, many good Knights had yet been living, which now (to my no little
grief) are dead. Alas father, why could not you sooner have revealed this? I
might not do it, answered the Hermit, for it was told me in confession, and
if now I have made it known to you, think it is done by such permission, as I
received from the Princess your daughter, for otherwise, you had never heard
it from me. But she is therewith well contented, as well for the clearing of
her soul: as also to take away all occasion from you, of further sinning
herein through ignorance.

At that very instant, mere conceit in the King, presented before the eyes of
his soul, the several services he had received by Amadis and his k^^^ed, and
such they were, as he had not then been living, but only by them, having so
many times ^olpen him in very serious affairs. Desert in Amadis pleaded justly
for his daughter, and a greater gift, if he could bestow it on him; and so
much the rather, because the Emperor (to whom he had promised her) was dead,
and beside, Vrganda had told him many wonders, concerning Esplandi^^: but
above all the rest, that he should be the cause, of perpetual peace between
him and Amadis, as even already (in a manner) he saw performed, and having
discoursed all this in his mind, thus he answered Nascian. Father, albeit I
had set down my rest for death, and all mine with me, or to have the upper
hand in this war: yet seeing how matters have happened, I will follow your
counsel, and I entreat you most affectionately, to work so well with Amadis:
that he may listen to peace, which (for my part) I put into your hands, to the
end, that you may hereafter testify before God, with what duty I submit my
self in this case.

These words were so pleasing to the good old Hermit, as, weeping for mere
joy, he fell before the Kings feet, saying. O most happy Prince, the Lord
almighty quite you for this kindness, and bless you with long and prosperous
life. The King taking him by the hand, and raising him up, said. Father, I will
perform what I have promised you, without any manner of reuocation.
Nevertheless, I would have al men to know, that neither fear, or defect of
courage, has hereunto constrained me: but reason only, and in such nature as
you have revealed to me. Wherefore, it shall be fitting for you, to go into
King Persons Camp, before the truce be fully ended, to the end, that
according to what you shall certify me, I may stand upon my guard. Sir, said
Nascian, if God so please, I will neither eat nor drink, till I have spoken
with Amadis, and let me entreat leave for my departure, because occasion now
frankly offers herself to me.

Having thus spoken, the King and he returned to the Knights, where they found
Esplandian, newly there arrived from Queen Brisena, who had sent him from
Vindilisore to King Lisuart only to understand of his health, whom when Nascian
beheld, he knew him presently: yet wondered to see him of so taule stature, and
very near ready to undergo Arms, which made him (with mere joy) run and
embrace him. But the young gentleman was much amazed, to see the old man so
wonderful kind to him, having wholly forgotten him, and therefore blushed
strangely: notwithstanding, soon after, he both remembered the Hermit and his
hermitage, and falling on his knees before him, kissed his hand, when the old
man folding him in his arms, said. Beloved child of God, blessed be the hour
of thy birth, and praised be the name of our Lord, for prospering thee to such
estate wherein I now see thee.

During this discourse, the standers by were much amazed, to see this holy man
use Esplandian so lovingly, and the King himself, bebut newly advertised, that
he was grandfather to him: moved with a fatherly affection, felt such joy in
his soul, as never at any time he received more. So that the hatred which he
formerly bare to Amadis and his friends: became suddenly changed into amity
extraordinary, and he demanded of the youth, from whence he came. Esplandian,
well enstructed by nature, kissing a packet of Letters in his hand, humbly
presented them to the King, answering thus. Sir, the Queen my Mistress sent
me to you, as there more at large you may be certified. Then the King opened
the letters, wherein (among other matters) she earnestly entreated him: that
by all means he would listen to peace, if he might do it with his honor.
After he had ouer-read the Letters, he showed them to Nascian, saying,
Behold good father, it seems that my Queen knows already, what is intended
between you and me. Sir, said the Hermit, she counsels you wisely, and if
God be so pleased, that which she so earnestly desires, shall be put in
execution, before this young gentleman returns to her again. Wherefore, let
me crave of your Majesty, to let him go along with me in company, to the
end, that during my travail, I may converse with him the more easily. Let it
be so then, answered the King, for it is my will, that he shall not leave you,
so long as you would have him with you. The Hermit most humbly thanked the
King, and presently mounted on his Ass, as Esplandian did on his horse,
attended only by Sergill his companion, who had come along thither with him.

So they departed thence, taking the way toward King Perion, and all that
while, the good old man conferred with Esplandian, even till they were arrived
at the watch. There they were stayed, to know wherefore they came, and what
they demanded: but when they understood, that Nascian came to speak with Lord
Amadis, they conducted them both to his Tent, and there presented them unto
him. Here you must consider, that he had never before seen the reverend old
man, and therefore knew not what he should think, or what business he might
have with such a person. Looking likewise on Esplandian, he had as little
knowledge of him: albeit he had formerly spoken to him, on the same day, when
he combated the Romans, on the behalf of fair Grasinda, and when he (being
then very young) begged the lives of the two Knights, that else had been slain
by Amadis. But Quedragant, who had taken better notice of him, when he met him
at his last return from Great Britain, went and embraced him, saying. Fair
Sir, you desired me (and Brian also) not long since, to do your commendations
to the Greek Knight; which we accordingly performed, and here he is himself,
to justify that we failed not therein.

These words gave assured testimony to Amadis, that he to whom Quedragant
spoke, was his son, which made him feel inwardly inestimable joy. And then
the young Gentleman came and did him reverence, not as a son to his father,
being yet ignorant of him: but as to the only Knight of the world, and by
whom he had hope to have his knighthood, so conceu ed in him, on the very same
day he combated the Emperors Knights. Notwithstanding, the differences
happening between the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and them of Great Britain,
raised a wounderfull doubt in him, that he should not attain to his intention.
Then Amadis embracing him, demanded if King Lisuart had granted leave for his
coming to him. My Lord, quoth he, this good old father Nascian, will acquaint
you with the reason of his coming to you.

Observe here, that Amadis had often heard of this Hermit, who was reputed
generally, for a most holy man of life: wherefore, going to him, he said.
Father, I pray you pardon me, for I knew you not at your entrance: but now I
understand more of you, and the honor that is due to you by desert. Honor
(replied the Hermit) be given to God only, I am his poor humble servant, who
(in his fear) desires to speak alone with you in secret, if it shall please
you but to hear me. Yes on my faith, answered Amadis. And so, taking him by
the hand, they went aside by themselves, and Nascian began in this manner with
him.

Son, before you understand the cause, which has moved me to come see you,
I would set before your eyes, the great obligations wherein you are indebted to
our Lord: to the end, that you may henceforth incline your self, to do such
things, as are best pleasing to him. I make no doubt, but am well assured, you
have often heard, how in the very first days of your life, you were forsaken
of all friends, and given over to the mercy of the Sea, in a matter of small
defense, and without any other guarde but God: by whose goodness, you fell
into their hands, who afterward gave you nourishment, even until you came to
be a Knight, and the most complete known at this day. For our Lord has
indu^d you with strength, to gain the maistery of many Giants, Monsters,
Tyrants, and most cruel beasts, whereby your renown has extended it self,
into all parts of the world. Now, seeing he has enriched you with so many
great graces, me thinks it is no more then reason: that you should
acknowledge him for your soueraign Lord, and labor in thankefulness to him, by
humbling your self before his face, for otherwise, all the favors he has
bestowen upon you, will turn but to your shame and disgrace.

Son, you see how old and decrepit I am, nature (almost) decayed in me:
Notwithstanding, I have not feared, to undertake so long a journey to you,
because I heard (even in mine own poor Hermitage) the discord between you
and King Lisuart, with whom I have lately spoken, and found him to be such a
man, as a good Prince, and minister of God ought to be, and ready (if nothing
keep you to the contrary) to listen to peace, which (me thinks) you ought not
to refuse, as well for the quiet of your conscience, as for the safety of your
person. And to the end, that you may make no disguising of your affections: let
me assure you, that I know more of your most intimate affairs, then you
imagine I do, for Madame Oriana (under the seal of confession) has told me
a chief secret, concerning you both.

When Amadis heard him speak so plainly, he knew well enough, that he spoke
nothing but the truth, wherefore he thus answered. Father, if I could serve my
God, according to his graces and mercies bestowed on me; I might well esteem
my self the most happy Knight in the world. But, being a grievous sinner,
as I am, preferring (too often) mine own pleasure before his glory: I must
needs fail, as other men do, to my no little grief. Yet I hope (knowing mine
own defects) to behave my self better then heretofore I have done. Humbly
beseeching you, good father, not to fear, or defer in telling me, what you
best think I ought to do, that may be most acceptable to him, for I will
therein obey you, to my uttermost power. Ah my good son (quoth he) you do
enough in taking this wholesome way: whereby I hope to be your guide, not only
for the tranquillity of your country, but also for the good of many souls.

Then he recounted to him, how he had traveled to the Enclosed Isle, where
he had conuersed with Oriana, and by her consent, was sent to King Lisuart,
and acquainted him with all he had in charge: especially, the troth-plight
marriage of them both, the issue where-of, was Esplandian. And believe me
child, quoth the Hermit, the King has herein carried himself so
virtuously, and takes all in such good part; that if you fall not off, I hope
to unite a perpetual alliance between you.

Now you may divine, whether Amadis heard these tidings gladly, or no: but I
dare assure you, they were so welcome to him, as he had no power to dissemble
his inward joy, but presently returned this answer to the Hermit. If it shall
please the King to accept me as his son, I promise you (good father) that he
shall find me so tractable to him, as I will be diligent in doing him any
service. There remains no more then, replied the Hermit, but that you both
may speak together: therefore advise with your self, both how and when it may
most conveniently be done. Let me tell you, answered Amadis, I would have you
first, go to King Perion my father, and tell him the cause of your coming to
me: likewise your own opinion, that king Lisuart will now accept those offers,
which lastly were made to him in Great Britain (on our behalf) by Quedragant
and Brian de Moniaste, concerning the Princess Oriana, if they might be once
more tendered to him. Say moreover, you are well assured, that he shall find
him reasonable, and a Prince of peace, even as any other what-soeuer in the
world: And you may tell him, that you have spoken with me, but I have referred
all to his disposition. For the honor of God, said the good old man, I pray
you (without any longer delaying) to let me be brought where he is. Father,
replied Amadis, my self therein will serve as a guide to you, and for so good
an occasion.

Upon these terms, they went instantly to King Perion, who being advertised
of Nascians coming, came to welcome him: but beholding Esplandian with him, he
could not guess who he should be, only he appeared to be a very goodly
creature, as any he had ever looked on in his life, wherefore he demanded of
the Hermit, whether he were his son, or no? Sir (quoth he) he is partly
mine, as being a foster father to him in his younger years, and our Lord
bestowed him on me (almost) miraculously. It is very true, answered the King,
if this be he, to whom the Lioness gave suck at his beginning, as I have
often heard, and of whom, Vrganda the Unknown has foretold many wounders:
and among the rest, that he shall be the cause of planting peace and amity
between King Lisuart and my son Amadis, which I pray God indu^ him with grace
to do. And believe me, seeing such fair fruit is to fall from his fortune,
he well deserves to be both beloved and esteemed. In truth answered the
Hermit, this is he of whom you speak, and when you have further knowledge of
him, you will affect him more then you imagine, as at better leisure, I shall
hereafter tell you.

Then he called Esplandian, and commanded him to do reverence to the King:
when the young Gentle man, setting his knee to the ground, would have kissed
the Kings hand, but he took him in his arms, saying. Gentle Sir, you are so
fair and virtuously quallified: that such as see you, or have ever heard of
you, does both love and highly esteem you. And I am persuaded, you will prove
so worthy a man, that Knighthood were very desertfully bestowed upon you.
Esplandian hearing himself so commended, began to grow somewhat bashful
thereat: and perceiving the King to blush likewise, desired to know of the
Hermit, if he could tell whose son he was. Sir, said Nascian to the King,
this young man (as yet) knows not any thing concerning his own demand, and
as for my self, I am very certain, that he has neither father or mother,
from whom (as yet) he has received any great favors. Nevertheless, our Lord
has hitherto preserved him, and gave him me (at the first) to love and
instruct him, as mine own child.

At these words, the King began to conceive, that he would not confer any
further with him before so many bystanders, and therefore took him aside: but
the Hermit changed his discourse, saying. I beseech you Sir to believe, that
considering the condition whereto I have been long time called, and so many
aged years already ouer-gone me: I would not have forsaken my Cell, to be
seen among wars and contentions, had it not been, that my slacknes in so
important a business, might have procured much evil, wherewith our Lord would
have been highly offended. And his displeasure would not only have extended it
self to you, and the people assembled in both these Camps: but also to many
other, unskillful in the discords between you and King Lisuart, with whom I
have already conferred, and so well persuaded him to peace, as he is ready
both to listen thereto, and to entertain it, according as I have imparted to
Lord Amadis your son, who wholly refers all to you. Therefore I desire you
Sir, that preferring the good and tranquile estate of so many people, before
private spleens and passions: not to disdain what is freely offered you, and
which you ought rather strive to purchase.

Father, replied King Perion, God is my witness, what grief I have endured,
for matters that are already past, with the loss of so many worthy men, and
how gladly I would have gone another way, if King Lisuart would have listened
thereto. But he always carried so high a hand, as, notwithstanding all
remonstrances made to him by our Ambassadors, especially in reguarde of Madame
Oriana, whom he sought to disinherite: he made no account of us at all,
presuming so much upon himself, that by the aid of the Roman Emperor, he
would ouer-run the whole world. By this means he made refusal, not only to
admit this difference to justice; but likewise contemned all hearing thereof.
Nevertheless, if he will yet submit to reason: I dare repose such trust in my
followers, as they will be ordered by mine advice. I have evermore descanted
on this discourse, proceeding from no other occasion, but whereto he stands
bound by right of nature, and to his own blood. So that, if he will yet
repeal the princess his daughter, into his former gracious favor, and not
marry her to any other person, not only to her, and his own people, but to
all them that know or hear thereof: we will deliver her to him, and continue
his kind friends, if he be as desirous as we.

Sir, answered the good old man, if God be so pleased, all this will come to
pass. Therefore, if you think it convenient, elect two Knights on your
behalf, to determine the differences, where-about so many harms have already
happened: King Lisuart shall likewise nominate two other for him, and I
standing in the midst between them will labor to end all strife and
contention. Be it so, quoth the King. Sir, said Nascian, I will not sleep,
before (I hope) to speed, with such success, as the effects shall be
answerable to your own desire.

Instantly he took leave of him and the rest, returning whence he came, to
finish what he had begun. And presently King Perion sommoned all the chief of
his Army together, speaking to them in this manner. Lords, and endeared
friends, as we are bound to put our goods and persons in danger, not only for
the defense of our honor, but also to maintain equity and justice: so are we
likewise obliged, to set aside all hatred and passion, to reconcile our selves
with our enemy: when (of himself) he profers us peace. For, although it
cannot be gaine-saied, but that the beginning of war may go on, without
offense to God: yetnotwithstanding, in the end, if through rash opinion,
fantisie and want of knowledge, we estrange our selves from reason; that which
(at the first) appeared honest, conuerts it self into injustice. And do not
think, that I use these speeches to you without cause. Nascian, a holy Hermit
(well known to the most part of you) came lately to me, as you saw, to
practice peace between us and our enemy: where-to King Lisuart is willing to
yield, if you mislike not. Nevertheless, I would not give him any resolution,
till first I heard your deliberations.

For, to me it seems very reasonable, that as you have been made partakers
of toil and travail, so should you also be of ease and tranquillity. And
therefore I pray you, that without any dissimulation, you would all advise for
the best, and God will therein further your counsel. For my self according to
the opinion of old Nascian, I hold it very meet, that we should make choice
of two Knights amongst us, and give them ample power, to determine with two
other (appointed by King Lisuart) of all differences, whereby this war
received original. Albeit, I desire not to be credited in this case; but
rather will allow of such advise, as you conceive fittest for the good of all
together. Hereupon, Angriote d' Estreuaus first presented himself, of whom the
King required his opinion. Sir, said he, you have been chosen chief of this
enterprise, as well for the dignity of a king shining in you; as for the favor
and esteem generally held of you, whereby you may resolve on the business of
this war, as it shall seem best unto your self. Notwithstanding, seeing it
is your pleasure, that I shall first speak my mind: I like it well (under
correction) that if peace be presented us by our enemy, we ought to accept it.
For, as it falls out, it is to our no mean advantage, having not only the
better of him already: but Madame Oriana also in our own power, for whose
cause we first entered into the field. Now, for the naming two choice men among
us, to accord (as you say) all differences: I know none more meet for such a
business, then the Lords Quedragant, and Brian de Moniaste. They (at the
first) underwent this charge, when they were sent into Great Britain, to
excuse us to King Lisuart, for that which we had done, in rescuing his daughter
from the Romans: and I am peswaded, they will undertake the same charge
again, if they were thereto entreated. Now because this advise found general
allowance, Brian and Quedragant yielded presently thereto: whereat king Perion
was highly pleased, hoping the war so hotly begun, would by these means be
calmely ended.

CHAP. XX.
How Nascian returned toward King Lisuart, with the answer he^receiued from
King Perion.

THe Hermit being returned back to King Lisuart, gave him to understand, all
that he had agreed on with king Perion: assuring him withal, that he would
make them good friends, before he parted from them. For I left him (quoth he)
with a purpose, to confer with the chief of his Army, to win them thereto,
if he can. Father, said the King, he deals most wisely therein, to the
end that none of them should receive coffeehouse: And for my part, I mean
to do the like, as you shall presently see performed. Then he went to see
Gasquilan, who (as yet) kept his bed, with the extreme pain of his broken
arm, received when he encountered with Amadis. There he sent for king
Cildadan, and some other chief Commanders in his Camp, to whom he declared,
what speeches had past between the Hermit Nascian and him, tending wholly to
peace and concord; concealing (nevertheless) matters concerning Amadis and his
daughter. Finally, he acquainted them with the answer of king Perion,
requiring their further counsel in the business.

But first of all (quoth he to Arquisill) seeing you now hold the place of
the deceased Emperor, my brother, for whom (in part) this war was begun; we
are to understand your mind. My Lord, answered Arquisill, if the Emperor were
now living, we that are his vassailes, ought to serve him as well in war as
peace: but he being dead; with the finishing of his days, all command he
had over us, is likewise concluded. Nevertheless, we will yet do for you, as
for him, so that your service (what lies in us) shall no way be tardied,
while you think good to make use of us. Notwithstanding, if king Perion be
inclined to peace, I believe, they that affect your honor, as they ought to
do, will counsel you always to accept thereof: provided, that it be no way
hurtful for you. For you may easily consider (at the very first view) that
fortune stands not for you and yours, and if we linger on further, it may
prove worse then hitherto it has done for us.

My Lord, said the King of Swetia, if peace may be treated with your enemy, I
would advise you not to refuse it: considering the most of your people are
wounded, others sick and crazed, and a long turce is now very needful, if a
re-enforcement be thought expedient, after a sufficient time of rest. By all
means possible, said the King, let us be delivered out of this pain, for king
Perion (on his side) has chosen two Knights, to accord all our differences:
And I will nominate two other, which shall be you Arban king of Norwales, and
Guillan le Pensif, who have well understood how al matters happened, from the
beginning to this day. In the mean while, I will send back Nascian to king
Perion, to entreat him, to withdraw his Camp a days journey backwarde: and
we will meet in the City of Lubania, for conference during the time of peace.

Such was their resolution, whereupon, king Lisuart, quickly returned to
Nascian, to whom he declared all that was agreed upon; praying him most
affectionately, to finish the business he had begun. Sir, quoth he, I will
obey whatsoever you shall command me, and having spoken with king Perion: you
shall know the hour for your departure hence, and when the Army must
dislodgh. So departing from him, he went to Amadis, who no sooner saw him,
but he demanded of him, what news he brought back: and whether king Lisuart
continued in his former determination, or no? The Hermit let him understand
all, and for the better proceeding in this case, thought it fit; that both the
Camps should be further divided from each other, then now they were: whereunto
king Perion easily condescended, and it was confirmed likewise by general
consent. Hereupon, carely the next morning, every man trussed up his bag and
baggage, and the Camps fell back seven miles and more. Where we will now
leave them planting their Tents, to tell you, what end the enterprise of king
Arauigne sorted to, who but awaited a convenient time, to surprise one or both
the Armies.

CHAP. XXI.
How King Arauigne, being advertised of the loss, which King Lisuart had
sustained, and the dislodging of his Camp; determined to give him battle.

YOu have already heard the enterprise of King Arauigne, who, after his powers
were united together, ceased not travailing over the mountains: but yet so
covertly, as neither king Perion or Lisuart could attain to any certain
knowledge thereof. For he kept himself very close, watching but opportunity,
to set on the first of the Camps that should be broken. For this cause
immediately after king Lisuart was dislodged, and gone directly to the City of
Lubania: the Scoutes of Archalaus his Camp, who were on the top of all the
mountain, discovered the Armies retyring, whereof he gave intelligence to king
Arauigne. Who imagining them to be the whole strength, intended to set
forward, and rather to assail them, then the forces of Amadis, as being
persuaded, that if he brought his attempt to effect, king Perion would not
afterward care for contending with him, about the kingdom of Great Britain,
but that easily he might enjoy it in peace.

These being his ends, and to compass them, he concluded still to lie
close, until the night ensuing: when he would then give both the Alarm and
battle together, as being the readiest way to surprise them. Then he
commanded his Nephew Esclanor, a man skillful in feats of war, as any other
possibly could be; to take twenty knights with him, and following the train of
the enemy in the closest manner, truly to discover, where they would camp the
night ensuing.

Now, you must here observe with me, that King Lisuart was continually
suspicious, what king Arauigne intended to do, having received sundry
aduertisements, that he marched in the country with a great power, and yet
could not hear which was he went. Some of the country gave him notice, that
he kept himself ambushed in the mountains, and because he would provide
against any inconvenience,: he called king Cildadan, and all the Captains, and
acquainted them with his mind, desiring them to take order, that their people
should keep close together, without any forraging, or scattering one from
another, but follow still the Artillery in frame of battle, as formerly had
been appointed them. And although some were of the mind, to send
advertisement to K. Perion, what they had heard concerning K. Arauigne, that he
might the better stand upon his own guard, and succor them if they should be
distressed: yet King Lisuart had a heart so high and magnanimous, as he would
by no means consent thereto, affecting rather to hazard his life, then lose
the least jot of his reputation. Only he sent Philipinel, accompanied with
twenty bold Knights, to discover and run thorough the country, commanding
them expressly, to coast along the mountains, and let him hourly understand,
what they could hear of the enemy. So pacing on about four miles, he
encamped, and gave it out by man to man, that a little rest must now serve,
because they would march all night to Lubania.

Not far had Philipinell travailed, but he discovered Esclanor and his twenty
Knights: wherewith immediately he acquainted king Lisuart, and that (without
all doubt) the strength of Arauignes Army was hid among the Rocks. At that
very instant king Lisuart dislodged, to gain entrance into the City: for
there he purposed to expect succor, if he should be pressed thereto,
stealing on by little and little from the mountain, and marching on upon the
plain. Which when Esclanor noted, he sent to bid king Aranigne, that he
should put on (with all haste) by the the most secret passages: but the way was
so strait and narrow, as they could not march but two together at the the
most. By which means, before they could attain to king Lisuart, he and his
were very near to the City: whereat Arauigne began to despair, fearing to
fail utterly in his enterprise.

By this time also, Esplandian and Sergill (whom the Hermit had sent to king
Lisuart) finding his Camp dislodged: made such speed, that they saw the men
(both horse and foot) descending down the mountain. Then they presently
coniectured, that this was the Army of king Arauigne, whereof they heard the
Queen Brisania speak, before they parted from her. Wherefore, fearing this
power to be over great, for that of king Lisuart (who had been almost utterly
ouerthrone in the precedent battles) they grew to great dismay, so that
Esplandian said to Sergill. Brother, I pray you that we may return to Lord
Amadis, and let him understand what we have seen. Sergill was very willing,
and returning the same way they came, they rode so dilligently: that by the
break of day, they alighted in king Perions Camp; where he had newly
received intelligence, that king Arauigne and his people marched thorough the
country, and therefore kept his Army (for the most part) all that night in
order of battle.

Esplandian and Sergill, going to the Tent of Amadis, found there the Hermit
Nascian: who was not a little amazed, to see the^ so quickly returned, and
demanded of them, whither they went. Father, answered Esplandian, it is very
needeful, that I should speak with Lord Amadis, to let him know some matters,
that do greatly concern king Lisuart and his troops. Now Amadis had but
withdrawn himself a while, only for a little refreshing, because all the
night he had been in Arms: notwithstanding, when he heard what the young
Gentleman had said, he called him to him, demanding of him the estate of the
matter. My Lord (quoth he) king Arauigne has besieged the King my Master,
near unto the city of Lubania, and with such a power: as if you send him not
succor, and that speedily, I think you shall never see him while you live,
but either taken or slain, and all that are with him. Wherefore I pray you do
so much for him, as you are wont to do for many others, who (it may be) are
not in such deep distress as he.

When Amadis heard these news; remembrance of displeasing his Ladic Oriana, if
her father should be discomfited, and by his most deadly enemy in the world,
through defect of assistance from him: enflamed so his soul, that, without
answering so much as a word, he went to king Perton, speaking thus. My Lord,
for ought I hear, king Arauigne has turned his back on us, to fight with
king Lisuart, and is already so near him, that it is a great adventure, but
he will bid him battle. Whereat I shall not be a little displeased,
knowing well that they of Great Britain, have lost so many of their men
against us, as they are not able now to outstand a fresh force. Moreover, if
they should be overthrown (being come forth of their Camp, in hope of future
peace between them and us:) it will appear to many, that this ambuscado was
laid for them by our invention, and that (by our means) king Arauigne was thus
treacherously set upon them, to our most high disparagement, among all them
that shall so imagine of us. Wherefore, I entreat you Sir, that with a part of
this Army, I may go before and give them succor.

Son answered King Perion, do what you think best, and if you go before, I
will follow and back you: if by mischance you should be prevented. Amadis most
humbly thanked him, and parting thence, met with Florestan, Quedragant,
Garuate, and Gastilles, whom he acquainted with his enterprise, where-to they
gave good allowance. Here-upon, they forthwith set their men in order, marching
directly for Lubania: fully resolved, to fight with king Arauigne and his men,
if they might meet them in the field.

CHAP. XXII.
How King Lisuart, was assaulted by King Arauigne, brought into great danger:
And of the succor given him by Amadis in his necessity.

WE have heretofore very amply declared, how King Lisuart had intelligence by
his vant courers, that the Army of King Arauigne pursued him: by means
whereof he dislodged, hoping to gain the City of Lubania before the fight.
For he knew well enough, that he had not strength sufficient to stand against
so great an host of men, and freshly come into the field: but he was suddenly
set upon, and followed so hotly, as he had small means of helping himself.
The two Camps began to skirmish together, continuing fierce assaults eace
against other, until dark night ouer-tooke them: wherefore, they were
constrained to remain encamped near one to another, in expectation of the
morning, to begin again in better manner, then before they had done.

King Lisuart (by no means) would retire, as fearing to affright his
followers, and wholly disharten them: and therefore making a virtue of
necessity, so soon as the night was spent, he ordered his battle so well as
he could, determining to die among his men, rather then blemish his honor in
the least degree. Barsinan, who led the vantguarde for king Arauigne, first
gave the onset with his troops: but before they came to handy blows, many
were laid on the earth with the great Ordenance, which played upon then
without ceasing. Nevertheless, at length they entered fight pell mell, and
Grisall, who was Ensign bearer to Archalaus, was ouer-throwne in this first
encounter by Norandell, albeit Archalaus labored his utmost to relieve him.
But king Cildadan, accompanied with many of his chiefest men, began to break
through the prease, whereby Barsinan had been instantly foiled: but for the
re-enforce, which king Arauigne sent by the Duke of Bristoy.

Now might you have seen many Lances shiuering in the air, and both horse and
foot weltring in their blood on the ground, a sight most pitiful to behold.
For king Lisuart (playing at double, or quit) attended by the rest of his
Army, came upon the flanks of his enemies, and the first he met withal, was
the brother to Aluinas (whom Florestan slew at the Fountain of Olives, where
the three Damsels were guarded by the Dwarsse) who^ he unhorsed so lubberly,
that he brake his neck, by his horses falling upon him. Pursuing on his
purpose, Archalaus espied him, who knew him very perfectly, and followed on so
fast, that he showed him to Barsinan, saying. You have no other work to do,
but instantly to revenge your fathers shameful death, for that is he, which
made him so suffer. Then Barsinan called to him ten of his Knights, with whom
he came, and set upon King Lisuart, and ouerthrewe him to the ground, where
he was enclosed (on all sides) by Archalaus and a great many more, who
labored their very uttermost, as hoping to take him. But Philipinell, with
them that had (the day before) discovered the Army of Arauigne, came and
succored him: notwithstanding their lot had fallen soul, but for king
Cildadan, Arquisill, Norandell, and Brandoryas.

Now grew the fight fiercer and fiercer, for these four rushed thorough the
croudes so boisterously, that they bare down horse and man before them: and
notwithstanding al resistance the enemy could make, they remounted the King
upon Norandells horse, for he had alighted, that the King might have him. Then
taking a Sword in both his hands, (which he found by good fortune) he
performed therewith such extraordinary deeds of Arms: as in mere despite of
Barsinan and his followers, he horsed himself again, wherein Brandoyuas was
no mean help to him. Archalaus then well perceived, that they must needs have
the worst, except king Arauigne came up with his troops: wherefore he sent
a young Squire of his, and bad him go tell him, that he was much amazed, why
he should leave him thus in so serious a business. The Squire ran presently,
and performed his charge: but Archalaus answered him, that he thus delayed,
hoping to draw King Lisuart and his men, further off from the City, that he
might be the more easily encompassed at pleasure.

But now he marched on with his squadron, which furiously brake in upon King
Lisuarts forces, who were then so wearied, and few in number: as they were
repelled to retire, even within the gate of the City, where they saved
themselves, by the means of king Cildadan, Arban, Grumedan, Norandell,
Guillan, Arquisill and others, who followed in the train. Now, if these
worthy men declared (thus rescuing) their greatness of spirit, you must
conceive, that king Lisuart as plainly witnessed, that he forgot not his
honor in such a necessity: for never was any Knight seen, that more
forwardely adventured his person to peril, then he did, nor with more
allacrity of courage, intending to revenge his own death, if such should be
his fatal disaster.

And as he was in this extreamitie, Grumedan, who carried the standard, and
King Arban, were beaten down before his face, and taken prisoners, whereat he
became most impatient: and with all his force, would needs enter into the
throng, to succor them. But some of his (being more discreetly advised) kept
him back, and finding means to get him into the City, and then shut up the
gates. So king Arauigne remained master of the field, not without great loss
of his men, which yet were but few, in regard of them belonging to king
Lisuart: who found then by experience, what dismal harm he had endured, by
giving overmuch credit to the persawsions of Brocadan and Gandandell, by whose
treacherous means, he had banished Amadis from his Court, and many other
worthy Knights, for which he now entirely grieved: And not without good cause,
considering what slender hope he had, to free himself from the danger which
round had engirt him.

By this time, king Arauigne, was withdrawn into the midst of his troops,
to take counsel; whether they should (now instantly) assault the City, or
defer it till the morning. Now, as in such affairs, opinions are diverse, so
some gave advice to refresh their people, already much wearied. Others spoke to
the contrary, alleging, that they should not permit their enemies thus to
rampire in themselves, or let them take heart: but lively, and without any
delay, to follow upon them, to increase their fear, and weaken their courage.
Whereupon king Arauigne commanded Barsinan, and the Duke of Bristoy, to lead
their troops up one side of the City, while he and his gave the assault on
the other, and that either side should strive for soonest entrance. Then Drums
and Trumpets sounded the assault, and men (on all sides) ran to the walls, where
they found king Lisuart and his men, with the inhabitants of the City, that
gave them two or three stout repulses, with Harquebuze s^o^^e, Darts, and
Crosbowes. All which discouraged not King Arauigne a jot, but rather did whette
him on more and more, and had not dark night prevented them; king Lisuart had
been shrewdly enforced, and the City surprised. But the obscurity was so
great, as they could not discern one another: in regard whereof king Arauigne
caused retreat to be sounded, hoping to begin again at the break of day, or
else, that they within the City, should yield to his mercy.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Amadis came to the succor of King Lisuart: And of the valiant ouerthnow
of King Arauigne.

BY the precedent chapter you have heard, how the young Gentleman Esplandian,
and Sergill, having discovered the Army of Arauigne, and doubting that king
Lisuart was not strong enough to fight with him: made a short return to
Amadis, entreating his succor, whereto he willingly yielded. Notwithstanding,
he could not proceed on so speedily (albeit he traveled night and day) but
King Lisuart was fallen into great peril of his person, as ever before had
happened to him: which danger thus befell him, only by means of unhappy
guides, that conducted Amadis and his troops, wandering (about midnight) far
out of the way, without knowing where they were, which much displeased Amadis.

Hereupon he demanded of them, if they were far from the mountain, or no.
The guides answered, that in their opinion (considering how far they had
alreade gone) they could not be near: wherefore he commanded Gandalin, to
ride so far on either side, as he might reach some matter of discovery. Then
he got up on the highest part of all, to try, if he could see the fire in king
Arauignes Camp, being led all the way by one of the guides: and far they had
not gone, but Gandalin descried the enemies fires in their Camp, which he
showed to the guide, demanding of him, if now he could give them better
direction, without any more straying, wherein he warranted him, and therefore
bad him boldly follow him.

Returning back to Amadis, they declared what they had seen: to his no little
contentment, as hoping to take king Arauigne napping. Moreover, he was partly
desirous, to let King Lisuart perceive, how willing he was (yet) to do him
service, notwithstanding all his former hatred to him, and therefore rode on
hard all the night. Yet could he not ariue there so soon, but King Arauigne
had begun the assault again, so sharp and hotly, as gave great danger to
them within the City, because the enemies were become masters of the
principal part: by means whereof they entered in by such numbers, as king
Lisuart was compelled to betake himself to a very little street or passage,
being followed by some of his chiefest Knights, and there he resolved to live
or die, rather then he would yield himself a prisoner to his proud foe.

Here began extreamitie to show it self apparently, for, like men despairing
of any help or remidy, they declared such manly deeds of Arms; as the Duke of
Bristoye and Barsinan, were much impeached in their hopes. On the other side,
King Cildadan, Arquisill, Flamian, and Norandell, who seemed to keep sure the
nearest Cantons, found Arauigne (that held them besieged) such hot work:
as, but for six Knights of the Isle Sagittarie, he had never gone any
further. For, the women and children of the City, were alost in the windows,
hurling down boiling Lead, Oil and water, as much perplexed him and them in
their passage. Now did Norandell, and such as were with him, fully persuade
themselves, there to end their lives: yet not as cowards and recreants, but
like true borne, bold and courageous Knights. And hereupon, king Cildadan,
stepping to one of them of the Sagittarte Isle, ran his Sword up to the hilts
in his body, that down he fell dead to the ground.

The sight hereof was so dreadful to the other five, that they began to
retire, and king Cildadan, with them of his troop, pursued them very stoutly:
till king Arauignes forces came up to relieve them, and there the day had
been utterly lost, but for the fresh supply of Amadis, who was not a little
dismayed at his ariuall, to see the enemy have such advantage of King Lisuart,
whom he greatly feared to be either slain, or taken. Wherefore vowing a
merciless revenge, he commanded all his horsemen to alight, and entering in
upon them pell mell, to cry aloud, Gaul, Gaul. When the other heard such a
sudden tumultuous noise, and found themselves so sharply charged in the rere:
they plainly perceived, that their attempt had failed, and all their hues to
be in very great danger. So that King Arauigne, wholly discouraged, fied with
Archalaus into a house, hoping there to strengthen themselves, and rather to
die there, then yield to mercy. But they had not long stayed there, before King
Lisuart came thither, and set upon them so sternely: that after some slender
resistance, they yielded themselves to be prisoners.

At the very same instant, Amadis met with the other five Knights of the Isle
Sagittarie, who fought against his people very boldly: but he making against
them, accompanied with Florestan and Angriote, at length surprised them, and
commanded them to safe custody. Passing on further, they met with Barsinan and
the Duke of Bristoye, fighting manfully: yet they no sooner saw Amadis, but
they threw themselves at his feet, defiring mercy, which he would not deny
them, and so committed them to Florestan. Now because a great part of King
Arauignes Army, had saved themselves by flight into the neighboring
mountains, and he found no further resistance in the City: he returned forth
of the same gate whereat he entered, and meeting with Gandalin, said. Go I pray
thee, and will Quedragant to retreat our people: for I would not be known to
King Lisuart, and I mean to stay for him half a mile hence.

Gandalin rode away presently, and finding Quedragant, did his message to him;
who without any longer delay, caused retreat to be sounded, rallying all his
troops together. As thus they retired, king Lisuart could not presume, how, or
whence he had received this high favor, and therefore demanded of Guillan le
Pensif, if he knew any thing in the case. Before God Sir (quoth he) he must
needs be a deaf man that could not hear Gaul, Gaul, cried so many times this
day; which may well assure you, that Amaedis, and no other, has done you this
unexpected kindness. I pray thee, said the King, do so much for me, as to
find and stay him, if it be possible, that I may have some conference with
him.

So departed Guillan, who knew before, that Amadis was already gone, wherefore,
galloping the same way which he had taken: at last he ouertook him, and
delivered the Kings message to him, aduising him to return back again with
him. Amadis perceiving, that he could not honestly gainsay him, rode back
with him to King Lisuart, and alighting from his horse, did him most humble
reverence: but the King embracing him, declared manifest signs of great love
to him. At which instant, King Cildadan came to them, and many other Knights,
with Florestan and Angriote, who were so lovingly welcomed by king Lisuart, as
it was impossible to be bettered. And as he was speaking unto them, Brandoyuas
came to tell him, that the inhabitants of the City, made such slaughter of
king Arauignes people, as they would not admit any one man to mercy. But
believe it Sir (quoth he) it weary good to cease this cruelty: for if their
leaders have not deserved death, their followers in service should not be
worse entreated. Sir said Amadis, give order quickly to stay this proceeding,
and content your self with the victory gotten against the^. Then the King
called Norandell, and gave him charge to command a retreat, that shedding of
blood might be spared, and the rest to be taken prisoners.

At that very time, an Esquire arrived there from king Perion, to advertise
Amadis, that he was hard at hand, with the rest of the Army, to give him
succor, if need rerequired. Not now, answered Amadis, thanks be to heaven.
And therefore Sir (quoth he, to King Lisuart) you may well give us leave to
depart: to the end, that without any further travail, king Perion may send us
home again. Before God, replied the King, although you have been hitherto
always invincible, yet shall you now be so far constrained by me, as to
abide here for his coming hither: because he must needs partake in the joy,
which we have received by your means and succor. Then, looking upon king
Cildadan, he said. Help me (I pray you) with your entreatie, and try
whether your request can more prevail with him, then mine. Believe me, Lord
Amadis, answered king Cildadan, you may not deny the King: considering he
mooues the matter to you so earnestly. Nor will I, said he, if my companions
think it convenient. What say you to it Lord Quedragant? you ought to obey the
King, quoth he, and seeing you have done so much for him, do more for him
yet, if it be in your power.

So was Amadis stayed there, and in this time of conference, king Arban and
Grumedan, returned from their imprisonement, having escaped thence, with their
hands bound hehinde them with strong cords: for their guardes, seeing what
supply Amadis had brought with him, betook themselves to flight, and so left
them at their own liberty. When king Lisuart saw them, never was man in
greater joy: because he was formerly persuaded, that either they were slain,
or eise worse wounded then they were, wherefore, with open arms he went and
embraced them. And while he was busied in these kindnesses, they espied (a
far off) the Army of king Perion come marching toward them, which Grumedan
showed to king Lisuart, saying. Sir, as I imagine, here is some new succor
coming to you: but if the first of Lord Amadis had tarried so long, we might
have shut the stable door after the Steed was gone, according to the ancient
Adage.

Grumedan (answered king Lisuart, smiling) I know very well, that whosoever
contests with you, in matters concerning the honor of Amadis, shall find
work enough to do: but much more, to defend himself, if extremity should
question the case by weapons. Sir, said Amadis, Lord Grumedan has reason to
wish me well, for he has neither friend or kinsman, that owes him more duty
and obedient service, then I do, and for such a one (I am certain) he will
acknowledge and esteem me.

By this time, king Perion drew nearer and nearer, and thereupon, king Lisuart
made forth to meet him, whereof Amadis advertised him by Durin: wherefore he
commanded his men to march a slow pace, and taking Gastiles, Grassandor, Brian
de Moniaste, and Tiron, with him, left Agraies to conduct the troops, because
king Perion well knew the ill will he bare to king Lisuart, and feared least
discourteous language might pass between them at their meeting, whereby the
purposed peace should be quite made frustrate. So the two Kings went to meet
each other, giving the spur to their horses, and embraced together very
lovingly, king Perion speaking thus to king Lisuart. My Lord and brother, me
thinks your Armor is much impaired, since you departed from the camp: albeit,
I am well assured, it lay not rusting in your Armourie, while the fight lasted
between your men and mine. And for ought I have heard, they that brought it
thus out of fashion, have received a payment beyond their expectation, and
little to their liking.

So they have, answered king Lisuart, thanks be given therefore to God, and
the good help that you Amadis, and these other Knights brought me, in so
urgent a necessity, as I am sure you have heard already. In good faith, said
king Perion, I have all my lifetime desired, that my children might be yours
in peace and true amity. I hope, replied king Lisuart, that so they shall be
before we part, and our kindness never to fail, especially on my behalf.
But seeing Prince Agraies not to be one among them: he enquired expressly for
him, having understood his hatred toward him, and desirous to reconcile him,
and make him his friend, if possible it might be. Whereupon, king Perion made
answer, that he stayed behind, as a conduct to the rest of the Army which
followed. I pray you Sir, said king Lisuart, that he may be sent for, because
I purpose, not to part from this place, before I have both seen and embraced
him. My Lord answered Amadis, then I my self will go for him. It is well
advised (quoth king Lisuart) because he will do more for you, then any other
whatsoever.

So Amadis rode directly to Agraies, whom he met not far off, and told him
what you have heard already: earnestly entreating him, that, forgetting all
coffeehouse, he would go with him, and give king Lisuart so good looks as
could be. My Lord and Cosen, said Agraies, you know, that my liking or
disliking lasts upon your pleasure, and I heartily desire, that the succor
which you have given him, of whom you speak, may be better acknowledged, then
all the better acknowledged, then all the former have been. And further I
assure you, I am content to requit all the wrongs done to you, me, and many
more, merely offered in despite of you, and without any occasion at all.

Then they rode on together to King Lisuart, who, so soon as he saw Agraies,
left all the rest, going to embrace him, saying. Cosen, do you think, this
embracing as dangerous to me, as that was which you gave me, on the day of our
last being together? Before God Sir, replied Agraies, I hope to find this much
better then the other, for I was never (to my knowledge) in the like danger. We
will talk thereof said the King, at better leisure. But now you see the king my
brother tarries for us, let us go conduct him to Lubania, where I will make
you all the best entertainment I can. So they returned to king Perion, and
took the way toward the City.

King Lisuart had received diverse wounds in his body, but the Chirurgions
having seen them, gave him hope of speedy recovery: yet he kept his bed ten
days together, being often visited by the Princes and Lords of his own
country, as also the other: who, to delight him, had almost no other talk, but
of the tricks and stratagems of Archalau^, by means whereof, he compassed his
purposes; especially, when he carried the Princess Oriana away prisoner, and
(after-warde) King Perion, Amadis., and Florestan, by the subtlety of Dinarda;
also, in what sort he escaped from Galaor and Norandell, faining himself to
be Branfiles, Cosengermaine to Grumedan. But most of all, his project plotted
(by the help of Arauigne) against them all: which surely had prevailed, but
that Amadis was the only hinderance.

Such accidents, answered king Lisuart, do often come to pass, by such wicked
wretches as he is, who dare endanger themselves in doing evil, and therein
make their most delight: finding the entrance sweet and easy, only by the
instigation of the Devil, who depriues them of all apprehension, concerning
what dishonor may happen to them, beside misery of life, which makes death
much more welcome to them, then life can be. As Arauigue himself has now some
cause to confess, being in the power of his chiefest enemies: and may well
serve as an example to all other, that are to be taxed with the like vice.

As he ended these words, the good old Hermit Nascian, came to them, who
had softly followed after king Perion, and finding the Princes in such
peaceable quietness: praised God for it, and the good advice of young
Esplandian, causing Amadis to depart so speedily, when he came to the rescue
of king Lisuart, as king Perion made known before them all. In troth, said
king Lisuart, I would gladly know, who gave the youth so good counsel. Sir,
replied Esplandian, my father Nascian sent me to you, to tell you, what he
had concluded with king Perion: but I could not find you in the Camp,
wherefore, Sergill and I, passing on further, discovered the Army of king
Arauigne, as they descended down the mountain. Then I called to mind, what I
heard the Queen my Mistress say, at my parting from her, that he was your
enemy, and fearing what afterward happened to you, I made haste to advertise
Lord Amadis, to the end he might give you succor, as he did. Before God sweet
youth (said king Lisuart) I shall not (while I live) forgette so great a
blessing happening to me: And folding Esplandian in his arms, sweetly kissed
him on the cheek.

At that time, king Gasquilan was brought thither, in a Litter, having softly
followed, as being unable to sit on horseback, by reason of the shrewd fall
he had, when he would needs try his manhood against Amadis, on the first day
when the two battles met. Into a reserved chamber he was conducted, by some
of the chief in the company, especially Amadis, who came and saluted him,
saying. Sir, I would gladly see you in far better disposition, than now you
are: but by the grace of heaven, your health may be as soon restored, as your
harm happened. Gasquilan thanked him with all his heart, yet did not know him,
because he had never seen him unarmed: which king Arban observing, said. Sir,
I think you know not the Knight that talks with you, yet you have often
heretofore heard of him: this is Amadis de Gaul, against whom (some few days
since) you made your proof.

Much amazed was Gasquilan, seeing his countenance (as he imagined) more meet
to court fair Ladies, then to endure the hard toils of knighthood: and if
he had not made the trial which he did, he should hardly have given credit
to the renown every where noysed of him, whereupon he thus replied. I swear
to you, Lord Amadis, upon my faith, that you are the Knight I have most desired
to see, since I began to bear Arms, not for any good will I bare you: but to
fight with you, even to the death, if this mishap had not befallen me, as now
it is too well known. For, if fortune had so much favored me, as to have
given me, what you have gotten over me: beside the glory, of conquering the
only most happy knight in the world, I should have won the love of one, who^
I affect much better then my self, and by whose command, I came twice to see
you in this country, with such misadaduenture, as I have cause to lament all
the days of my life, because I have lost (by you) all hope of ever enjoying
her. Sir, said Amadis, your honor had been but slenderly augmented, by
ouercomming me, after such plenty of worthy actions, by you performed. And as
for her, whom you hold as lost through mine occasion, if she be a woman of good
judgment, as doubtless she is: it is impossible, but she must needs love you
answerable to your merit, and as one of the best Knights this day b^ thing.
For, assure your self Sir, it would much displease me, to be the least means
of withholding her favor from you: yet if it should prove so, I crave your
pardon, with this condition, that in all places wheresoever I shall come, I am
ready to do you any service.

These gracious words, so highly satisfied King Gasquilan, as he extended
forth his arms to embrace him: and instantly they were made friends, Amadis
keeping him daily company, so long as he soiourned in the City of Lubania,
where Arquisill also yielded himself prisoner, to fulfill the promise he had
formerly made. But Amadis, who held the gentle Knight in high esteem, freed him
from all further submission, and promised him his hand for choosing him
Emperor, before they parted thence together: by means of the Archbishop of
Tarente, the Marquess of A^cona, Brandaiell de Rocque, and others, that were
prisoners in the Enclosed Isle. Of whom (quoth he) I will earnestly solicit
this matter, that (for my sake) they will afford you this favor: and which (I
hope) they cannot deny me, knowing none more near in blood, and fitter for
the Empire, they you are.

When Arquisill heard these words, he was most joyful: well knowing the
conspiracies of them of Rome, to make election of another, wherein they would
very hardly proceed, without the favor of Lord Amadis, and therefore, he
said. My Lord, you have heretofore done me so many honorable favors, as I
must needs confess my self wholly yours. And so much the rather, in seeking
thus my further advancement, which coming so to pass: you shall dispose both
of it and me, as holding all of you only, and none other. Refer all care
thereof (quoth Amadis) to me alone.

Proceeding on to further speeches, they entered into a lodging, where Gandalin
had the charge of Archalaus and King Arauigne, ^inthem laid upon a bed,
wondrous melancholy: wherefore Amadis demanded of them, whereon they thought?
What art thou (quoth Archalaus) that would know our thoughts? How? said
Amadis, do thou not know Amadis de Gaul, whom thou have threatened so many
times? I am he that speaks to thee. When Archalaus heard him, he began to
note him better than before, and remembering that he had formerly seen him,
thus answered. Believe me, I think thou speak truth, and although length
of time has partly taken thee out of my knowledge: yet I am persuaded, thou
art the same man that I had in my prison at Valderin, where thy youth and
complexion could so much command me, that the pity I then took on thee,
has brought me now into such distress, as constraines me to crave mercy of
thee. Mercy? said Amadis, I know not how thou can expect that from me,
considering thou could nebestowe it on thy self: for, if such had been thy
power, long ago thou would have ended a world of cruelties, that have been
thy continual exercise. Nevertheless, if thou could repent, and (with an
honest soul) promise me never to use the like again; I could find in mine
heart to pardon thee.

Trust me, answered Archalaus, it is a work very hard for me to do, almost
imposible, for there I knew continually how to conquer, and evermore took such
delight in doing ill; as now I cannot easily addict my self to goodness. But
necessity, which is a bridle sharp and rigorous, to metamorphose all bad
customs into virtue: happily will constrain my older years (seeing the
estate wherein I am) to follow those courses, which my youth and liberty then
disd^^ned to do. What other ransom then, replied Amadis, shall I have of thee,
to let thee go? All my Castles (quoth he) and other goods, by means whereof I
pursued a great part of those vices, for which thou justly do reprove me.
Leave me only what shall like thy self to do, for the remainder of my life;
and if thou grant me so much grace: it may be, this only bounty will beget in
me, that which reason heretofore could never compass. Believe me, said Amadis,
thine own confession of so lewd a life, and hope I have of thine amendment:
shall be the key to free thy soul from thy bodies thraldom, having so long a
time engaged them both to the Devil.

So he turned his face, to go from him: but Archalaus called him again, and
pointing to Arauigne, said. I pray thee Amadis, look vpvpon this wretched
King, who (not long since) was near hand to be one of the greatest Princes in
the world: but in a moment, the same fortune which (befoore) showed amiable
looks, has beaten him down, and wholly wrought his ruin. An observation not
unmeet for thee, for thou, and all other, that aspire unto the highest degree
of happiness, art subject to the like disfavors. And because to vanquish and
pardon, are most familiar to noble and magnanimous minds: bestow on us now
such entertainment, as thou would wish to receive from us, we holding the
place, as now thou do, and from which thou can not always warrant thy
self.

More account did Amadis make of these good words, than of him that spoke them,
and well understood the end whereat he aimed, although he would make no
outward show thereof: but, without any further contestation, left him,
departing thence to his own lodging, to dispatch Ardan the dwarffe to Oriana,
that she might know the wars finishing, as also what-soeuer had passed
between the Princes and Lords in the two Camps. Moreover, he gave him a
Letter, directed to Ysanio, whereby he gave order: that Brandaiell de Rocque,
the Marquess of Ancona, the Archbishop of Tarente, and the other Roman
prisoners, should be sent to him. So departed the Dwarffe, who travailed day
and night, until he arrived at the Palace of Apolidon.

He presently sent word to the Princess, byone of her women, that he would
speak with her from Amadis. She no sooner heard of his ariuall, but fearing
some unhappy fortune; became so afflicted in mind, that she trembled
exceedingly: knowing, that victory could not favor either of the Camps, but
it would procure sorrow and grief to her all her lifetime. Then Ardan entered
her chamber, who dedeclared by his looks, that she had no cause of sadness, or
melancholy. Nevertheless, so soon as she saw him (not having so much
patience, as to let him deliver his message) with tears in her eyes, she said
unto him. Alas my dear friend Ardan, tell me I pray thee quickly, in what
estate have thou left the King my father, and is thy Master alive or dead:
dead? Madame, answered the Dwarffe, they never (in their lives) were so merry
together.

Then he reported to her, all that which you have heard already, especially, in
what great danger King Lisuart was, when Amadis came with his happy succor.
Also, his royal entertainment to King Perion, and lastly, what love he
expressed to Esplandian, by whose means, Amadis, came to the rescue of them of
Great Britain: which gave such comfort to Oriana, that lifting up her eyes
and hands to heaven, she spoke so loud as all present might hear her. O most
merciful God, blessed for ever be thy divine bounty, shouring down thus thy
pity upon thy poor servant, and that happy child, who has been the
occasion of this great goodness. Oh, let thy mercy yet further permit, that all
those especial predictions, which the wise Vrganda delivered of him, may not
fail in him. All the Ladies there present, persuaded themselves, that she
used these words of Esplandian, for the help which he had procured to King
Lisuart: yet were ignorant of her further interest in him, which wisely she
concealed to her self.

Afterward, she demanded of Ardan, if he came thither about any other
business. Madame (quoth he) I have Letters from my Lord, directed to the
Governor Ysanio, commanding him by me, forthwith to send him the Roman
prisoners. What way then, said she, will he take, and the King also? Madame,
quoth he, for ought I can understand, they will not part each from other, till
all differences are fully concluded. Honest Dwarffe, said the Queen Sardamira,
tell me I pray thee, how have the Romans behaved themselves: are many of them
slain in the battle? Madame, answered Ardan, a great number of them have
ended their days valiantly, and (well near) all the rest are sore wounded:
but since the death of the Emperor, Floyan and Constant, no man of name (that
I know) has perished among the^, but was living, when I parted from the
Camp, where I left Arquisill in serious conference with my Master. As for your
brother Flamyan, he begins to grow strong, and wounds are (in a manner)
cured.

Ardan having received express charge from Amadis, to make so little tarrying
there as could be: demanded of Oriana, if she pleased to command any thing to
his Mastes? Do my most humble comdations (quoth she) to king Perion of Gaul,
Agraies, Bruneo, and Amadis, to whom I purpose not to write, because thou
broughtest me no Letter from him. So the dwarffe took leave of her, and went to
find Ysanio, giving him the Letters from his Master, and delivering his further
message beside. Whereupon, Ysanio took such order, that before the week was
expired: the Romans were all arrived at Lubania, in presence of King Lisuart,
and the other Princess and Lords. But Amadis calling them into his chamber,
and being there alone with them, spoke thus.

Lords, I am sure you are not ignorant, what issure this war has sorted to,
by means whereof, almost all the Princes of the East, and they likewise of the
West, have entered into Arms. And because we are now upon terms, for a
perpetual peace, I hold it reasonable, that albeit you are my prisoners: yet
nothing shall be concluded till first it be imparted to you. Now, as this is
the reason of your calling hither; so am I like wise to entreat you, that (for
my sake) you would accept and elect Lord Arquisill as your Emperor. For over
and beside, that there is not to be found (as I hear) any man more near in
birth to the Empire, then he: so am I well acquainted with his high deserts,
which mooues me the more (in his behalf) to be thus earnest with you. In the
doing whereof you shall be get your selves two especial graces. The first, by
calling to the government of so excellent a Monarchy, a Prince wise, valiant,
and virtuous, for your better conservation, and entertaining you in all love
and kindness. The other, that in my endeared affection to him, I freely give
you (with him) liberty, and all such ransomes, as are due to me from you,
continuing moreover (while I live) your affectionate friend. advise therefore
with your selves, what answer you will make me: to the end, I may also
consider, how I shall carry my self to you, in matter of so important
occasion.

Branda^^ll de Ro^que, being the ancientest of them all, stood forth, and made
this answer to Amadis. My Lord, most true it is, that we are your prisoners,
and know very well, what honor you have done us, and the extraordinary
entertainment we have received, since our ariuall in the Encl^sed Isle.
Wherefore I speak, not only for my self, but all here present: that there is
not a man among us, but will gladly employ himself in your service. But we
cannot resolve in the matter concerning Lord Arquisill, till we have first
spoken with Flamyan, and other ^ine Captains in the Army: wherefore we pray
you permit, that we may confer together swearing (for our part) that we will
hold our hands for him, whereby your desire may be satisfied. Well then said
Amadis, consult together, and to morrow let me have your answer.

So they withdrew thence, to go find Flamyan in his lodging: for (as yet) he
kept his chamber, not healed of the hurts, which he had received in the last
encounter. Then they declared to him, what speeches had past between them and
Amadis, what offers and promises he had made, in favor of Arquisill, and
lastly, the answer they returned him. Believe me, said Elamyan, Lord Amadis
speaks like a good Knights, and no more, then all we ought to take in good
part, and allow of very worthily. Nevertheless, the election of an Emperor
is of such importance, as it is good reason to acquaint the other Roman
Captains therewith: to morrow we will send to them all, and have the matter in
deliberation, th^^ will we answer Amadis, what we think best. Flamyan did
according to his speeches, and after they were all assembled, he revealed the
occasion of their meeting, and the request of Amadis, for Prince A^quis^. By
right of lineage (quoth he) the Empire ^s his. More-ouer, he is wise, hardy and
virtuous, what is to be resolved upon, that either we may excuse, or yield to
Amadis in his request.

Every man answered according to his mind: but in the end, Arquisill was
named Emperor, whereof Amadis was soon advertised, and all the other Prince,
and Lords were well pleased there with, especially the Kings Lisuart, Person,
and Cildadan, who with goodly troops (on the day following) went and conducted
him to the Church, where, before all the people, he was proclaimed Emperor of
the Romans, and at dinner, Amadis served as his Cup-taster, Gastilles as
Pantler, and Agraies as Ca^uer. After the tables were withdrawn, King ^su^rt
being seated somewhat beneath him, reporting what adventures had happened to
him, since he was crowned King of great Britain: fell into discourse, what
good turns and services he had received by Amadis, and proceeded on so far
therein, that he said to him, before them all. Lord Amadis, albeit very few can
be ignorant, in what you have done for me, since your first ariuall in my
Court, when you v^^quis^ed Ardan the P^oude: so will I not now spare to speak
somewat else, for reasons which hereafter will be better understood.

Then particularly he reported all the man, which would be tedious to trouble
you with again. But (quoth he) for many high and worthy services, Lord
Amadis, I give you my daughter Oriana as your wife, leaving her as mine heir
(after my decease) to my kingdom of Great Britain. Then Amadis more glad and
highly pleased, then ever before, falling on his knee, most humbly thanked him.
Well Son, said the King, let it not offend you, if I entreat old Nascian to
tell the Emperor, how Esplandian was begotten, and whose Son he is: that
every one may know, how the marriage of you and Oriana was long since
contracted. The Hermit being present to satisfy the Kings request, declared
all the precedent fortunes, and the promise past between Amadis and the
Princess, whereby Esplandian became his son.

We need make no doubt, concerning the inward joy of the noble youth, being
ignorant (till then) whose son he was. Whereupon, King Lisuart called him, and
avouched him for his Grandchild before them all, to the no little contentment
of Amadis: who knowing the Emperors mind, and how desirous he was, to enjoy
Orianaes sister in marriage, spoke thus to king Lisuart. Sir, seeing you have
given me that, which above all things else in this world, I most desired: let
me likewise most humbly entreat you, to give the Princess Leonora to the
Emperor, and then his joy will be equal to mine. By my troth, answered the
King, this good motion shall never be denied, if he will have it so. Then I
take your highness at your word, replied Arquisill. And I give her you, quoth
the King, with all mine heart. Moreover, I will bring her with me to the
Enclosed Isle, that both these marriages may be there accomplished together. To
morrow I purpose to part hence for Vindilisore, where she keeps company with
my Queen. In the mean while, you may expect me at the Palace of Apolidon,
whither my kingly brother may send for Galaor: and because nothing else may be
omitted, to complete our joy and contentment, I will send for my Cosen
Galuanes, and Madasima. The Marshalls of the lodgings, appertaining to the
Kings Lisuart and Perion: gave present order for their departure, the one side
to the Enclosed Isle, and the other to Vindilisore.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How King Lisuart arrived at Vindilisore, where his Queen Brisenia attended his
coming; whom (soon after) he caused to remove thence, and with her daughter
Leonora, accompany him to the Enclosed Isle.

AFter that King Lisuart was dislodged from the City of Lubania, accompanied
with the rest of his Army, he iournied so expeditiously, that he arrived at
Vindilisore; where his Queen Brisenia expected his coming, according to
former intelligence sent her. And although he was greatly perplexed in mind,
seeing his reputation much impaired, by those disfouours received from fortune,
notwithstanding the agreement he had made with Amadis: yet nevertheless (like
a wise and judicious Prince) he dissembled his grief, showing much better
outward carriage, then otherwise willingly he would have done. And his own
knowledge was no mean incitation thereto, by hourly pressing his conscience,
with a sensible apprehension, that he had been the only cause, of shedding
(ouer-prodigally) so much Christian blood: under an unjust color of revenge,
which he preferred before all counsel and advice, given him by the Princes and
Lords of his Land, wherewith our Lord being justly offended, had scourged him
with there rods, not to make him murmur or gruge against him, but rather to
thank him, for inflicting no heavier vengeance on him

In meditation of these matters, he went to the Queens lodgings, and she
being before advertised by Brandoynas, of all that had happened in his voyage;
welcomed him most graciously, and looking upon young Esplandian, who followed
next to the King: folding him in her arms, and sweetly kissing him, thus she
spoke. My worthy son, blessed be the hour of thy birth, having (in thy
young days) done such service to the King: as, but by thy good advise (as I
have understood) he had never seen his own kingdom any more. Madame,
answered the King, I hope, seeing he has begun so well: not any one hour
shall pass him, but will increase in him both will and power, of proceeding on
better and better. For I assure you, that beside the right of nature, which
justly incites me to wish him well: no day can pass over my head, but I must
needs confess a perticuliar affection to him, for the great happiness I enjoy
by him.

While thus the King and Queen conferred together, concerning Esplandian, the
other Princes and Lords were kindly entertained by the Ladies and Gentlewomen:
who being curious in inquiry, how the fights had been performed, between the
Kings people, and them belonging to Amadis, were a long while without any other
language. But when they heard of the purposed marriages, and that they must
likewise go to the Enclosed Isle: this raised much more pleasure in them, then
the recital of cold fears and Alarums, whereon they wholly conferred before.
For now, one made full account, to try the Arch of loyal lovers; others the
Defended chamber, and the other singularities in the Isle, and in these
delights they spent the whole day.

But the hour of rest being come, the King withdrew into the Queens chamber,
where being alone by themselves, he began in this manner. Madame, if you found
your self much amazed, when you heard the matters concerning your daughter and
Amadis: believe no less of me, when I heard the first news thereof. And by
that which I knew afterward, both you and I were far off from our
reckonning. For, persuade your self, it is no little disturbance to my mind,
that I could not know these things, before the scandal was discovered, and
nothing ever touched me so nearely, especially, the loss of so many worthy
Knights, who had now been living, and perished in these unhappy wars, which
breeds in me such remorse of conscience, as you, or any other, will hardly
credit: but matters already past, are ouer-late to be remedied. Wherefore, I
purpose now, that what yet remains to be done, shall be performed with our
very uttermost honor. Forgetting the offense of our daughter, who made choice
of a husband at her own pleasure: yet one that well deserves her, and a
better. For I never saw any Knight errant, that could win himself so many
friends, or have such a multitude of Kings, Princes, and potent Lords at his
comande: whereby it plainly appears, that Fortune is diposed to prefer
him, before any other.

And because at my parting from Lubania, I promised, to bring you with me to
the Enclosed Isle, there to consummate the marriage between her and him: I pray
you give order for all things, which you think requisite in such cases. Also,
for the conduct thither of your daughter Leonora, whom (upon his own request)
I have given as wife to the new Emperor. Very joyful was the Queen, to see
the King so well disposed: especially toward her daughter Oriana, which was
the thing she most desired. In regard whereof, and to maintain him in this
good mind, she said. Sir, it seems to me, that heaven has been very
gracious to you and me, bestowing such alliance on us, in favor of whom, their
friends shall for ever hereafter be ours. What else remains to be done,
refer all to me, for all shall be ordered to your contentment. Hereupon,
early the next morning, she sent for Arban, King of Norwales, Great master
of the Kings household, to whom she gave the charge of all.

CHAP. XXV.
How King Perion (and his company) took their way toward the Enclosed Isle:
And of that which they did, before King Lisuart came thither to them.

AFter that they of Great Britain were gone from Lubania: King Perion and his
Army marched back to the Enclosed Isle, where Oriana expected their coming,
newly advertised by Gandalin, what conclusion was made with king Lisuart. So
soon as they were there arrived, they went to see her, and Amadis presented the
Emperor Arquisill to her (whom she had never seen before) saying. Madame, as
yet you know not this Knight: but he is in good hope, to be nearer in kindred to
you, then you imagine. By these words she plainly understood, that he was the
Emperor, wherefore (raising her self) she went and did him reverence, as he
did the like to her, and with a very Princely grace, said. Madame, I am so much
beholding to Lord Amadis, that both you and he may dispose of me, and
whatsoever is in my power, at your pleasure. My Lord, answered the Princess, I
know what and who you are: wherefore, I most humbly beseech you, that (hence
forward) you would reckon me, as one of your best sisters, and kind friends.

During this time, Agraies, Florestan, Quedragant, and Brian gave courteous
salutaions to Queen Sardamira, Grasinda and Olinda, and Bruneo de bone Mer, to
his most dearly affected Melicia. But Amadis observing Grasandor, son to the
King of Bohemia, standing by the Infanta Mabila, so ravished in soul with love
to her, that accustomed fear in such affairs, closed up his mouth, not daring
to deliver so much as on ewo^d: caused him to call his Cosen, and thus he
rounded her in the ear. Madame, you know that Grasandor loves you more the^
himself, yet you appear overmuch to neglect him, I pray you speak to him: for
well I know that you being sick of the same disease, and many times in the
like extremity, would (even gladly as he) find ease in the like tormenting
affliction, therefore, to your mercy I recommend him.

She knowing, that Amadis was shot in the same place, where this loue-sicke
pain oppressed her, even as violently to another, as she to Grasandor: began
to blush in such strange manner, as all present did apparently perceive it, and
ghest at the cause of her alteration. Yet to cover it so well as she could;
she made answer to Amadis, that she would obey his command: And he taking
her by the hand, went with her to Grasandor presently, saying. See Sir, here
is a Lady, that finds fault with seeing you so melancholy. Let me entreat
you my Lord, to yield her some reason, how and from whence your affliction
ensues: and so he left them together. Grasandor finding opportunity to favor
him, and that now he might freely utter his mind to her: between hope and
fear, kindness and constraint, thus he began.

Madame, it seems to me, that Lord Amadis finds the same passions in me, as
him self suffered, when love allured him (at the first) to like Madame Oriana.
And to speak no more then truth, when I think to impart my oppressions to
you, the three principal organes of my life, are in most strange and unusual
distemper: namely, mine eyes, my heart, and my tongue. For so soon as mine
eyes can but ga^e a sight of you: they incite speech, only to tell you the
cause of my grief; but all in vain. Then my tongue, hoping to supply that
defect: opens my mouth, but fear prevailing, quickly closes it up again.
If then my heart be in heavy martyrdom, I leave to your own judgment,
speaking (as it does) by continual fighing. And finding it self vn-furnished
of all helping means: checks mine eyes, for bringing home the first tidings of
your bright beauty. Then they, in excusing their error: promise to perform
the tongues office, because it is dumb in your presence, and by outward
appearance (showing it self pitiful) would beg of you mercy and remedy.

While Grasandor continued these complaints, Amadis (not knowing how he should
raise the siege, the Emperor still talking with Oriana:) saw Queen Briolania
enter the chamber, whom he going to kiss, called the Emperor, saying. My
Lord, you have not yet seen all the beauties in this goodly beauty, as here
Queen Briolania may testify to you. Before God (quoth he) you say very true.
So leaving Oriana to salute the Queen: she seemed so fair in his eye, and her
behavior so gracious, that he used these words to her. I am persuaded
Madame, that Apolidon, in creating the singularities of this place, left them
in such rich perfection, only for the honor of excelling Ladies. For I can
repute them no other then immortal, and make men tractable, to abide (here
all their life time) among such rauishing beauties.

Now did Amadis step into the Emperors place, so soon as he was gone from
Oriana, feigning to do him a great favor, in helping him to confer with
Queen Briolania. But he had a quite contrary meaning, and did it to no other
end, but that the rest of his friends should talk with their Ladies, while he
might be alone with her whom he most desired. For he had not conuersed
familiarly with the Princess, since her ariuall in the Enclosed Isle:
wherefore, finding time and place sufficiently commodious, he began with her
in this manner.

Madame, I have thought all my life time hitherto, that no possibility remained
in me for acknowledgement of those great and gracious favors, which (so long
a while) I have received by your means only. And last of all, in being the
cause that aged Nascian revealed to the King your father, what right we had
each in other: whereby your son and mine became known to him, and peace
confirmed, between them of Great Britain and us. As for my self, I shall
stand much more obliged to you now, then ever heretofore: And therefore,
advisedly consider what else remains for me to do, for I assure you, I shall
take no little delight, in doing whatsoever you command me.

When Oriana heard him deliver such speeches, having before her eyes, what
duty every woman of honor and discretion, owes to her husband; she thus
answered. My Lord, in my poor opinion, you do both your self and me wrong,
and therefore I pray you, speak to me henceforward, as to your humble wife and
servant: and not after those kind of phrases, when I was no other then your
friend. Furthermore, let me humbly entreat you to tell me, in what condition
you left the King my father, and how I am now esteemed of him? Madame, said
Amadis, if outward looks may be true evidences, I never saw man declare more
contentment, then he delivered when we were together. Albeit I conjecture
(considering his inevitable danger in our last encounter, when he hoped to
recover you from us by mere force) his thoughts are otherwise quite different.
Yet he dissembles it so wisely as possibly can be, even to hurl shame upon
himself, and excusing what has past between you and me: fully resolved (as
he says) to be more cheerfully disposed, then ever hitherto he has been.
Where-upon he is returned back to Vindilisore, to fetch the Queen and your
sister Leonora, whom he has promised in marriage to the Emperor.

Oriana was not a little glad of these news, saying. My Lord, these are
matters of no mean comfort, especially, that I have recovered my fathers grace
again: for, next to you, I love him above any man living, notwithstanding, all
the hard sufferings (as well you know) he has put me to. But further I pray
you tell me, what is your opinion of Esplandian? By my faath Madame, quoth
he, by his carriage and behavior, he plainly declares himself to be yours:
And if good Nascian could have prevailed, he had brought him hither to you.
But the King would needs have him go with him, to please the Queen, because
she knows him not yet to be her Grandchild.

So, breaking off this discourse, King Perion, who had all this while
entertained Grasinda with talk: took leave of her and the company, because it
drew near supper time. Wherefore, withdrawing thence into his own lodging,
Amadis followed him: and there, looking forth at a window, till the tables
were furnished, he thus spoke. Seeing son it has pleased God, that you have
ended all troubles, with so great honor: let the whole glory be ascribed to
him, and while you live, acknowledge thankfulness to your friends, who to help
you in so serious a business, have made no spare of their lives and goods,
which binds you the more to love and honor them, reco^pencing their kindness
so much as in you lies. Considering, that without their assistance, it is most
certain, you had been in great danger, not only of your lives loss, but also
of your honor, which I account a thousand times dearer. And because it is no
more then reason, that, like as they have been pertakers of all pains and
perils, so they ought to be of pleasure and contentment, which you have
received by their means: let it therefore be no mean part of your care, to
respect them in especial manner, by distributing such booty among them, as is
in your hands, the Kings Aranigne, Barsinan, and others being your prisoners.

Moreover, such as you know affected to those Ladies, which keep company
with the Princess Oriana: let them have equal co^tentment with your self, by
espousing them, to whom their fancies are inclined. For which cause, I deliver
into your power, your sister Melitia, to give her to him whom you think
worthiest of her. You have likewise your Cosen Mabila, and the Queen Bri^lania,
to whom you stand highly obliged. Grasinda also, and the Queen Sardamira, who
have suffered a great part of Orianaes sorrows: me thinks they should
participate in her fairest fortune, and be advanced as you think meetest.
Assuring you, that the greatest comfort I can have in mine aged years, is, to
see your brethren Galaor and Florestan married, that before I depart this life,
I may rejoice in issue from you all. Consider hereof I pray you advisedly; and
further what I have said, to your uttermost power. My Lord answered Amadis, I
will do all that lies in me, to please both you and them. It is enough, quoth
the King. And so all things being aptly ordered, they sat down to supper.

In the morning, a sudden summons was sent to all the chief Knights, for an
immediate meeting: and when they were assembled, Amadis entered into these
speeches. Honorable Gentlemen and friends, the great and labourious travail,
which you have endured in these late wars: does very well deserve, that now
you should give ease and respite to your spirits, and in regard of the dear
debt, wherein I stand engaged to you, to essay my uttermost means, to let you
enjoy those beatitudes, which (I know) are pleasing to every man among you.
For, as by your most gracious assistance, afforded in my very nearest
extremity, I have attained to that, which I esteemed above all things else in
the world, namely, the peaceable enjoying of my long loved Oriana: Even so, I
beseech you (with all my heart) that each man would instantly declare, if he
stand affected to any Lady or Gentlewoman here, for I assure you, on the
faith of a Knight, to prevail so far as I can with them, that they shall not
easily deny, what I entreat on their friends behalf.

Moreover, you know that king Aranigne, Barsidan, and many other beside, are
our prisoners, defying those graceful virtues, whereto the order of knighthood
truly tied them, and exercising (so much as in them lay) all cruelties and
tyranny. In regard whereof, they are not worthy of any ransom, but justly
punishable, for the grieuousnesse of their treasons: and therefore I think it
fit, that consideration should be used, for dividing their estates and goods
amongyou. As for my self, I deny any part or portion belonging to me, holding
my self sufficiently satisfied, if I can compass any means, of doing you any
particular pleasure or service.

When they that were not meanly affected to their Ladies, heard him use these
words, and knew what power he had to forward them that way: you may well
imagine, that they did not lend any deaffe ^are to such a pleasing motion,
especially, Agraies, who earnestly entreated him, to give his honorable
furtherance, for his marriage with the fair Olinda, Bruneo with Melicia,
Grasandor with Mabila, and Quedragant, who never loved till then, declared his
affection to Grasinda, saying. I now sufficiently understand, that youth and
time have (heretofore) been contrary to my quiet, having then no other care,
but for the managing of my Horse and Arms: but at this instant, years and
reason constraines me to another kind of condition, so that if it like Madame
Grasinda, to accept me as her husband, I shall account my happiness equal to
any man's, of what condition soever he be.

Before God, said Florestan, I was once determined, to return into Aliemaine,
so soon as the business concerning my Lord Amadis was ended, as well to see my
mother, as many other mine endeared friends. Nevertheless, I know not with
what eye I observed the Queen Sardamira, but this I am well assured, that if I
could compass the means to marry her; I should easily forget mine intended
voyage, and all things else whatsoever. But others, more free from loves
imperious subjection, having their minds wholly addicted to follow Arms:
spoke in a quite contrary language, desiring Amadis, to employ them in the
conquest of Arauignes kingdom, the countries belonging to Barsinan, or any
where else. And we request (quoth they) no other part of booty, but the means
of winning renown, honor and Chivalry.

Hereupon, Amadis returned the^ answer. Seeing you are of this disposition:
with the good liking of the company, I will make a present division. On
Quedragant, I bestow the country of Sansuega, for his larger portion in
marrying with Grasinda. To you Bruneo, I give the kingdom of Arauigne, with my
sister Melicia. And as for my brother Florestan, I will work so with the
Emperor: that he shall give him the country of Calabria, with the Queen
Sardamira, whom he so dearly affects. As for my Lord Agraies, and
Grasandor, they are (thanks be to God) rich and mighty enough, by means of
their fathers, and will content themselves (as I think) to enjoy those
beauties that affect them. What else remains, shall be distributed
particularly, according to the merit of every man, so soon as King Lisuart
shall be here arrived. Which they all liked well, and so we leave them
returning to their lodgings: attending the time, when they should go and
converse with their Ladies, according to their wonted custom.

CHAP. XXVI.
How Bruneo de bonno Mer and Branfill, were appointed to journey into Gaul, to
fetch the Queen Elysena and Galaor, and of those adventures that happened to
them in their returning back again.

SOme few days after that K. Perion, and the other Knights were come to the
enclosed Isle; Agraies, Brunco, and they that had hope of speedy marriage,
fearing least the absence of the Queen Elysena and Galaor, might cause a
further deferring of that long desired day: Came and humbly requested King
Perion, that he would send for them, whereto he presently yielded. Whereupon
Bruneo made first tender of his service, saying. Sir, I humbly entreat you,
that none other then my brother and I may have this charge, for otherwise you
shall do us wrong. Well then answered the King, smyling to himself, if I
should grant your own request: I am persuaded, you would more gladly keep
company with Melicia, then undertake so long a journey from her. In good faith
Sir, replied Bruneo. to be always near her, is the only happiness I can
desire: notwithstanding, I am willing to go for the Queen, and Galaor only in
my earnest affection to do them service. By my faith, said Angriote, you must
not perform this voyage, without my company. Why then (quoth the King) go
you all three, and heaven grant, that you may find my son in better estate,
then when I left him. Sir, answered Ysanio, some few days since, certain
Merchants coming from Gaul, gave me credible assurance that he was well
recovered, because they had seen him; complaining only that his countenance
was (as yet) pale and Wan, by reason of his long sickness.

These news were highly pleasing to the King, and all the company, in regard
whereof, Bruneo, and his two other friends, took shipping the next morning,
and sailed with such prosperous Winds: that in few days after, they landed
where the Queen then lay, of whom they were most graciously entertained,
especially by Galaor, because he longed to hear tidings from his brother and
other friends. And as he embraced them, with the tears trickling down his
cheeks, he said. By my faith, my good Lords, misfortune has so long kept me
company, that, considering what injury she has done me (in withholding me
all this while from you and the exercise of Arms) it has been (well near) a
Thousand deaths to me. My Lord quoth Bruneo, we have brought you such news,
as will make a sufficient satisfaction, for all the anguish you have endured.

So, he declared before the Queen, the encounter, and battles between the
Kings, Perion, and Lisuart, what great dangers and perils they were in, by the
sudden onset of King Arauigne and Archalaus: And last of all, the league of
love and amity, combined on both sides, and the several marriages consulted
and agreed upon. hereat Galaor was somewhat amazed, having never heard any
thing of such attempts, and answered Bruneo thus. Is it possible, that my noble
Lord king Lisuart should be in such extremity, and I not near him? Upon my
soul, I must now confess, that Fortune loved me much better then ever she
did: For had I not been sick, whatsoever duty I owe to the King my father, I
should have made no spare of my life, to succor the other. Yet it had fallen
out worse for me, if in the time of my sickness, I had received any certain
tidings of this matter: undoubtedly it had been my death, to fail him in a
necessity so urgent. It is much better said Bruneo, that all things are past
in so good order.

Then taking him by the hand, thus he proceeded. I received charge from my Lord
Amadis, to do his re-commendations to you, and to desire you, that you would
cheer up and recreate your spirits, in the best manner you can devise: for he
is minded (if you think it so convenient) to have you joined in marriage with
Queen Briolania, so soon as you shall be arrived there. And we were expressly
sent from king Perion, to conduct the Queen to the Enclosed Isle, where he
attends her coming, with a goodly train of Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen.
Son (quoth she to Galaor) we will part hence this next ensuing week, in the
mean while, take order for shipping, and all things needful for our voyage.
And therefore presently sent for sailers, who having understood his pleasure,
made immediate provision, of the very best Ship the King had, and went aboarde
the sixth day following.

Not far had they sailed from the coast of Gaul, but they descried a vessel
on the Sea, well fitted with the wind, and making nimble speed, the Pilot or
Master striking sail, so soon as he espied the Queens ship. Whereupon,
the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, thinking them to be Coursaires, or Pirates*
forthwith armed themselves, and to understand the truth, sent one of their
Squires in a Squiffe toward them, to demand of whence they were, and whither
they intended. The Squire drawing near unto them, called out aloude unto them,
saying. Hoe, aboard there, they in the Ship here not far off from you, in
kindness sent to know what you are, and whither you are bound? My friend,
quoth a knight standing on the Deck, there is a Lady of honor in this
vessel, whose voyage tends to the Enclosed Isle. Believe me Sir, replied
the Squire, then she has met with company, if she be so pleased: for they
that sent me to you, are sailing thither, and you may safely come aboard them.
Which words being ended, he returned to them he came from.

In the mean space, that knight that was above, went down to the Lady, and
acquainted her with the Squires message: by means whereof, she sent one in a
Frigate presently away, to understand the truth, and whether (upon the Squires
words) she might safely come to them, or no: and so went nearer to the Queens
Ship, where Angriote being first of all seen, the other Knight spoke thus unto
him. Sir, a Squire of yours, (not long since) came to us, to know what we were
and whither our travail intended. We gave him answer, that we were bound
directly for the Enclosed Isle, and thither (he said) was likewise your
intention, now Sir, because we have in charge, a Princeste of great esteem;
we pray you give us some assurance of your company. Knight, answered Angriote,
if you please to come aboard of us, the Lady you talk of shall find a Queen
here, who will gladly welcome her into her company, and give her as gracious
entertainment, as she can desire to have. Sir, said the knight, I heartily
thank you for her, and this I dare assure you, that having heard her cause,
and the reason of her travailing thus on the Sea, you will so much
compassionate her case, as not to deny her your help if she require it of you.

So taking leave, he returned to the other vessel, which presently came and
joined with the Queens. Then came up a Lady in a garment of black cloth,
showing (both she and all her company) very sad and disconsolate looks,
whereat Angriote (who well observed them) was much abashed, reputing her by her
countenance, to be a Lady of good descent and reputation. And courteously
saluting her, demanded, if she pleased to ascend, and visit the Queen. Sir
Knight, quoth she, I will do what shall please you* nevertheless, I pray you
name her to me, and them that are in her company, Madam, said Angriote, she is
the Queen of Gaul, my Lord Galaor her son, is with her, and three other
knights of the Enclosed Isle, whither we are sailing. Then will I attend upon
her and you thither, replied the Lady.

So Angriote, supporting her by the hand, brought her into the Queens Cabin,
and she having understood all that you have heard already, welcomed her most
graciously* but the Lady ^ing much oppressed with grief, fell down at her
feet, intending to kiss them, which the Queen would not permit, put raised
her gently, desiting to know the cause of her sorrow.

Madam, quoth she, though now I am left quite naked, of all fortunes blessings
and favors, having no other comfort or repose, but only the recytall of my
misfortunes: yet you may believe me, that I was (not long time since) a ^dy of
great quality, and married to the discea^ed King of Dacia, by whom I had two
Sons, and one only unfortunate daughter, and so much the more unfortunate in
her Birth, by being the death of the King hi^ Father, and the total ruin of
me and her brethren, for you must understand, Madam, that after she was
married to the Duke of ^tia, one of the greatest neighboring Princes to my
Country: by how much the day of her Bridal was pleasing, by so much the more,
was this marriage wretched and miserable. For, very soon after the solemnity,
the Duke, my new son in Law, being young, and ambitious of rule: conspired
the death of my husband, and of my two other children, the eldest of them
having not (as then) attained to the age of fourteen years. According to his
project, so did he perform it upon my Lord, and appointing a day, pretending
an honest visitation of us, accompanied with a great number of his people,
which (as he said) were brought with him for our greater honor: the King my
husband no way misdoubting the premeditated treason, rode forth to meet him,
and as he embraced him, t^ villain drew a pocketdagger, and cruely murdered
him.

Both my sons (in a fair and fortunate ho^^e for them) came riding a good
distance behind their father, and heairng of this bloody tumult: returned in a
maine gallop back to the City, where the traitor holds them (as yet) sharply
besieged. Then was I absent, in a pilgrimage to our Lady, at a very ancient
Church, builded on the top of a high Promo^^o^^e, and there I was advertised of
my mis-hap. If then I was in woeful extream^y, or no: be you my judge good
Madame, considering I (in a moment) found my self utterly destitute of all
rem^^^e, and forsaken of any hope: so that, but for the comfort and advise
given me, by these two Knights which keep me company, I had not lived one
only hour.

They called to remembrance, one nan ed Amadis de Gaul, who is said, to be the
refuge and support of all afflicted Ladies, never denying them his assistance.
Whereupon, I have attempted this long voyage, to find him at the Enclosed
Isle, where he is affirmed certainly to be, with a great number of other good
Knights, his companions in Arms. When the wrong done me by this wicked son
in law, shall be known to that noble Lord and his other friends, and how
extremely he maintains the siege against mine own natural sons: I hope
he and they will take compassion on me, and give me such succor, as by
means thereof, I shall expel the enemy out of my country, for my subjects
attend nothing else, but to undertake Arms against him, they want but only a
comamnder to lead them.

Greatly was the Queen moved to pity, hearing the misfortunes which besell
the Queen of Dacia: and the three Knights were so nearly touched, that they
instantly resolved to give her help, and the Queen thus replied. Sister, and
fair friend, your sorrow does or a little grieve me; nevertheless, I consider
Fortune as she is, seldom sparing either strong or feeble, king or subject. So
that they which taste of her best favors, ought most to ^eare (...) suspect
her mutability: in regard, that when they think themselves to be ^a^est and
secure, they fall the sooner into your disaster. But, seeing good hap has
sent you thus to me; I take some comfort, that we shall sail in company
together into the Enclosed Isle, where I hope you shall find such succor as
you seek for.

Madame, answered the Queen of Dacia, I remember, that certain Knights (not
long since) trauayling through our country, told the late king my husband,
that Amadis had succored Oriana, daughter to King Lisuart, who was
constrainedly sent to the Emperor of Rome. But Amadis rescued her from the
Romans, and conuayed her to the Enclosed Isle (even in despite of their
uttermost malice) where yet she abides well accompanied: which gives me
hope, that seeing she has tried the rigor of misfortune, she will like wise
take pity on my injuries, so that (by her means) I may find mercy according
to my expectation. By my faith Madame, said Angriote, if the Queen be so
pleased, you shall pass hence no further: for I am ready to go with you, and
will make no spare of my perion, in your service. The like answered Bruneo and
Branfill, most humbly entreating the Queen, to grant them leave: considering,
she was now come so near to the Enclosed Isle, as she might soon be there,
without any hindrance, and so much they importuned her, that at length she
condiscended.

Hereupon, they entered into the Queen of Daciaes Ship, and taking farewell of
the rest, commanded the Mariners to ho^^^ sails, and away. The Queen of Gaul
and Galaor, they pursued their porpose to the Enclosed Isle, where (soon
after) they landed, and the Knights being advertised thereof, went forth to
entertain them. When King Perion saw Galaor in so good disposition, the grave
old man was so wonderfully joyful, that (smiling) he said to him. In good
sadness son, seeing now we are in amity with King Lisuart. I will stand in
less doubt of you hence forward, then heretofore I have done. My Lord (quoth
he) I was never so joyful in all my life, as when news were brought me, of
your leauging with him, and long I wish that this peace may continue. There
shall be no fault in me answered the King.

Looking then aside, he saw Oriana and her train, coming forth of the Park,
to meet the Queen, to whom the King said. You see Madame, we have no want
of good company here. No believe me, my Lord said she, and now I need not
marvel any more, that I heard no news from you in so long a time, having
work enough to do, to govern these Ladies. Amadis and the Emperor led her by
either arm, when Oriana came and did her humble reverence, as the Queen also
did the like to her. But Galaor, who was none of the hindemost, beholding the
Queen Briolania: left all the rest, and went to her, and kissing her, she
blushed so sweetly, that Amadis perceiving it, said. Madame, I hope here after
(having so good a Knight to be your servant) you will divide a little of that
dainty color, between your self and him, for he has great need of it, as
you may perceive, and therefore to your gracious mercy I commend him.

Galaor, who had not seen her, since his parting from Sobradisa, when he
brought Florestan thither, but only one other time, being as then very young,
when she came into Great Britain to seek Amadis: found her now so fair,
and grown great with infinite rare perfections, that his former love to her
renewed so strongly, that he, who never sought after a woman, to marie her,
resolved now to have none other then she, and she with the self same purpose
to him. And so it came to pass, for soon after, they were married, and of them
descended sons bold and hardy, which conquered by (their valor) many
strange countries: as you shall understand more at large in the fist book,
reading the actions of Esplandian, and there, all their high enterprises, are
amply discoursed.

But returning to our former business, so soon as the Queen Elisena, was
entered the Park: the Knights (according to the custom ordained by Oriana, on
the day when Amadis brought her thither) departed: and this law lasted, until
the marriages agreed upon, were celebrated in the presence of King Lisuart, as
also of the Queen Brisena, whose coming thither was hourly expected. In the
mean while, their usual exercise was, some to hunting, others to hawking,
according as the time and season served. For the place was accomodated with all
kind of Beasts, Fowls of the River, and other such like pleasures, as it were
most admirable to be hold. And in these varieties of delights we will leave
them, to tell you, what happened to Bruneo, Angriote, and Branfill, after their
parting from the queen Elisend.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Bruneo de bonne Mer, Branfill and Angriote, went on with the Queen of
Dacia: and what adventures happened to them.

AFter that the three knights were entered into the Ship, belonging to the
queen of Dacia, she not knowing their names, began in this manner with them.
Lords, seeing it has pleased you to undertake this travail for me, let me
entreat you, to tell me what, and who you are, to the end, I may do you such
honor as becomes me. For you know, that I have no more understanding of you,
then as one that never saw you, until I came aboard the ship, where I found
you in company of the queen. Madam, answered Angriote, our same is (as yet)
so slenderly noysed through the World, that to tell you our names, will give
you no greater knowledge of us, then before: nevertheless, because your desire
is such, I will presently therein resolve you. These two my friendly
companions, are brethren, the one named Branfill, the other Bruneo de bonne
Mer, not long since affianced to the Princess Melicia, sister to Lord Amadis
de Gaul, to whom you were travailing. As for my self, I am called Angriote
d'Estrauaus, who desires to do you any service.

Oh my fair stars, quoth she, what friendly conducts have you been to me?
Never could I wish for better tidings, because I have heard you much esteemed,
by such as have spoken of you to my late king and husband, and how helpefull
you have been to Amadis, in behalf of the Princess Oriana: which increases
my hope now better then ever, that I shall be fully revenged on the traitor,
who has so highly wronged me. Madam, said Angriote, we will do for you what
we can, without spare of any thing in our power. Humbly did the queen return
thanks both to him and the rest, and from that time forward, showed her self
more sprightly disposed, then before she had done. And within some short while
after, they discovered the coast of Dacia, where as they purposed, so they
took landing.

Now did Angriote think it most convenient, that the queen should keep still
aboard the ship, until they perceived how the affairs proceeded, and that
they (being guided by the two knights which attended on the queen) should ride
directly to the besieged City, where gayning means of entrance, the two
Princes might be acquainted with their tidings. Hereupon, they committed her
to heavens protection, and rode away keeping the most covert passages they
could, till dark night ouer-tooke them, and hoping to escape the watch, fell
into the ambush of ten knights, five of which being slain the other five fled
to the Camp, to raise the Alarm.

In the interim time, Angriote and his consorts still rode on, even until they
came close to the walls of the City: where the guides called to the
Sentinel, and being well known to the Watch, a Posterne was suddenly opened
for them, whereat they entered, and quickly were conducted to the two Princes
lodgings, Sons to the murdered king. They understanding the occasion of their
ariuall, and that the queen their mother, was returned in health and
prosperous success: first gave thanks to heaven, and then welcomed them in
such good manner, as their present estate and distress could afford. Yet let
me tell you, they came but to a very sorry supper, for there was a great dearth
of victuals in the City, through the severe besieging of the enemy, and our
knights were so hungry (not having eaten any thing all that Day, that they
needed no sauce to whet on their apetite. Wherefore seeing no other redress,
and making a virtue of necessity; they went to rest.

All this while, the Duke and his Army kept themselves in form of battle,
remaining quiet till the break of Day: but then the other five knights of the
watch, which had escaped from the rest, brought such dreadful tidings, as
they verily persuaded themselves, that some fresh succor was coming to the
City. When it was fair day, each went to his charge, and the kings Sons,
with the knights of the Enclosed Isle, called a counsel of the principal
Captains and commanders: Wherein was concluded, that one part of their people,
should be ready to issue forth the night following, at the changing of the
Watch, as well to make an essay of sudden surprising the enemy: as also, to
get forth (during the Allarm) the younger of the two Princes, with Bruneo and a
guide only, for conducting them to the nearest neighboring towns, and
villages, to ^^rge their revolt from the faithless Duke. Where-to they easily
condescended, in regard of their unjust oppressions: as also, because the
queen was returned, and the knights which she had brought with her.

Hereupon, about the dead of night, Angriote and Branfill the chief
undertakers of this enterprise) came to the place where they found their men
ready to march. The night was extraordinary dark, with a mighty wind and
extreme rain, so cold; as seldom had been felt the like: which gave them
great hope, to find but small resistance at the Watch, as indeed it fell out
to their expectation. For, so soon as each man had put a white cross upon his
breast, to know one another in the horrid darkness: they went out secretly at
a false Port, marching on fair and softly, without the least noise, and
seazing on the Scouts, slew them, before the watch could understand any thing.
For, the time did so (...) them, as some slept, others lay to shelter
themselves in the Trenches: so that they made a shrewd slaughter of them,
before the Allarm could come to the camp. By which happy means, they of the
City, (following their good fortune) ran in upon the rest, whom they found in
their Tents and Cabanes, and of them also they made such a massacre; as the
clamor came to the Dukes ears, and he presently mounted on horseback, with
such few followers as he could get to him.

Now was the Alarm, re-enforced, and the noise of Drums and Trumpets so
great, beside the outcry of the Soldiers, the impetuous murmur of the winds
and rain: as the very boldest spirit became much daunted, because there was
neither Tent nor Pauillion, but they were all overthrown, and rampled in the
mire. Notwithstanding, the Duke compassed the means to rallire the more part
of his horsemen, and with some small number of his foot, marched directly
against his enemies: who perceiving their approach, and contenting themselves
with what they had done; made a soft retire toward the City, because their
strength did no way equal their enemies, who followed upon them with a fierce
charge. But Angriote and Branfill (being in the re^stood them so courageously,
as very many were dismounted, and more ^ore wounded. Which the Duke well
observing, began to despair of his success, and as it many times comes to
pass, that men thinking to revenge their injuries, run thereby into greater
peri^ls: even so this wicked Prince (guided more by fury, then reason) rushed
in so far among his enemies, as by a powerful stroke with a Mace or Battle.
A^e, he was beaten down, taken and carried away. At the sight hereof, the
terror of his Soldiers, grew so great that being quite out of h^rt, they
retired to their Camp, and Angriote and his followers, returned back into the
City, with their booty.

During the time of this hot ski^mish, Bruneo de bonne Mer, seeing a fit
and commodious hour for his dislodging: set on away with the young Prince, and
his guide, and without any impeachment, travailed so successefully, that they
arrived (by point of day) (...) to a goodly Town or City (...) Alumenta, where
they met (...) two Knights, armed at all points, who had been sent by the duke
the day before, about some especial affairs. The first that discovered these
Knights, was the guide, who showing them to Bruneo, said. Sir Knight, for Gods
sake let us turn back again: see you not two of our most especial enemies
making toward us. Art thou afraid? answered Bruneo, be careful only of thy
Master, and for the ^^st, leave that to me. So charging his l^n^^, and giving
the spur to his noise, he cried out aloude to the two Knights. Traitors,
thieves, supporters to the bad cause of the (...) Duke in the world: you are
but dead, except you defend your selves the better.

By this cry, the other well knew, that (perforce) they must prepare for fight:
wherefore, without returning any answer, they ran both at Bruneo. The one
crossed and broke his Lance, and the other failed in the attainte: but so did
not Bruneo, for his Lance entering between his thighs and the Saddle, threw
the Knight to the ground with so violent a fall, that there he lay more then
half entranced. His other companion, hoping to revenge his cause, drawing
forth his sword, returned upon Bruneo, and gave him such a blow, as cle^t his
Shield in the midst. But he carried not this comfort far, for Bruneo joined
with him suddenly, and reached him such a mighty stroke on the Helmet, as made
him sit staggerring on his horse: by which advantage, catching fast hold on
his Gorget, he drew him so strongly to him, that down he fell to the ground
amazedly.

There lay the Knight shaking and quaking, while Bruneo (diverse times)
couruetted his horse over him, even as if he meant to tread him in pieces: as
indeed he had done, but that he cried out to him for mercy. Arise then, said
Bruneo, and see if thy companion be dead, or no. The Knight being full of
pain, rose quakingly up, and coming to the other, took off his Helmet, when
receiving air, he began to breath. Lift him up, said Bruneo, into thine own
saddle, and sit behind to supporte him up: which the Knight accordingly did.
Then looking about, he saw that the young Prince and his guide were fled: but
they returned again upon fight of the victory, and being come to him, he said
to the Kings son. My Lord, here I present you two prisoners, advise with
your self, whether I shall pardon them, or put them to death before your face,
for more terror to the rest, that follow the treacherous Duke their Master.
Sir Knight, replied the Prince, they should not pay penance for this offense, I
pray you send them back to the Camp, where, if they will become ours, I will
cause them to be as well respected, as lies in my power to do.

This advise was well liked by Bruneo, and much did he commend the wisdom and
good mind of the young Prince, wherefore, upon receipt of their fidelity, they
rode together to the City Aumenta, where they were no sooner arrived, but the
inhabitants knew both the guide, and their young Lord. Whereupon, in a very
small time, all the people assembled about him, to kiss his hand, and offered
him the very uttermost of their power: whereof Bruneo being very joyful, spoke
unto them in this manner.

worthy Citizens, the love which you have shown to this young Prince, your
true and lawful Lord, binds him to you in endeared affection, so long as he
shall live: and the trust which he reposeth in you, should bind you to love
and honor him. You see he is but young, and has small means to expel the
enemy out of your limits, and that enemy (as you all well know) murdered by
treason, your late good and royal King. Since when, usurping on the kingdom,
he has besieged the chiefest City, and keeps his strength (as yet) so
near about it: that without your aid, it is in danger of utter spoil and
ruin, with all the noble Citizens and good Knights abiding therein. Wherefore,
worthy Lords and Citizens, now that occasion so lovingly offers herself, by
return of the Queen your royali Mistress, who has brought with her three
Knights of the Enclosed Isle, whereof I am one: conclude among your selves to
revenge such injuries as you have received by the traitor, and do so much,
that your legittimate Lords may be re-seated in their rights. And this I dare
assure you, if you will follow me: that I shall have the means, to surprise
both him and his Army, yea, utterly to overthrow them; only by the help of my
companions, who are already within the City, and they will not fail to
issue forth, so soon as I shall give them the signal.

As thus he continued on his Oration, there arrived two peasants, who came in
great have from the camp to advertise the^ of this city, for certain: That
the besieged knights and Citizens, had made a fallie forth (in the night) upon
the Watch, whom they had slain, as also a great number more, before they could
be any way succored. Moreover, that the Duke himself was beaten down from
his horse, taken, and led away prisoner into the City, by two strange
knights, as the report went. Hereof, said these fellows, there need no doubt
to be made, because we were in the camp when the Allarm was given, where we
were constrained to abide, by reason of the turbulent night, which hindered us
from selling our victuals. But we were never in such a fear, and not without
great reason: considering that the Soldiers were (and yet are) so mightily
terrified, as they ran away confusedly, striving who shall get himself
first farthest off. So help me God, said Bruneo, these are happy news. Now
bestirre your selves, my friends, let us forthwith part hence, and pursue them
in the rere, that we may the sooner send them packing.

At these words every man cried, to Arms: but Bruneo (upon better advice)
deferred this have until the evening, to the end they might come upon them
unprovided: in the mean while they went to receive some sustentation, that
they might the better march away in the night. His ad^uice was geeerally
allowed, and they all resolved, to live and die with him. Hereupon, the hour
for their departing being come, they were all marshalled in order, and each
battalion, appointed, marching on in good order toward the Camp: and about
break of day, they came near it within a quarter of a league. Then Bruneo by
fiering of a Beacon, gave a signal to them of the City, aduertising them
thereby what he intended. But the Dukes watch perceiving it, presently sent
intelligence to their Captains, who doubting some immediate danger, and not
forgetting the precedent night and great loss: caused their bag, and baggage
closely to be trussed up, and raised their siedge so speedily, as they were
gone three leagues off, before any knowledge could be had of them, or where they
were.

But, so soon as these news came to Angriote and Bruneo, they and their
people mounted on horseback to follow them: finding them very conveniently,
driving all their luggage before them: then they began to skirmish each
against other, and although the harquebuziers kept themselves behind with the
greater part of the Horse: yet were they so sharply charged by them of the
City, that they fell from their ranckes, and ran into great disorder. By
means whereof very many lost their lives, a great number were taken prisoners,
and more had received much greater damage, but that they rallied themselves
together again, and kept in a fast combination.

Angriote well observing this, and calling to mind, that the pursuit of a
desperate enemy, causes (often times) the loss of a battle already won:
commanded retreat to be sounded, and the rather, because dark night
approached. So, returning back to the City, each man betook himself to
rest till the next morning, concluding then, to go visit the Queen, who (as
you have already heard) remained still aboard her Ship, in expectation of
tidings from the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and of her sons. Accordingly,
they came thither to her, finding her so oppressed with melancholy, as no woman
possibly could be more. But when she saw them in so good disposition,
understanding also the surprisall of her enemy, and dissipation (most ruinous)
of his Camp: her soul became extraordinarily joyful, as triumphing in the
very highest happiness the world could yield her. And the Princes, her sons,
with the three Knights, came near unto her, to kiss her hand: which she
would not suffer, but embraced them very graciously, declaring no mean
thankfulness for her happy fortune.

Afterward, they conuayed her into a rich Litter, purposely brought for her
journey, and so co^ducted her to the Palace in most royal manner: where she
was no sooner alighted, but she commanded the Duke to be brought before her, as
(accordingly it was performed. And albeit she had resolved with her thoughts,
not to execute any revenge upon him, but (even in mere pity) to forget and
forgive all: yet considering what shameful wrongs she had suffered, and the
murder of the King her husband so fresh in her soul; she commanded him
presently to the ^ibbet. But the Knights of the Enclosed Isle were not
therewith contented, and therefore, in most gracious and modest manner, told
her: that they never took any prisoner to mercy, to whom (after-warde) they
used any molestation. Wherefore, they desired her, to contain her purpose till
their departure: and then, to do what she thought fit, and as her Council
should best advise her, requiring also favor for their departure.

She fearful to offend such honorable and high deserving friends, returned
this answer. Nay my Lords, think not, but I will do whatsoever you command
me: yet notwithstanding, you must needs grant me, to stay here with me
eight or ten days more. In which time, I hope to compass the Coronation of
my son, and then to send him along with you to Lord Amadis, if you will but
honor me so much, as to be his conuoy thither. Madame, quoth they, we are
all herewith heartily contented. Hereupon she sent presently to one of the
Masters of the household, giving him charge, to see all things fitting in
readiness, as were belonging to such a solemnity, and in him there wanted not
any diligence.

The day of triumph being come, the young King, accompanied with the Princes of
his blood, the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and multitudes of noble Personages
more: rode maiestically to the Cathedral Church, where they heard solemn and
divine service. Afterward, he was conducted to a goodly Theater most
magnificently adorned, and there by sound of Trumpets, and voice of the
Heralds, he was openly proclaimed King: he throwing much gold and silver among
the people, crying three several times, Largess, Largess, Largess, given by
the most mighty and magnanimous Prince, Garinter, king of Dacia.

As four of the chiefest Dukes in the kingdom, conducted him to the place
where the royal feast was prepared, the Trumpets and Clarions sounded on all
sides: so that, for the space of three whole days and nights together, the
people ceased not, from making Bonfires, and other signs of joyful
triumphing. As also the Nobility of the Court, had Maskes, Tourneies, Dances,
and such like pastimes: which had continued much longer, if Angriote and his
companions would have stayed there. But they earnestly importuned the Queen,
to license their departure, which (much against her mind) she was enforced to
grant, and before their embarquing, thus she spoke to the^. Noble Gentlemen,
although it is impossible for me, in any duty to requite what you have done
for me, without any merit at all on mine own behalf: yet is so falls out
at this season, that (running into a farther debt) I am to solicit you with a
second request, and wherein, I desire you, not to deny me. You know very well,
that I never saw Lord Amadis de Gaul, for whose sake you did partly (as I
imagine) undertake this long voyage, which has fallen out most fortunate to
me, and to your endless honor for ever. Now, I have not any thing more dear
in esteem, then the new created King my son, who (as I have already told you)
I desire to send to the Enclosed Isle, to live among so many good knights as
are there: until he come to years fit for knighthood, hoping that a novel
kind of breeding there, will highly advantage him, and that then, Lord Amadis
will deal so honorably with him, as to bestow knighthood on him with his own
hand. Wherefore, once more I entreat you, to take him with you, and deliver
him to Lord Amadis, as a present from me.

Madame, answered Bruneo, I faithfully promise you, that (with all my heart) I
will perform it; and further I dare assure, that he will be very welcome
thither. Take order then for his equipage, because we would aboard to morrow,
the wind now sitting so prosperously for us. Hereupon, the Queen having
fitted all things necessary for her son: with a very honorable train,
conducted him to the Ship, and there committing him to God, and the Knights
loving care, away they sailed, discovering (in few days) the coaste of the
Enclosed Isle. But before they landed, they sent to Amadis, to let him
understand, that the king of Dacia was in their company, being purposely sent
thither to him, and to remain under his government. Which caused Amadis
immediately to take horse, and accompanied with many of the knights, conducted
him to the lodging of king Perion.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How King Lisuart, his Queen Brisena, and their Daughter Leonora, departed
from Vindilisore, to go for the Enclosed Isle according as it was concluded
on, at their setting from Lubania.

NOt long since, it was told you, that the same day as King Lisuart came to his
Queen, he acquainted her, with his promise made to Amadis, and some others
beside: entreating her likewise most earnestly, to take order for all things
fitting her own preparation, and her daughter Leonora ^whom he had affianced,
by his word, to the Emperor, and that they might set away the next week
following. In the mean while, he sent to Galuanes and Mad^sima, to come to
bear him company in this vaoyage, as accordingly they did. Soon after, they
set on forward, and at the end of eight days, came within less then four
leagues of the Palace of Apolidon. Whereof when king Perion and the rest were
advertised, they mounted on horse back, with the Ladies and Gentlewomen,
ryding not far before they met them. Many embracings past on either side,
but Amadis and Galaor alighted, so soon as they came to King Lisuart, only to
kiss his hand; which he would not suffer, but embracing them in his arms,
desired themto mount themselves again.

King Perion, who came one of hindemost, gave the spur to his horse, and
gallopped to meet king Lasuart: who came in the like manner toward him, and
they both embraced very lovingly together. In the mean space, Oriana went to
the Queen her mother, and doing her very humble reverence: she entertained her
so graciously, as no woman living could do more. As the Queen Elisena,
Briolanta, Sardamira, and all the other Ladies saluted each other: the Emperor
Arquesill came, and alighted from his horse, to kiss, and welcome them. Then
the knights of great Britain went among the Ladies, who held them in pleasing
and familiar discourse, until they came to the Palace of Apolidon, where King
Lisuart, and Queen Brisena, were lodged. Quedragant conducted King Cildadan to
his lodging; Amadis, King Arban and Gr^medan, Guillan Galaor and N^randell, and
Agraies his uncle Galuanes, all these were thus honorably attended.

Now was Esplandian just equal in age with the young king of Dacia, and this
very day grew in such friendly acquaintance with him: as they made themselves
vowed companions together: never (thence forward) to sunder company. But more
especially, after they received the order of knighthood, and during their
voyage to Constantinople, where Esplandian became amorous of the fair
Leonerina, whose gracious company he enjoyed, by the means of his companion
Talanque, Son to Galaor, and Manely le Sage, Son to King Cildadan, whom
they begot on the two Nieces to Vrganda the Unknown, in the time of their
imprisonment: As our history more amply relates in the fifth Book, wherefore
at this time we will speak no more thereof, but return to our first purpose.

After the ariuall of king Lisuart in this manner, the Lords, Ladies, and
Gentlewomen, being walking together in the garden of Apolidon, viewing the rare
and most artificial pictures: they heard (without the palace) a wonderful
noise and clamor of people, and therefore sent immediately to know the reason
thereof. News came to them for certain, that on the Sea there was a fire so
dreadful, as never had the like been seen before, and it made directly
toward the Port: where-upon, the knights sent for their horses, mounting on
them presently, and the Ladies up into the highest Turrets, the better to
behold this marvel. All of them did visiblie discern on the Sea, a flaming
Rock so impetiously driven by the winds and waves, as if it were continually in
danger of drowning. And that which most augmented their fear, was, a sudden
alteration of this fire, into the shape of a most horrible and hiddeous
serpent, which in more then supernatural manner, extended forth his wings so
far, as a very good Archer was not able to shoot.

If this gave them just cause of amazement, that which followed did no less,
for it came directly toward them, with his head so highly exalted, as the head
or scuttle of a Shippe-mast, delivering such thick black smoke out at his
nosthrills, as made the sight of it to be lost many times together: then
suddenly again was it heard to hiss and make a noise, as never could the like
devilish terror be talked of: the common people taking it to be some divine
judgment, and a punishment sent from heaven, for a notorious affliction upon
them all, fled up into the highest part of the Isle: and the like did most part
of the knights, though much against their minds, because their Horses,
affrighted at the horrid sight of this monster, began to snoare, and fling
about, and foaming upon the bits in their mouths, ran up into the
mountains, their Masters being unable to stay them. Yet in the end, such as
preferred honor before loss of life, got themselves dismounted, returning
back to the Sea shore, to make resistance against this monster, if it should
presume to come on land.

No sooner were they returned thither but they saw the Serpent advance his
wings, as if he meant to fly away: and instantly from underneath them
launched forth a small Frigot, covered with cloth of Gold, having two dwarfes
in it rowing with Oars, conducting a very beautiful Damsel, and two
Esquires attending on her. Suddenly King Lisuart called to mind how terribly
Vrganda affrighted him, when first she came to him in the City of Fenusa,
assuring them all that doubtless this was she and none other. Sir, answered
Amadis I began to imagine as much, so soon as I discovered the Friggot:
although (before) I knew not what to think, but was verily persuaded, some
Devil was come to work us mischief.

Scarsely had he concluded these words, but Vrganda showed her self to them
all: whereupon, their former great fear, was converted into as exceeding joy,
and so much the rather, because in her own familiar shape she came on Land,
which seldom before she used to do. For at all other times, when she would
be seen in any such assemblies: she came in the likeness of an aged woman or
Beldame, or as a child, a beast, a bird, or any similitude best pleasing to
her self. Then King Lisuart and Amadis went on to welcome her, and so did the
Emperor, whom she had never seen before: Nevertheless, she shaped her
course to him, before any of the other, and spoke to him in this manner.

Sir, never in all my life time have I been in any place, that was honored
with your royal presence, till now: yet notwithstanding, I know you so well,
as I desire to do any grateful service to you and your Empress, as always
has been my studious inclination, and as your selves hereafter shall perceive.
For by my means, the first fruit proceeding from your generation, shall be
preserved from diverse dangers; wherefore I wish you to remember my words. And
although my abiding is far from the limittes of your Empire: yet can I (when
pleases me) be with you in Rome, in less space then the compass of a
natural day. Lady, said the Emperor, far be it from me, to refuse your
gracious kindness, much less, to misprise your happy remembrance: Assuring
you, I hold this for the greatest good that can happen unto me, and I hope
that you will keep promise with me. I will not fail answered Vrganda.

Then looking about, and seeing Amadis near her, kissing him, she said.
Although (my Lord) you have been so highly favored by Fortune, as to teach
the height of your affectionate desires: yet give not too much credit to her
wanton smyles. For, although you seem to be now above all stormy tempests,
being in the peaceful possession of your long loved Oriana, whom you prefer
before al things else whatsoever: yet let me tell ye, you will find more
serious business hereafter to be performed, then (as yet) you have gone
thorough. Because blame will more nearely choke you, by loss of the
reputation wherein you now are; then if you had never attained thereto. But as I
have been always yours in your passed fortunes, so credit me. I will continue
in them that are to come. Madame, quoth he, considering the manifold favors
I have received from you, and what true signs of love you have always shown
me: you may well persuade your self, that while any breath remains in this
body, you have entire power of commanding me, and that my desires are apted to
your obedience. Concerning such travails, as are destined and ordained to me:
you know my wonted patience to endure them, and my undoubted hope in you, will
enable me with sufficient strength to withstand all encombrances, being
guided by your favor and good counsel.

King Lisuart then came to her, saying. Madame, if you be so pleased, let us
go on to the Palace of Apolidon, where the Ladies do attend your coming:
for they are already advertised of your ariuall, and there we may much better
confer together. With all my heart, quoth she, and calling the two young
Squires forth of the Frigate, placing the one on her right hand, and the other
on her left, she went on with the King and troop: then calling Esplandian to
her, thus she spoke. I promise you (fair youth) I have had better remembrance
of you, then you can imagine: And behold I have brought hither these two
Gentlemen, to keep company with you, because you will stand in much need of
their help, when you shall be in the greatest heat of all your business.
Wherefore, hence forward, I pray you to affect them, even as dear as your
sefe.

Then, perceiving the Ladies coming to meet them, she gave over talking, to
do them reverence: and as she kissed each after other, coming to Oriana,
she spoke out so loud as all might hear her. Believe me Madame, never was I
better pleased, then being in such company: for hardly can (elsewhere) be
found such store of bright beauties, enriched with all rarietie of choice
perfections. Madame, answered Queen Brisena, no doubt but your words would be
very true, if all here were such as you speak of. So taking her by the hand,
she conducted her into her chamber, where the Knights left them, that they
might converse more privately together.

CHAP. XXIX.
Of the conference which Amadis had with his Cosen Dragonis, in giving him the
kingdom of the Profound Isle, and the Princess Estoilleta to wife, whom he
had loved a long time.

DRagonis was not with Amadis, when he made partition of king Arauignes
countries, and them belonging to the other prisoners: but followed a Damsel,
that guided him from the Monastarie of Lubania, to fight with Angriffort, Lord
of the Deep Gulffe, who kept her father in prison, to compel him surrender up
a Castle, belonging to him. And the Combat was wonderful between them, for
Angriffort was the most hardy and valiant Knight, then living in all that
country. Notwithstanding, Dragonis had the victory, and made him promise, to
meet him at the Enclosed Isle, within twenty days next ensuing, and there to
crave mercy of the Princess Oriana.

This Dragonis that we speak of, was young, actiuely disposed, and an
excellent warrior: as he well declared in the Isle of Mongoza, when King
Lisuart, came thither to assault Galuanes. For the more part of his
confederates being defeated and fled: he kept a narrow passage, with very few
men, and performed there such deeds of Chivalry, as he became famous thereby
all his life time after. Now, he could not come to Amadis so soon, but at his
return from the Deep Gulffe, he went to Galuanes, and being both together:
they received Letters from king Lisuart, whereby Galuanes was requested, to
come and bear him company, according as formerly he had made promise. By this
means, Dragonis and he iourneyed thither together, and so soon as they were
come to the Enclosed Isle; Amadis remembering what good services his Colen
Drogonis had done for him, in the late foughten battles, and what wrong
should be offered him, if he did not partake in the like pleasures and
contentments, equal with his other companions: being alone by themselves
together, thus he spoke to him.

Cosen, since such time as you left us, diverse marriages have been concluded
on, of the chiefest knights here present, and those gracious Ladies, whom they
have so long time entirely affected. Moreover, by general advice and consent,
the countries belonging to king Arauigne, Barsinan, and our other prisoners,
have been divided, and you therein forgotten, by reason of your absence: Yet
there is further consideration had of you, as you shall presently understand. I
have been lately advertised by a Squire, that since our parting for Lubania,
the King of the Profounde Island (being grievously wounded before) died on the
Sea, some few days after, sailing homeward from recovery of his health. In
which respect his kingdom shall become yours, and likewise you shall enjoy in
marriage the beautiful Estoilletta, by you long time beloved: merely as due
desert, she being a fair, wise, and virtuous Princess, descended from Kings
by either side, and as dearly esteemed by Oriana, as any that I know, me
thinks that (for your own conte^tment) no better satisfaction can be made you:
Then to enjoy her whom you love, and esteem as choysely as your self.

Dragonis being not a little pleased, to hear Amadis speak in this manner:
knew not (at the first) what answer to make. For he was once purposed, to go
along with Brunco and Quedragant, in conquest of those lands, which Amadis had
divided to them, and from thence, to seek after strange adventures in
Sardaignia: then to join with king Florestan, and assistt him in his serious
affairs. Notwithstanding, considering how Amadis affected him, and what
zealous care he showed on his behalf; he promised to obey him. Whereupon, the
next day following, he and Estoilletta were affianced together, in presence of
all the Knights, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, to general joy on every side,
expecting the long looked for day, when these marriages should be celebrated
and accomplished. The same night, Amadis desired of King Lisuart, the Dukedom
of Bristoy, for Guillan le Pensif: who gladly granted it, and the widow to the
deceased Duke also, for whose sake he had so much suffered, as thereby he got
the name of Pensive.

CHAP. XXX.
How the marriages of Amadis with Oriana, and the other Princes, and Ladies,
Were solemnly Celebrated in the Enclosed Isle: Where, the self same day,
Oriana made proof of the Arch of loyal Lovers, and likewise of the Defended
Chamber.

THe day being appointed, when the amorous knights should receive from their
Ladies, the fruit of their longing expectation, and that the marriages so long
time delayed, were come to the point of celebration: the holy man Nascian
prepared himself for that office, and after the solemnity in such cases used,
a coming from Mass, Amadis spoke thus to King Lisuart. My Lord, most humbly I
beg one boon of you, which reasonably you cannot deny me. Son and my best
friend (quoth he) I grant it with all my heart, what soever it be. Then I
entreat you sir said Amadis, command Madam Oriana your daughter, before we
sit down to dinner, to make proof of the Arch of loyal Lovers, as also of
the Defended Chamber: Whereto she would not (as yet) by any means listen, by
all entreaties made unto her. Howbeit, I have such confidence in her loyalty,
and likewise in her excelling beauty: that she will obtain the honor of the
place, whereinto (for more then a hundred years) neither Lady, or Gentlewoman
could be so happy as to enter. And hereof I do so much the rather assure my
self, having often times seen the statue of Grimanesa, which is portrayed in
her chief and most eminent perfection nevertheless, I am verily persuaded,
she never was equal to your daughter. And therefore by her means, we may
all enter this day into Apolidons Chamber, and there finish the solemnity of
this festival.

Son answered King Lisuart, these are matters not appertaining to me, and it
is to be doubted, that such an enterprise as this is, may induce some trouble
or molestation, in so worthy an assembly as here are met together. For we see
many times, desire to compass a case of importance, may dim both the eyes
and understanding of the attempter, and that in such sort, as he may mistake
one thing for another, and so run riot from all course of reason, whereby he
seemed (at first) to make his entrance. My Lord, said Amadis, I still contain
my former opinion, and that the success, will be answerable to my desire: free
from all harm or offense, but rather to the content of all this company.
Well, quoth the King, your will shall be fulfilled. So he called Oriana, whom
the kings Perion, and Cildadan (Bride-like) guyded by either hand, and thus he
spoke to her. Daughter your husband has requested a boon of me, which I have
granted, although I greatly doubt, that very hardly (in my opinion) it will be
accomplished according to his hope; nevertheless, you know that I have always
kept my word, and therefore advise your self, in doing that you shall be
enjoined.

Oriana being not a little joyful to hear the King her father speak so
familliarly; performing very great reverence to him, thus replied. My gracious
Lord and father, command what you please, I amready to obey you. Then daughter
(quoth the King) before you sit down as a Bride at the table, you must essay
the adventure, of the Arch of loyal lovers, and likewise that of the Defended
Chamber; this is the boon I have granted to Amadis. When these words where
heard by the other Ladies, a secret murmur ran suddenly among them; some for
the love they bare to Oriana, fearing least she should not finish so high an
enterprise, and to her honor: others more addicted to self conceit, made
promise to them of going beyond her. Notwithstanding, this striving had but a
small continuance, because the King had a hand in the business, and he well
knowing, that Olinda and Melicia, were desirous to accompany his daughter in
her fortune; entreated them thereto very earnestly.

But their choice friends, and new married husbands, were of a quite contrary
mind, and labored to alter them from this humor, fearing their falling into
danger, of loosing that, which they were not able to win themselves: and
therefore, they desired no such trial, but were satisfied with enjoying their
long expectation. By the faith I bear to God, said the King, you can no way
mislike their forwardness, but rather should highly allow thereof: because,
for ought I can perceive, they covet to make testimony of their loyalty, by
better means then you your selves are able to judge of, and it is my mind,
that they shall make their proof, before my daughter Oriana do attempt it.

This pleased Amadis extraordinarily, knowing well that they could not enter
into the Defended Chamber, before her: and this disfavor to them, would be the
higher augmentation of her honor. So Melicia and Olinda, went on toward the
Arch of loyal lovers, under which they passed without any impeachment. Then
the Brazen Statue began to sound so melodiously, as every one took great
delight to hear it; but especially Agraies and Bruneo above all the rest.
Going on further, the two ladies entered into the Garden, where they beheld the
Statues of Apolidon and Grimanesa. As they were busily looking on them, they
espied Orania almost under the Arch, looking behind her, if Amadis followed
her: and instantly, such an amiable blush mounted up into her face, that with
her own natural pale complexion, made her appear most sweetly beautiful.

No sooner was she just under the vault of the Arch, but the Image sou^ded,
much more harmonious and pleasing, then ever before had been heard by any:
casting forth of his Trumpet, Gilliflowers, Pinkes, Daisies, Colonbines,
Pauuces, and a thousand other kind of flowers, the most oderiferous that ever
were smelt. Then entering into the Garden, Melicia and Olinda called her, to
show her the figures of Apolidon and Grimanesa: but she was already come to
the Jasper pillar, where she found all their names newly engraven, but could
not guess how, or by what means. Herupon she called them to see what she had
done, and thence they returned to the Images, which they found to be so
ingeniously framed, as nothing wanted, but life it self, and speech:
especially that of Grimanesa, which seemed so exceeding fair, as Oriana grew
distrustful, of her entrance into the Defended Chamber.

But this doubt had no long lasting, for she going near to the Venus made of
Agate (only to take water of the fountain) the Statua put forth her right
hand, presenting her the Apple, while, snatching away the most excellent
pearl, hanging in her ear, she made the like tender of it with the other
hand. Now, albeit her two companions loved her very singularly, yet could they
not prevail over their own passions: but (beholding this extraordinary
favor) some secret sparks of envy took fire against her: yet she being
willing to leave nothing unperfected, went to the Dedalus, in the midst
where-of (as I have already told you) was the Colossus of Brass, holding the
Lantern, where the divine fire was kept by the Serpents, who looking on
Oriana, began fawningly to move their tails, and bow down their heads, in
sign of humiliation.

By this means, without any other hinderance, she passed on to the midst of
the Labirinth, and there beheld (at her own pleasure) the theft of Prometheas,
which in the presence of the three Ladies, vanished away, and never was
after-warde seen by any one, nor the Serpents neither. Wherefore the Ladies
returned back again, to the place where the Knights, and other of the company
attended for them. If now their amorous friends were in the maine height of
contentment; judge you fair Ladies, that have made proof of loves sweetest
favors. For mine own part. I would gladly make you believe, that they all
felt such a heaven of happiness, as I could hertily wish to my self. Now
listen what follows, and (perhaps) you shall hear matters, no less pleasing
and delightful.

The Ladies having ended these adventures, as you have lately heard, Grasinda,
being much offended, that she had not followed on with them: concluded in her
self, to approve that of the Defended Chamber, before any of the other, and
thereupon, coming to Amadis, spoke thus. My Lord, although my beauty cannot
satisfy mine own desire: yet it is not so distrustful of it self, but it
dare essay the adventure of the stairs, or ascending to the Defended Chamber.
For if that be likewise ended, without some of my pains imploiment; all my
life time (afterward) will be but irksome and tedious to me. Therefore, let
come what can or may, if I obtain entrance, my mind will be satisfied: but
if I meet with repulse, others have had the like fortune before me. Madame,
answered Amadis, it appears to me, that defect of beauty should no way be your
hinderance, much less any want of good will: so that, if you like to believe
me, you may pass them before any other, who (by this means) may well be
relieved by you, and spare their labor in attempting entrance.

Grasinda imagining that Amadis spoke as he thought, deferred no further, but
blessing herself with the sign of the cross: went on directly to the first
degree, which easily she ascended. But when she came to that of Marble, she
was repulsed back so rudely, that she lay along upon the ground, unable to
move either hand or foot. Which Quedragant beholding, ran to her, and lifted
her up gently in his arms: not without much pitying her estate, albeit he
was well assured that his infirmity would turn to nothing. Nevertheless,
such was his dear affection to her, as he most misdoubted her own danger by
conceit.

Agraies, who all this while stood talking with Olinda, spoke thus unto her.
Fair beauty, though madam Grasinda has had such ill success: yet you may
revenge her wrong, and therefore never fear, but proceed on boldly. So,
kissing her, he took her by the hand, and conducting her very near to the
step of copper: she passed it as easily as Grasinda had done before her. But
as the one was beaten back, weening to get over the marble staire, so the
other found no better fortune, but was suddenly surprised by the tresses of her
hair, and thrown to the ground very disgracefully. By means whereof, Melicia
advanced her self, and, even as if her heart and feet had flown together,
she passed over the two foremost stairs: whereby they which observed it, were
verily persuaded, that this adventure was only dedicated to her, and to none
other.

Now began Oriana to grow very suspicious, which lasted but a little while:
for very soon after, she was worse repulsed then any of the former, and so
shaken, that Bruneo, thinking her verily to be dead, began to grieve very
extremely. Notwithstanding, they that were well acquainted with the sight of
such accidents, did nothing else but laugh: knowing for a certain, that these
fears were but signs of better assurance. There remained now no more of the
four Ladies, to gain (by proof) the supremacy of beauty, for entrance into
the Enchanted Chamber, but only Oriana: And she standing somewhat near to
Amadis, smiling, thus he spoke to her. Madam, I know well enough that this
honor is only due to you, and many times I have assured your of it: therefore,
pursue you fortunate promise, and stand in dread of no danger whatsoever.

At these words, he left the Princess, and she, proceeding unto the stayres,
passed them all without any difficulty, but when she drew near to the doors
entrance, she seemed to feel an infinite number of arms and hands, which
very strongly and mainely resisted her. Nevertheless, she was not a jot
discouraged, but defended her self virtuously turning every way to any
resistance; and in mere despite of any impeachment, made free her passage,
yet much out of breath. But when she could no longer sustain her self, the
hand which first favored Amadis (as you have already heard in the beginning of
the second Book) drew her pleasantly in. Then an infinite of human voices
were heard, singing so loud as they were easily understood. Blessed be the
ariuall of that only and excellent Lady, none the like since Grimanesa, and yet
goeing beyond her in all beauties, in regard whereof, she is worthy of the
most valiant Knight, that ever bare arms this hundred years, and more; with
whom she may here henceforward, li^e at her own pleasure, according as best
shall seem to her self.

Instantly the chamber door flew open, and Oriana entered thereinto so highly
satisfied, as the command of the whole world could not more content her. Which
when Ysanio, the Governor of the Isle perceived, he plainly published before
them all. This day is the consummation of the Enchantments, which Apolidon left
here to perpetuate his memory: But seeing this Lady has entered the Chambers
all others may follow without any hindrance. Hereupon all the rest, as well
Knights, ^s Ladies and Gentle-women followed in after her, and there beheld all
the singularities, which have been already related to you, in the beginning of
this fourth Book; about which they spent so long pleasing time, as they quite
forgot when they should go to dinner. But the master of the household came to
king Perion, and told him, that their meat was near spoiling: Wherefore, he
took Oriana by the hand, and led her into the great dining Hale, where a
royal Feast was ready for them: there they sat down at each Table, according
as the master of the Ceremonies called them by name, and were served with the
most exquisite cheer, that could be possibly devised.

No sooner were the tables with-drawne, but they fell to dancing, and so spent
out the day, till they covered for supper, which being ended, masks, and
mummeries came in, continuing so long among the Ladies: till the Queens of
great Britain and Gaul withdrew the new married couples. Amadis had prepared
his lodging in the Defended Chamber, where he meant to rest with his long loved
Ortana: the like preparation was made for the Empress, and the other brides.
In the mean while, Amadis disroabed himself, to meet with her in lovely
embracings, whom he had so long time desired, and by infinite travails
dearly deserved. And being now alone by themselves, no doubt but they made
proof, of the greatest delights love could afford which fear had kept the^
from long before. And if they were well pleased we must needs think no less
of Brunco and Melicia, and also of the other amorous combatants, displaying now
their colors in the face of Venus.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Vrganda the unknown revealed before them all, such matters as she long
time had foretold before they happened. And how she took her leave of Amadis,
as also of all the other company, to return whence she came.

AFter that the triumphs and feastings were ouerpast, which continued for the
space of eight days together: Vrganda the Unknown (desirous to return home
to her own dwelling) desired the Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen, to meet on
the morrow following, in the great hall of the Palace, to the end, that before
her departure) she might imparte some matters to them, which as yet they never
understood. And for the apter way, the next day following, after dinner was
ended, and the tables taken away: in the midst of the whole assembly, she
called the two young Gentlemen or Squires which came with her in her Frigot and
taking them by the hand directing her self to the company in general, thus
she began.

Lords and fair Ladies, I know long time ago, and without the advice or help
of any mortal man that this meeting should be here in this place; after the
passed conflicts, wherein so many famous and worthy men have perished on
either side. And, God is my witness, if it, had lien in my power to help it,
how gladly I would have employed my very uttermost pains. But things being so
ordained, by the prescience of him, to whom all creatures owe honor and
obeisance: it comes to pass, that these occurrences have happened according
to his apointment.

And to let you understand, that I was not ignorant of those things thus come
to pass: I think you remember yet (very well) Madame Oriana, that being in the
City of Fenusa (you and I being bedfellowes together) you entreated me, to
reveal what fortunes were toward you. And albeit I did earnestly dissuade
you, to cease from such curious questioning: yet notwithstanding, in the end
(overcome with opportunity) I told you, that the Lion of the Doubtful Isle,
should issue forth of his den, and by his loud cries and roarings, affright
his guardes, so that in (mere despite of them) he should seize on your
person, and thereby appease his own extreme hunger.

Now Madame let me tell you, how this Prophecy has taken his full effect,
for if you heedfully observe it, Amadis your Lord and husband (more strong and
invincible then any Lion) came forth of that Isle, which by great reason might
be termed doubtful: and furiously assailed the Romans that had you in
guarde. Them he foiled, took you into his own power, and if (by you) he has
given any ease to his own affections, you both do best know it. As for you
Lord Amadis, I told you also at the same time, how constrained you should
oppose your life, even to the vtter-most danger that could be, and that the
recompense you should receive, for all the li^ll expense of your blood, would
be but a long and large separation, from her whom you so dearly affected. And
even so it came to pass, for after you had combated, and vanquished the
valiant Ardan Canile, where you fell into such peril, as every one does well
remember: the benefit came to King Lisuart, begetting you his hatred, and a
tedious absence from Madame Oriana.

And you Sir (quoth she to King Lisuart) have not forgot the Letter which I
wrote unto you, the same day as you found young Esplandian, in the Enchanted
Forest, hunting with his Lioness, whereby I gave you to understand (if yet you
remember it) the strange manner of his nourishing, having sucked three Nurses,
quite contrary one to another: a Lioness, an Ewe, and a Woman. Moreover, that
he should be the cause of planting love and peace between you and Amadis,
after that (by his means) you escaped the very greatest danger, that ever
befell you, since you received the order of knighthood. Whereof remains (as a
sufficient testimony) the sharp assault given you by the King Arauigne, only
through the procurement of Archalaus, and the succor you received from Amadis,
by the hasty diligence of the young gentleman, as also your instant alliance
one with another. Now may you easily perceive, if heretofore I revealed true
matters to you, or no: wherefore, I will now proceed on further, and foretell
other fortunes, yet remaining in the destynies of power.

First, I will begin with you two, quoth she to King Cildadan and Galaor. See
you these two young Squires, Talanque and Manely? Assure your selves, that in
them I have recompensed the services, which you have received from me, if I
have done you any heretofore: causing you to begette them on two such Ladies,
whom I do affect uery singularly. And this I dare warrant, that if heaven
bless them with life: they will prove to be Knights of great prowess, very
bold and active in Arms, and as fortunate as any that have fore-gone them.
Therefore you gentle Gentleman, receive them as your kind companions, loving
them at they shall deserve: for I dare assure you, that they will be
faithful, making no spare of their persons, to assist you in your greatest
perils, which Fortune prepared for you, before the day of your nativity:
which partly to obuiat and prevent, I caused the great Serpent (which you saw)
to bring me hither, within whose womb you shall receive the order of
knighthood, and there you shall be armed, and there is a gallant horse carefuly
kept for you.

Moreover, if hereafter you will remember it, it will guide you to the first
place, where the courage of your gentle heart, shall yield the first testimony
of your magnanimity, traversing (without peril or danger) the deepes of the
Sea, accompanied with many Knights of your blood. By it you shall beget a new
name, and be called in many places, the Knight of the Serpent, and under that
title, you shall fail into diverse strange countries, with much labor both of
mind and body, for the love of her, that can read the seven red letters on
your left shoulder, which will witness (by the lively color remaining in
them) that your heart is then enflamed with extreme love, Until such time, as
a flight of Ravens, breed on the Sea Marches, shall pass from the East parts,
over the proud waters of the Sea, where the great Eagle will be brought into
such extreamitie, as he shall find no safety in his own air. When the proud
peregrine Faulcon (more fair and sound of wing and feathers, then any other
bird of prey) shall assemble many, as well of his own kind, as of others, to
come and souccour the Eagle, and they fighting with the R^s, in hot fury,
shall well near kill them all, by the power of their beakes and tallons,
constrayning them (for their latest refuge) to enter the mercy of the waves,
where a great number of them will be drowned.

Then the great Eagle, acknowledging the benefit received by the gentle
peregrine; shall draw forth of his own body, a great many of his entrails;
and liberally give them to his tallons, that bestowed such favor on him, that
he may (at ease) assuage the extreme hunger, which had tormented him long time
before, and beside, he shall give him the free enjoying, of all the great
Forests and mountains in his own country. At the same time, the great Serpent
shall drown himself before the eyes of all present, in the very deepest of the
Sea, giving thereby to understand, that then it will be more convenient for you
(quoth she to Esplandian) to dwell more safely on the land, then on the moving
waters. Now necessity enforces, that I must go hence into other places,
where partly I cannot excuse my self: nevertheless, I will not fail to be
here again, at such time as you, and your companions shall be able to
undergo Knighthood. For I am well assured, that at that time, for some
occasion which is now concealed from you: you will all meet here again, and
many more with you, before whom I will discover wonderful things. In the mean
while, I charge you all upon your lives, that none of you be so bold, as to
come near the Serpent: for I dare assure you, whosoever aduenters it, shall
perish without any remedy,

And for as much said she to Amadis, as you detain in prison that wicked
wretch Archalaus, surnamed the enchaunter, who at all times has practiced to
work you mischief, and will hereafter attempt the like behold, here are two
Rings the one for you, and the other for Madam Oriana, the virtue of them is
such, as they that have them, or wear them, none of his enchantments can hurt
them, or any in their company, so being as he continues in captivity. And
therefore let me advise you, to have him straightly kept, and in a strong Cage
of Iron, where he may be seen of all: to the end, that living in such
misery, he may die a thousand times a day. For death is much more cruel, in
so prolonging a man's life, then when he quickly makes an end of him in a moment.

Madam, answered Amadis, I well perceive, that you deprive me of all hope, of
ever satisfying the favors that I have received from you and which day by day
you still heap upon me. Lord Amadis (quoth she) you did so much for me, when,
by your means, I received my friend from the Castle at the Causey where you
gave knighthood to your brother Galaor, as I hold my self sufficiently
recompensed, for all that I have done, or can do hereafter in your behalf.

Having thus spoken she took her leave of the whole company, and mounting
upon a Palfray, brought thither ready for her: she rode to the port where the
two Dwarfes awaited her coming. Thither did all the Knights conduct her,
until she entered into her Frigot, which suddenly was wrapped in so black a
cloud: as they lost the fight of her, and of the serpent also, which lay
houering half a league off, and showed not it self till three days after.
But the darkness being vanished away, they beheld it in the same place, where
Vrganda left it at the first. So the Knights ^urning to the Palace of
Apolidon, continued out their feasting, which lasted yet eight days longer. In
the mean while, the Emperor Arquisil sent to prepare the shipping, which his
predecessor Patin, brought with his Army to Vindilasore, and they being come
thither, his people were imparked and the next day following, for the earnest
desire he had to be at Rome, there to be lawfully crowned) he went aboard,
with his Empress Florestan and the Queen Sardamira.

The wind sitting fairly for them the weighed Anchors, and hoysed sails, so
that (in short while) they were a great way off from the coast of Britain,
and crossing the straites of Gibraltare, entered into the Leuant Sea: where we
will leave them sailing, returning to King Lisuart and the rest, in the
Enclosed Isle, the more part whereof prepared themselves, for the kingdom of
Arauigne. But others, more affecting their ease, made account of repayring home
to their own houses, especially King Lisuart. Nevertheless, before he
dislodged thence, knowing well, how faithful King Cildadan had been to him, so
long as all his serious affairs endured: he did the part of a most
magnanimous and bountiful Prince toward him, and before all them of the
Enclosed Isle, remitted the tribute he paid him, to the loss of many worthy
knights hearts, that had formerly served him, more by constraint, then any
inclination of good will.

So taking leave of them all, he returned home to his country. And the same
day, they remained there with Amadis, as well for the purposed war in
Sansuega, as elsewhere, held a Council: wherein was decreed, that Don
Quedragant, Bruneo de bonne Mer, Agraies, Angriote, d' Estrauaus, and Brian de
Moniaste, should go together, with them that were left of the Scots, Irish, and
Spanish, by whose help, the countries of Arauigne and Sansuega, (being
neighbors, and butting one upon another) might be the sooner conquered. And
because the country of the Profound Isle, confined on the kingdom of
Sobradisa: Galaor should grant supply of vittailes and passage, to his Cosen
Dragonis and his Army, which consisted of Gauls and Bohemians, with the
people that Galuanes could bring from the Isle of Mongoza.

Hereupon, such as were named, and set down for the war, took shipping on
the sixth day following, and the rest returned home to their countries: King
Perion to Gaul, King Cildadan to his Queen, and Gastilles to Constantinople.
But Amadis and Grasandor, kept themselves at, the Enclosed Isle, with Oriana,
Melicia, Grasinda, Mabila, Esplandian, and the King of Dacia, in expectation of
news from them, that were gone thence with so great a power.

CHAP. XXXII.
How Amadis went away alone, to revenge the knights loss, whom a Lady had
brought dead in a small Bark; And of that which happened to him.

AMadis and Grasandor, void (as it appeared to them) of all trouble or
offense, having them in their company, whom they most esteemed: took no other
care, but how to spend their time in all pleasure and delight. But Fortune,
utter enemy to any man's ease and quiet, when she likes to play her changing
prankes: had prepared a new occasion for them of sorrow and sadness, as
presently you shall understand.

One day among other, when these two Knights were gone to hunt the Heart, as
Amadis held his hound in a leash, for his best advantage of the game: he
espied a far off from the coaste, a small Bark on the Sea, yet making
toward land, and imagining it should have some strange occasion therein, he
descended down the Rock, to see what might ensue. But before he could go low
enough, the Bark was close at the shore, and a Lady came forth thereof, and
one Mariner, who (with much labor) drew forth a dead Knight, yet wholly armed.
Amadis made a stay somewhat short of them, to try what would ensue of this sad
beginning, hiding himself behind a ^ush for his better shelter, and long he
had not tarried there, but he saw the Mariner and the Lady, lay the Knight
along upon the Sands, placing his shield under his head.

This caused Amadis to conceal ^lse no longer, but going toward them, the
Lady presently knew him: Whereupon, suddenly throwing her self at his feet,
and fountains of tears flowing from hi^ eyes, she spoke thus. Alas Lord
Amadis, take pity on a poor woman, and for the honor of Knighthood, give
her succor: for I am she, that first laid hand on you (because the Queen
your mother had no other help then my poor self) when you were borne into
the World: moreover, I can well tell you, that all the harms I suffer at this
present, has happened to me by the love I have always carried to you. Amadis
seeing her so woe, begone, and even merely drowned in tears, as it were, could
not know her at the first sight: but looking on her more advisedly, he^
remembered her to be Darioletta, of whom we have spoken in the beginning of
the first Book, and took so great compassion on her, as raising her up very
graciously, he promised to assist her to his uttermost power. Alas Sir,
answered Darioletta, you have but one only means, whereby to relieve me in
this urgent extremity, and that is instantly to go with me whether I shall
conduct you.

Amadis pausing hereon a while, suddenly replied, how Lady, I have no arms to
fight withal, but my Sword only, and this bugle about my neck, and this hound
in my leash, I hope you will allow me some better fournishing then they are. As
for Arms, replied Darioletta, defer no further dallying but vn^ase this dead
Knight, and put them on: for if you stand on any trifling, it redounds not only
to my death, but also such another as you love, as well (if not more dearly)
then you do me. Speaking these words, she drowned her fair cheeks in tears,
and held Amadis fast about the legs not suffering him to stir from her,
whereby he became so moved to pity, that he yielded to her request.
Foreseeing very well, that if he returned back to Oriana; hardly he should
gain leave to go along with the Lady, and as their necessity vrgently
required.

Whereupon, arming himself with the Arms of the dead knight, and taking up
his Shield, he entered into the bark. As they were putting off from the shore,
one of the huntsemen came, to whom Amadis called, saying friend, go seek Lord
Grasandor, and tell him, that I am constrained (in mere pity) to go with
this Lady, whom I met on the Sea-sands but ere while, even in such mournful
manner as thou beholdest her. Pray him to pardon me, and to entreat as much
for me of Oriana, not to be offended with my sudden departure, but rather to
allow thereof: because I could no way excuse it, but to my great reproach and
dishonor. For thy self, I pray thee give burial to that dead knights body,
in recompense of his Arms which I have taken from him. Scarcely had he ended
these words, but a lusty gale of wind filled the Sails, and (in a moment)
they were so far off from Land, as Amadis could not hear the huntsmans
answer. As they sailed on, Amadis seeing the Lady to take no truce with her
tears: earnestly entreated her, to relate, whither she intended to conduct
him, and also the occasion of her mourning: whereto gladly she yielded,
beginning in this manner.

Understand Lord Amadis, that at such time as the Queen your mother departed
from Gaul, travailing toward the Enclosed Isle, according as the King your
father had sent for her: she sent a Lackey to my husband in little Britain,
where he was governor of your lands, willing him, that both he and I should
meet her at the Palace of Apolidon, where the marriages of you and my Lords
your brethren were to be solemnised. My husband ioying not a little hereat, and
my self much more: suddenly provided a good Ship, wherein we imbarqued our
selves, with my son, whom you saw dead on the sands, and also my daughter,
hoping to bestow her on Madame Melicia your sister. But night coming on us,
the waves and winds were suddenly tempestuously moved: so that by their
extreme violence, the sails, rudder, and tacklings of our Ship, were all
split in sunder. Our Pilot also was so distracted in mind, as all knowledge of
his Compass or Quadrant utterly forsook him, whereby it came to pass, that our
Ship remaining at mercy of the waves and weather: we were driven upon the Red
Island (utterly unknown to any of us) where the Giant Balan abides, of whom
you have heretofore heard, and there we landed.

At that very instant, we were enclosed, and seized on by the Guards of the
Port, and forcibly brought before the Giant: who presently demanded of us, if
we had ever a Knight in our company. My husband made answer, that both he
and his son had (long since) undergone that order. It behooves then, said
the Giant, that according to the custom of this country, you fight with me
one after an other, and if you can hold out but an hour only, you and yours
shall go free: but otherwise, you must remain my prisoners, and therefore make
choice of which you think fittest for you. And one thing I will acquaint you
withal before hand, that performing your manhood (as true Knights ought to
do) you shall find so much the more love and courtesy in me: but if (through
faintness of courage) you fail in any the least point, whereto the honor of
Chivalry binds you; I will use ye like villains and cowards, and lay you
where neither Sun or Moon can be seen, and so you shall remain ten years
together.

My husband hearing these threatenings, and observing the high stature of the
Giant; could warrant no assurance of himself. Nevertheless, knowing what it
was to fail any way: forgetting all fear, he replied. Basely are they bred
(quoth he) and ill is Arms bestowed on them, that through dread of danger,
shall refuse to fight for their own liberty. Nowitstanding, what assurance
shall we have of your promise, if we maintain an hours fight against you,
according as you have proposed. Nothing else, said the Giant, but my word
only, which never was, or ever shall be broken, for any good or ill that can
befall me. For rather will I consent, not only to mine own death, but
likewise, to my sons, and kindred, and servants beside, as already I have
made them to swear and promise. Before God, answered my husband, cause our
horses to be restored us, and the Arms belonging to my son and me; and
then begin the combat when thou please.

The Giant commanded them to be delivered. But my son, too rash and ill
advised, desired of his father, that he might begin the first fight: which
being granted him, he was so ill entreated by the Giant, that even in the first
encounter, he overthrew him so mainely, and his horse upon him, that both their
necks were broken in the fall. Whereat my husband being offended, and
thinking to revenge the loss of his son: ran against Balan, and brake his
Lance manfully on his Shield, yet the Giant stirred no more at the shock, then
if his body had been a huge and strong Tower. But as my husband perfected his
carrire, he took him by the arm, and (in despite of all he could do to
the contrary) lifted him out of his saddle, and carried him into his Castle,
without any more harm done to him, but shutting him up in a chamber, and I and
my daughter with him.

Pondering there on our great misfortune, having lost the life of my son; my
husband, daughter, and my self imprisoned, and our servants no way able now to
sted us: I fell into sad complaints, and spoke so loud (as it seemed) that the
Giant heard me. All good king Perion, said I, if thou or any of thy sons were
here, I am sure our wrongs would be quickly revenged: but I know you are all
too far hence. When the Giant had heard my words, and the Kings name: he
demanded of me, what knowledge I had of him, and whether he was the father to
one named Amadis de Gaul, or no? I answered him, he was, and that you and
your brethren knew me for such a one, as had dedicated her whole life to your
service.

Musing a while to himself, at last he told me, he was so desirous to see
you, that if I could compass the means, of bringing you to him, and that you
would fight with him for our liberty: he would allow this small Bark, and
this Mariner, because he would revenge the death of his father Mandafabul,
whom you slew cowardely (as he said) in the battle between the Kings
Cildadan and Lisuart, at such time as you called your self, the Bright Obscure.
Moreover, that you took him unprovided, as he carried away the King of Great
Britain prisoner in his Ship. And that you might have the more occasion of
going with me, and by an urgent motive to commiseration: he permitted me, to
bear the dead body of my son along with me, according as you saw at our
meeting. But first of all I demanded of him, that if it were my good hap to
find you: what security you should have, of wrong or injury from any, but
himself only? My faith and word alone (quoth he) which I will maintain so
long as breath is in my body, not only against him, but any other Knight
whatsoever, that would come hither with me in this service.

Thus (Lord Amadis) perceiving the offers he made me, and the extremity I was
in: I was so bold to undertake what you have heard, trusting in the mercy of
heaven, and your goodness, which never was denied to any, that desired your
help. For I am verily persuaded, that you will easily overcome this Devil,
that maintains so wicked a custom in his country. Dear friend answered,
Amadis, I am very sorry for the death of your son: what else remains to be
done, I will die but you shall have reason.

So they sailed on three days and three nights, together, and on the fourth,,
discovering a small Island, in the midst whereof stood a Castle somewhat far
off: which made him demand of the Mariner, if he knew the name of it, and to
whom it appertayned. To king Cildadan, quoth the Mariner, and it is commonly
called, the Isle of the Infants. Let us go a shore there, said Amadis, to
refresh our selus with water and victuals: for we know not what necessity we
may fall into hereafter. Hereupon, the Mariner struck in close to the foot of
a Rock, from whence they beheld a Gentleman, descending, who coming near to
them, faluted Amadis dema^ding, of whence and what he was. I am (quoth he) a
knight of the Enclosed Isle, and from thence I came not long since, thereto
expressly moved by this Lady, to have some reason done her, if I can, for an
injurious wrong offered her by one abiding in an Island not far from this as
I am given to understand.

The Gentleman requested to know his name. Balan answered Amadis. Well Sir,
quoth the other, and what course do you mean to take therein? Fight with him,
replied Amadis, and pluck down his ouer-daring Pride, whereby he iniurieth
many that never offended him. The Gentleman began to smile, and in a mocking
manner nodding his head, said. Sir Knight of the Enclosed Isle, there is a
great difference between saying and doing. I can easily believe, that you
came hither with such animation, but I am wonderfully affraide, that before you
return back (if you purpose to go on any further) a great part of the heat,
which I now see in you, will be more calmely qualified. Therefore sir, I
would advise ye, to turn some other way for, if the Lord of the Isle, from
whence you now came, who is (as I understand, and have many times heard) Amadis
de Gaul, and his two brethren, Don Galaor and Florestan, (accounted amongst
the very best Knights in the World this day living) had met together, and gone
about such a fond enterprise, as you have now undertaken: they were sure to be
much rather reprehended then allowed for wise and discreet men. And because
you are (in mine opinion) one of King Lisuarts knights, to whom my Master King
Cildadan, is an intimate friend: I would persuade you to believe me, otherwise,
worse will befall you, and you must needs prove a murderer of your self,
being advised, and will not avoid it.

I know not what may happen, answered Amadis, but I have heard all my life
hitherto, that it is an Article, proper and peculiar to them, that covet the
supreme place of honor and renown, to attempt occasions of most danger, and
difficulty. Not that they intend to be, so highly esteemed: But to shun
discouraging in so brave an enterprise. And seeing I am now so forward on my
journey; death it self cannot alter mine intention: wherefore Sir, I entreat
you in courtesy, to help us with fresh water and victuals, for which we will
be thankful to you. With all my heart, replied the Gentleman, and more; I
will bear you company thither, to see the success of your fortune, and
whether you shall speed well or ill with the Giant.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Amadis sailed away from the Port of the Island of the Infanta, to pursue
the purpose he had formerly intended.

THE Barque / belonging to Amadis, being furnished with fresh water and
victuals: the Gentleman of the Isle, snipt himself with them, and set sail
away. And as they were conuersing together, the Gentleman (who indeed was a
Knight of good fame) demanded of Amadis, if he did ever know King Cildadan?
Yes truly, quoth he, I have oftentimes ^eene him, among many good Knights, and
no long time since, in the contentions which King Lisuart and Amadis had
together: Where he carried himself so valiantly, as I never saw any Knight of
more merit. By my faith sir, replied the other, it is great pity, that
Fortune favors no better his high deserving, but evermore turns her back upon
him, yea, and ouer-rigorously: in making him (who is borne to great occasions)
tributorie to king Lisuart.

Of that tribute, answered Amadis, he stands now discharged, for the King you
talk of, has freely forgiven it him, for the noble deeds of Arms he has
discerned in him, and for his many services done to him, during the time of his
hot employments. Wherefore, the taxation, which was such a blemish to his
renown (not by any fault in himself, but only upon accident) is now clearly
acquitted. But know you this for truth? said the Knight. Yes verily, quoth
Amadis: And so related the whole business to him, according as you have heard
it already. Then the knight lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, said.
Blessed be the name of God, who has permitted my good King and Master, to
enjoy the right which is due unto him. Sir Knight, said Amadis, have you at any
time seen Balan. Yes, that I have, answered he. I pray you replied Amadis, to
certify me what you know concerning him. That will I very gladly, said the
knight, and (perhaps) in better manner then any man else you could light upon.

Understand then sir, that he is Son to the fierce Giant Mandaffabull, the
same man, that Amadis (when he termed himself the Bright Obscure) slew, and
on the very day, when the king my Master, and he of Great Britain, fought a
hundred, against a hundred, wherein perished many other Giants, all neighbors
to this country, and kinsemen to Balan, whom you now enquire for. By the death
of his father, he became and yet remains Lord of the Red Island, where he
makes his aboade at this instant, it being one of the most fertile Islands in
all the Eastern Sea, and of the greatest revenues, by means of the frequent
resort of strange Merchants, that land there at all times, of whom he exacts
an infinite tribute. Now sir, you are to observe beside, that if his father was
valiant, and not meanly experienced in Arms: His son exceeds him in all
things, only cruelty excepted. For, look how much the one was a Tyrant, and
most inhumane: the other is so much the more mild, peaceable and gracious, so
that it appears (almost) a miracle in nature, to see men issued of one and
the same lineage, to be so different in their qualities.

In this point, I must tell you a general opinion, that this fair demeanor
became hereditarie to him, only by virtue of his mother, who was one of the
most modest, benign and affable Ladies, then to be seen, far differing
herein from the other Giantesse, wife to Famongomad, and her own sister, she
being the most foul, deformed, sluttish and unhandsome creature, that ever was
seen of her kind. Whereby may be collected, that two such contrary
complexions, seldom have power to agree together, being derived from such
discordant nature. Notwithstanding, the reason hereof (in my poor opinion) may
be thus rendered: that virtue most commonly is a companion with beauty and
comely feature; but is a mere stranger to ugly deformity, and base disposition.

Now Sir, I am further to tell you, that it is more then twenty years since I
was appointed Governor of the Isle where you found me: therefore I can speak
to you the more understandingly, as a man most frequent, in knowledge of any
thing you can demand of me. For since the youngest years of the King my master,
I never went out of this Climate, by reason of the faithful trust reposed in
me, especially in those days, when the rich golden Sun shone not so
abundantly on him, as in later times it has done. For by his prowess and
other high deseruings, he married the daughter to King Abies of Ireland, who
was slain by Amadis, when he entitled himself, by the name of the gentleman
of the Sea, or the like kind of appellation.

Believe me Sir, said Amadis, you have done me a great pleasure, so well to
acquaint me with the conditions of Balan, whom I could wish (for mine own
benefit) to be of another kind of Character, then you have now described him
to me. For if he had been endued with such plenty of vices, as you have given
him to me in virtues: he cannot expect (when time shall serve for our
meeting) any hope in his own ability of strength. And let me tell you, till
this instant, I never stood in fear of his vtter-most power: albeit I cannot
now well resolve what to think of my self, in a case of such strange
contrariety. Nevertheless, come what can, more precious to me is mine honor,
then my life. And let me further entreat you to tell me, if he be married,
and whence he had his wife? In good faith (quoth the Knight) never man had
better fortune in marriage, then he, enjoying one of the most virtuous Ladies
that can be: she being daughter to Gandalack, Lord of the Rock of Galtares, by
whom he has a son, aged (as I imagine) about fifteen years.

Very sorry was Amadis when he understood for a certainty, what alliance was
between Balan and Gandalack, whom he loved dearly, for the nourishing which
his brother Galaor had of him, in the time of his infancy: and he could well
have wished, that this combat might have been against some other person,
although it should fall out more doubtful and dangerous to him. But if it were
against his own brother, he could not now deny it, in regard of his promise
passed to Darioletta. And so long they held on discourse, that dark night
ouer-tooke them, yet they sailed on merrily still, till somewhat ^arely the
next morning; they discovered the Island with the red Tower, whereby the whole
country had her name: because in the midst thereof was a goodly Castle
builded, environed with great Towers, and such walls as were of no mean
marvel to be seen.

Then the Knight seeing Amadis take some delight in beholding the^, said. Sir,
this Castle which you see yonder, was not built as this day, no^ more then an
hundred since: but as you now see it, so do ancient Histories speak of it,
that he who first founded it was named Joseph, son to that Joseph of
Aramathia, who brought the Sangreal into Great Britain, at such time as the
whole land consisted of Paganes. But by his means, the most part of the people
converted to the faith of Jesus Christ: not without suffering many incursions
of hostile enemies, that daily came in upon them, and grievously molested them
from time to time.

To prevent this annoyance, this Tower was thus erected, in manner as you now
behold it, but after-wards (as all things have their changes, with the
alteration of times:) if fell into the hands of Giants, who took great pains
to re-people the Isle with worshippers of Idols, and excluded all them that
honored the true God. Nevertheless, our Lord provided so well for them, that
(in despite of their enemies) they still continued here, though not in so
great a number, or enjoying such liberty as formerly they had: yet partly by
paying great taxations and tributes, and other of less ability, by continual
seruitudes to the Giants, until such time as Balan came to be Lord thereof,
who (as I have already told you) is debonnaire, virtuous and of Catholic
religion, whereby he is very naturally beloved of all his subjects.

Now, although the Knight declared all these good qualities, and many more in
the Giant, to Amadis: yet all were but as fuel to fire, enflaming him so
forwardly, that he entreated him to go before, and to let the Giant
understand, that a Knight of the Enclosed Isle was come thither with a Lady,
whose son he had slain and kept her husband, daughter and servants
prisoners. And if by combating with him, and vanquishing him, they might be
delivered, he reque, sted security against all men, but himself; otherwise
let him not adventure to come near the Port, because the challenger held it as
his refuge.

The Knight forthwith entered into a small Skiffe, leaving Amadis and his
company at the haven, in expectation of his return. So soon as he came near
the Giant, he knew him, as one who^ he had many times seen, and demanded of
him, whither he went. Lord Balan, quoth he, I came hither with a Knight, whom
I left at the Port, who tells me, that he came embarked from the Enclosed
Isle, and his coming is purposely to fight with you. At these words the Giant
started, and began to imagine, that this was one of those men, whom Darioletta
had before spoken of, and suddenly said to the Knight. Is there not a Lady
with him of some indifferent years. There is, answered the Knight. On my life,
quoth he, it is Amadis de Gaul, or one of his brethren, whose fame is so
great throughout the world. I know not that replied the Knight, but I never
beheld a Gentleman of more goodly form, nor less fearful, by his words, for
if you send for him hither by me, and give him warrant against all men, but
your self, he will quickly be here, to end his enterprise. He shall be
welcome, said Balan, and you know my use and custom to all men, assure him
upon mine honor, that he shall have no wrong or injury done him by any of
mine: but if he gain the upper hand of me, he shall enjoy what he can demand
of me any way.

At these words the Knight took his leave of Balan, and entered into his boat
again, to go find Amadis, to whom he declared all that the Giant had said.
Whereupon, setting thence from the port, and coming to ascend the Rock, they
went on toward Balans Castle, where he sat before the gate unarmed, saluting
Amadis and Darioletta, he demanded of her, if this Knight was one of them, whom
she had promised to bring with her. But Amadis, taking the answer from her (as
fearing to be discovered) told him. That he was not come thither to tell his
name, but to let him feel the keen edge of his sword if he did not make a
liberal amends, for the wrongs which the Lady had received, and the rest of her
company. Knight, replied the Giant (in a kind of scornful manner) I feel
such a fear instantly possess me, as constraines me to offer you such a
courtesy, which as yet I never did to any other: knowing, that you are deceiud
by her which brought you hither, ignorant who I am, and what I can do.
Therefore I am contented to suffer you seek after adventures in other strange
countries and not (for this time) make you liable to the custom of this
Country.

Amadis being much displeased, to hear in what slender esteem the Giant held
him; chollerickly returned this answer. Grant pity or pardon to such as thou
have power over, and not to me, that have thus far adventured by Sea, only to
deal with thee: and that I will soundly let thee know, before the son can
circle this Rock, if thou do not consent to abolish, and give over the
damnable custom, which here thou maintainest both against God and man, and
which (in reason) thou ought not to gainsay. Moreover, I would entreat
thee (in kindness) to do it, for the good I wish to thy self, and in favor
of some of thy nearest friends whose welfare, I as dearly account of, as mine
own. Let me therefore advise thee, to yield this Lady redress of her wrongs,
before constraint compells it, and we proceed on in further trouble.

This request, (quoth the Giant) exceeds reason, and never shall it be
granted by me: Beside: let me tell thee, but that I am somewhat desirous to
approve, how your knights of the Enclosed Isle, can maitaine the Arms they
bear; I would not vouchsafe to put on any myself. And because thou art on
foot, and lackest a Horse to do thee service: I will send thee one of the
very best in my Stable, with Lance and Armor, if thou standst in need. For I
have great store of such as I have conquered, as well from some of thy
companions, as others, who thought their manhood as good as thine. So help me
God said Amadis, thou dealest like a good and worthy Knight, the horse I will
not refuse, neither the lance but as for any Armor or Shield. I will have
none other then those (at this time) which belonged to the knight slain by thee
on no occasion, whose innocence gives me both strength and courage, to revenge
the Wrongs done to him and the rest.

He is dead and gone, answered the Giant. So leaving him, Darioletta and the
knight, he went into his Castle from whence soon after, came forth a squire,
who presented a uery goodly courser, and a strong Lance to Amadis: and
instantly, upon the top of the Red Tower, a noise of Trumpets sounded most
cheerfully, which caused Amadis to demand the reason thereof, Sir Knight, said
the Squire, Balan my master is now ready to come forth, therefore stand upon
your guard, if you will be well advised.

Scarcely had he ended these words, but all they within the Castle, as well
men as women, came upon the walls, and battlements, to behold the issue of
this combat: and presently came forth Balan, mounted on the like courser as he
had sent to Amadis, armed with a most bright Armor, and bearing an huge shield
beyond measure. As he approached near to his enemy, who sat readily prepared
to encounter him, he spoke so loud as every one might hear him. Before God,
Knight of the Enclosed Isle, thine ouer-weening has too far blinded thine
understanding, and I am so much moved thereat, that I cannot choose but pity
thee, for refusing my kind offer when I tendered it to thee. Pity me?
answered Amadis, I well may do it on thee and thy soul, except thou speedily
repent: Otherwise, le^ employ the time in manly execution, and not in idle
menacing words, as thou do.

Clasping down their Beauers, and couching their Lances, they ran each
against other with such swiftness, as if lightning had carried them. Amadis
met Balan so strongly, that he pierced both his shield and coat of Male,
directly upon the stomach bone, which was so painful to him, that he fell
down on the ground, when as he had charged Amadis, and ran his Lance so
far into the horses head (the pain he felt much qualifying the vigor of the
blow) that the horse fell down dead, and his Master under him. But he quickly
recovered himself, and drawing forth his Sword, marched toward Balan, who yet
was so terrified with his fall as he could hardly stand on his feet.
Notwithstanding fear of death, and shame to be vanquished, made him cheer up
his spirits, and stand upon the mainest manly defense of himself. Then they
began to hack and hew one another, that whosoever had heard and not seen
them: would rather have thought the noise to be hammers one an anuile, then
swords on Armor.

As the Giant lifted up his sword with all his force, thinking to beat down
Amadis with the blow: his Shield glaunced aside, whereof Amadis taking
advantage, and seeing Balan so openly discovered wounded him in the right arm,
just on the elbow joint, the grief whereof made him almost senseless, and
retyring back two or three paces, reeled like a drunken man, When the knight of
the Isle of the In^anta perceived plainly, that Amadis had the better of the
fight, chiefly, that at the first encounter with the Lance, he had
overthrown him, whom he (before) reputed invincible, and beheld so much blood
issuing forth of his Arm, as set a crimson die on the ground: he could not
presume who or what he might be, but as diverse conjectures met his thoughts,
blessing himself, with the sign of the Cross, he said to the Lady. Where
could you meet with such a devil as performs things impossible for any
mortal man to do. Ah Sir Knight, quoth she, if the world hade a few more such
men as he, the pride of wicked wretches would not be so insolent, as it is in
many places.

In this mean while, Amadis followed the Giant hot and fiercely, and he so
weakened more and more, by losing the benefit of his right arm: that he was
compelled to take his sword into his left hand, but his enemy gave him such a
stroke (in the mean space) on the top of his Helmet, as made the sight or
fore part turn directly behind. Which fell out very ill for Balan, for being
thus bereft of sight, he strove extremely to recover it again: but not
without much pain and difficulty, thorough his right arms disabling, from
whence the blood still streamed abundantly. Then Amadis hoping for a final
conclusion of his busy trouble, lifted up his sword for another stroke:
but the Giant had first re-seated his Helmet, and seeing the blow coming,
defended it with his Shield so well as he could, and the sword of Amadis
entered so far into it, that it was impossible for him to get it out again.

Now began they to hale and tugge one another so violently, that the thongs
or leathers of their Armor brake in sunder, and both the sword and shield was
wholly in the power of Amadis, which proved far more troublesome to him then
before; for it was so exceeding heavy, as he could scarsely stir it from
the ground. By means whereof, the Giant had more ease to bestirre himself,
charging Amadis at his own pleasure: but it was with his left hand only, and
much the better for Amadis, for if Balan could have commanded his other arm,
Amadis had died without all doubt having neither sword nor shield, wherewith to
defend himself. But necessity (the quick conceiving mother of invention)
enstructed him suddenly with a new kind of remedy, in manner following.

He had his own Shield still hanging behind him in a Bauldrick, which did
mightily hinder his strength, in recovering his Sword out of Balans Shield:
wherefore, he rent it violently from his own neck, and threw mainly astainst
the shinnes of Balan, who felt the throw very painefully. Afterward, taking his
Sword (newly recovered by both his hands, from out of the Giants Shield, and
by setting his right foot manfully on it) it plainly appeared to every eye,
that he won it not easily, because (in the interim) Balan charged him severely,
and grievously wounded him in many places on his body. But having recovered
the best part of his defense, his heart and courage became thereby the more
cheerful and forward, in following his enemy at all advantages, to play still
upon him, as occasion served, and therein he expressed all care and diligence.
And indeed, the pain of the Giants stomach, by the push of the Lance, with
the over liberal expense of his blood, so extremely increased his pain and
torment: that breath failed him, and in a swone he fell on the ground.

When they in the Castle beheld this, and verily supposing him to be dead;
crying out with one voice to Amadis: Ah traitor, in an ill hour have thou
slain the best Knight in the world. But notwithstanding, all their
lamentations Amadis would not be stayed, but stepping upon the Giant; rent the
Helmet from his Head, and perceiving him to be yet living, spoke out loud
enough to him, saying. Yield thy self Balan, if thou will not lose thy head:
nevertheless, he stirred neither hand nor foot for all these words. Then the
Knight, who was Governor of the Infanta Island, fearing least Amadis would use
Balan as he threatened him: came near unto him, and demanded, whether the Giant
were dead, or no. No, answered Amadis, neither do I see any wound on him,
whereby he should be thus far out of heart Let me entreat you then Sir,
said the Knight, to deal no worse with him then you have done, until he come
to himself again, and then I dare promise you, that he will satisfy
what-soeuer you can demand of him. Otherwise, believe it undoubtedly, more
harm will happen to you, then you can easily imagine: for the people within
the Castle are already in Arms, and will be revenged on you to their uttermost
power. For them (answered Amadis) I make no reckoning at all: but for your
sake, and his near alliance to Gandalack, I am the more willing to be
persuaded.

At these words, they saw Brauor, son to Balan, come forth of the Castle,
accompanied with thirty men well armed, whereupon, Amadis perceiving in what
danger he was: drew back to the Rock, wherein was a rift, after the form of
a cave o^ den, and there, one, or two men could well withstand twenty and
more, and the Grants Shield there served as a rampire of defense. They of the
Castle came meanly against him, hurling darts and huge stones at him, being
no way able to offend him but before: but he was so well sheltered with the
Giants Shield, as all their malice could not a jot touch or hurt him. Hereat,
they grew so incensed and enraged, that two of the boldest in all the troop,
stepped forward to pluck him out of the cane perforce: but Amadis gave the first
of them so sound a welcome, as he never spak^a word after. This so terrified
the other, and the rest, that none durst adventure to come near him, or step
within his reach.

During this time of so sharp assayling, some of them belonging to the Castle,
had carried Balan home into his bed, while the rest oppressed Amadis very
desperately. Which was no little affliction to the Knight of the Infanta
Island, under whose word and warrant, he had come thither: whereupon he
called Brauor, and thus he spoke to him. Before God Brauor, thou have
undertaken a business, little to thine honor. Do thou not know, that thy
father was always a man honest and virtuous of his word? And will thou
degenerate, in breaking both his faith and promise. By me he gave assurance to
the Knight, and by solemn protestations, that he should not be offended by
any, but himself only. Nevertheless, thou suffer him to be wronged most
vilely, although thy father be yet living, and will hardly allow this thy
discurteous dealing. Believe me as thou list, for it thou stand in doubt of
Balans death, take order, that the Knight may be securely kept this night,
without any injury or disgrace done unto him: And to morrow, thou shall better
see the disposition of thy father, and govern thy self thereto accordingly,
for I dare assure thee, that he is in no peril of life. True it is, that
without my request first propounded for him, and the Knights affection to
Gandalacke thy grandfather (as himself assured me) he had smitten off his
head: therefore follow my counsel, and better will befall thee, then thou art
aware of. I will do so answered Brauor, if my mother shall allow of your
advise. Go then said the Knight, to know her mind, and in the mean while,
let every man withdraw himself.

Brauor commanded his people to depart, and keep themselves far enough off
from the Cave, least they should any way offend Amadis in the time of his going
to the castle Where coming to his mother, he declared all that the knight had
said to him: and how for the love of Gandalack he that had vanquished his
father, refused to kill him. When she heard what her son had said, she
presently imagined that he was Galaor, whom she affected as her own brother,
because they had been nursed together at the Rock of Galtares. Whereupon she
wished her Son to follow the Knights advise for his father began much to
mend. By this means Amadis remained in peace, yet standing still upon his
guard, least he should again be aslaulted by them of the Castle, who stood
still as his besiedgers, but a great distance off from him.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How Darioletta, perceiving Amadis to be in such danger, made great ^oa^e and
lamentation: And how Balan and he were made friends.

WHen Darioletta perceived Amadis to be besieged on all sids, without any
means of aid or succor: she began to grieve and lament very earnestly, and in
her weeping used these words. Wretched and unfortunate woman that I am, must
the only best knight in the world lose his life, and by mine occasion. How dare
I (hereafter) appear in the presence of the King his Father, the Queen, or
any other of his friends, knowing what harm I have procured to him? Miserable
woman, and much more miserable then I am able to term my self. If I was once
the means of saving his life, by inuenting that strange kind of cradle,
wherein he was committed to the rude Seas mercy: how far unkind and
contrary am I now to him, in causing the end of his days, when I most
expected and hoped for help by him? Alas! how misguided were my senses from
reason and understanding, at the time when I met him on the Sea shore, and
would not suffer him so much as turn back to the Castle of Apoliaon, to take
his leave of madam Oriana, and from whence he might have brought some other
Knights with him, by whom (in this extremity) he should have been well
supported? Who therefore deserves justly to be punished, but only my self,
hated and despised of all good luck, and performing the part of a light headed
and indescreete Woman, trusting over much to mine own rash opinion.

All this while did Amadis behold Dariolettaes sad complaynings, and how
often times she heaued up her hands to heaven, as requiring comfort only from
thence, yet could he not understand any one word she spoke, but enjoyed this
benefit of seeing her, by light of fire, made by them that watched him, and for
their better wearing away the cloudie night, which also gave him some feeling
of her woeful condition, and so afflicted him in soul, as he resolved to die,
or get out of the rocky cave, because the nights obscurity would therein more
avail him, then day light could do, or delaying time till the morning.
Beside, considering the doubtful issue of his present estate, it appeared
plainly to him, that he could not escape thence, without either death, or
taking: being over wearied with weight of his Arms, want of natural rest, and
extreamitie of hunger, all of these being no mean enemies to any hopeful
expectation. Only his best help in this necessity was, that he saw his guardes
begin to nodde and sleep, and therefore so softly as he could, and by little
and little) he offered to steal out of the Cave, hoping so to compass his
peace.

Well was this observed by the Knight of the Infanta Island, who considering
what danger he might fall into, what speeches had past between Brauor and the
Giants wife, all tending to his good and safety: ran presently to him, and
stayed him, even against his will, as it were, saying Sir Knight, I pray you to
befrend me so much, as but to hear me, before you adventure any farther,
whereat Amadis stood still, to listen what he would say, and the other declared
to him, how he had conditioned a truce with Brauor upon hope of the Giants
recovery; who already appeared to be out of peril, and told him (beside) what
you have formerly heard. Amadis hereat was very joyful, believing him to be an
honest and kind man, that would bring him so good news and that no dread of
death could cause him to invent them, where-upon he thus answered. Courteous
Knight, for this time, I both credit, and will follow your counsel, swearing
to you by mine order of knighthood, wherein already I have spent ten years
service: that I had much rather be hewn in pieces, then the Lady (for whom I
have contended with Balan) should not be fully satisfied in her demand. Both
you and she, replied the Knight, shall have all that you can desire. For I
know Balan to be such a man, as makes more account of his word, then he does
of his life.

During this time, the Giant lay on his bed, not able to utter a word, but
panted extraordinarily as one that endured a strange kind of perplexity in
his stomach; whereby his breath began greatly to fail him, and still (one while
after another) he showed with his left hand, and poynted to the place where he
was most payned. Which his Surgeons perceiving, (who durst not as yet take
off his garments, as fearing much to stir him) they adventured to observe the
place whereto he signed, and found (by present appearance) that he had great
reason so to do, for more then the palm of a hands breadth, round upon the
stomach, the flesh and bones were quashed, and merely broken, as it were
whereupon, they applied immediately so many oils, unguents, and other helpefull
remedies: that, before break of day, speech came to him again, and he
demanded, what was become of the Knight and the Lady.

Then the truth of all was told him, for none of them durst tell a lie in his
hearing: which made him to call for his son Brauor, and all the rest, that
kept Amadis so sharply besieged, and being come before him, he began in this
manner to his son. Infamous villain, durst thou presume to falsify my
word, in any thing that I had promised. Slave, as thou art, what honor, or
what advantage could redound to thee, by so base a deed as thou have done? was
it in thy power to recall my life, if death had pleaded possion of it? Or how
can thou excuse this treason, in pursuing that villainy which thou have so
impudently begun, against a worthy Knight, who had not entered upon my land,
but under the assurance of my word? Did thou ever know hitherto, that for
any thing happening to me, I was any way false or injurious in my promise? Have I
not evermore justly kept my word, to my power, as valuing it far above thee,
or the dear esteem of mine own life? By the faith I bear to God, but that
nature somewhat speaks for thee: thou should instantly be hanged over my
Castle wall, as an example to all such villains as thou art, enemies to truth
and virtue. Take him, take the wretch, bind him hand and foot, and so bear
him to the Knight: then tell him from me, thus I have sent the traitor, that
not only abused him, but me much more, and say, I entreat him, to take such
vengeance on him, for us both, as he has worthily deserved.

Not any man among them, durst ever contradict what he had cammanded: wherefore
Brauor, was presently seized on, strictly bound, and so carried thence to
Amadis. But his mother, fearing least such severity might be fall him, as Balan
had urged, and knowing also, what wrong* the Knight had received: departed
secretly out of the chamber, and ran after her son. Nevertheless, she was
not so swift of foot, but Brauor was presented to Amadis before she came, and
in such manner as the Giant had appointed. Whereof (notwithstanding) Amadis
made small account, but pardoned him honorably, and untied his bonds himself,
even as the good Lady came to him, whom she presently knew: for he had taken
off his Helmet because it was over burdenous to him, but she could not
imagine, how he would deal with her son Brauor, wherefore she threw her
self at his feet, and weeping, said. Alas, Lord Amadis, do you not know me?
Now, albeit he very well remembered her, and that she was the sister to
Gandalack: yet (for a while) he would not let her perciue so much, but somewhat
fiercely, answered. Lady, I know not who, or what you are, and desire never to
come among such bad and wicked people, as I have met withal in this place.
Alas Sir, said she, if you think it meet that I shall conceal your name, I
am well contented to do it: nevertheless, I know you to be Lord Amadis de
Gaul, brother to Galaor, whom I so dearly affect, as in honor of him, and for
his sake, I humbly entreat you to pity and pardon my son.

These words moved his noble heart to such compassion, as he could no longer
dissemble his displeasure: but taking the Lady gently from the ground, he thus
spoke to her. Madame, my brother and my self have received such benefits and
courtesies from Gandalack your Father, as I would hazard my person to any
peril, yea even to my very latest gasp to do him the best service consisting
in my power, or any of his friends, for his sake. But as concerning your Son,
these men here present know right well, that I pardoned him before you could
come to beg it of me: nay more, I unbound him with mine own hands, before
your arrival, without desiring any other revenge on him, but only on such as
maintain wicked and unlawful customs. Among whom I name your ^usband as the
chiefest man, whose knowledge of my name I care not for: because he may hold
himself well assured, that I will never depart from this Isle, until he have
satisfied the lady that came hither with me. And therefore, if he be so just and
true of his word, as he would have it appear by open publication: let him
meet me in place convenient for us both, and then he shall know, whether he
was carried away from me by right or wrong, after I had obtained the mastery
over him.

Again she fell upon her knees, saying, believe me sir, he will do you
reason, in any thing you can demand of him, as you may well perceive, that he
was utterly ignorant, in that which his people have done contrary to his word.
For then he had neither sense nor understanding, which may well serve in his
excuse. Wherefore I swear to you upon my faith, that if you please to go
along with me to him (because he cannot by any means come to you) before you
part one from another, I doubt not but you will be reconciled loving friends.
Madam, answered Amadis, I have not any susption of you: But I greatly doubt the
condition of Giants, who are commonly little governed by reason, but carried
away only by fury and cruelty. It is true Sir, (quoth she) and yet
notwithstanding, I know his goodness to be such, as you may well cred it him
on mine assurance. Your word ^hen (answered Amadis) shall be my warrant, And so
I will go along with you.

So lacing on his helmet, fastening his shield about his neck, and grasping his
Sword fast in his fist: he entered the Castle, with the wife to Balan, who
quickly had advertisement of their arrival, and therefore requested the knights
presence in his chamber. No sooner were they entered, but the Giant raised
himself on his bed so well as he could, saying, that he was most heartily
welcome. Balan, answered Amadis, I know not how thou meanest, but I have just
occasion to complain of the villainy offered me by thy men: being come (upon
thy words warrant) to combat with thee, and urge reason for thy wrong to the
Lady that conducted me hither. And albeit I had the better of thee, yet
cowardly they assaulted me: although I think it was not done by thy command,
being then in disposition not to do it. But be it howsoever, seeing thy
Justice upon thine own Son, I acquit both thee and them also: but not in the
case of right appertayning to the Lady, for, death it self cannot hinder me
from my duty in her behalf which makes me the more lovingly dersie thee to
give her contentment. Otherwise, I must be constrained, to finish upon thy
Body, that which I have already begun: a matter much displeasing to me, for
Gandalacks sake, whom I dearly affect and esteem, and to whom (as I am
informed) thou art nearely allied in some nature of affinity.

Knight replied Balan, although my extremity of grief is such, to see my
self vanquished by one Knight only, as death would be a thousand times more
welcome to me: yet both these are of no value at all with me, in regard of that
dishonor acted by my son and servants. And did my strength so much favor
me, as but to execute mine own determinations, thou should sufficiently
perceive, how far the power of my word extends. For the instant, I could
do no less, or yield thee any better testimony of my truth: then deliver him
into thy power, that began so foul and injurious an offense, albeit he is of
no mean esteem both to me and his mother. But seeing this submission cannot
content thee; command what else thou would have, and it shall be granted.
For matters past between thee and me (answered Amadis) I am sufficiently
satisfied: but not in the wrongs that concern the Lady. I am ready (replied
the Giant) to suffer any such condemnation as thou think best, whereby to
please both her and thee: with this consideration, that the unrecoverable life
of her son stands out of my reach, and therefore must needs be answered by
some thing, remaining in my power

First of all then, said Amadis, my will is, that thou deliver her husband, her
daughter, and all their attendants out of thy prisons. Next, in steed of her
son, flaine by thee, condemn thy son to make her amends, by present
marriage of her daughter. For let me tell thee ^^lan, her husband is as good a
^^ntleman as thy self, and as sufficiently enriched with means: even so
fair, as he is governor of all those countries, which the King my father
commands in the lesser Britain. When Balan heard him speak in that manner,
he began to observe him more i^ then before, and thus replied. I pray thee (in
courtesy) without ^onger delay, to tell me (...) ^e, and thy fathers (...)
father answered A^ is the King of Gaul, and I am his (...) Amadis.

At these words, the Giant lifted up his head, saying. Is it possible that
thou should^ be ^s, who slew my father? It is very true, quoth he, for I being
in aid of King L^, and perceiving him to be in vnau^ydable danger of death: I
slew a (...), who was reported to be thy father. Before God, answered Balan,
it can n^uer enter into my understanding, how thou durst be so bold, as to
presume so sarre into my ^diction: but only by my ever kn^ h^^orable renown,
of keeping my faith and word inuiolate, in any cause whatsoever. Or else, the
mere magnanimity of thy soul, which never made reckoning of the very greatest
peril, but fu^thered thee in the haughtiest enterprises, is thy continual
good guiding Angel. And therefore, seeing fortune is so favorable to thee; it
were against reason, that I should contradict her in thy happiness, having
made so dear a proof thereof my self already. As concerning my son I give
him freely t^ thee, to be disposed of at thy pleasure: not in any favorable
respect of me, but as beseems a villain, that durst presume to break his
fathers faith. For no good^^sse else can now remain in him, but what his
con^ce may well learn^ ^f thee: as ^^^ing a true teacher (...) ^^^dodoning him
so great an offense.

Then reaching forth his hand, and Amadis meeting it gently with his, he thus
proceeded. The husband to this Lady, her daughter, and all the priso^ers else
in my custody, shall forth with be released: accou^ the very fairest fortune,
(...) did or can befall me, to be ^ed as thy friend, and so I b^h thee to
accept me. That will I with all my heart, answered Amadis: And embracing him as
he lay, said. I am so far engaged in service, to thy Father in Law Gandalack,
as, for his sake only, I hold it an Article of my duty to love thee truly.
And as a beginning of our a^e, let me entreat and persuade thee, to cease and
give over this wicked custom, which (both against God and reason) thou have
here so long time maintained. Also, forgive thy Son Brauor, whose error
rather ensued by folly of youth, then otherwise: commanding him withal, that
(to morrow) he marry this Ladies daughter, that so we both may stand
discharged of our promises. Where-to Balan gladly condescended, and Darioletta,
with her husband were also well pleased and satisfied.

And not without great reason, and much to our purpose, does our History
speak of this marriage. For from them two issued a Son, named Galeote, that
married one of the daughters to Galuanes, and the fair Giantesse Madasima;
whence descended the second Balan, succeding evermore (from father to Son) in
this Island of the Red Tower. Until it came to the gentle knight Segurades,
brother to the knight that came to the court of ^ing Arthur, being aged above
sixscore years: he having (in regard of his age) for borne the use of Arms,
the space of twenty years did yet (without the help of any Lance) unhorse
all the famous knights that came to C^mel^t.

This Segurades, whereof I now speak, was in the time of king Vt^r Pendragon,
Father to king Arthur, and left one only Son Lord of this Island, who was
named Brauor le Bran: who was slain by Sir Tristram de Lions, as he conducted
fair ^seult, wife to King Mark, into Cornwall. Of this Brauor le Brun:
issued the valiant Galehaut le Brun, Lord of the far remote Isles, a great
friend to Sir Lancelot du Lake, as you may well remember, if you have read the
histories of the Round Table, where mention is made of the Bruns, who descended
all from the stock of Balan. With whom we will leave Amadis, attending the
curing of his Wounds: to tell you, what happened to Grasandor, after the
hunts-man had done his message to him, and knew assuredly, that he was
embarked thence with the Lady his conducter.

CHAP. XXXV.
How Grasandor followed in the quest of Amadis, and what adventures happened to
him in his trauatie.

NOt long since you read, that Amadis being entered the Barque of the Lady, who
purposely came thither to seek him: one of the Huntsmen came along the shore,
to whom he called, commanding him to bury the dead Knight, and acquaint
Grasandor with the reason of his so sudden departure. Which being imparted to
Grasandor, he was a long time pensive, maruailing what adventure had befallen
him, to draw him so far off from him and Madame Oriana.

Hereupon, giving over further pursuing the game, he desired him, to conduct
him where the dead Knight lay, and being there arrived: he saw him lie along,
quite disarmed, but neither Ship or sail could he dis^^ne on the Sea. So
carrying the dead body into an Abbey near adjoining, which Amadis had founded,
Grasandor returned to Oriana, whom he found with the Infanta Mabila, and the
other Ladies, who seeing him enter without Amadis, demanded whence he came
thus all alone?

From point to point, he related the whole adventure, according as he had
received it from the hunts-man; yet with some regard, as fearing to afflict
her over much, whom it most concerned, I mean Madame Oriana: whose heart was
so severely shut up with grief, as she could not (for a long while) utter one
word. But when her soul had won more liberty, then she thus answered.
Surely I am persuaded, that seeing he has le^^ you and taken no farewell o^
me^: he departed not, but upon some very great occasion. By my faith Madame,
replied Grasandor, I (...) of your mind: for he sent me word by the Huntsman,
that I should excuse his absence to you. Alas quo^h the Princess) I know not
what excuse to allow of, neither what we are best to do. Madame, answered
Grasandor, I have resolved with my self, to travail in quest of him, and if
(by good fortune) we may meet together, we shall (...) more easily pass all
good or harm that can betide us. And one thing I da^e promise ye, that no
place shall contain me above one night, until I can hear tidings of him.

Oriana, and all the other Ladies, liked this motion very well: only Mabila
excepted, who all that night could not refrain from tears. Notwithstanding,
her sorrows could not stay Grasandor, but carely in the morning he armed
himself, and after he had heard Mass, taking leave of the Princess, and the
whole company: he went aboard a Barque, with two Squires and his horse only,
and none else, but the Mariners to conduct him. So ^etting sail, not knowing
which way to direct their course, they say^^d all that day and night, not
meeting with any ship or vessel, to (...) them tidings of what they sought
for. The second night ensuing, they passed close by the Isle of the ^ta: but
such was the (...) they could not discover it, (...) uens were then so dark
and (...) die. So parting from that Coast, and by the Island of the Red Tower
also: about the break of day, they descried a broad strand o^ haven, where
Grasandor would needs go on shore, to understand what country it was, for
it appeared very pleasing to him, and plentifully planted with all kinds of
Trees.

Taking his Arms, and accompanied with his two squires on foot he went up into
the Country, giving charge first to the Mar^^ers, to part away from thence, if
they heard no other ^^dings from him. So they ^ourneyed on a large part of the
day, not meeting any one whom they might speak unto: where^^ ^andor did not a
little m^r^ail^ considering the ^ertilitie of the soil, and how well it stood
planted in many places. Being entered into a very thick wood, and following a
guyding track therein: he came to a goodly clear fountain, where he alighted
from his Horse, and feed on such viands as (...) Squires had there for him,
and they being weary with travailing on foot, advised him to return back to
his ^que. So help me God, quoth he) I will never endure the rep^, that being
so far entered into a Country, I returned without some satisfaction of my
desire.

Whereupon, the Squires left him, and ^ee went on still by the track of the
wood, till he came into a narrow vailey, so (...) set with trees, as hardly
could the beams of the Sun ga^ any passage through them. In the (...) of
this vale, there stood a small Monastery, where being desirous to enter, he
dismounted from his horse, and ^astening him to the ring of the door, went into
the Church to say his orisons: beseeching God deuourely, to guide him in such
sort, that this enterprise which he had undertaken, might chiefly redound to
his honor and glory, and lastly to some happy issue of his pains. Continuing
thus on his knees before the Alter, there came in a white Monk, to whom he
called, saying. Good father tell me what land is this, and to whom it
appertains. S^^ Knight answered the Monk, this is the ^dome of Ireland. but
searcely (at this time) in obeisance to the King: because, not fa^re off from
this place, there hues a Knight, named ^en, with two other of his brethren,
mighty (...), and powerful in Arms, who by favor of a Fortress, whereto
they make their common retreat, have utterly ruinated all these parts, and
forcibly excluded all the inhabitants, which usually made their abiding about
this mountain. Growing on thus still from bad to worse, thy commit an infinite
number of evils, thefts and spoils, without making spare of my passenger: no,
(...) Knights e^ant, if they can (...) of any.

But will you understand how they execute their villainy? They (...)
continualiy all three together, and when they hear of any one coming their
way: two presently go and closely hide themselves, while the third stands
ready for the sight. But if he chance to prove too weak: then comes forth
the other two brethren to succor him, and kill the party that is assaulted.
And even but yesterday, it chanced that two of my holy brethren, returning
homeward, with such alms as is in charit^e given us to live upon: they saw
these three villains altogether, and so cruelly dealing with one gentle
Knight, that after they had wounded him in many places of his body, they would
likewise have smitten off his head; but for the earnest entreatie of those two
Religious men, by whose importunity, they left him, and s^ffered them to bring
him hither, where he is yet living. His friendly companion (afterward)
happened hither likewise, who grieuing for the others ill fortune: departed
hence, even but a very little before your ariuall. Gone is he to find these
wretched traitors, and to combat them, with dangerous hazard of his life. I
pray you father, said Grasandor, to show me the wounded Knight. Very
willingly, replied the Monk.

So he conducted him to a ^le Cell where he lay, and so soon as they saw
eithers face, they presently knew one another. For the wounded man was (...),
Cosen to Land^n, and Nephew to Don Quedragant, who had been present in many
worthy actions, during the waires between King Lasuart and Amadts, but
especially in the company of Grasandor. He finding him in this woeful estate,
grew very sorrowful, and after some few speeches together, (...) spoke in this
manner. I beseech you noble Lord, go help my Cosen ^and^n, who is ridden
after those traitors, that dealt with me thus upon ba^e advantage. Because I
am persuaded, that your speedy aid (perhaps may save his life: for they are
three, and will all set upon him together, if he chance to meet with them.
But where may I soonest (said Grasandor) find him? You shall replied E^) come
to a little turning track in this valley, which will guide you (...) upon the
plain: in the (...) whereof stands a strong (...) and thither the (...) use
to withdraw themselves, after any such treachery committed.

By these words, Grasander well perceived, that the Religious man had truly
informed him: wherefore, commending Eliseo into (...) protection, and the (...)
care of his health, forthwith ^ee took hor^e, and gallopped so speedily as he
could) directly as the Monk had formerly enstructed him. No sooner was he
past the valley, but he espied the Cas^le, and Landin before the gate, crying
out aloude to them within: but he could not understand what he (...) was not
(as then) ^^me near (...) nough, and therefore (...) among the trees and
(...), to (...) the success^ of his (...). With in a while after, (...) bridge
to be let down (...) ^^awe come forth, of goodly stature, and well appointed.
He having spoken some few words to Landin, they sundred themselves far from
each other, giving the carriere to the^ (...) and (...) then lances: that all
the val^^y gave an ecchoing novse thereof, and both of them (...) to the ground
albert the Knight of the Ca^es fall, was much more dreadful then that of
Landins.

Quickly they both recovered footing, and having their Swords aptly prepared,
ra^^^ mainely each at other. Then began the fight to be hot and (...), yea,
and in such cruel violence, as the large expense of their blood gave plain
appearance thereof. Nevertheless, Landin carried him^ (...) couragi^ly, as he
brought (...) other soon to his command, be being able to d^e nothing else,
but only ward off his blows. When (...) he could hold out no (...) made a
sign to them of the (...), that the other should quickly come to his rescue.
Forth came the two other Knights, riding very hastily, and being provided of
huge strong lances, made toward Landin, crying out aloud Traitor, if thou
killest him, thou art but dead. When Landin saw them coming, he prepared for
his own best defense, and, without any show of dismay, said. (...), you are
the men that I (...) for, serting treacherously upon Knights errant: But I view
here before God, I will leave my Life in this place, or revenge our wrongs with
the loss^ of your heads.

Grasandor well noted all these (...), mounting suddenly on hi^ horse, and
riding mainly upon the bridle: came among the (...) so loud as possibly he
could. Thieves, Villains, leave this Knight. Thus speaking, he charged one of
the brethren so strongly, that down he fell, and brake his right arm in the
fall, measuring all his length on the ground having no power at all to help
himself. The other ran against Landin hoping (...) bear him, (...) else to
kill the (...) under him: But he avoided it so dexteriously, as receiving no
(...) at all, he wounded the horse of his enemy in the flanck more then a
hands breadth. Now if Landin was glad of such unlooked for help, let me (in
like necessity) yield their opinion, for he never was in the like danger
before, and especially, when he ^eard his (...) call to him, saying. Finish
(...) him thou (...) withal, and leave the other to my mercy.

Landin was ruled by his direction and ran to the first whom he had
overthrown, bringing him quickly to such confor^, that he made his face to
(...) the bare Earth. In the (...) while, G^^sandor slept not in dealing with
the other, but followed one of them so freely; that at the third stroke, he
cut off the hand wherewith he held his Sword. Wherefore, despayring now of any
redress, and seeing his two other companions in such pitiful condition: He
turned bridle toward the Castle, for there was his latest refuge. But the
Horse being stubborn, and unruly mouthed, in despite of all that his Master
could do: Leapt beside the bridge, on the bank of the diteh, and so tumbled
down to the bottom, giving a des^rned ending to his riders days.

By this time was Landin coming toward him (who had left both the other
lying along on the ground) searing, least some in the Castle would make a
sallie forth, upon him to whom he stood so much obliged: But perceiving none to
make any such offer, coming near to Grasandor. Landin spoke thus. Sir Knight,
I pray you tell me who you are, that I may know the man, to whom I am indebted
for my life's safety. My dear friend Landin, (...) the other, I am Grasandor,
thankful to Heaven for our happy meeting and suceesse. Much amazed was
Landin, to see him there, who he had left in the Enclosed (...), with At^adis,
being able to imagine no reason, why they two should be thus sundred, wherefore
he said. Belecue me Lord Grasandor, I durst have sworn you to be in a quite
contrary place: therefore let me entreat you to tell me what adventure drew
you into these so far distant parts.

Grasandor related all the whole matter to him, as formerly you have heard, and
how he travailed in the quest of Amadis: desyring, if he knew any tidings of
him, not to conceal them from him. First my Lord, answered Landin, you are not
ignorant, that my Cosen Eliseo and my self, were not long since discharged
thence, with mine uncle Don Quedragant, and Bruneo de bonne Mer, to go to
King Cildadan for aid of men: because the Nephew to King Arauigne,
understanding the overthrow of his Uncle, had taken possession of his
kingdom, and gave us (at our entrance) a very sharp battle. Now although
the victory fell to us, and the enemies loss proved to be great: yet many
men of worth perished on our side, and we were sent for the levy of fresh
forces. And because good water grew scant with us in our travail, the first
place we came to, was the Isle of the Infanta; where it was told us, that but
lately before, a Knight passed thence with a Lady, and went purposely to fight
with Balan the Giant. Yet could we not know, what was the cause of this his
attempt: only we were informed, that the governor of the Isle was gone along
with him, to see the issue of the co^bate.

By further intelligence we gathered, that this Balan was of huge stature and
strength, whereby I am persuaded, that none (other then Amadis) durst undertake
the adventure: and comparing the manner of his so sudden leaving you, with the
other circumstances of your discourse think therefore (undoubtedly) it is he.
Before God, said Grasandor, I am half offended, in that he refused my
company in this action. How? answered Lindin, are you to learn now, that the
Fates and Fortune, have reserved all haughty enterprises for him only, and to
him they are due, and to none other? I perceive it (quoth Grasandor) too
apparently: but how happened you to be separated from your Cosen? By the
greatest mis-hap, answered Landin, that could be, as you shall instantly
understand.

No sooner took we landing in this country, but he began to feel himself
not half fit for travail, by some sudden apprehension of sickness seazing on
him. Yet his vndantable mind was such, as he would not soi^urne in any place,
or determine on any ease or rest, until we might come to King Cildadan. In
which purpose, crossing over the country, we came at (...) to a little
Monasters, where (...) him. There we m^, who (with liberal expense or ^ea^es,
required succor of us, against a Knight that kept her husband prisoner:
because (against his will) he would dispossess him of his lawful inheritance,
and by his disability of resistance, has shut him up in a strong Tower, where
neither the Sun, or any light else can yield him comfort. Then she entreated
my Cosen, who was so sickly disposed, as I have told ye, to suffer me go
along with her: not doubting, but (by Gods assistance) I should quickly return
again to him; because the Knight with who^ I was to deal, stayed not above
two miles from thence, as the Damsel solemnly assured us both.

All the requests and entreaties I used to him, could not dissuade him, but
needs he would ride along with me, and when we came to the end of the
clowdie valley, which you have likewise past: we saw a Knight well armed and
mounted, sl^n^ing by us as if he desired not to be seen. Whereupon my Cosen
advised me, to follow the Damsel, and he would ride to know what that other
was. Thus were we severed, and (soon after) I met with him I sought for, and
calling to him, he came to me presently unarmed. After some small conference
between us, he seemed to know me well, and demanded of me, what I would
have. I acquainted wim hith all that the (...) had told me, desiring him to
deliver her husband, without any further molestation; where to for my sake (as
he said) (...) with gave consent.

Appea^ing to this (...) kindness to (...), even as much as any (...) could
do: I told him (...) that (...) ou^ with a good mind and wo^ but win him
blame among all Knights of merit. For which gentle reprehension, he thanke^
me most lovingly, and promised (never after) to be so forgetful of himself.
So parting from him, I returned to the Monastery, where I found my Cosen very
sore wounded. Demanding of him, how this peril had happened to him, he made
me answer, that going after the Knight we met: so soon as he had left me:
he cried to him, to stay and turn his face, which he did. After the Lances
encounter, a stern and dreadful combat passed between them: nevertheless,
the issue of the action proving to my kinsmans honor, and holding his enemy for
fully vanquished. two other came forth of a secret ambushment, and ^an together
so (...) upon him that they brought him unto such a case as you have lately
seen him. And it God had (...) directed two Religious men that way,
accidentally (...) their wonted way home, (...) he had utterly (...) there. But
then prayer, and (...), were so earnest and instant: that they prevailed for
his life, and so carried him thence with them.

One of those reverend Monks (answered Grasandor) acquainted me with all that
which you have reported of your Cosen: yet not any thing of you, but that you
were gone thence, to pursue the committers of so horrid a villainy, for which
(thanks be given to God, both you and I are sufficiently revenged, because I
think they are all dead. I know not that, replied Landin. let us go see for
more assurance. So going to Galifon, ly^, unable to rise and his brother ^ard
by him, not dead, but (...): Landin (...) his two Squires to alight, who
mounted them into the faddles of their horses, and sat behind on the cruppers
themselves, only to support them. So rode they on toward the Monastery,
fully resolved that if Elisco were dead, they both should be hanged: but if he
were in good disposition, then they would take some other deliberation.

Being come to the Monastery they found (...) in much better estate of
health, then they expected: for one of the religious Monks (a man most expert
and skillful in the art of Chirurgerie) had tended him so carefully that he
was quite out of any danger. Causing Galifon and his brother to be dismounted,
and they looking on Landin disarmed: they presently kn^w him, having often seen
him with King Cildadan, before they forsook his service, only thorough the
small account they made of him, when he became tributarie to King Lisuart;
after which time, they fell to robbing and theeuing spoiling any that fell into
their power.

Highly pleased was Galifon (his misfortune considered) to see himself and
his brother at the command of such a man, from whom he assured himself of
mercy: and therefore with tears in his eyes, thus he began. For the honor of
God, and true Nobility, I beseech you Lord Landin, not to deal with us as we
have justly deserved: but by declaring your goodness and gentle breeding,
refer the base lives of me and my brother, unto your wonted mercy and pity.
Galifon (answered Landin) I never thought you to be such men, having been
brought up under so good a Prince, as is the King your Master, and among so
many worthy Knights, as ordinarily do attend on him: among which number (God
is my Judge) I always esteemed you, and not to be any such men as I have
found ye. Alas sir (quoth Galifon) desire of rule and commanding, has won me
this due desert, as it has done many more, as idle headed and improuident as
my self. But be it howsoever, in your hands now lies all my remedy. What
would you said Landin, that I should do for you? Beg pardon replied Galifon,
for me of the King, to whose mercy, and your good pleasure, I willingly
submit my self. I am contented so to do: said Landin, provided, that
herafter you change your vile condition, and become as virtuous, as you have
been lewd and vicious. That I solemnly vow and swear to you, answered
Galifon. Upon that faithful promise (quoth Landin) I dismiss you:
conditionally that you and your brother, within the space of three weeks hence
ensuing, wheresoever King Cildadan shall then be, you do render your selves
unto him, entirely obey him, and then I will compass the means, that he may
forget what has past, and pardon you, if my power can stretch so far.

Most humbly did Galifon and his brother show themselves thankeful; and because
it grew to be late, they supped together with such mean cheer, as both the
time and place could afforde them. Early the next morning Grasandor, having
heard Mass took leave of the company: and returned to the place where the
Barque waited his coming, and the men not a little joyful, that he had heard
news of Amadis. For, by the plain appearing words of Landin, he made no doubt
of meeting with him in short time, or else to hear report of him, in the Isle
of the Infanta, for which cause he intended the greater have. Being in the
Barque, he enquired of the Patron, if he could conveniently bring him to the
Isle of the Infanta? who made him answer, that knowing now the country
wherein they were, he could easily set sail for that Island: and Grasandor
earnestly entreated him so to do.

So, without any farther delay, they weighed Anchors, and having the wind
prosperous for them, sailed all that night, till (about break of day) they
descried the Island. Then drawing to starbord, and making up into the Seas
hight, about evening they came to coast it. Grasandor went a shore, and
mounted up the Rock, until he came to the great Town, where meeting with the
Governor (already returned back) he understood, that Amadis had conquered
Balan, and friendship was united between them, according as you heretofore
heard. By my Knight hood, said Grasandor, these are the best news that ever I
could ask for, not so much for knowing whether Amadis had finished (to his
high honor) a combat so perilous, being evermore inured to such happy
fortunes as this: but for my more certain knowledge, where I may find him, for
otherwise, I am not capable of any rest, either by day or night, so strictly am
I bound by my vow.

I am verily persuaded, answered the Governor, that many other have seen
extraordinary actions of Arms, and (doubtless) performed with no mean
honor: but if they knew as well as I, his admirable valor in this haughty
attempt, and resolution in the execution, I think in (my poor opinion) they
would confess it to exceed all former presidents whatsoever. Honor be
attributed to heaven, said Grasanaor, for this blessed favor. And now there
remains no more to complete my contentment, but only to stay no where till I
have found him: may it therefore please you, to lend me some one skillful
Mariner of yours, to be my help in this negotiation. With all my heart said the
Governor, and victuals also for your vessel, if you are in such necessity.

Then the Governor of the Isle called for one of his chiefest Pilots, and
presenting him to Grasandor, said. This man came from thence but yesterday, and
very well knows how to conduct you thither. I thank you Sir, replied
Grasandor. So after some little time of rest, his desire still provoking, him to
see the man he sought for the went aboard, and (without any sinister fortune)
landed the next morning in the Island of the Red Tower; enquiring there of
Balans people, if Amadis were there as yet, or no. You shall find him above at
the Castle, quoth they, and (if you please) we will conduct you thither.

So they ascended up the Rock, and as they set foot within the Castle gate:
Grasandor espied Amadis, to whom he ran. and caught him fast in his arms. My
dearest friend (quoth Amadis) what fortune has conducted you hither? How fares
Madame Oriana, and all the other Ladies in her company? Trust me Sir, answered
Grasandor, all are in good health, considering their grief for your so sudden
parting from them: And by their advice, I put my self upon your quest, with
solemn vow, not to give over till I found you; otherwise Madame Oriana could
not have lived three days, such was her extreme sorrow for your absence. Yet
she considered very well, that you would not have parted so peremptorily, if
some earnest occasion had not enforced it. My return, said Amadis, shall be
sooner (perhaps) then she expects. That will be no discontent to me answered
Grasandor: only let us stay here six or eight days, because the Seas have
been somewhat offensive to me. With right good will, replied Amadis, for I
would also have my wounds thoroughly cured, before I did adventure on any
travail.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How Amadis being in the Island of the Red Tower, conferring with Grasandor;
espied a small Foist on the Sea, which put into the Port, having people in her,
that told them tidings of the Army, which was gone for Sansuegua, and to the
Isles of Lands, or the Profound Isle.

Upon a day, as Amadis and Grasandor walked together in private conferrence,
concerning the Princess Oriana, being on the very highest hill, or Rock of
the Red Island: they descried a far off on the Sea, a Foist of no great
bigness, making toward the Land. Hereupon, they began to descend, to know
what persons were in her, and no sooner were they down the Rock; but one of
their Squires (whom they had sent before for news) returning back, told them:
that the vessel was in the haven, and it was a Master of the household to
Madasima, for by that name he had styled himself.

Scarcely had he finished this report, but Nalfon, who was the man we now
speak off; came to meet them, and Amadis knew him immediately: demanding of
him, whether he went, and what news he could tell them. Nalfon, who likewise
knew him perfectly, humbly saluted him, wondering not a little to see him in
those parts, where Balan commanded, and knowing also his hatred to him, because
he was the man that slew his Father. Wherefore after some few courtesies
passing between them, Nalfon said. Trust me my Lord, I would never have
enquired for you in this country, neither can I well imagine, what adventure
should draw you hither. My honest friend, answered Amadis it was the will of
Heaven to have it so, and for what reason, I shall have better leisure to tell
you: but first acquaint me, in what estate you left my brother Galaor and
Galuanes, as also if you met with Dragonis? My Lord, quoth Nalfon, they never
were in better condition, and I shall tell you some things, that will content
you.

Know then Sir, that after Galaor, and Dragonis were dislodged from Sobradisa,
with their Army: My Lord and Master Galuanes, well accompanied with Soldiers,
which he had levied in the Isle of Mongaza, came to join with them, at a place
commonly called, the Rock of the Damsel Enchantresse, which is on a
Promentary far in the Sea, I know not if ever you heard any speech thereof,
or no. Yes that I have replied Amadis, Garnate of the Dreadful Dale heretofore
told me of it, how he being sick sailed by this coast: but in regard of his
great infirmity then, he could not make any proof, of that which gladly he
would have done. Wherefore, I pray you discourse (at large) what you know
thereof, because I have been credibly informed, that many Knights of name,
have bin lost in that passage. On my Faith sir, answered Nalfon, not anything I
know shall be concealed from you, and then he thus began.

The common ^ame is, that this Rock was so called by reason of a Damsel there
dwelling, who was (in her time) very curious in understanding all magical
Sciences, and grew so expert in them, that she wrought wonderful things, and
far beyond the power of nature. Among the rest, she erected there the most
sumptuous building that ever was seen, and afterward, she prevailed so
powerfully by her skill: that she drew thither (were they never so far off)
all Ships passing to Ireland, Norway, Sobradisa, the Isle of Lands, or the
Profound Isle; they not having any power or means (what winds soever blew) to
help themselves, but (by mere constraint) were brought to take landing not
far from her abiding, whence they could not be discharged, except she
pleased. There she stayed them, and compulsiuely kept them, taking of their
marchandises or goods, whatsoever liked her best: especially errant Knights, if
they had any aboard, and them she would make (afterward) to combat one with
another, even to death many times, and therein she took very great delight.

But as it often happens, that suc as deceive others, come (in the end) to
be deceived themselves: so she of whom I speak, having heaped together
infinite treasures, and by such means as I have related, thinking still to
live by her Arts, and contrary to the course of nature, as if she had power
and command over the Stars; was taken tardy in her own strength. For the
awefull arm of Heaven, no longer suffering the mischief, which (undeservedly)
she had exercised upon many; did darken her understanding in such sort, that
she who was wont to abuse the very best advised, found her self ouerreached,
by one merely ignorant in such skill, not through any ingenuity or subtlety of
spirit remaining in him, but plainly, as I shall discourse unto you.

It came to pass, that among the number of Knights there by her detained, the
man whom my instant report concerns, borne in the I^le of Creete, a comely
person, well disposed, active in Arms, and aged about five and twenty years:
was made choice of by her, to be her amorous friend, albeit the had (at all
times) fully resolved, never to come under any man's subjection, either by
marriage, or otherwise. Yet now, in one poor mome^^, she became so conquered
by love, and so far strayed from her former liberty, only by the outward
behavior of this Knight, a^ to conclude, he had the full conquest of her, and
could command more over her, then she her self had power to do. Herein she
conceived such extraordinary liking, as (...) minute (almost) was omitted from
their new familiar exercise. But he being discreet and well advised,
considered with himself; that time would betray him in his amorous warfare,
and the edge of her coffeehouse might cut off all those sweet embraces.

Observing well this sudden learned lesson, he contended with his own
humors, to show her better satisfaction then ever be had done: to the end,
that she conceiving his love addicted more to her, then any other respect he
had of himself, might so increase her credulity, as to hit the mark he most
aimed at. Perceiving her flame to wexe fiercer and fiercer, and all in a
settled persuasion of his fidelity; he earnestly importuned her, that as his
love was no way alterable to he^: he might receive the self same reason from
her, of no deceit on^ her side, but that they both balanced an equal and true
affection, as by many solemn vows and protestations she had often swore unto
him. And as a testimony of of her loyal meaning in this case, he desired no
more of her, but his entire freedom, and to enjoy the like liberty of estate,
as when he was (constrainedly) brought into that Isle: whereto (at length) she
yielded, and hence ensued her utter overthrow.

For here Sir I must tell you, that this project in the Knight, was to no
other end, but only to be utterly quitted of her, as well foreseeing the
mutabilitie and inconstancy of women. Being (on a day) devising with her, on
the highest piece of all the Rock, embracing and kissing her as he was wont to
do, perceiving place and opportunity fit for his intention: he thrust her
suddenly backward from off the Rock, so that in falling downward upon the
several crags and clifts, her body was quite torn in pieces, before it could
get burial in the Waves, which (at the length) swallowed them up all. This
being done, and the Knight nothing sorry for it: he compassed the means to
conuaie into his Ship, whatsoever he could carry away from the Isle, and
with so many people as were therein, set away from thence home to hi own
country.

Here I may not omit to tell you, that he was constrained to leave an enchanted
treasure behind him, remaining yet (as is affirmed fathfully) in one of the
chambers of the great Palace: no way able to be ceazd on, by such as since
then have landed there, not only to win it by conquest, but also are debarred
from entering the place where it is enclosed. And as yet, Serpents repair
thither in winter, which continue there likewise all summer, and hide themselus
there in very strange manner. Moreover, as I have credibly heard, the doors
belonging to this Chamber, are continually fast closed, and a sharp Sword (to
forbid entrance) thwarting the way having on the one side certain letters as
red as blood, and those on the other side as white as Snow. These strange
charracters are said to signify and declare the name of him, by whom
(undoubtedly) this adventure is to be ended. And he must draw out the Sword,
there thrust in up to the hilts, and barring the passage between both the doors
For then they will open of themselves, as by common rumor it is reported in
many places.

Very pensive was Amadis, all the time as Nolfon had declared these news, one
while concluding with his thoughts (whatsoever might ensue thereon) to
travail thither, and essay the finishing of the enchantment, wherein so many
worthy Knights had failed. Suddenly again his opinion altered, being pressed
with an earnest desire of returning back to the Enclosed Isle.
Notwithstanding, he resolved in the end, seeing he was now so forward on the
way, to pass on somewhat farther, yet he made no noted or instant appearance
thereof but seeming careless and negligent of that which had been said,
falling into another kind of conferrence, demanded of Nolfon, what way Galaor
and his Army took afterward? My Lord (quoth he) after he had stayed some few
days in the harbor, very near unto the Rock: he set sail directly for the
Profound Isle, as hoping to enter it by way of suprizall. But they of the
country having some suspicion; before we could come thither, had betaken
themselves to Arms, and awayted for us upon the shore, where they found us
work enough to do, before we could compass any means of landing. For one of
the ^osens to the late King, conducted the people, and had so animated them
against us; as you never saw men fight more courageously, nor with better
judgment.

But the valor of the Lords, Galaor, Galuanes, and Dragonis (they having leapt
into the water up to the chinne, and fighting with vndantable resolution) did
so hearten and embolden on our men in following them: that our enemies were
enforced to retire, and in despite of all they could do, we entered in upon
them; but not without great slaughter of our men, and a wonderful butchery of
the contrary side, we pursuing them still into the City, where their chief
and principal Captain, was soon numbered among the dead. Then did we beleauger
them on all sides, which drove them to such astonishment, as (seeing themselves
destitute of a guide and leader) soon after they required a parlee, which
accordingly was granted them.

For the effecting of this business, four were delegated among them, who came
to Prince Galaor and our other Captains; with whom they so capitulated, that
they yielded themselves. Provided that their liberty and goods might remain
entire unto them: which was afforded them willingly. And the very same day we
entered into the City, where (before the week was fully expired) Dragonis was
crowned King. Afterward, having received their homage, and oath of loyal
allegiance, as well of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, as of the Commons in
general: Prince Galaor, and Galuanes my Masteer, perceiving that their
departure thence would not be so soon as they had intended; dispatched me
toward the Queen Briolania, as also to Madasima, to acquaint them with all
the good news which I have told you.

But heard you nothing (quoth Amadas) of Quedragant and Brunco? My Lord replied
Nolfon, before I dislodged from the Camp, some escaping from the Isles of
Lands, and from the City of Ara^igne, hoping for safety in the kingdom of
the Profound Isle: came thither, and by them we understood, that one of the
kindred to Arauigne, backed by the people of the country, had given a great
battle to our friends, that purposely came to assail the^. But ours had the
better, and drove them to flight, since when we heard no further how matters
have happened. We shall hear that no doubt (said Grasander) at better
leisure, and in more ample manner. So continuing on their conference, they
entered into Balans Castle, and Amadis went to visit him lying still on his
bed, being (as yet) not able to walk about. And they two being alone,
Amadis told him, that he had received certain intelligences, whereby he was
constrained to depart thence the next morning, earnestly desiring him: that
(according as he had promised) he would restore to Darioletta her husband,
daughter, servants, and the Barque which they had brought thither with them,
and whatsoever else he had taken from them. To the end, that they might fail
away to the Enclosed Isle at their pleasure. Moreover, that ^r^uor and his wife
should bear them company, to see Ortana, and the other Ladies there, that came
thither with her. There may ^ee remain (quoth Amadis) till (...) be of years
fit for Knight hood, and I am well assured, that the best entertainment can be
made to a man, will there be done unto him, and only for your sake.

Lord Amadis, answered the Giant, though (heretofore) my full intent and
purpose was, to do you what harm I could possibly devise, yet now I am turned
quite contrary, and love you as dearly as I can do my self, accounting it as
my only felicity, to be your servant, as (indeed) I am, wherefore, presently
I will take order, to fulfill those things which you have enjoined me, and
assure you also, upon my Faith, that so soon as I have recovered my health: I
will visit the Palace of Apolidon, only to see you, and will keep you
company, when and whether you shall please to command me. I pray you do so,
said Amadis, and if you would have any thing else with me, command it, and
therein (trust me) you shall be obeyed.

Most kindly did the Giant return him thanks, and lovingly embracing one
another, took their final farewell for the next morning. But Batan came not
so soon to the Enclosed Isle, as he intended, and Amadis expected, because
after his departure, he received advertisement: that Quedragant and Bruneo,
(through want of men) were held in the City of Arauigne, still besiged.
Whereupon, he beat his dromms througout all his marches, and assembled
together a worthy band of Soldiers, which he led thither in person: whence
ensued quickly, not only the reduction of the place besiged, but likewise the
whole countries both of Arauigne, and Sansueg^^, as elsewhere you shall hear
more at large.

Let it suffice then, that after the two knights of the Enclosed Isle were
aboard their Ship, and ready to weigh Anchors: Amadis desired Nolson to
furnish him with a guide, that could conduct him to the Island of the Damsel
Enchantresse, because he had a mind to see it. With all my heart answered
Nolfon and I my self will bear you company thither, if so you please to
permit me. And one thing I can assure ye, that now is the best season of all
the year, for seeing the singularities of the place: the stearn frosts and
colds being already with-drawne, whereby horrible and venomous creatures retire
themselves into their hoales, dens, and cauerns in the Earth. It shall
suffice me replied Amadis, to have but one of your skillfull Mariners, and not
to hinder you, in an employment so serious.

Nolson herein fulfilled his mind, delivering him a Pilate of expert judgment,
and so, commending him to God: sailed on to the Island of Mongaza, and Amadis
with Grasandor, directly to the Rock of the Damsel Enchauntresse. So aptly
did the winds fit their purpose, that (within six days) they did discern it,
and saw it so high, that it seemed to them to be above the Clouds. coming
into the Port, there they found a Barque lying at Anchor, all alone, and no one
to have care of it: whereby they immagined, that they to whom it belonged, were
asscended up the Rock, and feared no disaster of the vessel. Then Amadis,
being desirous to attemp the adventure by himself; spoke thus to Grasandor. My
dear friend and companion, let me in treat you to attend me here till to
morrow morning, by which time I may be returned, or perhaps sooner: And if my
fortune stand fair, from aloft I will give you some sign, whereby to find
me. But if within three days you hear no tidings of me: then assure your
self, that mine enterprise has succeeded ill, and then proceed in the rest as
you shall see occasion.

Grasandor seeming somewhat offended, thus answered. How? my Lord, do you think
I have not courage enough, to endure what travail soever can be in this
place, especially, being in your company? where it would much more increase, if
I had but as little as the value of amity. I promise you dear friend, said
Amadis, never any such opinion of you, did once enter into my mind, having
known you in so many worthy actions; as deservedly bestows the esteem on
you, to be one of the best Knights in the world. And seeing you think good
to bear me company; I have a great desire that it should be so.

So he commanded a planke to be laid for landing, and they two only went
ashore (^rmed at al parts, with their Swords and Shields readily prepared,
whenever or howsoever they should be assailed. This done, they began to
mount the Rock, by a little tracke somewhat rough and uneasy, scrambling up
by little and little: till they came to an Hermitage, wherein stood a Statue
of Brass crowned, holding in both hands (just before the breast) a Table of
Copper gilded, whereon were engraven certain Greek Letters and Characters,
easy enough for them to read that understood the language. And yet it was
above two hundred years, since they had been engraven by the Damsel
Enchantresse: who was in her time, the most expert in Magic Arts, that ever
had been since, and daughter to one named Finctor, of the City of Arges, in
the country of Greece.

Now were our Knights so weary, and out of breath, as they were able to go no
further: wherefore they sat down on a seat of stone, to observe the Statue
more advisedly. It appeared to them an admirable piece of Art, especially the
Table and Characters: which Amadis began to read, as well he could, although
his stay in Greece was not long, when he conquered the Monster Endriagus; and
the writing on the Table, was as follows.

The inscription on the Table. At such time as the Great Island shall flourish,
and therein shall be assembled the flower of Chivalry and of beauty, and the
land governed by a most potent and magnanimious Prince: Then shall he come
from thence, to whom the Sword and enchanted Treasures are destined, and not
(tell then) shall they come to any man's power.



Full well did Amadis perceive, that this adventure was not appointed for him,
but persuaded himself, that it was reserved for his son Esplandian only,
who was borne the fairest and goodliest person living: nevertheless, he
concealed it to himself, and asked Grasandor whether he understood the
inscription, or no? No truly, quoth he, for I never was in place where the
language was spoken. Upon my faith answered Amadis, this is some very ancient
Prophecy: And then he told him all that it contained. I know not, replied
Grasandor, wherefore it should be thus predicted, except it aimed only at your
self: you being son to the most worthy Prince, that ever girded sword by his
side, and the very choysest Lady for beauty of her time, as evidently may be
discerned, by the other especial beauties remaining in her. Therefore, let us
boldly ascend up higher, because it shall be as much blame to you in
forbearing to try it, as presumption in any other that shall dare to attempt
it. Nor speak I this without just occasion; because my hope is, to see that by
your means, which no man else in these days is worthy to see, Amadis began
to smile, perceiving with what zeal Grasandor spoke, and said Seeing it must
be so, let us go on then and up to the Palace, before dark night prevent us
in our determination.

From the hermitage thus they parted, and followed still the track that guided
them: but with such difficulty and danger, as they had many down slidings,
and very perilous falls. Yet worse then all this befell them, for day light
failed, and they were enforced (by the nights extreme darkness) to stay upon
a little plain till morning: where they lay down so vneasilie, as they could
not take a jot of rest. And therefore they fell into discourse of the painful
usury Fortune now paid them, for the former pleasures (borrowed of their
friends) in the Enclosed Isle. All which notwithstanding, said Amadis, were it
not for fear of Orianaes distaste, and suspicion of the grief wherein now she
may be: happen to me what may, I would go see the Camp of Bruneo and
Agraies, before I returned to her.

Hereat Grasandor began to startle, and said. By my faith Sir, you will make
her die with mere doubt fearing whether you be alive or no. And so much the
rather, because I promised and swore to her, to bring you back again with me,
so soon as I could find you. Wherefore, let me advise you, and herein somewhat
overrule you, to obey her, rather then your own rash desires. Afterward,
according as we shall learn by others informations, we may either go to them,
or send some supply, if need require. I think (quoth Amadis) we may do much
better, at our parting hence, to shape our course for the Island of the
Infanta, from whence I will send a Gentleman to Balan, requesting his
assistance for them: which I am sure he will perform in the best manner, and
so we may (in the mean while) set on to the Enclosed Isle, to prepare
entertainment for him, against he comes t^ither.

Thus our two Knights spent out the most part of the night, sometimes napping
and nodding, and other whiles waking, till day appeared: when up they rose, and
mounted up the Rock again, till they came to the entrance of a greater
plain, where they beheld huge ruins of very ancient buildings. Proceeding
still on, they came to an Arch of Marble, whereon stood a Statue of Alablaster,
being made for a Woman, and so ingeniously wrought, that nothing wanted but
life it self. In her right hand, she held a Pen, as if she were readily
wrighting, and in her left hand, a role of Parchment, with Greek letters
thereon, containing these words.

The Inscription on the Role. That Science is most certain, whereby we profit
more before the Gods, then we do among Men: because the one is holy, and the
other vain and unprofitable.



Behold, quoth Amadis, excellent knowledge delivered in very few words, for if
every man understood rightly, what graces heaven has bestowed upon him: many
would more addict themselves to virtuous actions, then they do, and shun
those vices which lead to perdition. So passing on farther they entered into a
base Court, full of fragments of Collumnes, as well Ionick and Tuscane, as
Dorick. Likewise, of many ancient Medalls, and personages so artificially
carved, as it was impossible to look on better. Nor had the injury of time
much offended them, but gave them leave still to contain, a very especial,
appearance of their singularity: which ^cited Amadis to note them with s^e more
heedefull observation, and thought he could never sufficiently satisfy his eye.

As he turned from one side to another, he came into a very goodly hall, so
richly painted, as it was most wonderful to behold, and looking about it: they
perceived an entrance into a fast looked up chamber, having two doors of bright
shining stone, in the midst of which doors was a Sword so transfixed, as it
passed quite through up to the Cross. Hereby they gathered apparently, that the
treasurs and enchan^ments (so much spoken of) were there enclosed. In regard
whereof, Amadis (purposing to approve the Chambers opening) went near to essay
the getting forth of the Sword. But looking upon the po^ell and the cross
hilt, which were of bone, yet more cl^^r and ^ai^e (...), then any Ruby of the
East: he beheld seven letters in Greek (redder then any fire) to be upon
the one side, and some few other (whiter then Snow) upon the other side, all
concording after this manner.

The Prophecy engraven on the Sword. In vain does the Knight bestow his
pains, that shall essay (what force soever or strength remains in him) to
draw forth this Sword: except it be he (only destined hereto) by the same
Letters, as the Statue of Brass has written in the Table it bears, and
carries upon him the same Charracters as are engraven on either side of this
pommell. For this prediction was set down by her, who was not to be seconded
by any (of her time) for most admirable intelligence in all Magical Sciences.



Hereby Amadis took occasion to mark these red letters more advisedly, then
formerly he had done, and called to mind, that Esplandian had the very like
upon his body: wherefore he resolved assuredly that only he must end this
marvel, nevertheless, he demanded of Grasandor, what was his opinion in this
case? So help me God, quoth he, I understand well enough the contents of the
white Letters: but for the red, I am able to say just nothing. Nor I
(answered Amadis) albeit I imagine, that both you and I have seen the very
like, upon somebody that we know. You say very true, replied Grasandor for
your son as I have heard, brought the like into the World with him from his
mothers womb, and surely in mine opinion, they are the very same.
Notwithstanding, if you had not quickened my memory, I should never have
thought on it. And therefore make no complaint of your Fortune, if you fail in
this enterprise: because, for ought I can perceive, you have begot him, that
must carry this honor from you.

Amadis musing to himself while suddenly starting said. I am of your mind,
for so have I gathered, by the Table on the Image of Brass. Return we then
back again, quoth Grasandor, and leave the rest to be ended by him, to whom
the destenies have made their promise. So we must be enforced to do, said
Amadis, albeit I am somewhat offended, that I may not carry away his sword
with me. By my faith, replied Grasandor, if you should offer to get it, your
hinderance may be more then you imagine; and yet it may fall out, not to prove
so good a sword as your own. Moreover, when I consider how you obtained it:
never could any Knight attain to a fairer fortune, nor more beseeming a man,
than yours was then. This he spoke, in regard that Amadis won it, by
approouing himself to be the most loyal and perfect lover, that ever loved:
according as in the Second book of this History, has been oftentimes
declared unto ye.

Hereupon, they returned back by the same way they came, and passing again
among the Antiquities: Amadis stayed there a while, better to behold them. The
more he looked on them, the more he commended their rare perfections, both in
moldings, friezes, and chapters, lying among the ruins of those famous
buildings. And no way could he turn his eye, but he beheld many fractures of
singular carved parsonages, the very muscles observed to the life, and such
perspectiue where occasion required it: that (in his opinion) it relished more
of some divinity, then to be performed by the skill of man in workmanship.

As he continued in these meditations, a knight armed with a white Armor, and
holding his sword ready drawn, came to them, courteously saluting them, as
they did the like to him. Then he demanded of the^, whether they were of the
Enclosed Isle, or no? We are, answered Grasandor: but why do you move that
question? Because (quoth the other) I found a Batque beneath, and men therein,
who told me, that two Knights belonging to the Palace of Apolidon, were
ascended up this Rock: but they concealed their names from me, as I did mine
from them. Nor desire I any thing else, but peace and friend-shippe with them,
being casually come hither in pursuit of a knight, who (by trompery) is
escaped from me, with a Damsel forcibly carried away by him. Friend, said
Grasandor, in courtesy let me entreat you to take off your Helmet, or to tell
us your name. If you will swear to me, replied the Knight, whether you know my
Lord Amadis or no, and that you will do the like to me: I am well contented,
otherwise you speak but in vain. By my faith, quoth Grasandor, we are two of
the best friends he has, and therefore you may well be known to us.

So the Knight disarmed his head, saying: You may now know me well enough, if
you be such as you have sworn your selves to me. Hardly had he concluded his
words, but Amadis ran and caught him in his arms, saying. Brother Gandalin,
is it possible that fortune should cause us to meet in this manner? Much amazed
was Gandalin, to see himself thus embraced, and by a man unknown to him, and
unable to conjecture who he should be: wherefore Grasandor suddenly said. Why
how now Gandalin? Have you forgotten your Lord Amadis? Amadis? answered
Gandalin, may it be possible? Then falling on his knee; whether he would or
no, he kissed his hand, before Amadis could any way prevent him: but then
demanded of him, how and by what means he came thither? Believe me my Lords,
replied Gandalin, your equals in loyalty of affection, would gladly know as
much concerning you, as you now demand of me, you being as far from them, as
this place is from their abiding. Nevertheless, to give you content, I will
declare the whole truth unto you.

Know then, that being with Bruneo and others, who are yet in conquering the
countries of Arauigne and Sansuegua, returning from a cruel battle, which
the Kings Nephew gave us at our entrance, and wherein many worthy men lost
their lives: one day (among other) a Damsel belonging to the kingdom of
Norway, attired all in black, came into the Tent of Agraies, desiring him on
her knees (in no mean plenty of tears) to give her rescue in a wrong done unto
her. Agraies causing her to rise, and sit down by him, demanded the cause of
her sad complaint, and he would redress it so much as lay in him to do. Alas
Sir (quoth she) you have good reason to help me, because I am both a subject
and servant to the King, who is father to Madame Olinda your wife: for whose
sake and honor, I desire you to assist me with one of your Knights, for
recovery back of my daughter, whom the Lord of the great Tower on the Sea
shore, has forcibly taken from me, being thereto only emboldened, because I
would not give him her in marriage. And my reason is, in regard he is neither
so noble, nor descended of so good a house, as my husband was: but rather is of
base and servile condition, usurping the place he possesses, upon his
neighbors, whom he has since expelled. The father to my daughter was brother
to Don (...) honor, and (...) of Great Britain. (...) I at any means for
the reco^ of her, without you: because notwithstanding all the earnest
entreaties I have v^ed to him, the wicked man is so cruelly minded, as he does
daily deny me, so that my days can have no long continuance, except (by
Arms) he be compelled to restore her.

Damsel, answered Agraies, why does not your King do you justice, as (in
right) to him belongs? My Lord, quoth she, he is so ouerspent in years, and
decayed in body, as he is not able to govern himself, or any other: neither
does he ever come forth of his bed, only through his extreamitie of age and
sickness. The man then you speaks of, replied Agraies, is his abiding far
from hence? No Sir (quoth she) in less space then a day and a half, the
wind sitting conveniently, we may by Sea easily sail thither. Then I made
tender of my service, as willing to go along with the Lady. But my Lord
Agraies would not consent thereto: except I made him faithful promise, of
returning back again to him, after I should have combated the Knight, without
attempting any further, if (with honor) I might safely do it.

My promise made to that effect, and I sufficiently furnished, I went aboard
with the Damsel, in a Barque which she had purposely brought with her: and
the Sea was so calm and favorable to us, that on the morrow (about midday)
we took landing, and the Lady conducted me thither where her daughter was
detayned. At my entrance into the Port, I called out aloude (...) any to
answer me: and a (...) (^g forth at a window) de^ded of me, what I would
have, whereto, thus I replied. Tell thy master that he must quickly deliver a
Damsel, which he forcibly has taken from her which is in my company, or
yield me a reason why he will not: otherwise, not a man shall issue forth,
but he dies the death. By my Soul (quoth he I spoke to) your threatening
assures us sufficiently what you are: nevertheless, do but stay a little, and
(I think) you shall hear other tidings.

I withdrew somewhat off, and tarried not long, but they of the Tower opened
the gates, and forth came a Knight well mounted, having on a yellow colored
Armor, and at the length of a carriere, he called to me, saying. Knight, thou
that (without any discretion) thretnest me that knows thee not, say, what
do thou demand of me? I answered, that I neither did or would threaten nor
defy him, until I understood the cause, why he kept the daughter of the Lady
here present with me) from her. Well, said he, admit it were so, what is that
to thee? I hope (quoth I) to revenge her wrong, and to make thee restore her
again, whether thou will or no. We shall soon try that, said the other: And
so giving his horse the spur, he came running mainly against me, as I did
the like to him, couching our Lances so conveniently, that the shiuers of them
flew up into the air very gallantly.

Setting hand to our swords, a tough battle began between us, which
continued (almost) to the evening: but in the end, the right being on my side,
the victory fell to me, having him down under my foot, and my sword ready to
smite off his head. But he calling for mercy, prayed me to save his life, and
he would do whatsoever I would have him. Why then said I, deliver this Lady her
daughter again, and swear never to take maid or wife contary to their own
liking: which faithfully he vowed to do. Here-upon pretending to go fetch the
Damsel forth, he went into the Tower, and here he stayed not long but I saw
him embarked on the Sea, armed as I left him, and the Damsel with him, he
calling out thus aloude to me Knight, wonder not that I have broken my word
with thee, for the power of Love has thereto compelled me, being not able to
live one hour, without her whom I thus carry away with me. And seeing it is
out of mine own ability, either to conquer or govern my self: I pray thee,
find no fault with this that I have done. And because neither thou, nor her
Mother, shall hope hereafter to see her any more: behold, I will now convey her
to such a place, where thou shall never hear any tidings of her.

Speaking these words, he rowed away, and the Damosel wrung, and wrested her
hands, whereat I conceived such grief, that death was much more pleasing to
me then Life. For the mother began to make such strange Lamentations,
tearing both her hair and Garments; casting in my teeth, that she had received
more wrong by me then from the Knight himself. For (quoth she) while my
daughter was in the Tower, there always was hope of recovering her again: but
now, all expectation is utterly frustrated, being carried to a place unknown,
and whereof you are the only occasion, by not executing the victory, when it
remained in your power to do it. Now am I our of hope of any remedy, and not
only is the pains you have taken for me thanklesse: but also I have just
cause, to complain of you before all men I shall ever meet withal.

In my answer to her, and to appease her (...), I confessed, that I held my
self guilty of he^ new d^ter, because I might w^l have considered that the
Knight being disloyal to her, in so (...) her daughter, small virtue el^^
would be expected in him. (...) (...) it ^^d (...). I (...) swore to ^er,
(...), either by (...) reco^ered her daughter, and delivered her (...) hands.
Provided, that she would lend ^e her Barque, and some of her Mariners, as my
guides, whereto she condiscended. Moreover, she promised to attend my return
in a Castle, there near adjoining: (...) also the (...) of me, and to see
that I should p^^^me my promise.

So we p^^ted from he^, s^tting sail the same w^y, as (...) the Knight had
taken before us, and long time we s^yled, without hearing any news at all:
vnt^ll this very day ((...) is the fift^ we met with (...), who told me (...)
a (...), with ^di^g to (...) in the (...) the ^chantr^. Wh^^^ I ariuin^, I
(...) a^ empty Sq^, and your people no^ (...) whom I enquired, if (...) any
belonging (...). They could (...), but that the Sq^ was th^^^ before the^
ariuall, and in such manner as I found it. Whereupon, I ascended up this Rock,
thinking they might be hidden here about: and also to try an adventure, which
the fishermen told me was here aloft in an old ruined Palace, wherein if I
f^^led, yet I might make some report thereof, to such as a^terward I met
withal.

Friend Gandalin, answered Grasandor, concerning the Knight and the Damsel,
th^^e may remain ^e hope of meeting with them: b^t f^r the Aduentur, your
la^our (...) is utterly lost. So, ^ee reported all that had formerly happened,
whereat Gandalin (somewhat amazed) demanded, whether they had seen the
Knight, or no? No truly, answered Amadis, and yet we have visited all these
ruins two several times: notwithstanding, we will once more go over them
again, and make a more advised observation. Walking about from place to place,
they espied the Knight close h^d in a corner, who (...) him^^^fe to be discoue^
^ame f^rth to them, d^mand^n^ ^or whom they sought* For the^ (...) answered
Gandalin. The Knight presently knowing him by his white Armor, replied. Trust
me Sir, I wonder not a little, what pleasure you take in thus pursuing me,
having already assured you, the arm of love ^ath so ouer-awed me, that I have
no power to go^^^ne my (...) I am verily persuaded, that (...) either you, or
any other (...) this company, had (in like manner) felt the force of love, as I
have do^^: I should not appear to be ^o faulty, as (perhaps) I seem to be ^n
your imaginations. Therefore d^e with me what you will, for nothing else but
death can divide me from this Damsel, such, and so unfeigned is my affection
to her.

Amadis, who had many thousand times felt himself in the same extremity,
began to take compassion on him: Nevertheless, thus he answered. Although
what you have said, is in some measure excusable: yet the Knight that has
pursued in search of you, may not fail in his promise made to the Lady, for
otherwise he deserves to be reprehended before all worthy persons: I know it
well sir, replied the knight and am likewise contented to put my self into his
power, provided that he will be so kind unto me as carry me back again to
the Lady, and there plead my cause for me, that she will be pleased to
suffer me enjoy her daughters as my wife, because now she has made choice of
me before any other. Is that true? quoth Amadis to the Damsel. Yes sir, said
she, albeit heretofore he detayned me against my will nevertheless observing
the truth, and integrity of his affection, I am now fully minded to forget all
former violences, both pardoning, and promising to accept him in marriage.
Believe me said Amadis, I am very glad of it, and Gandalin, if you will follow
mine advice, work with the Mother so much as you can, that this happy wedding
may be effected. I shall Sir (quoth he) with all my heart, and rejoice to see
so good a conclusion.

So they went on, to return to the Sea shore: but the night preventing them,
they were enforced to stay in the Hermitage, discending the next morning down
to their men, who awaited their coming in the Barque. As Gandalin took his
leave, Amadis and Grasandor entreated him, to recommend them to Agraies, and
their other friends there: aduising him and them also, to return speedily to
the Enclosed Isle, where they should hear other tidings. Thus Gandalin, sailed
thence to the Lady mother, where, having delivered both her daughter and the
Knight: he labored the matter so effectually, that (notwithstanding all
former spleen) the mother quickly consented to her Daughters mind. Gandalin
was not a little amazed hereat, but remembering, that women's constancy was as
certain, as the continual turning tides of the Ocean: he could not choose but
smile, and leaving them to their further affairs, went aboarde the Barque,
returning to Agrates, who was highly pleased with Gandalins good success, as
also his fortunate meeting with Amadis and Grasandor in so strange a manner.

But now we must change our purpose, to them that were bound for the Enclosed
Isle. with an earnest desire to see their wives, whom they had left in no mean
melancholy, only for their absence. Amadis and Grasandor, departing from the
Island of the Damsel Enchantresse, found the Seas and Winds so favorable
that (without any impeachment whatsoever) they entered the port of the Enclosed
Isle. As they mounted up the Rock, and came to the Monastery, which Amadis had
caused to be builded: they saw before the Gate, a Damsel attired all in
mourning, and two Squires with her, holding their Pal^raies by the bridles.
They saluted her very courteously, as she did the like to them, and then they
entered into the Church to perform their Orisons: in the mean while, the
Damsel enquired of one of the Monks there standing, what they were. The
religious man answered her, that the one was the Lord of the Isle, and the
other was his noble friend and companion.

When the D^^osell knew that Amadis was there, she stayed in the porch of the
Church, and seeing him coming toward her: she fell at his feet, and weeping
abundantly, said. Alas, Lord Amadis are not you he, who knows how to give
remedy to ^re afflicted soul, such as mine is at this instant? Assuredly, if
it were not so, your fame and renown would never have circled the world, so
oftentimes as already they have don. For this cause, I the most unfortunate of
all other, am come to to crave mercy and pity of you. Thus speaking, she
caught fast h^ld about his legs, embracing them so strictly, as Amadis could
by no means get from her: for, the more he strove to get loose, the more
violently still she pressed upon him, wherefore he said unto her. Fair
Damsel, I pray you tell me your cause of grief, as also what and whence you
are, and although I should refuse a^l other Ladies: yet will I do for you
whatsoever I am able; to release you out of the sorrow wherein I see you.

Pausing a while, she said. My name you shall not know, till I be certain,
that you will perform what you are to prom^se: but the cause of my grie^e and
tribulation grew in this manner. I am wi^e to a Knight, whom I love with all my
heart: but such is both my misfort^ and his, that he is become a prisoner to
the very greatest enemy he has in the world, and it is impossible for him to
be thence delivered, without such help as I hope for in your goodness, and no
man else whatsoever. Believe it Sir, quoth she, my knees shall never part from
this earth, nor mine arms from about your legs (except thereto you forcibly
constrain me) till you grant what I am to demand of you. Amadis perceiving
both her importunity and obstinacy, knew not well what to say, fearing to
stand obliged by his promise, for the undertaking of some such matter, which
well he might repent at leisure: as indeed he did. Nevertheless, he was so
moved to compassion, seeing her tears flow forth so incessantly: that he
granted what she desired, requiring that he might know her name. Then she
caught him by both the hands, and (whether he would or no) kissed them
sweetly; and addressing her speech^s to Grasandor, began in this manner.

Sir Knight, I pray you remember, that Lord Amadis has made this promise to
me, who am the wife to Archalaus the Enchanter, and him he keeps in prison,
being the greatest enemy he has in the world. But if Heaven were so pleased,
this hatred may convert it self into the greater amity, by such happy means
as may be wrought. Much offended was Amadis, to see himself deceived by the
subtilty of this woman, and gladly he would have revoked his promise sworn
unto her: notwithstanding, he could not blame the woman, who had just reason
to employ her utmost pains, for the benefit of her husband, as every good wife
else ought to do, and thus he answered her. By the faith I bear to God
(Lady) you have made too large a request to me, for in despite of any peril
that can come to me, I would not consent to such a matter: but only in regard
of the promise I have made ye, and it is the first that ever I granted to
Lady or Damsel, whereof I repented my self afterward.

With these words, he and Grasandor mounted on / horseback, commanding the
wife of Archalaus, to follow him to the Palace of Apollidon: but before they
could get thither, Oriana and Mabila had intelligence of their arrival. What
pleasure they conceived, by this their so long expected coming, it is
impossible for me to express: yet such it was, that not only they, but all the
Ladies and Gentlewomen went to attend their entrance into the Park. At their
meeting, there needs no other question to be made, but the like kisses and
embraces passed between them, even as young married couples use to do, upon
the very day of their choicest delighting, to yield the truer testimony of
their Faiths firmness. And these sweet ceremonies vshered them to their
Chambers, where (no doubt) but they paid sound arrearges, for their so long
absence from their sweet Mistresses.

On the morrow morning, being at Mass, the wife of Archalaus came again, and
fell before the feet of Amadis, entreating him to perform his promise, which
he had sworn to on her husbands behalf, and which (accordingly) he yielded
unto. Afterward, before he would sit down at the Table, accompanied with all
the train of Ladies, he went to see him in his Cage, where he found his head
and beard to be as white as Snow, extending down so far as his girdle.
Unfashionable he appeard to be in every part, great, crooked, and somewhat
deformed, but his looks fiery and much to be feared. Wherefore, so soon as
the Ladies beheld him, they were greatly afraid of him: especially the
Princess Oriana, who formerly had made proof of his malice, when he carried
her away, and when Amadis came to her happy rescue, as has been declared in
the first Book of this our famous History.

Now although Archalaus saw his wife among the rest: yet he seemed to make no
account thereof, which caused Amadis to ask him, whether he knew her: or no?
Yes, (quoth he) I know her. Art thou pleased (said Amadis) at her coming
hither? Sufficiently said he, if it be about my business, otherwise, I take no
care at all. For considering the condition wherein I have lived, ever since I
fell into thy hands (being resolved to suffer patiently, any harm whatsoever
can happen to me) my heart is settled, and my persuasion confirmed (in mere
despite of thee) to live thus, and no otherwise, till I die. But listen me
said Amadis, if for her sake, I should set thee at liberty: would thou
accept it so thankfully, as to extend the like to me, if my case were
answerable to thine now? Yes, quoth he, if thou did send for her on thine
own instigation, but if by her wit and cunning she has presumed on this
enterprise, and wone some promise from thee against thy liking I neither can or
ought render any thanks to thee therefore, because good works done perforce,
deservedly (of themselves) do lose their merit, and therefore I pray thee to
tell me the truth of all.

Amadis did then declare unto him, how he met with her at the Monastery, in
what manner she had deceived him, and gotten his deliverance. Howsoever things
have past, said Archalaus; I will plainly tell thee my mind. If thou had
taken pity on me in Lubania, when I my self desired mercy of thee: assure
thy soul, that all the remainder of my life, I had continued thy bounden and
perfect friend. But at this instant, thou being constrained to release me,
without any desire of mine, or suit made on mine own behalf for it, but in
mere performance of thy promise: so will I receive this freedom (if thou will
let me enjoy it) and with as much content as thou deseruest. Otherwise, thou
might imagine me dull, and of very silly courage, if, in steed of so good
occasion, as I have to hate thee, I should show my self thankful for so
many injuries as thou have done me.

Thou have highly pleased me, answered Amadis, in not disguising thy venomous
malice toward me, and I deserve no blame for thy deliverance: for I was
resolved, a long while, to kept thee thus mued up, as thinking it very
reasonable, to make theee suffer the pain justly due to thee, rather then by
releasing thee, thou should torment good people, as heretofore thou have
done. Nevertheless, since I promised thy freedom to thy wife, I will send
thee hence, and cause thee to be conuayed to some place of safety: desiring
thee (so much as is possible for me to do) that although, neither in will nor
word, thou can find in thy heart to pardon me; yet thou would not
treacherously beguile me. At leastwise, do not hereafter use thy wonted
cruelties, to such as never did offer thee any displeasure: which the rather
thou ought to do, for his sake, that has bestowed this instant favor on
thee, and gave thee release, when thou did least look for it. I know well
enough replied Archalaus, that in any thing concerning thee, I shall exercisethe
^ery best of my will and skill, by all means possible I may, continually to
work thee mischief: but for harming others, perhaps (therein) I will follow
thy counsel.

Wonderfully were all the Ladies amazed, to hear the old villain speak so
sawcily to Amadis, and much they did reprove him for it, but told them: It was
naturally his humor to be obstinate, and they must endure it so well as they
could; but for the rest he would be sure to keep promise with them.

So they departed out of the Chamber, leaving the wife of Archalaus there to
keep him company till the next morning, and then Amadis sent for Ysanio,
commanding him, to release Archalaus out of his iron Cage, to give him horse
and Armor, and guide both him and his, far from the limittes of the Enclosed
Isle, and with such safety, as his wife might receive no coffeehouse. Ysanio
performed his charge, bringing him and his company so far as his Castle of
Valderine: where, taking leave of him, Archalaus returned him many thanks,
saying. Sir, tell Amadis from me, it belongs only to cruel and savage beasts,
to be mewed up in Cages of iron, as I all this while have been, and not to
Knights, such as he knows I am. But bid him beware of me, I hope very
speedily to be revenged on him, even in despite of that old whore Vrganda the
Unknown, in whom he reposeth too much trust. I rather think answered Ysanio,
that I must take pains again to keep you fast, so long as already I have done
in your Cage.

With these words they parted, Ysanio and his train returning the same way
they came, even till they arrived at the Enclosed Isle: and thither (sooner
after) came Darioletta, with her company, being all most kindly entertained.
But now we must alter our present discourse, to tell you what Balan did, after
that Amadis and Grasandor had left him, in the Island of the Red Tower.

About fifteen days, or three weeks, after the two Knights of the Enclosed
Isle, were dislodged from the Red Tower; the Giant Balan, finding his wounds
almost cured, and he able to walk about his Chamber, forthwith gave order,
that Dariolettaes Ship should be made ready, because she and all her
company might safely sail to the Enclosed Isle, with Brauor his Son. Many
goodly Jewels and gifts he bestowed on them, and being early embarked on a
Monday morning, they set sail and away, and landed as you have already heard.
The Giant being returned to his Castle, gave presently charge, to leuy and
muster men in all parts of his dominions, for the succor of Agraies, who still
held the City of Arauigne besiged, and long he delayed not, but all things
were prepared, his ships well munited, and put forth to Sea.

So furtherous was both the wind and weather, that on the tenth day following,
they landed where the Army of the Enclosed Isles Knights were encamped. No
sooner were Galaor and Galuanes Agrates, and the rest advertised thereof, and
that Balan himself was come on shore: but they mounted on horseback, to go
meet and welcome him, with a worthy troop attending on them, for they knew
before, all that had passed between Amadis and him. As they came near they
embraced each other, and the first that stepped to Balan, was Galuanes, of whom
the Giant (not knowing him) demanded, if he were Galaor, the brother to
Amadis, whom he was very desirous to see? No sir (quoth he) I am Galuanes your
friend and kins-man, if so you please to accept me. Ha, my Lord and Cousin
said Balan, I had not been so tardy from your company, and my dear Cousin
Madasima also, but for your friend-shippe with him, who then was my most deadly
enemy: yet now we are become so good friends, that I love you so much the
more, and for his sake.

Close by him was Galaor, who presenting himself to Balan, bad him most
lovingly welcome. The Giant understanding what and who he was, did him very
humble reverence, saying. My Lord, I stand so engaged to your Noble brother, as
no Gentleman in the world can be more his, then I am, and yours likewise. And
surely wonder must now cease in me, concerning the fame and renown published
of you both because I never saw any man more truly resemble him then (in all
respects) you effectually do. But to speak truly, there is no other
difference between ye: but that you are somewhat taller, and Lord Amadis a
little more corpulent. By this time they were come to the Camp and his lodging
appointed in the Tent of Galuanes: which was singulerly beautiful, and far
more rich then any of the rest.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How Balan being in the Tent of Galuanes, the principal Commanders of the
Army came to see him: And what conference they had together.

YOu have heard, how the Giant Balan, being come to the siege before the City
of Arauigne, he was visited by Agraies, Quedragant, (...) d^ bonne Mer,
Angriote d'Estrauaus, Granate of the Dreadful ^ale, Palomir, Brian de Mo^ste,
and all the chiefest Lords of the Army: after some kind salutations and
speeches passed between them, Bal^ began in this manner. My Lords, i^ you
wonder at my so sudden com^^ing hither, and in a season so little expected: my
self may well marvel as much, at something (not long since) happening to me:
because, from the time of my first apprehension of knowledge, I had a
continual purpose and deliberation, by all means possible to procure his
death, whom now I affect more dearly then my self. And therefore it is most
certain, that the execution o^ men's wills, are more in the power of Heavens
strong hand, then in any ability of such as intend them, as I have well
experienced by my self.

So, turning about to them all, he pr^^eeded thus. I think there is not (...)
among yo^, (...) me to be the (...) liant and dr^adfull (...) bull, (...) of
the Island of the (...) Tower, who was slain by Amadis in the battle of King
Cildadan, where ^med himself the bright Obs^. N^tur^l reason (...) then, to
(...) revenge on him ^^r my fathe^^ death: but the contrary has ((...))
happened unto me, my self being vanquished and overcome by his hand. So he
discoursed the whole manner of the combat between them, and upon what
occa^^^n Am^ came to seek him in hi^ (...): l^stly, the peace and (...)
concluded b^tween the^, with (...) him in the (...) (quoth ^^c) (...)
aduertisem^nt, (...), as well at the ^^^ges be^ing, as since: I resol^ed to
bring (...) s^^h ^u^cour as I could, and as already you have ^eene, purposing
(...) leave you, till (...) country were reduced to perfect obedience, and in
such manner as you would have it.

Lord Balan, aniwered Agraies, your fathers death deserves just excuse,
especially on the behalf of (...) C^ Amadis, performing no (...), then as one
enemy ^^^uld do to another, meeting him in the (...) of fight, though (...)
of persons, your father so far out going and exceeding him, both (...)
strength and stature: whereby may be g^ed, that it is no m^r of mar^ai^^, when
Heaven main^ a ^full cause, and by imagi^^d w^akenesse, ^astes (...) the (...)
might. Con^ now be^ from his (...) I am very well (...), tha^^ thereby) you
have rather wo^ then lost, because there is not a Knight in this Camp, but is
w^ yours, in all kinds of employment, as our further willing seru^ce, (at all
times) shall apro^e. B^l^n returned him many thanks, and, because it waxed
somewhat late, being also a private night of supper, all bad him good rest
except Galaor and Galuanes, who stayed still to keep him company.

On the morrow morning, Balan being desirous to round the City, to observe
the best strength thereof, and which place was fittest for breach, or entrance:
Galaor and he walked very early together, so covertly as they could. But when
Balan had well considered the Bulwarks all about, the platformes and Rampires,
within the depth of the ditches, and (above all else) what number of men were
to defend it, with their store of victuals, and necessary munition; it appeared
a City to him, very hardly to be enforced. But then Galaor told him, that the
most part of the Soldiers were bandied against the inhabitants, and the
inhabitants against them: Whereby (quoth he) this discord is sufficient for
their ruin utterly. Considering withal, that (as we have received
advertisement) their hearts are so dejected, as they dare make no more sallies
forth upon us, in regard of the great losses they have had already. More-ouer,
our men are resolved to die in the assault, or they will enter:
notwithstanding, we will not permit them to have so much head, fearing their
loss, and respecting our hope (day by day) of their surrender, the reasons
before alleged considered, and our detayning their King here prisoner with us
also. Believe me Sir, said Balan, you stand upon very great apparances,
nevertheless, if my advise were worthy to be allowed, I would give them no
longer time of respite: But attempt our fortune to morrow morning, and see what
looks they will set upon us, in a bold sudden and sprightly assault.

So long lasted this discourse, as it brought them to the Camp of Agraies,
where meeting with Enill he saluted Balan, saying. My Lord, the Prince Agraies,
entreates you, (being ^n this forwardness) that you would see the King
Arauigne, here prisoner in my Tent: because he is desirous to speak with you,
as he has made known to the Prince. I am well contented answered Balan, for
(perhaps) this coming of mine, may promise some good agreement with him. So
they went all three to the King Arauigne, whom they found attended with his
guard: But so soon as Balan, saw him, he set his knee to the ground, and
kissed his hand. The King took him up, saying: he was most heartily welcome.
And because they would confer privately on their affairs, the others left
them alone, and departed thence.

Then King Arauigne demanded of him, what he conceived of his hard Fortune?
And breathing forth a sigh, sufficient to have broken a bigger heart: he stood
along while silent, as being unable to deliver a word, till at last, thus he
spoke. Ah my dear friend Balan, if your Father Mandafabull were now living,
how Irksome would my mishap be to him? And to speak truly, matters are
mightily altered since his death. For, it is not fully a year, since I stood
upon no mean terms of being the very greatest King in all the West: but now,
I am beecome the poorest and most miserable man in all the World. How Sir?
replied Balan, it seems you distrust the mercy of the almighty in whose power
it is, to dispose of you as best likes him. If Fortune have once frowned on
you, is her wheel so fast nailed or printed, as she cannot lift you to the
place from whence you are fallen? Let me persuade you Sir, not to be thus
discomforted, but in kingly patience to thank God for all, and he will not
forget you.

Walking on along with him, he began thus again. I know very well Sir,
that hardly can you express constancy or courage, in such cases of so sharp
affliction, and uneasy to be endured, as your imprisonement is. Yet I can
desire no better experience therein, then the like misfortune has ministered to
me, in permitting me to be vanquished by the same man, that was the worker
of your downfall. Notwithstanding, let me take it ill or well, be pleased or
offended at my foil: I see no other remedy, but only to arm my self with
patience, and sooner to forget the i^iurie I have received, then my self. For
the rest, I am of opinion that it is possible, to treat on some good agreement
between you and these Princes: who (I am persuaded) will therein listen to
you, if such a motion proceed from your self. How can that be done (quoth the
King) except in forgoing all, which they pretend to have conquered from me: and
I had rather die, bearing the name of an imprisoned King, then to live a beggar
at liberty.

If after death, said Balan, life were easy to be recalled back again, I
should join with you in this opinion: but having nothing dearer to us in this
world, we should preserve it so long as is possible for us. My worthy friend
Balan replied the the King, do with me what you please, into your hands I
commit my self, my life, my goods, and honor: beseeching you entirely, to
remember my business in such nature, as I make no doubt but you will. Now
because they saw Enill coming in to them: they altered their discourse, and
Balan taking leave of him, went to find Galuanes and Galaor, who stayed his
return in the Tent of Agraies.

There he declared, what speeches had past between him and the King Arauigne.
And in my mind, quoth he, considering the humor wherein I left him, I think
it were good to make him some offer, giving him some country of his own for a
place of retirement, where he may wear out the remainder of his days: and be
contented to resign up all the rest. The whole company was well pleased
heere-with, and highly allowed the advice of Balan: for to speak impartially,
he was one of the wisest men, and as sound in judgment, as any where else was
to be found. Whereupon they entreated him, to mediate this matter with Arauigne,
committing all to his discretion: because indeed, they themselves were half
tired, and grew weary of the war.

On the next morning, he went to the King Arauigne, and (among diverse others
remonstrances) told him, how at his request, and only by his means, he had so
well prevailed with the Princes of the Army: that they were all contented, to
leave him part of the Isles of Lands, in full and entire sovereignty. Which
liked him well, considering it was much better for him, to continue King of a
little, then to be Lord of nothing. Hereupon the City was surrendered, and
certain Ships and victuals were given him, for his retreat into the Isle of
Liconia: And the very same day, Brun^o was crowned king with great
magnificence. So, having received their homages, and faithful aleagance for
the whole Country, their Army being (in this time) well refreshed: they set
away to the City of Calaffan, in the Realm of Sansu^gua. Whereof the people
being advertised, assembled themselves in great numbers, and, electing
Captains and Commanders among them: resolved to attend their coming, and bid
them battle, before they would suffer any besieging. But they tarried so long
for their mustered forces; that I am loath to d^l^y you in so idle an
expectation. Let it suffice then, that the Country of Sansuegua was conquered,
and because it is not any thing (...), or incident to our History; to tell you
in what manner it was performed: we will be silent therein at this time,
leaving the ^e to them of the Enclosed Isle; and now we will tell you, what
happened to King Lisuart, after his re^ into Great Britain.

CHAP. XXXVIII*
How King Lisuart being hunting, was taken prisoner by Enchantment and very
strangely.

ALthough our History has long discontinued, from speaking of King ^isu^^t,
and of any thing happening to him, since he went imbarqued from the Enclosed
Isle, returning home to his Country of Great Britain: yet I now find apt
occasion to be no longer forgetful of him, but to declare, how afterward he
ca^ied himsese, as being a matter fit for our purpose in this place.

^sten then to me, Lords and fair Ladies, and you shall understand a new
kind of subtlety, which fortune made him taste of, to let him the better
know, what slender assurance he had of her favors: for at such time as he
thought to be most at quiet, after so many wars and discords passed wherewith
already you are fully acquainted, this accedent ensuing happened to him. First,
he resolved with him self, to make some indifferent long soiourning in the
City of F^nusa, because it was seated in a very sweet air, and highly
comodious for Forests and fair Rivers, well stored with all kinds of beasts
fit for game, wherein he the no mean delight and pleasure. And alb^^t his aged
years required ease and rest, as most meetest for him: yet such was his
forward will, and noble magnanimity of spirit, as he would (by no means)
yield thereto, but rather daily sighed and sorrowed, that he could not
perform what formerly he had done, and be seen in such adventures and
combats, as continually befell him in the beginning of his reign.

This disputable questioning, between his desire, and ability of body, drew
his soul into an vnac^ustomed sadness, making him become so pensive and
melan^^^lie: as he would ^^nder himself from all company and delighted in no
other pastime, but to walk abroad sometimes with his Cross-^ow, to strike a
heart, ^inde or ^idde in the Forest. Hereupon it fortuned, that walking (one
day) without any other Arms, but only his Sword and Crosse-bow: he dis^^rned
(somewhat far off) a D^ell making toward him, mounted on a seemly P^l^rey,
ryding mainly on the br^dle, as if the had bee^e nearly pressed and pur^^^d,
and coming near to him, he demanded of her, the (...). Ah my Lord (...) s^
such man, as w^ll succ^ si^ of m^ and ^. ^ ^ him where (...) the (...) came,
the so (...) together, till (...) a very thick wood, the King (...) man
v^^^med, holding a Damsel by the tresses of her hair, str^ng to cast her
down upon the ground. But she resisted him so strongly as she ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ forth
his Sword, he said (...) leave the D^mo^ell free from violence, or (...).

The man be fearful, ^an o^ the wood, and with such (...), as all the pains
the King took, admitted (...) means of ouer^ the (...) being (...) hindered
(...) t^ees and bushes, so that (indeed) he could use no diligence. Wherup^^
lighting from his horse, he (...) after him, (...) he came (...) a great
meadowe, in the midst whereof was a P^on ^r^^^^d, and thereinto he (...) the
(...) enter. Wherefore he went directly thither, and coming near, a Damosel
presented her self unto him, desiring to know, why he ran so expeditiously?
Damsel, answered the King, ^ne is entered into this Tent, who not (long since)
would have ^ed a Gentlewoman in the wood, and I come hither to give him
chastis^^ent for his lewdness. ^^ter Sir (quoth thee) and if any such be there
as you (...) after, I will deliver him to you: (...) hardly can I endure, that
wrong (...) should be offered to any woman whatsoever, having (all my life
time, lo^ed honor and (...).

Upon th^se words the King went onward, but at his first step within the Tent:
he fell down in such strange manner as he was quite bere^t of all knowledge
and understanding. Soon after, the other two D^mosels which he had left behind
him, came thither also, and taking up the ^ent immediately, carried the King
(...) a Ship, awayting there (...) for him at the S^^ (...) and (...) they
ho^ (...) sail* without any discovery ^f (...). The Kings Bow (...) being
(...) behind, and making what haste he could after him, (...) found the
horse, and not his Master: never was man in such woeful extremity, fearing the
mishappe that (...) befallen him. He sought about for him in every place, b^t
neither (...) nor way yielded (...) any (...) whereupon, disconsolate* and out
of all hope, seeing the night stealing fast upon him, he returned back to the
City, and without speaking to any person, entered into the Queens chamber,
reporting to her, in what manner King Lisuart had left him, and afterward,
could hear no tyding of him. Not a little amazed was the Queen, when she
heard of this strange and unexpected accident, which made her fall down into a
trance: but her Ladies and Gentle-women being at hand, cut her laces, and
quickly recovered life in her again. Then sending for King Arban, and Cendill
de Ganote, she told them all that the Kings Bowbearer had imparted to her. But
they fearing further to offend her seemed to make small account of it,
persuading her, that the Forest being long and large, and very thickly set
with huge Woods: he might there loose himself for a while, yet afterward
return well enough home. No, never, said the Queen. His horse to be found, and
no news of him? what answer you to that? Madam, quoth King A^ban, it appears
very likely, that the trees and bushes standing so thick, as no mean
hinderance to his sport, he therefore left his horse.

These words did somewhat comfort the Queen, but yet her opinion went quite
contrary to his saying, and therefore, making a show of some other business,
they returned to their lodgings, to Arm themselves, and aduising other
Knights (there present) to follow them, they entered into quest of the King. But
all was in vain, for they could hear no tidings of him: so remained the
Queen in sadness till the next morning, when Grumedan and Giontes (being
returned from their voyage) came to see her. She demanded of them, if they had
met with the king? No truly Madam, quoth they, neither did we know of his
loss, till some of the City acquainted them therewith, but we intend to
follow in the search of him. On my faith, said she, I find my self in such
affliction of mind, as I must needs go with you: for abiding here alone, I
shall die with extremity of sorrow. But if either we can find him, or hear
any news of him, it will shorten my grief: otherwise, it will be some ease to
me, to endure any toil or travel whatsoever, rather then desolately continue
here.

So she sent for two Palfrayes her self mounting upon the one, and the wife to
Brandoynas on the other riding on in quest of the King, with the two knights.
From place to place they travailed, but they could hear no news at all, and on
the third day following, they met with King Arban very pensive, and his Horse
so weary, as hardly was he able to go. Then the Queen asked him, if he had
heard any thing of the King? Madam, quoth he, even as much as when I left you,
only I stand in doubt, that he is surprised by some treason, and carried out of
this country. Long ago it is since I foresaw and suspected this accident, and
if he would have been ruled by me, this had never happened to him. I evermore
dissuaded him, yea, with tears, and entire entreaties, never to wander so
alone in doubtful and deceiving Forests where infinite unlooked for dangers
lie hid; but he would never like my advise.

As he would have proceeded on further, the Queen fell down in a swound from
her Horse: But Grumedan suddenly alighting, took her up in his Arms, and
speech soon after came to her again, when delivering a very vehement sigh,
she said. False and deceitful Fortune, hope of the miserable, and cruel
enemy to the prosperous, have I now any occasion to speak well of thee? If in
times past, thou made me Lady of many Kingdoms, honored and obeyed by
worlds of people, but (above all the rest) mar^ me to a mighty and virtuous
Kings in one mere moment, thou h^ly undone me, thou have robde me of all my
joys in him, because on him only, depended all my comfort, life and honor. And
therefore I know right well, that thou make a triumph of my tormen^^, and
enforcest too dear an intrest, for all the former (...) thou did lend me.
But why d^e I complain on thee, having so long time seen and observed that
this is only thy true behavior? death is far more powerful then thou art,
and he can end thy utmost malli^^ infl^cted on me: which being my chiefest
hope and Anker-holde, I will comfort my self therein, and victoriously vaunt
over thee.

Thus the woeful Queen sat weeping and lamenting, with such violent passions
and anguishes, as they that were about her, durst nor open their mo^thes to
comfort her. Only they pitied her distress, and she often looking on Grumedan,
with an eye that truly spoke sorrow from her heart, said. An Gr^medan, if
ever thou did me any service, now, when I find my self forsaken of all
hope, and neuermore to receive any the least pleasue: I pray thee give end to
my griefs, by some sudden way to death, which will he highly welcome to me,
especially by thy hand, rather then living longer i^ such languis^g as I do.
But Gr^medan* to alter (...) desperate disposition in her, comforted her in the
best manner he could: but all would not pass for current payment, it proved
rather to increase her anguish more and more. In which regard, both he and
the rest compassed the means, for conuaying her to the nearest village,
sending immediately to the City for skillful Physicians: who found her so
feeble, and such a debility in her understanding, as they stood greatly in
doubt of her recovery.

Nevertheless, they expressed their pains so diligently, applying such
cordialls and other sovereign comforts, as within two days, she began to
(...) knowledge again. And calling for Grumedan, after some few ^des passing
between them, he said unto her. Believe (...), you do not well, to take
(...) ^n such sort as you do, considering, I have heard you say an hundred
times: that the virtue of prudence (...) not to be discerned in any person, but
in such as are most solicited with sorrows and afflictions. Whereby plainly
appears, that the counsel you were wont to give to others, is now most
necessary for your self. Are you now to learn, that Fortune has two
daughters, the one called (by many) F^, the other Infelicity? If (...) has
kept company with you, all your life time till now, and Infelicitie comes to
visit you in her steed: arm your self (as becomes a virtuous Queen) with the
de^encible weapons of courage, wisdom and constancy, even to enter the lists
with the mother herself, which will so daunt her unhappy daughter, as she
will ^e (...) to follow you any longer, but give you over even in the open
(...).

Consider (good Madame) what I say unto you, because otherwise, I ^ore^ee two
necare approaching and irreparable accidents, threatening danger to you: the one
is v^^er perdition of your self, and the other, of my Lord the King, if at his
return he finds you dead. Say he should be lost, why, these are but words,
for he cannot be so closely hidden, but he will be seen. And if we can hear
no speedy tidings of him, either in this country or else where: yet his
captivity in any prison cannot be so strong, but by the help of your Subjects,
and favor of your friends and kinsemen, he will be quickly thence delivered.
And therefore I beseech you Madam, setting aside these sorrows, which threaten
danger to you: you would round engirt your self with good Council and
comfort, to reach the height of that, which is much more needful for you in
this case.

The Queen liking this discourse, yielded to Grumedans advise, and thereupon,
purposed to send Brandoynas to Amadis, to let him understand the Kings loss,
and in what extremity she her self was, by him she sent this Letter following.

The Letter from Queen Brisena, to Lord Amadis.
My Lord and Son, if heretofore the estate of King Lisuart your Father, has
been defended and augmented by your means: a season (better now then ever)
presents it self for your employment (considering the peril prepared for him)
to keep and preserve all still in perfect condition. For, some small while
since, by his enemies (as it appears most likely) he is carried away and
imprisoned none of us knowing where, or why: which makes me believe, that but
upon occasion of a far greater enterprise, this Treason would never have
been undertaken. Now, because it is a matter concerning you (next to my self)
more then a^^ other I have sent to advertise you thereof by Brandoynas this
bearer, who has seen and understands all, and who can acquaint you with my
instant aistresse, better then I am able to set it down in wrighting.
Wherefore I pray you to credit him as my self, and consider on the rest.

Your woeful Mother Queen Brisena.


This Letter written and delivered to Brandoynas, he set on toward Amadis: and
the Queen with her company, went directly to London to call a council, and
set all things in order. Here you are to understand, that soon after the romor
of the Kings loss, spre^d it self so liberally in all places: that
Quedragant, Bruneo and the rest, being then in Sansuegua, had intelligence
thereof, and they honorably considering what prejudice might redound thereby to
Amadis, if any need should happen in Great Britain: concluded on the speedy
goeing to the Enclosed Isle, to undertake whatsoever he should command them.
Here-upon, having planted Garrisons in all needful places, they sailed thence
with so fair a wind: that they landed at the Palace of Apolidon, the very
same day as Brandoynas arrived there.

As Amadis was comforting Oriana, by reason of the news formerly received; the
coming of these Knights was made known to him: but he being loath to leave
the Princess alone, entreated Grasandor to go meet them, and acquaint them
with the occasion of his staying behind, which accordingly he performed,
finding them in good forwardness on the way. Then he declared to them, what
he had received in charge from Amadis, desiring them to excuse him, if this
day did not allow them to see him: but early the next morning he intended to
visit them. Now, because the affairs they came about, required some speed and
diligence, they entered into Council, and Brandoynas was called before them
all: where amply he declared, what he could say concerning the Kings loss, and
in what dangerous condition he had left the Queen. Many opinions passed among
them, but at length it was resolved: that they all should pursue the quest of
him, both by Sea and Land, hoping Fortune would be no less favorable to them
herein, then heereto-fore she had been in the like attempts.

Scarcely had they concluded on this deliberation, but one of their Squires
came and told them, that a Lady was come forth of the great Serpent, and (in
their opinion) it was Vrgania the Unknown. If it be she said Amadis, then the
case will go well with us. So they all set forward, and met her (almost) at
the Parkes entrance, mounted on a goodly Palfrey, which her two Dwarffes led by
the bridle reins. The first she addressed her self unto, was Galaor, whom
she kindly saluted, and all the rest, and being in the midst among them, she
thus began. How now Lords? did not I lately tell you, that I should find you
here again assembled in this place, about some business then unknown to
you? You did Madame, answered Galaor, I remember it very well, so does Madame
Oriana likewise, who will not be a little joyful for your ariuall. And partly
to comfort her (quoth she) is the cause of my now coming.

So they entered into the Palace, and being dismounted from horseback, they
conducted her to the chamber of the Princess; who so soon as she saw her,
ca^e and fell at her feet, and weeping incessantly, said. Alas madame, you that
know future accidents, as well as them present, why did you not take order,
for the King my fathers misfortune, he being your so dearly esteemed
friend? I may well assure my self, that when you fail him, his case is
utterly void of any remedy.

Madame, answered Vrganda, I pray you do not thus discomfort your self. Know
you not, that the more men are mounted to high degrees, the more subject they
are to as great tribulations? Although we are all made of one and the same
substance, all obliged to vices and passions, yea equal alike to death: yet
the omnipotent Lord of all, has made us diverse, in enjoying the goods of this
world. To some he gives authority; others are subject to seruility and
vassalage. Some are made poor and very miserable, others enjoy abundance and
prosperity, and all according to his own good pleasure. So worthy Madame,
comparing the great blessing, you now enjoy, with such sorrows and vexations
as you have sustained, put all your present af^ictions into one seal, and your
passed fortunes into another, and they will no way be answerable in weight. As
for the King your father, I knew (long ago) this which has happened to him,
and yet notwithstanding, I could not help it. For so it was appointed by divine
pre-science, who (in time) will also permit: that he shall return home again
into his own country, with as much contentment, as ever heretofore he
enjoyed.

Then converting her speeches to Amadis, and others there present, thus she
proceeded. When I departed last from his company, I did then assure ye, that
at such time as Esplandian should receive his order of Knighthood, I would
meet you again in this place, for this cause, to keep promise both with you,
and him, and to discharge you of a labor you are entering into: I am come
hither as you see. And this I tell you, that if all the men this day living,
and so many more as shall come hereafter, do attempt the quest of king
Lisuart, and to deliver him out of the place where he is: they loose all their
pains. Therefore let me advise you to desist from the promise you have made
each to other. Requesting you beside, that you will all be my guests in the
great Serpent, with Esplandian, Telanque, Manelie, the King of Dacia, and
Ambor, Son to Angriote, presently giving order for your Horses, for the hour
now inuites us.

They not daring to deny her, did as she commanded, and giving good rest to
Oriana, accompanied her to the Sea side: where they found a Barque ready, which
conveyed them to the place where the great Serpent lay. Entering thereinto they
left their horses in the great Hall, where taking Esplandian and his companions
with her, she led them into a Chapel, to perform their watch and prayer,
according to the ancient custom, before any man might be made a Knight.
Afterward she returned again to the rest, and bad them sit down to supper,
which they found ready prepared for them, and in most royal manner. The tables
being with-drawne, she sent them to keep company with them that watched in the
Chapel. Then she and her two kinsewomen, Solisa and her Sister, followed
them, Vrganda carrying a Habbit or Coat of Male, very black, Salisa an Helmet,
of the same color, and the third a shield answerable thereto.

Now, albeit (at the beginning) all other Knights were armed with white
Armor: yet would she needs have him to differ from them in this manner. So
soon as she was entered the Chapel, she called Esplandian to her, saying.
Most happy young Gentleman, see what accoutraments I have brought for you, as
testimonies of the power, wherewith your heart will hereafter be enueloped,
partaking (in some measure) with the natural disposition of the king your
grandfather. Moreover, it is to put you in mind, that as other (when they are
made Knights) receive this honor with white Armor, and brightly polished, in
sign of joy and cheerfulness: so these thus black and unsightly, are
bestowed on you by destiny, to remember you (many times) of those sorrows and
tribulations, wherein all your friends are at this present. So they three armed
him from head to foot, only his Sword excepted, and demanded of Amadis his
opinion therein. By my faith Madam, quoth he, if he had a Sword, he were in
case (me thinks) both to defend himself, and to assail any other.

You know answered Vrganda, as well, or better then any other in this troup,
where one has been kept for him above two hundred years past and you have
seen it in the Rock of the Damsel Enchauntresse who left it there (by
apointment of the fates) only for him. And therefore he must needs go
thither to conquer it, for I dare assure you, he will perform such actions of
arms, as shall eclipse the bright fames of many that have shined most clearly
in all parts of the world. As she spoke these words, four other Damosells
came in, each one bringing furniture for a horse, and an Armor as white as
snow, having a black cross in the midst thereof, and these four other
Damosells armed him therewith. All this while, was Esplandian on his knees,
before the Altar devoutly imploring the assistance of heaven, to give him grace
and means, whereby to accomplish those things destined to him: as well for the
deliverance of King Lisuart, as any other enterprise whatsoever, wherein he
coueted not his own private glory.

Thus remained the Knights all night in prayer, even until the next morning,
when a misshapen ill favored Dwarffe, being mounted on the very height of the
serpent, winding a Cornet with such loudnes, as the whole Island returned the
Echo thereof from all parts: and the Ladies ran up to the Towers in the
Palace of Apolidon, to see and observe whence this noise came. Then went
Vrganda from the Chapel, with them that had watched all night whom she
conducted up near to the Dwarffe: And inwardly came six other Damsels,
attired all in black, each bearing a Trumpet of gold in her hand: and Vrganda
calling Balan to her, said. Friend Balan even as nature has preferred you
before all other of your lineage, making you an enemy to vice, to follow reason
and virtue, so will I advance you (for the love I know Amadis bears you, and
every other Knight in this company) and do you such an honor this day, as all
that have been before you, or are living at this present, could not, nor can
attain to the like. And this it is, that Esplandian (who shall be esteemed the
best Knight in the world) must have his order of Knighthood from your hand.

Balan fearing to displease Amadis and the rest, excused himself very
honorably: but they all prevailing with him, he took Esplandian by the hand,
and asked him if he would be a Knight? Yes Sir, quoth ^ee, if you please to
bestow such honor on me. Then Balan gave him the accolade, and after-warde,
buckled on his right spur, saying: I pray God (fair Gentleman) to make thee
such a man, as general hope is conceived of thee. This done, Vrganda took
Amadis aside, saying. Bethink your self, if you will have any thing with your
son, because he is to depart hence suddenly. Hereupon, Amadis rounding him
in the ear, saying. My son, at such time as I arrived in Greece, I was
received, and highly honored by the Emperor, who afterward lent me so good
assistance, as I must confess my self for ever beholding to him. And because
he tied me to some promises, made then (under mine oath) to his fair
daughter Leonoryna, one of the most wise and gracious Princesses in the world,
as also to the Queen Menoressa, and other Ladies in her company: that if I
could nor return again to them my self, I should send them a Knight of my
lineage, to serve them. I find my self in no disposition leaning that way, but
command you, that so soon as you have released King Lisuart, you go and
discharge my duty to her. And that you may be the better known, receive this
Ring, which was given me there for a kind token.

Esplandian humbly upon his knee promised, not to fail a jot herein: but it
was not fulfilled so soon as they both hoped for, because before he came
thither, he passed through many perils for the love of that fair Lady, whose
renown only (having never seen her, tied him so subject to her, as he made
no valuation of his Life, as when it comes more aptly to our purpose, you shall
further understand. Then Vrganda called him, saying. Son you must needs
bestow Knighthood of these your four companions, who, before many days are
past, may render you the honor of your gift. Esplandian obeying the will of
Vrganda, gave them the embrace, and spur on their heels, and then the six
Damosells sounded their Trumpets so sweetly: As all the Lords and the five new
made Knights likewise became so sleepilie en^^aunced, as they were void of ^ll
understanding. At which very instant, the Serpent voided out ^er mouth and
nosthrills such a horrible smoke, as the Sea could not be discerned for a
long while. But very soon after (no body could ^e^l how) the Knights of the
Enclosed Isle, found themselves to be in the Park of Apo^^idon, not a little
wondering how they came ^her, but much more beside, what was become of the
Serpent, and the five new created Knights. But that which most of all amazed
Amadis, was, when he awaked, (...) find a wrighting in his hand (...)
inscription.

The wrighting which Amadis found in his hand, at his waking.
Kings and Lords, that are in the Enclosed Isle, return home to your
Countries, and there contentedly rest your Spirits, leaving the glory and
prize of Arms, to those that begin to mount aloft, upon the mutable wheel
of Fortune, let the Favors she has hitherto affoorded you, remain as a full
satisfaction. And thou Amadis de Gaul, who (since the day that King Perion
made thee Knight, at the request of thy Oriana) have vanquished many brave
Knights and cruel Giants, escaping strange and vnparraleld perils: Let the
happiness thou have had, suffice thee, being more then any could attain unto
before thee. Learn now to taste those sweets and sowres, which Kings and
Rulers are Subject unto, for they are now provided for thee. And like as in thy
younger years, thou wentst in the condition of a simple Knight errant
succouring many in their necessities: So at this time, as thou entrest into
far higher felicities, thou shall find more need then ever heretofore, to
lend thine assistance in much greater matters, bemoaning many times thy former
condition of Life, and thy Dwarsse only, over whom thou have had command.


Having all of them read this Letter, they entered into a contestation, whether
they should follow the Counsel of Vrganda, or no: But at length Amadis told
them, that it was behouefull to credit her, in regard of the continual truth
of her predictions. And therefore (quoth he to Galaor) I take it for the best,
that you and Galuanes should go to Great Britain, to visit the queen, and
let her know what Vrganda has proposed us, for the Kings deliverance, which
will be no little joy to her, and so soon as you return me answer, my Cosen
Agraies, Balan and I will follow after you. And you my Lords (quoth he to the
rest) that / have accomplished so many famous conquests: return to take more
ample possession, and fully enjoy the fruits of your labors. Where-to they all
willingly condiscended, and leading their wives along with them, on the morrow
they took leave of Amadis, Oriana, and the rest, that made their stay in the
Enclosed Isle. And here we intend to leave them, making an end of this our
Fourth Book, attending till the Fifth shall come to our hands.

The end of the Fourth Book*
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this Fourth Book of Amadis de Gaul.
CHPTER 1. OF the great sorrow made by the Queen Sardamira, after she
understood the death of the Prince Saluste Quide: and of the ariuall of Oriana
in the Enclosed Isle. Fol. 1. Chap. 2. A description of the Linographie and
foundation of the Palace, which Apolidon had caused to be builded in the
Enclosed Isle. Fol. 4. Chap. 3. Of the Council held among the Knights of the
Enclosed Isle, touching the business for the Princess Oriana; And what they
further determined to do. Fol. 11. Chap. 4. Of the discourse which Amadis had
with Grasinda, and the answer sh^e made him,: Also what Letters were directed
by Amadis to diverse great Princes. Fol. 18. Chap. 5. Of the private talk
which Oriana and Mabila, had with Gandalin; And what he gave Amadis to
understand, concerning them. Fol. 24. Chap. 6. How news was brought to King
Lisuart, of the Romans foil and overthrow, and how his daughter Oriana was
taken from the; whereath grieved greatly. Fol. 31. Chap. 7. Of a Letter sent
by the Pri^cesse Oriana (being in the Enclosed Isle) to the Queen her mother.
Fol. 34. Chap. 8. How King Lisuart called a Council, concerning what he
intended to do against the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: And what resolution
was agreed upon. Fol. 39. Chap. 9. How Quedragant and Brian sailing on the Sea,
by a sudden and unexpected tempest, were cast so far out of their course,
that having lost all knowledge of Land; they met (accidentally) with Queen
Bri^lania: And what happened to them. Fol. 46. Chap. 10. Of the report
delivered by Quedragant and Brian, to the Knights of the Enclosed Isle,
concerning their Embassy to King Li^uart; And of that which thereup^ was
resoluedly determined. Fol. 51. Chap. 11. How Master Elisabet arrived in the
country belonging to Grasinda, and passed from thence to Constantinople to the
Emperor, according to the charge given him by Amadis. Fol. 53. Chap. 12. How
Gandalin arrived in Gaul; And of the speeches between him and King Perion.
Fol. 55 Chap. 13. How Guillan le Pensif arrived at the Empereurs Court of Rome;
Philipinell in Swetia, and Brandoynas in Ireland. Fol. 58. Chap. 14. How
Grasandor, son to the King of Bohemia, sailing upon the Sea, met with
Giontes; And of that which happened unto them. Fol. 60. Chap. 15. How Patin
Emperor of Rome landed with his ar^ie at Vindilisore, where King Li^uart lay
in expectation of his coming; And of that which happened to the. Fol. 65 Chap.
16. How King Perion was advertised of the dislodging of his enemies: And what
order he look to march before, and to fight with them. Fol. 69. Chap. 17. How
Gandalin, squire to Amadis, and Lasinde, squire to Bruneo de bo^ne Mer, were
made knights And of the Battle between the two Kings, Li^uart and Perion.
Fol. 71. Ch^p. 18. What order was taken by both the Armies, for further
proceeding in the fight, the time of truce being ended. Fol. 7^. Chap. 19. Of
the conference which King Lisuart had with the Romans, after the fought
battatle. And how the holy m^n Nascian, who had nourished Esplandian in his
younger years, ^earing of this war: departed from his He^ ^tage, to come to
the two Kings, to make peace between them. Fol. 80. Chap. 20. How Nascian
returned toward King Lisuart, with the answer he received from King Perion.
Fol. 91. Chap. 21. How King Arauigne being advertised of the loss which King
Lisuart had sustainea, and the dislodging of his Camp, determined to give him
^attaile. Fol. 93 Chap. 22. How King Lisuart was assaulted by King Arauigne,
brought into great danger: And of the succor given him by Amadis in his
necessity. Fol. 95. Chap. 23. How Amadis came to the succor of King Lisuart:
And of the valiant overthrow of King Arauigne. Fol. 98. Chap. 24. How King
Lisuart arrived at Vindi^ore, where his queen Brisena attended his coming whom
(soon after) he caused to remove thence, and with her daughter Leonora,
accompany him to the Enclosed Isle. Fol. 108. Chap. 25. How King Perion, and
his (...) their way toward the Enclosed Isle* and of that which they did,
before King Lisuart came thither to them. Fol. 110. Chap. 26. How Bruneo de
bonne Mer and Branfill, were appointed to journey into Gaul, to fetch the
queen Elysena and Galaor: and of those adventures which happened to them in
their returning back again. Fol. 115. Chap. 27. How Bruneo de bonne Mer,
Branfill and Angriote, went on with the Queen of Dacia, and what Adventures
happened to them. Fol. 120. Chap. 28. How King Lisuart, his queen Brisena, and
their daughter Leonora, departed from Vindilisore, to go for the Enclosed
Isle, according as it was concluded on, a^ their setting from Lubania. Fol.
126. Chap. 29. Of the conference which Amadis had with his Cousin Dragonis; in
giving him the Kingdom of the Profounde Island, and the Princess Estoiletta
to Wife, whom he had loved a long time Fol. 130 Chap. 30. How the marriages of
Amadis with Oriana, and the other Princes and Ladies, were solemnlie celebrated
in the Enclosed Isle where (the self same day) Oriana made proof of the Arch
of Loyal Lovers, and likewise of the Defended Chamber Fol. 132. Chap. 31. How
Vrganda the Unknown revealed before them all, such matters as she long time
had foretold before they happened. And how she took her leave of Amadis, as
also of a^ the other company to remou^ whence she came. Fol. 137 Chap. 32. How
Amadis went away alone, to revenge the Knights loss, whom a Lady had brought
dead in a small Barque: and of that which happened to him. Fol. 140 Chap. 33.
How Amadis sailed away from the port of the Island of the Infanta, to (...) the
purpose he had formerly intended. Fol. 145 Chap. 34. How Darioletta perceiving
Amadis to be in such danger, made great moan and lamentation. And how Balan
and he were made friends. Fol. 152. Chap. 35. How Grasandor followed in the
quest of Amadis, and what adventures happened to him in his travails. Fol.
158. Chap. 36. How Amadis being in the Island of the Red Tower, conferring with
Grasandor, espied a small Foist in the Sea, which put into the Port, having
people in her, that told him the tidings of the Army, which was gone for
Sansuegua, and to the Isle of Lands, or the Profound Isle. Fol. 161 Chap. 37.
How Balan being in the Tent of Galuanes, the principal Commander of the Army
came to see him: And what conferrence they had together. Fol. 184 Chap. 38. How
King Lisuart being a hunting, was taken prisoner by Enchantment and very
strangely. Fol. 186.

