THE PARABLE OF THE UNCLEAN SPIRIT: Pithily opened, and plainly applied;
wherein is showed Satan's possession, his dispossession, and repossession.

A work needful for these secure times, in which the most neglect the means
of their salvation.

1 Pet. 5. 8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a
roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. August. Epist. 7. Ego
ex eorum numero me esse profiteor, qui scribendo proficiunt, and proficiendo
scribunt. Preached, and now published, by Edmund Cobbes Minister of the Word of
God.

Printed at London by T. Cotes, for John Bellamie dwelling at the three Golden
Lions in Cornehill, 1633.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Nathanael Brent Knight, Doctor of the Civil Law,
Vicar general in causes spiritual for the Province of Canterbury, Commissary
for the Diocese of the same, and Warden of Merton College in Oxford: And to
the Right virtuous and honored Lady, the Lady Martha Brent his wife:
The best blessings of this life, and eternal blessedness in the world to
come.
RIght Worshipful, although Gods word can countenance it self, and needs no
shelter from the arm of flesh: yet experience shows, that not only the
writings of the most, but even some of those sacred books which were breathed
from heaven, have been dedicated to renowned Saints on earth. If that heavenly
Evangelist, dedicated his ^uke 1: 3:
Gospel, and Treatise of the holy Acts of the Apostles unto Acts 1: 1:
that most excellent Theophilus: And that eminent pillar of the Church,
directed 2 John 1: 1:
that heavenly Epistle to that elect Lady whom he loved in the truth: In
imitation whereof I have made bold to devote this poor mite (in comparison of
that rich treasure) unto your Worships, whose virtues and pieties have also
dignified you for the countenance and respect which you bear to religion and
learning. The subject of my discourse is divine, answerable to your affections;
not unbefitting your place, and most necessary, and so not unworthy your
studies. Here I have discovered Satan's inveterate malice against the godly,
and for their sakes have prescribed such spiritual Antidots as Christ the
Saints comforter has confected. In which if I have passed the bounds of
modesty, I humbly crave pardon for the same, relying upon the innate goodness
that rests in your nature, I have presumed to offer unto your acceptations a
taste of such fruits as my barren orchard could afford; my meaning hereby is
not to crave any thanks or praise where none is deserved, but (that so far
as I may) I might make evident to others for imitation, those excellent virtues
which God has made so eminent in you. And also according to my poor ability,
leave to the world a testimonial of that duty and respect which I bear unto
either of your Worships, for those many favors you have extended toward me,
which I have no other way to requite, saving my prayers; which shall be, that
you may go forward in your pious courses to serve God, your King, and Country;
that you may stand courageously for religion before men, and then it will stand
for you before God. Thus shall you gain glory from your God, favor from your
King, purchase peace to your conscience, and shame them that say Law and piety
cannot stand together, or that greatness is any hinderance to goodness; then
shall you cause all them that fear God to love and reverence you; and me
among the rest to be your servant in Christ, and remain

Your Worships humbly devoted and ready to be commanded, Edmund Cobbes.

To the Courteous Reader, grace, mercy, and peace.
DEarly beloved, you may be pleased to remember, that not long since I set
forth a Treatise under this Title, The worldlings looking-glass, In which I
promised to publish this present Parable; And seeing promise is counted a due
debt, though I have stayed long, before I have performed that which I then
undertook, yet at last, as you see, I am as good as my word, and now tender
you payment. In this present Discourse, I have laid open the fearful estate of
all Hypocrites, who have Christ rife in their mouths, and therefore would seem
better than any; when as indeed they are worse than many, for God accountes a
devout Hypocrite, no better than a profane Epicure, he cannot endure a Devil
though he be in Samuels mantell; and that because they respect not the reward
of virtue, but the regard of men; as if virtue were not a sufficient recompense
to it self. Happy is that man that can espy this cursed vice in himself;
happier that labors by the power of God to purge it out. They that will have
help against this spiritual wickedness, must seek unto God, and get
directions out of his Word, which is mighty through 2 Cor. 10, 3
God to the pulling down of strong houlds. Praying daily for the assistance of
his Ephesians. 6, 18.
Spirit, else it will not be enough to fight with Gods weapons, unless we
borrow his arm. The enemy of our Salvation is powerful, and therefore called
the god Ephesians. 2, 2.
of this World, and the Prince that rules in the Air: who labors mightily
to keep us in league with our sins. And therefore uses innumerable
stratagems to hinder us in our journey, to the Celestial Canaan: Working
either upon the corruption of our nature, to disturb us in the practice of
Piety, or else by dishartning of us under the cross, when we should be most
resolute for Gods glory: and therefore seeing he is so resolute to work our
ruin, it should make us careful to Phil. 2, 12.
work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, and give all diligence
to make our calling and election sure, and to 2 Pet. 1, 10
let our conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of Christ; that so we
may be Phil. 1, 27.
blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke in the midst of
a Phil. 2, 15.
crooked and perverse nation. Else if we neglect the means of our salvation,
and spend our days in sensuality, carnal security will seize upon us, and
then when we would cast off these bonds, we cannot, because our Dalilahs; our
own follies have beguiled us. Therefore seeing our enemy is so potent, and
malicious, let us not 1 These. 5, 7
sleep as do other, but let us watch and be sober. Nature can teach men to
care for those things that concern their temporal life; but it is grace that
must teach men to mind those things that concern their spiritual life: and
seeing that upon the breath of our lives hanges two eternities, the one of
endless felicity, the other of easelesse and endless pains; what manner of
persons ought we to be passing the time of our pilgrimage herein fear, and
with Job, 14. 14. to wait all the days of our appointed time, till our change
come? Happy will that servant be whom his Master when he comes shall find
so doing. But least I should seem monere memorem, more laborious than need
requires, I surcease, desiring you to accept of this simple scarce ripe fruit
of these my Meditations, and to look over my failings with an eye of
compassion, and to cover my slippes and infirmities with the mantell of
Charity, for Bernardus non videt omnia. So shall I remain thankful to you,
and will endeavor to provide some better Present, whereby I may declare the
sincerity of my affection toward them that fear the Lord. In the mean time I
commend you to God, and this present work to your charitable Censure, and my
self to your Christian prayers, and always rest,

Yours in the Lord to be commanded, Edmund Cobbes.

A TOPICALL INDEX, OR TABLE Alphabeticall, pointing out the material heads
contained in the whole Book.
A
ACtions. A godly man will not justify himself in any sinful action. Page.
29 The Devil ready to hinder good actions. 67 He is Gods Apo. 33 He gets
advantage by man's carelesnes. 84 He has many Agents. 74, 75 Is a purgative to
the purse. 17 Adultery.
A hell to the Soul. ibid. Hateful to God. ibid. Destroys the noble name of
a Christian. ib. Hateful to God. ibid. A sinful trick of youth. ibid.
Adulterer is the Devils house. 118 A great help. 60 Admonition. Apostasy,
Exceeding dangerouse. 89, 166, 167 Makes men loose all their labors. 89
Preservatives against it. 168 Satan's walks. 89 Alehouses.
Places of wickedness. 74 Will make men climb to honor, by bas^ Ambition.
means. 115 Barrenness under the word, arms Satan. 174 Of innocence put off
by Satan. 14, 74 Armor.
It is complete. 156 Invincible. 98 It must be buckled on. 86 Without it a man
is like an unwalled City. 157 Tale-bearers are archers. 81 Archers.

B
DAngerouse. 155 Backsliding
Dishonours God. 167 Backesliders loose all their labors. 167 Natural men
Satan's bondmen. 16, 133 Bondmen.
Ignorant Reasons why Christ frees his children from Satan's bondage. 25 The
Devil deceives men with sugared baits. Baits.
115 Under the preaching of the Word arms Satan. Barrennes:
174 Christians must be better and better. 16 Men's callings subject to Satan's
temptations. Calling.
84, 85 Conscionable walking in a man's calling brings comfort. Carding and
dicing, no means to bring comfort. 91 The bane of Charity. 82 Envy.

C
MEn are careless amids dangers. 86 Careless.
Carelessness gives the Devil advantage. 84 Hypocrites are covetous. 74
Covetous.
A covetous man will dig down to hell for wealth. 115 They have the Devil
in them. 55 The Devil observes men's constitutions. 66 Constitut.
Constancy required. 87 Profane Company dangerouse. 91, 137 Satan's conditions
dishonorable. 103 Gods children must be valiant. 103 They show their
weakness in the time of danger. 104 Conference very profitable. 162 The
Devil cannot endure it. ibid. Custom of sin takes away the sense of sin.
16 It must be forsaken. 123 God will have no Corrivall. 131 Violence not so
dangerous as craft. 3 How wrought. 19 It is a supernatural work. 41, 19, 20,
26, 135 Satan envies it. 19 Christ foiled Satan. 22 Reasons why. 22, 26 How
Satan is foiled. 25 What it is. 53 Civility.
Wherein it consists. ibid. Civil men will not ransack their hearts. 55 They
are well conceited of themselves. ibid. Their conceit proved a deceit. 55, 56
They reject admonition. 6 Contemners of grace great sinners. 45 Contentious men
have the Devil in the^. 56 Devil cruel to children that have not offended
him. 147 Christians must strive to be better and better. 168 They must lay a
good foundation. 169 Good counsel to be remembered. 169 Sin against
conscience fearful. 170
D
DArling sins must be pared away. 109 The Devil will not let men take notice
of them. 31 Gods ape. 133 Devil.
He is a Spirit. 10, 11, 12 He was an angel of Gods making, and a Devil of
his own. 13 His sin. 12 He is an enemy to godliness: 13 Good actions. 67 He
hates man for Gods cause. 74 He envies man's happiness. ibid. 18 His malice
endless: 84, 70 Restless. 64 No place free from his temptations. 84 He fears
none. 66 He is a continual tempter, 66, 64 He gets advantage by men's
carelessness. 84 He is a murderer. 64 Worse than a thief. 83 He stirs up
sinful dreams. 66 He spreades his net over all the world. 83, 70 His circuit.
84 He dwells in wicked men. 158 He deludes the senses. 114 He knows men's
nature, what they love or hate. 115 He knows the tide of men's affections. 74
He will make a show of holiness. 51 He is ready to ensnare men by their
virtues or their vices. 67 He will be cast out in one sin to be entertained
in another. 52 He will let men perform holy duties, and why. 51 He will
gratify his servants, 51, 134 What he teaches them. 134 He has his Agents. 74
Who they be. 79 There are infinite number of Devils. 71 They certify one
another what is done in all places. 71 They discourage ministers. 67 And
people. 69 Dangerous to come in Satan's walks. 89 Or to be idle. 91 A drunkard
loath to part with the Devil. 35 A drunkard is Belphegors stie. 118 The Devils
garnished house. 132 To discourage men in the practice of piety very fearful.
166 Devil when expelled. 6, 7 How expelled. 18, 22 His power must give place
to Christ. 22 Reasons why. 23, 25 How he foiled him. 23 Duties of them that are
delivered from Satan's bondage. 25, ad 30 Ministers duties. 29 Private men's
duties. ibid. Defending of sin, a sign of a graceless man. 30 Wicked men
will rather part with Heaven than their sins. 35 Decay in grace dishonours
God, and shames Religion. 167 Popery great darkness. 173 Dry places what they
signify. 61, 62
E
Envy the door of iniquity. 82 The bane of Charity. ibid. The corruption of
health. ibid. They are senseless fools. 92 An envious man the Devils cage,
118 He has a Devil in him. 118 The Devil is encouraged by man's weakness.
114 He knows not who are elected. 106 Wicked men run from one extreme to
another. 78 He has good entertainment among them. 123 Empty what it
signifies. 108 Words must tend to edification. 5 Examination how it must be
made. 172 Sin must have no entertainment. 144
F
FAith invincible. 172 Historical Faith. 48 Wherein it consists. 48 Trial of
Faith is obedience. 172 Joined with good works. 108 The Devil opposes it. 92
Envious men senseless fools. 82 The Devil deceives under the name of
friendship. 113 To fall from piety to profaneness a great fall. 165 A
fornicatour has a Devil in him. 55
G
GAming house Satan's walk. 89 Garnished what it signifies. 110, 133, 136 Why
pleasing to the Devil. 132, 133 The Gentiles had many Gods. 6 Their Idolatry.
7 How Christ prevailed with them. 6, 7 The Devil labors to dishonor God. 93
And to destroy the godly. 95 Yet they are preserved. 101 They must have an eye
to his malice. 102 The Devil an enemy to Godliness. 13 The Godlies
infirmities their triumphs. Of the Devil and his instruments. 75, 79 He bends
his forces against them. 94 Yet he cannot prevail. 94 The Devil is a
chargeable guest. 159 Grace of God must be stirred up. 156 Dangerous to oppose
the Grace of God. 8, 170 Hindrances in Gods service a grief to the Godly.
Godly. 29 Wicked men's conversation their grief. 29 They will not justify
themselves. 29 It is a sign of a graceless man to plead for sin. 30 Gifts
of Nature, if they be not sanctified by grace, fit preyes for the Devil. 48
Gospel a great blessing. 173 The means to expel Satan. 174
H
THe Devil labors to hinder the Godly. 135 He envies their happiness. 74 The
Devil knows what men love and hate. 71 He knows the heart by outward signs.
73 God requires the heart. 131 Man's heart Satan's den. 118 Full of filthiness.
109 Ready to open to Satan. 119 Tale-bearers compared to Hell. 82 Wicked men
hardened in prophanes. 123 Happiness of the Godly, a grief to Satan. 19 Heaven
would be full, if sinful pleasures would send them thither. 129 Men must take
great pains to get thither. 36, 37 Hypocrites are covetous. 7 They are
garnished with hypocrisy. 110 They are Satan's house. 118 They have all manner
of furniture to entertain him. 110 They are his resting place. 108 They are a
swept house. 108 They have room enough for many sins. 160 They Indent with
God for a dispensation. 131 They will not part with their darling sins. 45
They are temporisers. 4, 7, 50 How far they may go. ibid. 49, 51 They deceive
the world. 162 Their morrall virtues. 47 They discover themselves. 50
Hypocrisy odious. 132 Swept what it signifies, 108 Godly never empty houses
and why. 125
I
Jews ingratitude. 2 Their Religion full of blind Ceremonies. 7 Their malice
paid home. 172 How they profaned their temple. 7 Ignorant men Satan's bondmen.
32 Their estate fearful. 32 Idleness the Devils pillow. 90, 118 The mother
of mischief. 123 A fit subject for the Devil to work upon. 123, 124
Condemned by the heathen. 124 God severely punishes it. 123 Inconstancy in
Religion fearful. 171
K
KNowledge and practice must go together. 171 God regards not the quantity but
the quality. 48 It must not floate in the brain. 172 But men must make use of
it. 172
L
LAw how it prepares the heart. 19 Satan's power limited. 22 Lets and
hindrances in Gods service a grief to the godly. 29 To pretend Religion, and
intend vilany, one of the Devils lessons. 134 Lukewarmnesse dangerouse. 170 To
forsake our first love fearful. 170 Makes Men loose all their labors. 89
Fleshly Lusts Satan's porter. 14
M
THe Devils malice is to destroy. 12, 15, 83 He is a murderer. 64 A bloody
midwife. 95 The godly have must an eye to the Devils malice. 162 Wicked men's
malice limited. 96, 99 Disapointed. 101 Tale-bearers malice to the godly. 81
Ministers how tempted. 67, 87, 113 Their duty. 29 Mercy despaired damnable.
121, 173 Man quickly made miserable. 128 He perceives not his misery. 36, ad
40
N
SLuggish Nature to be awakened* 88 The Devil by observing our Nature tempts
us to sin. 115 Natural men Satan bond men. 16, 38 Negligence dangerouse. 4
O
Wicked men oppose the grace of God. 8 They use variety of objects to satisfy
their lusts. 78 The Devil wakes by outward objects. 66 He waits his
opportunity. 7, 8 Original sin. 15, 38 Universal obedience a sign of
sineerity. 28 The trial of Faith. 172 The only way to be approved of God. 31
Occasions of sin Satan's bait. 136 They must be avoided. 139 Stopped. 143
P
THe Devil deceived our first parens. 14 Perseverance crowns Religion. 168
Piety rewarded. 119 Profane men will do that in Gods presence which they are
ashamed to do in man's. 90 Their company dangerous. 91 They are hardened in
sin. 123 The Devil labors to batter our patience. 92 His power limited. 95
He has no power but from God. 103 He cannot prevail against the godly. 95, 22
There is an hour appointed for the power of darkness. 99 Gods children are
precious in his sight, 98 He miraculously preserves them. 96, 99 Their prayers
are very profitable. 163 Persecuters loose their labors. 168, 106 They fight
against God. 106 Heaven would be full if sinful pleasures send men thither.
129 Sinful lusts Satan's porter. 14 The devil in Adam poisoned all man kind. 15
He will keep a pawn and pledge in his hand, and why. 135 Dangerous not to
profit under the Word. 174 Popery darkness. 173
Q
HOw the Devil may be said to be gone out of a man and yet remain in him. 44,
45 He labors to quench men's zeal. 87 How the Devil can tempt all man kind.
71
R
SAtan restless to do mischief. 64 What rest he seeks. 62 Hypocrites his
resting place. 108, 109 Repentance a hard work. 169 It begins when sin is
forsaken: 27 Counterfeit repentance. 4 Swept house. 125 Of no worth. 130 Men
must be reformed, or else they have not repented. 130 Relapses dangerous. 270
Men must make a league with Religion. 171 Religion whence it came first. 144
Men must resolve to come out of their sins. 136 Piety rewarded. 87 Men must
learn of the Devil to be resolute* 87 Covetous men will dig to hell for
riches. 115 Revengefull man Baalberiths palace. 118 It is a dangerous thing to
be ashamed of Religion. 123 Jews religion full of blind ceremonies. 7, 8 Man's
redemption wonderful. 19, 20
S
PRophaners of the Sabbath loath to forsake their sin. 35 Soul must be
committed unto God in well doing. 172 It is no easy thing to be saved. 129 The
best time must be spent for it. 88 Wicked men have filthy souls. 172 It has
enemies. 93 Security in sin dangerous. 154, 156 Satan dwells in sinners, 158
What he works in them. ibid. He sets a false varnish on sin. 159 Sin will
not be cleansed with sweeping. 125 It poisons all good things. 37 Penitents
must take revenge on themselves. 127 Sinners are slovens. 128 Darling sins
are the Devils windows. 130 Original sin. 3^ Sin how aggravated. 149 How
made worse. 150, 151 It gets strenght by committing. 152 Proppes of sin must
be removed. 152 Compared to the soars of the body. 169 The Devil has a great
band of soldiers 70 His instruments allure to sin. 74 The Devil lays his
snares over all the world 83 Solitary places Satan's walk. 90 His undaunted
courage. 111 His great strenght. 111 Upon what he relies. 113 Security
dangerouse* 119 The Devil makes men secure. 115 He is a spirit. 10 His sin.
12
T
TAle-bearers the Devils Champions. 79 They are archers. 81 They carry their
swords in their mouths. 81 They are worse than Crows. 81 Compared to hell. 82
Their malice to the godly. 81 Temples of our body must be kept holy. 136 Wicked
men's trade is to draw one another in sin. 32, 74 Devil worse than a thief.
83 No place free from his temptations. 11. 6 He began to tempt. 84 He is never
weary. 113, 64, 66, 116 Wicked men tempt themselves. 143 Evil thoughts are
stirred up by Satan. 66 Trial of a man's state how made. 26, 27, 28 Time cannot
be better spent than upon God, to glorify him; and upon our souls, to save
them. 87 Time servers are miserable. 171 Men must not conform themselves to
the sinfulness of the times. 171 A sin of times. ibid. Satan is the head of
Tyrants. 111 Their malice limited. 99 God has a hook in their nostrils. 100
Their malice cannot compel the fire to burn us. ibid. Thankfulness opens
Gods hand, 154 Gods Talents must be employed to his honor. 171
V
THe Devil will ensnare men by their Virtues or their Vices. 67 Saints virtues
are to be imitated. 171 The Devil is a vanquished slave. 104 Usury unlawful.
130 Unbelievers miserable: 32
W
Walk, what it signifies. 61 The Devil walks any way to do mischief. 76
His walks are dangerous. 89 Where his walk are, 86, 90 Watchfulness
needful. 87, 112 Required. 92, 93 Why neglect of it full of danger. 116, 117
Wicked men's trade is to draw men to sin. 70. 74 They are restless in sin.
77 They are the Devils standards bearers. 70 They rejoice at the fall of the
godly. 75, 79 They are enemies to godliness. 75 They are hateful to God, and
hurtful to men 32 They are quiet among themselves. 160 They use variety of
objects to satisfy their pleasure 78 They run from one extreme to another. 78
The world is the Devil circuit. 84 He knows how to handle his weapons. 157
Man's weakness encourages him. 114 Spiritual weapons must be used. 126 It is
not enough to fight with Gods weapons unless we borrow his arm. 105 Gods
children show their weakness in dangers. 104 Words must be weighed in the
balance of wisdom, and tend to edification. 45 Gods Word is the star that
leads to Christ. 41
Y
ADultery a sinful trick of Youth. 17
Z
THe Devil labors to cool and undermine our Zeal. To decrease our Zeal
dangerous. 171
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Men's works have faults since Adam first offended.
And those in these are thus to be amended.
PAge 57. l. 8 supply, Papists in profession, yet many of them are Papists in
ignorance, and prophanes, etc. p. 67. l. 1. r. Iehosuah. p. 62. l. 6. put out
Satan seek. l. ult. r. bodies. p. 66. l. 18. r. so now. p. 81. in margent r.
habeo and meum. p. 110. p. 24. Courage. l. 4, r. plowing. p. 144. in the
margent, r. scintilla. p. 144. r. after evil spirits. q. 148. l. 8. r.
restless.

THE PARABLE OF THE UNCLEAN SPIRIT.
Matthew. 12. 43. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks
through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. Then he says, I will
return into my house whence I came out, and when he is come, he finds it
empty, swept, and garnished.
Our Savior Christ in great humility and mercy, came to save and to seek the
lost sheep of Israel; unto whom he came, not empty handed, neither did he
lead an unprofitable life among them: but all his works were witnesses of his
love, to their souls and bodies, in curing the one, and feeding the other; for
he went about Act. 10. 38.
doing good, curing all that were oppressed of the devil.

Yet for all his manifold mercies and manifest miracles which he wroght among
these stubborn Jews, they requited him with inveterate hatred, and
maliciously interpreted his works, to be wrought by the power of the Devil;
for so they say, This fellow does not cast Verse. 24.
out Devils but by Beelzebub the prince of the Devils. But our blessed
Savior knowing their cursed malice and obstinate wickedness, by sound
arguments confutes their calumnies, and discovers their intolerable
blasphemy. So that in this Story, the holy Evangelist does lay open a double
conflict ofour Savior; the first is against Satan the enemy of mankind, in
the body of a poor man; the other in the tongue of these obstinate pharisees.
In the one, he was a blind and dumb devil, in the other a seeing and perverse
adversary. Now, because violence does not make an enemy so dangerous as
cunning and crafty: therefore our Savior casts him presently out of the
blind and dumb man. Where in he showed himself by force; but out of these
subtle and malicious Pharisees, he did not so easily cast him out, but is
forced to come from sound arguments (which might have stopped their mouths) to
pass a doom upon them in the conclusion of Verse 45.
this Parable; Even so shall it be also to this wicked generation.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man.

Whether these words were directed to the poor man, out of whom the devil was
gone out, or to the stubborn Jews, may seem a Question. No doubt but it may
very fitly be applied to the former, that having received so great a benefit,
he should not be unthankefull to the Lord for his deliverance, or grow secure
and careless; least by his negligence and misdemeanour, the devil which now
was cast out of him, should return and take possession of him again; and so
his last end should be worse than the beginning. Or else these words may serve
to be a witness against these perverse Scribes and Pharisees, to seal up their
further damnation: It may serve for both, and be as a pattern for the godly
to imitate; to teach them to order their speech, that their words being weighed
in the balance of wisdom, and powdered with the salt of discretion, may
tend to edification, and minister grace to the Col. 4. 6.
hearers. For, many times the standers by, do more heedefully mark what is
delivered, than those unto whom the speech is directed.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man. This unclean spirit which
keeps possession by the power of sin, was after a sort formerly cast out of
the Jews, when they received the Law of Moses, and so were taught to worship
the true God aright; then this unclean spirit, with his filthy troop, being
destitute of so convenient a lodging, walked through dry places, amongst the
Gentiles to seek rest, whom he corrupted in such a vile manner, that he made
them leese both sense and humanity, and fall into all manner of blindness and
Idolatry, as we may see Romans 1. 24. in so much, that being seduced by him, they
worshipped and served him, with manifold Idolatries; so that at the last, he
had so far infatuated their understanding, that they also worshipped Catts,
Serpents, and other filthy creatures, as may appear by the testimony of diverse
historians. Hesiod (as Eusebius observes) says, There was worshipped upon the
earth 30. thousand gods. In which Idolatry the Gentiles continued, until the
Lord Jesus preached the truth of his Gospel amongst them; which glad tidings
they embraced, and forsook their former errors, and believed in him, and when
they saw his miracles, they spoke very honorably of him, and acknowledged him
to be Savior of the world; of whom it was foretold by the Prophet, that He
Esaias 35. 6.
should open the eyes of the blind, and unstop the ears of the deaf. Then
Satan this unclean spirit, was forced to go out of them also. But the Jews,
unto whom Christ the Savior of the world was sent, opposed and disgraced him
in his works and miracles, and by all means labored to withstand him. Satan
finding this opportunity, returned back again unto these stubborn Jews,
whose Religion he found stuffed with a number of blind Ceremonies and
pharisaicall traditions, contrary to the Law of God. In the Temple, in stead of
Pastors to teach the word, he found Drovers and Brokers, making of sale: In
stead of pues for prayer, tables for Usurers and money changers; and in stead
of a Congregation for the Saints, he found a den of Thieves. Satan I say,
finding this opportunity, enters into them, and houlds them in blindness and
ignorance; so that their last end is worse than their beginning: For, now they
are deprived of their Temple and liberty, and are as vagabonds upon the face of
the earth, as appears this day. By which we may see, what a woeful judgment
all those are liable unto, which oppose the grace of God, when it is offered
unto them. They do as much as in them lies, lay themselves open to the malice
of Satan; who having gained any opportunity, will hardly be driven from them.

Thus having said as much as is needful for the understanding of this present
Parable; yet, that we may receive the greater profit by it, we will for methods
sake (which is memories guide) reduce the matter therein contained under these
four heads.

1. We will show the manner and the measure of Satan's departure from the
soul of man; and then how he demeaneth himself, when he is gone.

2. His diligence to regaine his former possession, with the reasons that
induce him thereunto.

3. When he has regained possession, how forciblie he senses himself to
prevent expulsion.

4. The miserable estate of all those he repossesses, how and wherein their
end is worse than their beginning.

These 4. points by Gods grace shall be the substance of my ensuing discourse,
of which in their order. We will begin with the first, contained in these
words, When the unclean spirit is gone out, etc.

In these words is contained the unclean spirits departure, and demeanor when
he is gone. This unclean spirit is here described:

1. By his essence, he is a spirit.

2. By his quality or condition, an unclean spirit. He is a spirit. The word
spirit in Scripture, sometime does signify the essence of the godhead, as God
is a Spirit. John 4. 24. 1 John 5. 6.


Sometimes the third person in the Trinity, called the Spirit of truth.

Sometime the gifts and graces of the Spirit, as the Angel did foretell of
John, that he should be Luke 1* 15.
filled with the holy Ghost.

Sometime it signifies the soul Luke 23. 46. Psalm. 3 1, 5.
of man, as Father, into thy hand I commend my Spirit. But that we may not
spend our time about the diverse acceptance of the word Spirit, we are to know,
that whenever we find the word Spirit set down without any other word to
express the meaning of it, then we are to know, that the third person in the
Holy Trinity is meant, as Romans 8. 26. The Spirit helps our infirmity. But
when it is set down with his adjective, the nature and quality of his
adjective will easily demonstrate what the substantive imports; as the evil
spirit vexed 1 Samuel 16, 15.
Saul; that is, the Devil. And in this place he is called An unclean spirit,
whereby his nature is expressed to be unclean. And thus much for his essence.
He is a Spirit. Come we now to speak of his quality and condition; He is
unclean. The devil is an unclean spirit, but not in regard of his creation,
but in respect of the condition he brought upon himself. The Scriptures
teach, that the Devil was not created evil; For, God saw every thing that he
had Genesis 1. 31.
made, and behold it was very good. He was created an Angel of Light, and a
spirit without mixture of body; immortal without fear of corruption;
intellectual with exceeding promptness of wit; free that nothing could force
his will, wise with fullness of natural knowledge; powerful above all
inferior creatures: wholly decked with admirable virtues; capable of seeing God
clearly, with promise of this glory, if he persevered in his service. But not
being content with this his estate, but seeking to pry into the majesty of the
deity, Esaias 14. 12.
and to usurp the glory of his maker, was therefore dejected and cast into
hell; and so from being a blessed Angel in Heaven, he is become a damned
devil in hell. As he derived his nature from God, so he is good; but this
depravation of his nature is from himself. An Angel he was of Gods making,
and a devil of his own. And now being deprived of the glory of God, he
delights in all uncleanness, and is an utter enemy to all holiness.
Therefore he uses all means to make mankind as unhappie as himself, and to
wrappe every mothers Child under the curse of God. As soon as our first
Parents were set in Paradise; though they were furnished with the invincible
army of innocence and righteousness, so that he was not able to conquer them
by force and violence; yet out of an inveterate hatred which he bare to the
Image of God shining in them, and out of envy to their happiness, he entered
into a treacherous parlie with our Grandmother Eve, and so bewitched her senses
with flattery, that he caused her to wandor from the truth of Gods Word; and to
entice her husband to transgress Genesis 3, 16.
the Commandment of God; whereby they put off the Armor of innocence and
righteousness, and entertained into their souls a troop of his ambitious
tentations; and then having gained the possession he sought for, presently he
ransacked their souls, and deprived them of all spiritual graces, and brought
them like inferior Captives under his dominion. And that he might the more
securely keep them under subjection, he did not only kill and wound Gods
graces in their souls, but in stead of them, he placed a strong Garrison of
carnal corruptions and fleshly lusts, which should be as a Porter to open
passage to his temptations, whenever he please to make any entrance. Thus
having so poisoned the fountain and head spring of all mankind; all men now
they are conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity. And are deprived
Psalm. 51. 5. Romans 3, 23.
of the glory of God. And remain under the governance of this unclean spirit.
And in this miserable condition, every one had remained, if the wisdom of God
had not found out a way to redeem us, out of this his bondage and servitude.
Thus we have discovered our adversary, to be in power a spirit, and in nature
and condition an unclean spirit, one that for his pride and rebellion was cast
out of Heaven: therefore woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth, for he will do
as much mischief as he can; he knows his time is but short, and therefore he
will loose no opportunity, but will labor by all means, to make all mankind
as filthy as himself. Thus he made Caine swell in envy Gen, 4, 8.
to his brother, and to bathe his hands with cruelty in his blood: Achan with
theft, Gehazi and Annanias Iosu. 7. 1. 2 King. 5. 22. Act. 5. 1.
and his wife with lying and dissembling. Thus he defiles all men with sin,
and pollutes the land Ezekiel, 23. 18.
with transgressions. For, every sin, as it dishonours God; so it holds the
sinner in perpetual bondage. For, whosoever commits John 8. 34.
sin, is the servant of sin. Then in this bondage and Captivity, all
natural and unregenerate men remain, bound under the curse of the Law, until
the custom of sin has taken away the sense of sin; and then this Tyrant,
plunges them under the curse of God before they are aware. As every sin is
unclean in the Concreat; so there is a sin called uncleanness in the
Abstract; as if it were in a special manner breathed out of the mouth of this
unclean spirit. This unclean and filthy sin, is the sin of Adultery and
Fornication, which though it seem a Paradise to the desire, yet it is a
Purgatory to the purse; and a hell to the soul, and dishonours the noble name
of a Christian. And though the wanton minions of this age extenuate it, and
say, it is but a trick of youth; yet let them know, that it is a sin
hateful in the sight of God, who will not let them go unpunished; for,
whoremongers and Adulterers Heb. 13. 14.
God will judge. But of the filthiness and fearfulness of this sin I have
spoken at large in a Treatise, Entitled The Worldlings looking Glass.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest, and finds none.

In these words is contained Satan's departure, and demeanor when he is gone.
In his departure observe these particulars:

1. The manner of his going out. 2. The measure of his going out.

First, for the manner of his going out; Satan will not depart but by
compulsion; for he keeps possession like a strong armed man, which will not be
amooved, till a stronger, even the strength of Israel come against him; he
alone and none but he, can Math. 17, 19,
master and subdue him. The disciples were unable to do it; and by his own
good will, he will never depart. Math. 8, 29, Mark. 5. 7.
He loves his dwelling so well, that he accounts it no less than a Torment to
be cast out. And so envious he is to mankind, that he will never leave him
till he have brought him to destruction; because he is greeved that mankind
should enjoy that happiness he himself has lost.

Secondly, In regard of the curse that was given him in Paradise, that the
seed of the woman should bruise Genesis 3 15.
his head. Therefore he pursues mankind with deadly hatred and implacable
malice, that either he may frustrate the truth of Gods word, or bring mankind
into perpetual bondage. Yet for all his power and malice, there is a time when
he must be gone; and that is when the Lord by the powerful working of his
Spirit, dispelleth the blindness of nature, and the sinful corruptions
thereof, out of the hearts of his children, and does inlighten them with the
saving knowledge of himself. This he does, when by the ministry of the Law
he convinces their consciences of sin; and shows them the heynousnesse and
fearfulness thereof, and then the grievous punishments due to them for the
same; which are Levit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
not only all the plagues and punishments denounced in the Law, but also the
eternal torments of Hell for ever and ever: And that no mortal man is able to
free them from this condition, no not all the world is able to make
satisfaction for one soul; for The Earth is the Lords, and all that is Psalm.
24, 1,
therein. Nay, if all the Angels in Heaven should offer themselves, they were
unable to deliver one soul, (because they are engaged to God for their
creation; and they were created but a finit and temporary good) are not able
to make satisfaction for infinite sins committed against the majesty of a
most holy and glorious God. Thus when the Lord has 1 King. 19. 11, 12.
brought his children to the gates of Hell, and by the strong wind of his
wrath has broken their hearts, and by the Earthquake of his judgment awakened
their souls, and by the fire of his spirit ransackt their consciences, and by
the ministry of his word has plowed up the fallow ground of their hearts, and
by the terrors of conscience made them to despair of salvation in respect of
themselves: Then he makes them to hear the still voice of his Spirit, by which
he reveals to them his infinite mercy and free grace, and his eternal love to
them in Christ Jesus with all his me^its; then he works in their souls
^aith, whereby they apprehend Christ, and rest upon him alone for their
salvation; and in their judgments a wonderful esteem of Gods mercies and
Christ's merits, from whence and by whom they receive and obtain remission of
all their sins. This assurance of Gods favor, works in their souls, a
hungering and thirsting after Christ and his righteousness; and in their
wills, a constant resolution, to rest upon him alone, for justification and
salvation: And in the whole course of their lives, a detestation and hatred of
all sin whatsoever. And stirs up in them a care and conscience, to use all
good means whereby they may be assured that they shall have their part in the
mercies of God, and in the merits of Christ. Then God joyneth them unto him as
the head unto the body, and then as soon as Christ is joined to them, they are
made members of his body, who by his Spirit renews their will and affections,
and frames in them a spiritual life that they may serve him in holiness and
righteousness Luke 1. 74.
all the days of their life. Thus the Lord by these means casts this
unclean spirit out of the hearts of his children, so that he shall never
totally regaine his former possession; for it is a certain Maxim in
Philosophy, that two contraries cannot stand together at one time, in one and
the same subject. There can be no agreement between light and darkness, God
and Belial; but when grace comes in, vice must go out. When the holy Spirit
takes possession, the unclean spirit must pack away. So then from the truth
of the premises we may conclude:

That Satan's power must give place Christ's.

This was promised, that The seed of the woman should bruise his head. Genesis 3,
15,


This Christ performed in his temptations, Luke 4. 8. for which the devil does
fear him so much, Matthew. 8. 29. His chiefest labor in the days of his flesh
was to overthrow his kingdom and cast him out, Matthew. 9. 33. Luke 11. 14. Ioh.
12. 31. Act. 10. 38. which was a Type of this spiritual deliverance. This was
foretold, that he should bring out the prisoner from the Prison, Esa. 43, 6,
and them that sat in darkness out of the prison house, and proclaim
liberty to Esa. 61. 1.
the captives, and the opening of prison Luke 11, 22,
to them that are bound.

Hereby he manifested his power prevailing against the strong man; whose power
Gamaliel acknowledged. Act. 5, 39,
This he performed by his death, when he spoiled Principalities and powers,
Col. 2, 15,
and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them. And led captivity Ephe,
4, 8,
captive. And by his death destroyed him that had the power of death, Heb, 2,
14, Ioh* 10, 29,
that is, the devil. Hereby he showed himself greater than all; and stronger
than all. For, all power is given him Math. 28, 18,
in heaven and earth. And has made good his power by the preaching of his
word, which Satan was not able Act. 6, 10, Act* 8, Revel. 12. 15.
to resist, though he raised up persecution, and cast out floods to drown his
children; and by sorceries, labored to turn away their hearts from him; Yet
he pulled his children Act, 8, 9,
out of his hands, and daily Added Act. 4, 4,
to the Church such as he had appoinpointed to be saved. And for all his power
and malice, at the last he will give his children power to tread him Rom, 16,
20*
under their feet. And thus we have confirmed the truth of the doctrine, by
evidence of Scriptures, that Satan's power must give place to Christ's.

The ground of this truth is;

1 For this very purpose the Son of 1 Ioh, 3, 5, 8
God was manifested in the flesh, that he might destroy the works of the
devil. Esa, 49, 1, 5
And take away the captives from the Luk, 1, 74,
mighty, and deliver his subjects out of his hand; for the Lord is stronger
than Satan, and has a better title to his children than he.

2 Satan is his enemy, and labors to set up the kingdom of sin, which
Ephe. 2, 2, 3
he hates; and to govern his subjects in all righteousness.

3 His honor is deeply engaged for the delivery of his Church, because Satan
labors to overthrow his kingdom, and continually annoyes his subjects by
persecuting Revel, 2, 10, Math. 13, 25,
them, and corrupting them. And if he should not deliver them, it would be a
great disgrace for him, to let his subjects be overcome by his mortal enemy.
And if he did not preserve his servants, he could not be king of his Church,
nor rule his subjects in peace.

4 If he did not deliver his children, he should want a people to call upon
his Name, for they cannot serve him, till they be freed from the devils
power. Thus also we have proved the truth of the point, by evidence of
reasons. Come we now to make use and application.

This doctrine is useful, and that in

1. For examination and trial. 2. For comfort and consolation. 3. For Terror.
We will begin with the first.

Must Satan's power give place unto Christ? then examine thy heart and try thy
ways, whether this unclean spirit be cast out of thee or no? Thou must try it
by the means which God uses to make entrance, and to take possession of his
children for his own service; which is by the ministry of the word of God.
For when the flesh with the lusts thereof are terrified with the canon shot of
legal threatenings, making a great breach into the heart and conscience,
wounding and smiting it, for the breach of Gods Commandments; which works
fear and shame in the soul, for offending so gracious a God: and then by the
Trumpet of the Gospel, remission of sins, and eternal salvation is offered
to all that believe and repent; and when the humbled soul does embrace the
grace of God when it is offered; then this triumphant Captain makes his
entrance, and takes possession of his soul for a Temple for himself to dwell
in.

2. We may try whether this unclean spirit be cast out of us, by the
reformation of our lives and conversations; for by virtue of the sanctification
of the heart, Gods children are brought to a sight of the danger of their
natural estate, and what need they have of repentance and of Christ, and of
inward purging from their corruptions. Regeneration begins at repentance, and
repentance begins when sin is forsaken; let every one of us then consider our
thoughts and actions, and try our sanctification thereby: consider I say, thy
thoughts and thy actions when thou art alone, is thy care then to meditate upon
Gods righteous judgments; and do thou strive with thy self, how thou may
advance Gods glory and benefit his Church? Do thou strive by all means, to
cast out this unclean spirit out of thy soul, whose power consists in the
corruption of nature, the maine pillar whereof is ignorance and unbeleefe? And
do thou labor for knowledge and sanctification, that thereby thou may be
enabled to yield obedience to all the commandments of the Lord, though they
cross thy nature, and curb thee in thy profits and delights; yet for all this
thou strivest to walk in all Gods ordinances without reproof, Luk, 1, 75,
and do so walk in thy calling toward the world, as if Gods eye did
always behold thee, and were privy to all thy actions? Again, do thou so
carry thy self with reverence to the glorious majesty of God, in thy private
devotions, as if the eye of man did always behold thee? Do thou labor also
to subvert the kingdom of Satan in others? If thou be a private man, in love
and Charity, by exhortation to moove to good works, showing thy self by
practice in obedience to God and Tit. 2, 7,
the king; a pattern of all goodness. If thou be a Magistrate, to restrain
from evil by the power of the sword: If a Minister, to allure to virtue, by
the power of the word, and unblamable conversation. Art thou troubled and
greeved in thy mind, when thou meetest with hindrances and lets, whereby thou
can not serve God, in such manner as thou would? And do thou carefully
redeem the time for thy souls good? Is it a vexation and grief for thee to
live among such people as have not the fear of God before their eyes, and are
careless to use those means which God has appointed for their salvation? If at
any time thou have fallen into some scandalous sin, how stands the case
between God and thy soul, do thou extenuate or defend thy faults, and so
justify thy self in thy transgression? or, on the contrary, can thou not be
quiet and at rest, till thou have humbled thy self before God, and craved
pardon for thy sins? And then can thou more comfortably rejoice in the
favor of God, than in any earthly blessing whatsoever? Then if thou can
find these or the like marks of salvation in thy soul; then I pronounce unto
thee out of the word of God, that this unclean spirit is gone out of thee. For
if he held thee under his bondage, he would not suffer thee to take notice of
thy darling sins, but rather to justify thy self in thy transgressions. He
would not have thee question thy want of faith, inward pride, malice,
covetousness, or foolish speaking, conforming thy self to the corruptions of
the time. These with many other sins he would not have thee take notice of,
by which thou may conclude that God in mercy has freed thee from the bondage
of this Tyrant. Has Christ by the powerful work of his Spirit, cast this
unclean spirit out of thee? Christ, to be guided by his word, for he is able
to 2 Timothy, 1, 22, Romans 14. 18,
keep that which is committed to him. And by this means ye shall be accepted
of God, and approoved of men; else we shall be in danger to revolt, and then
we may see our 2 Pet, 2, 21,
fearful case and condition. Therefore having received so great a benefit,
let us be sure to give God the Revel. 12, 10,
praise of his mercies, for he deserves it, and it is all that he looks for;
and Psalm, 50, 15,
there is great reason he should have it Gratiarum Actio est ad plus dandum in
vitatio. Chry^. in Genesis Hem. 52.
because we shall need his help another time.

And thus much for the former uses. Come we now to the latter, which is an use
of terror unto all that are under Satan's bondage.

their god which has blinded 2 Cor. 4, 4,
the eyes of all unbeleevers, least the light of the Gospel of Christ should
shine unto them. He is thy Father; and Ioh. 8, 44,
works his own work in thee; and 1 Ioh. 3. 8,
makes thee to resemble him in pride and disobedience, and to fight for him,
against God and his word, which he makes thee to hate, and to oppose, and to
draw others from the worship of God, and to lay a stumbling block Revel. 1, 15,
in their ways, to cause them to sin. Deuteronomy. 32, 33,
And so makes thy best works like the poison of Dragons, hateful unto God,
and dangerous unto men. Besides all this, he holds thee as a slave, and keeps
thee in ignorance, and Ephe. 4, 18, 2 Cor, 2, 14, Luk, 8, 12,
robbs thee of the use of Gods word. And while thou remainest in this miserable
estate, there is no goodness in thee, nor nothing good can come from thee. Thy
reason is blind, thy heart is rebellious, and thy wisdom is enmity against
God; and Romans 8, 7.
art incapable of the means of salvation; and art given over to a reprobate
sense; to work all uncleanness with greediness. And remaining in Ephe. 4, 19
this estate, thou art without Christ, and so a stranger from the covenant of
promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. So long as thou
continuest in this estate, thou art under the rigor of the Law, which exacteth
at thy hands the performance of all it requires; and also the blessings of the
Lord, they tend to thy damnation, for so he says, I will Mal. 2, 2,
curse your blessings, yea I have cursed Pro. 1, 32,
them already. Again, The prosperity of fools destroys them. And as All
Romans 8 28
things work for good to Gods children; so all things work thy hurt and
ruin, Thy table is made a snare; and that Psalm. 69, 22
which should have been for thy welfare Romans 11. 9.
is become a trap. Yea Christ himself, which is unto the godly a sweet
smelling savor of life, is unto thee a stumbling stone and a rock of offense.
Romans 9, 23,
Crosses and afflictions which God uses to purge out the sins of his children;
these work in thee hatred against God, and stirs up thy corruptions, to
murmr and to be impatient; and still to shun the gracious presence of God,
and to hate the means of salvation.

Thus we see the miserable estate of all those which are under Satan's
bondage; how miserable they are in this life, and how miserable they shall be
in the world to come. But alas, how may we lament the desperate estate of
many in our age, who though they remain in so fearful an estate, yet they
are unwilling to come out of it. Tell the drunkard that this unclean spirit
must be cast out of him, else he shall not inherit the kingdom of God; and
he will for your pains give you a squib, or, watch opportunity to do you a
mischief. Tell the Prophaner of the Lords Sabbath, and the filthy livers of
our time, that this unclean spirit must be cast out of them, and you shall
hear them roar like the devil in the Gospel, that they will not be
tormented before their time. Oh! what a lamentation may we take up for the
desperate sins of our time, which furiously march to hell under Satan's
colors, and will not be reclaymed? God has offered them the means, and has
showed them the way how they may be freed from this fearful bondage, and yet
they will not, but had rather be Satan's vassalls in the Egypt of sin, than the
Lords freemen in the land of Canaan:

The servant under the Law, that would not be free from his masters service
when he might, was to have his ear boared through with an aule, and so to be
made a servant for ever. So it is just with God, to let such willing and
careless men to be slaves to Satan for ever.

Question. But may some say, if their state be so miserable, how comes it to
pass, that they do not see and feel their miserable condition?

Answer. Satan blindes their eyes with the pleasures and profits of sin
(which are very agreeable to their nature) that they never consider of their
miserable condition, and so at last the Custom of sin takes away the
insuetudo occandi ^llit sensum ^eecate.
feeling of sin. Again, they were never sensible of any better estate, and
therefore no marvel if Satan hoodwinkes them to their destruction.

Let the consideration here of moove all men to labor in time to see their
miserable condition, and to repent, least they be plunged under Gods
judgments, before they are aware. Spare no pains then and give no rest unto
thy soul, until thou art assured that thou art freed out of this miserable
condition; Ply Christ with thy prayers, and take no nay at his hands, till he
set thee free; he has the Keys of Heaven and hell, and if Revel. 1, 18, Ioh,
8, 30,
he make thee free, thou art free indeed. Confess thy self to be a wretched
creature, and without his help undone; power forth thy soul in sense of thy
misery, before the Throne of grace, and say; Father I have sinned Luke 15, 18,
against heaven and against thee, and not worthy to be called thy son. O my
God, I am ashamed and blush, to lift up my face to thee my God; for my
iniquities are increased over my head, and my trespass is grown up into the
heavens: Ezra. 9. 6.
crying for vengeance to fall down upon me. Lord, I am a sinful creature, and
thou art a God of infinite purity and holiness. Sin has left me no good
thing, all is wounded, all is poisoned; how shall I appear before thee, whose
glory the Angels cannot behold? I was conceived in sin, borne in sin, and
all my days have lived in sin. My heart is a seedplot of sin and
corruption; my eyes the windows of vanity, my ears the ears of folly, my
mouth the mouth of deceit, my hands the hands of iniquity; and every part of
my body, and faculty of my soul, which thou have created for thy service, has
dishonored thee. My understanding apprehends nothing but sin, my will
delights in nothing but wickedness, my memory retains nothing but evil
things which dishonours thee. As for thy holy precepts and heavenly ordinances,
I have not observed; but have profaned thy Sabbaths, contemned thy Sacraments,
and lived in contempt of thy providence all my days; I have been so far
from keeping any part of thy law, that I have added transgression unto
blindness, malice to ignorance, and rebellion to sin. And because thou have
spared me, and waited for my repentance, and have suffered me with such
patience, to run on in my sins, and because thou have been so merciful unto
me, and multiplied thy favors toward me; I have took liberty to my self to
commit great sins against thee; so that the same medicine which thou have
appointed to purge out my sins, I have made a provocation unto sin. Yet
Lord for thy names sake, thy mercy sake, thy truths sake, take away all mine
iniquities, and magnify thy mercy, in the pardoning of my sins which I have
committed against thee, mine own knowledge, and many motions of thy Spirit,
and purposes of my heart. I do acknowledge I have been dull and unprofitable
in thy service; I have not had care and zeal which I should have had to serve
thee; I have been weary of well doing, and have not taken to heart my misery
as I should, nor mourned for my transgressions against thee my God, as
becomes such a notorious offender as I am; but have hardened my heart against
thy judgments, and have walked stubbornly before thee, in the light of thy
countenance. Psalm. 90.
But though I am full of wickedness, yet thou art full of goodness. Lord,
thou made me at the first of nothing, save me now I pray thee, which am
worse than nothing. It is thou (O Lord) which know my heart, and it must be
thou which must renew and change it. Take it therefore into thy own hand, and
take from it the hardness, deadnes, and dullness, which the custom of sin
has brought upon it; and frame it according to thy own liking; cast out of it
all the cursed fruits of the flesh which fight against thy grace and my soul.
Enlarge my understanding, and increase my knowledge, that being guided by thy
wisdom and assisted by thy Spirit, I may understand and perceive those things
which may please thee; and refrain those things which may dishonor thee; that
so being directed by thy grace, and guided by thy Spirit, I may clearly see
what thou requirest of me* and what may make for my peace and future
happiness. Lord, this must be thy work, for I confess that my reason is
blind, my will is froward, my wit is crafty, ready to deceive me, my
understanding, is quite estranged from thee; but Lord dispell these clouds of
error and ignorance, and rectify the perverseness of my understanding, and
indue me with thy holy Spirit of grace and wisdom, that my soul may be
cleansed from the corruption of this sinful world, and the eyes of my
understanding opened to embrace the mystery of redemption by Jesus Christ. Make
thy word unto me like the star which led the wisemen to my Savior in the
time of his infancy; make thy benefits and graces like the Pillar which
conducted thy people to the land of promise.

Kindle thy love in my heart, that in respect of thee and thy service, I may
despise whatsoever is against thee and thy truth. Confirm my faith in thy
promises, that by thy Spirit I may be assured that thou have forgiven my
sins, and that thou will not reject me a poor sinner, that relyeth wholly
upon thee. Lord, thou desire not the death of a sinner, but have promised
that if I repent thou will be pleased; thou only can raise me out of the
grave of sin, for I am dead and buried in trespasses and sins, quicken me
by thy grace, that I may praise thy name. Let me not want any mercy, whereby I
may be fitted for thy service, and so dispose and guide the remainder of my
life, in such manner as that thou may be honored, and my soul comforted;
which grant unto me for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, my blessed Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

Thus we have proved the truth ^f the proposition, that Satan's ^ower must
give place unto Christ. We have also confirmed it by Scripture, proved it by
reasons, and have made use and application of it to our selves.

In the next place we are to examine the measure of his going out. Satan is
so expelled out of the godly, as that he shall never return again. But he
goes out of hypocrites so, as that he still remains. For if he were once
reallie cast out, (as we have heard,) he could never return again. But this
speech of going out, is rather a form of speaking, than a real action.

This phrase of speech is used with other of like signification, as Heb. 10. 6.
If we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Again the same Author says, It
is impossible for those which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gifts, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted Heb.
6. 4.
the good word of God and of the power of the world to come, if they fall away,
to renew them by repentance. Then from hence I reason thus. If a man may
receive the truth and yet sin willingly, and then forsake the truth; be
enlightened and taste of the heavenly gift, and be made partakers of the holy
Ghost, and yet fall away: then by the same reason Satan may be said to go
out of a man, and yet still remain in him. Therefore wheresoever we find such
phrases of Scripture, as these of Satan's going out, or of being made partaker
of the holy Ghost, and yet by the sequel of the words, we read of their
Apostacy and falling away, we must not think that such men, were ever
effectually called, and endued with the Spirit of God, but that the Lord would
have us take notice of the riches of his mer^ offered unto hypocrites in the
out^ard means of salvation, as the lord and Sacraments for the casting ^t of
Satan out of them. And also ^e may see what a desperate judge^ent they bring
upon themselves, which neglect and contemn the ^eanes God offers for their
delivery; Mat. 23, 37,
and this made our blessed Savior ^ourne for the hardness of the Jews
^earts, that looked for a Savior, which should free them out of their ^isery,
and when he was come to seek and to save the lost sheep of the house of
^srael, then they scorned and contem^ed him.

This unclean spirit may be said ^o far to go out of a man and yet ^
reprobate, as the good spirit of God may be said to depart from a Child of
God, and yet still remain the chosen of the Lord. That the spirit of God may
seem to depart from a Child of God; let David a man after Gods own heart
speak; he^ prays, Cast me not away from thy presence, Psalm. 51, 11.
and take not thy holy Spirit from me. And in another place, he bewailes the
absence of Gods Spirit Psalm. 77, 8.
yet for all this, he had it still* For, The gifts and callings of God ar^
Romans 11, 29.
without repentance, yet they may ly^ hid without feeling, as fire under ^
heap of ashes, which cannot be^ seen or perceived till the ashes be^ stirred;
so this unclean spirit may lie hid a while, till he be stirred up by some
scandalous sin or other.

2. So far may this unclean spirit seem to go out as the mind i^
enlightened; this* the Apostle affirms, may be in a reprobate: He may be
enlightened, and yet fall away. Se^ this in Herod, he amended many things, at
the Preaching of John, and this unclean spirit seemed to begone out, in regard
of outward reformation; for^ when an hypocrite has understanding of Gods word,
he may acknowledge the truth, as Balaam did; and leave his sins for a time,
as Simon Magus did his Sorcery, when he believed and was Baptized; and may
humble himself for his sins, as Pharaoh and Ahab did: yet for all this, he
may lie frozen in the dregs of his sins, and this ^ncleane spirit may keep
possession; for an hypocrite will not part with his darling sin, but rather
part with his first borne; yea loose his own Micha. 6, 6.
soul, rather than leave it, as may be seen by the love which Herod bare to
his Herodias. An hypocrite will cleave unto Christ so far as the world will
^et him, and if he may share with him in his benefits, and not be hindered in
his profits and pleasures; but ^f he must part with them, this is so hard a
saying, that they cannot abide ^t. By which we may see, that their obedience,
is but for fear of Gods ^udgements, and their understanding ^s but enlightened
with historical faith, which consists in quickenesse of wi^ and plausibility
of speech; this fait^ is effectual to inlighten the understanding, but not to
save the soul Now so far as this speculative fait^ is admitted, so far
this unclean spirit is said to go out. God in the knowledge regards not the
quantit^ so much as the quality; an Hypocrit^ may exceed a child of God in
the gifts of nature, which God esteem no better than shining sins. Mistake
me not, I would not have knowledge vilified, but rather rectified, an^ virtue
added to knowledge, else the gifts of nature, if they be not sanctified by
grace, are fit preyes for the Devil.

3. So far this unclean spirit i^ gone out of an hypocrite, as he has
received some sparckles of conversion For by the illumination of his mind^ he
may behold the kingdom o^ Christ to be glorious, and in many degrees to
exceed the glory of the world. This made the mother of Zebedees children
think, that if she could procure a place for her sonns that one might sit at
Christ's right hand and the Mat. 20, 21.
^ther at his left in his kingdom, she would have been abundantly satisfied.
Another thought him a happy Luke 14. 15.
man that might eat bread in the kingdom of God. This also made Balaam
earnestly desire to dye the death of Number. 23, 10.
the righteous, and that his last end might be like theirs. Now what may be
the reason of this that hypocrites are so ravished with the apprehension of
future glory, and happiness* Surely this; they perceive, that Gods kingdom is
full of happiness, and they see a possibility of obtaining this happiness for
themselves; for they have tasted of the heavenly gifts floting in their
brains, which makes them embrace the Gospel, and to do many things that they
are commanded; therefore they hope they shall be saved. On the contrary, they
see this sinful world to be full of trouble and vexation, and they fear that
there will be great bitterness in death.

Therefore hearing of a full deliverance by Christ from these dangers, they are
content to yield obedience to the Word; but yet for want of the Ioh. 5, 34,
sap of grace, this abides with them but for a season. And so for all their
outward conformity, they may be rotten and unsound. For they do not love the
truth, for the truths sake, but for some private ends; as to gain estimation
of men, and to be accounted good Common wealths men, and so thought fit to live
in a society. As for their desire after the Word, it is either with Eve to get
knowledge, or with Simon Magus to make gain of it, or with the Pharisees to
get a name by it; for they discover themselves in the time of temptation, and
are either allured with the baits of prosperity, or pinched with crosses and
afflictions; so that at last, they fall away and become Apostates from the
faith.

4. This unclean spirit is so far gone out of a man, as he lies hid and
covered; He may keep his hold, though he do not show himself in hostile
manner; he can transform himself into an Angel of light, and will make a
show of holiness, that he may do the more wickedness; he cares not though
Abimelech entertayne Abraham and give him the best of his land, if he can but
make him to commit adultery with his wife. He cares not though Judas become a
Disciple and a professor of Christ, if he can fill his heart with covetousness
to betray his Master. He cares not though Annanias and Saphirah sell their
goods for the Churches good, if he can make them lie and dissemble. He cares
not though many of us come to Church to hear Gods word, if he can make our
minds wander after our profits and pleasures, then he knows he can wrap us
under the curse of the Lord, in doing his work negligently. He will be
content to be expelled out of an ignorant heart, if so be he can corrupt his
knowledge with faction and Schism. He can be content to be cast out in one
sin, if he can be entertained in another. He cares not if he be cast out of
an Idolatrous heart, if he can keep possession by profane Atheism, then he
has as much as he desires. And by this one sin he marks them for his own.

5. This unclean spirit may be cast out in the opinion of the party in whom
he dwells, and not in the worlds account; for every man is ready to deceive
himself in this particular, seeming pure in his own eyes, though he be not
washed from his filthiness. Pro. 30.
Let us see how nature occasions this deceit, and how many delude themselves,
in thinking they are some Gal. 6, 3,
body, when as indeed they are no body.

1. Deceit is to make a man think he is a good Christian, because he leads
a civil life, and is just and upright in his dealings. This is indeed an
excellent virtue in it self, and a good step to Christianity, and it were to
be wished, that all Gods Children would be careful to walk unblameably in
respect of the world. But yet for all this, this Commendable virtue is made
evil by accident, and so becomes a dangerous outward means to exclude grace.
For civil honesty, if it be severed from true piety, is nothing else but
glorious iniquity. For the ornament thereof is, to rest in the performance of
outward actions, as to deal justly and uprightly with their neighbors, and to
be free from the reproachful crimes of the world; Now here they rest and
think themselves good Christians, though all this while they be ignorant of
the true God, and the grounds of his worship. And in their honest dealing with
men they aim not at Gods glory, that by their unblameable conversation his
name may be magnified; yet for all this, because the world cannot condemn
them, they rest contented with a probable error of being in the state of
grace; and the rather because they know that if they should step forwards in
religion, and labor for inward sanctification, they should not only stir up
against themselves many thundering storms and the contemptuous Censures of this
spiteful world, but also from the bottom of hell, many disturbances and
fearful temptations; therefore Satan labors to keep them in this estate,
and persuades them, that this civil righteousness will carry them to heaven;
and that God will exact this precise and strict obedience at the hands of the
Preachers and those which are better learned than themselves. But these men
must know, that though their works make a glorious show in the sight of men,
yet they are odious in Gods sight, if they be not done in obedience to his
Commandments, and in zeal for his glory.

2. Men will not be persuaded they are so bad, as indeed they are. Will you see
how this deceit is also occasioned? It is, because they compare themselves
with those that are Satan's outrageous revellers, whom they do excel in
regard of their civil moderation and moral carriage: now finding themselves in
a better condition, they are in their own opinions Canonized Saints, and so
need no reformation. Thus it comes to pass, that the proud man will not be
persuaded, that he has a filthy Lucifer in him. The covetous man will not be
persuaded that Mammon rules in him. The fornicator and Adulterer will not be
persuaded that Asmodeus a filthy and unclean spirit reigns in him: The
envious man will not be persuaded that Beelzebub an irefull devil governes
him. The contentious man he will not believe, that Baalberith a troublesome
Devil is in him. The drunkard he will not believe that Beelphegor a beastly
Devil domineers in him. The idle person, he does not think that Astaroth a
lazy Devil is in him. Thus all men are ready to deceive themselves; but we
must know that where the works Vbi opera ^bi operans.
are, the workemaister is at hand. And though the world cannot detect them for
their sins; yet the Allseeing God is privy to their corruptions. The Scribes
and Pharisees were just and upright men to the world, in regard of their
austere life and strict observations, but yet our Savior tells his Disciples,
and in them us; That except your righteousness exceed the righteousness Mat.
5, 20.
of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of
Heaven. These men were careful to abstain from such sins, as the world
takes notice of; but the Lord Jesus the wisdom of his Father, detects Mat. 23.
them of much hypocrisy. So he knows these Iusticiaries well enough, and
though they be not Papists in ignorance and profaneness, or in Idolatry;
making their good meaning their God, their wit and policy their God, nay,
peradventure their money or their belly their god. And Phil. 3, 19.
for all their civil honesty, Satan sees them make little conscience of
profaning the Sabbath; swearing by their faith or troth, Mass, or our Lady.
Now, because they count these small sins, the devil holds them fast enough
as his vessales and slaves.

3 Many men deceive themselves, because upon some good motions of Gods Spirit,
by the powerful ministry of the Word, their consciences are awaked, and they
brought to a sight of their sins, so that they begin to hate those sins
they delighted in, and to perform some holy duties, and so now they think
that this unclean spirit is gone out of them: but for want of watchfulness,
he comes again, and allures them to the committing of one sin or other, or
else by covetousness sets them as deep in their gainefull sin of Usury,
deceit, gaming and the like, as ever they were; so with Judas they receive the
soppe, and the Devil again; and so their former righteousness, is but a
morning dew, and their unrighteousness by little and little returns again,
and they become as disordered in their courses, and as sinful in their
practices as ever they were.

6. This unclean spirit, may seem to be cast out in the opinion of the
godly, and not of the party himself.

Thus the Disciples had a good opinion of Judas, because of his outward
conformity to the word, and because Christ had put him in trust with the bag:
therefore when our Savior told them, that one of them should betray him, they
suspected themselves rather than Judas, and yet all this while Christ knew he
would prove a Traitor to him, and a butcher to himself, and Judas himself
knew that he had a covetous, envious devil within him. Thus we have seen how
far an hypocrite may go by natures light, and how they may attain to much
knowledge, and so may shine in outward profession; and yet for all this gallop
to hell under Satan's colors. And though they are well persuaded of their own
estate, yet Gods Word does discover, that they are miserable, and are
hoodwinked of Satan to their own destruction; Because by the shining lamp of
outward profession, and standing upon the goodness of their nature, and their
correspondencie with the world, they deprive themselves, of the benefit of
godly admonition, which is a notable means ordained of God to reclayme many
desperate sinners, from their sinful courses, and to bring them home by
repentance. Now because they post off this to others which are more scandalous
to the world, and so do not feel that they stand in need of Christ to purge
them from their sins; therefore they remain strangers from the covenant of
Ephe. 2, 2,
promise, and without God in the world.

And thus we have seen the measure of Satan's going out of an hypocrite; he
so seems to go, as that he always continewes.

We are now to consider of his demeanor when he is gone, contained in these
words, He walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. In which
words observe:

1. His labor, he walks. 2. His station, in dry places. 3. The end of his
walking, he seeks rest. 4. The issue or event, he finds none. He walks
through dry places, etc.
We will first endeavor to free the words from obscurity, and then draw such
conclusions as may be profitable for our edification.

He walks. This word is a metaphor or borrowed speech taken from Travelers,
who out of a desire they have to come to their journeyes end, put forth all
their strength to the end they may the more speedily obtain their desires. And
this speech being applied to other actions, notes celerity and continuance of
that thing unto which it is applied. Which speech being applied unto Satan,
notes his restless diligence; he does not Arentia lota dicuntur respect^
Sathanae; illa talia sunt omnia, quae eum excludunt, quali^ sunt ^ector^
fidelium Aret. in locum.
go drowsily or sleepily, but courageously and constantly, for so much the
word walks imports. He walks through dry places, is also a metaphor taken
from dry ground which for want of moisture cannot bring forth fruit; so that by
dry places, as afterward shall appear, is meant the hearts of Gods children;
his banishment from them is as uncomfortable to him, as a dry wilderness is
to a thirsty Traveller seeking rest. What rest does he seek, Satan seek?
Does he seek to be reconciled unto God? No. Would he be reconciled unto man
whom he has so much wronged? No. What rest does he then seek? Surely this,
to do all the mischief he can do to mankind, to deface Gods Image in our
souls, and to wrap all mankind under the curse of God. The hearts of Gods
children which are watered with faith and repentance, whereby he is excluded
with all his temptations, are said to be dry places because they yield him no
moisture, whereby he may set his temptations a working; so that when he cannot
hurt us in our souls, then he labors by all means to plague us in our
bodies. If he cannot mischief us in our bodies, then he labors to hurt us in
our states; and if he cannot hurt us in our substance, then he will vex us in
our good names and reputations; and cast out floods of reproaches against us;
and if he cannot prevail against us herein, then he will destroy the fruits
of the earth, fish in the Sea; and if he cannot hurt us in them, then he will
corrupt and infect the air, that thereby he may infect our bodies with
noisome diseases; and if God will not give him leave to annoy us in these or
the like, then he is said to walk in dry places, for he accounts all those
places dry and uncomfortable to him, in which he can do no mischief. And thus
you have the sense and meaning of the words.

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places
seeking rest. Hence learn, That Satan 1 Pet. 5. 8.
is very diligent, to watch all opportunity to do as much mischief as he may
to mankind; therefore he is said to walk about like a 1 Pet 5, 8.
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. He goes not about as a king in
Progress for delight; but his going about is to devour. He is no idle
spectator, but a diligent tempter; he is one that will never be weary, for he
will never give over his temptations, till there be an end of time. He began
early, as soon as our first Parents were created; he set upon them, and
rested not till they were turned out of Paradise, and wrapped under the curse
of God. Yet for all this he was not content, but as soon as Adam had two
sons, by whom mankind might be increased, he labored to destroy the body of
one of them, and the soul of the other. Therefore he filled Caines heart with
envy, and made him kill his innocent brother. And then the first age of the
Genesis 4.
world, he so corrupted and filled with iniquity, which did so provoke the
Lord, that he drowned all the world. And after the world was to be repayed by
Noah and his Family, presently he filled it with Idolatry; Genesis 6,
and ever since he has showed himself an enemy that is never wearied with
toyling, nor weakened with watching, but at all occasions is plyant and
watchful, and labors by all means to molest the godly, and make himself
sure of the wicked. His hand like Ismaels is against every man, but especially
against the godly. He beguiled Evah in the likeness of a Genesis 3,
Serpent, and deceived Saul in Samuels mantle. He is very forward to offer his
service; if God call, Who shall 1 King. 2^, 22,
go forth to deceive Ahab? He is at hand, and says, Send me; for now still
he is at hand to tempt all men. He puts into our hearts evil thoughts into our
mouths lewd speeches, into our members sinful actions. When we are awake, he
stirs us up to unlawful deeds; and when we are asleep, he stirs up
in us filthy dreams. If we be merry, then he makes us wanton; if sad and
melancholy, then he labors to bring us to despair. He tempts all men and in
all places; and by outward objects he stirrs up inward corruptions. He tempted
our Savior Christ presently after his Baptism; he was not afraid of the
holiness of his person, though he were proclaimed from heaven to be the Son
of God. He tempted David, a man after Gods own heart, to number the people;
Peter to deny and forswear his Master. Neither the holiness of the place nor
action can hinder his temptation. He set upon Judas, in the presence of his
Master; and is always at hand to hinder the word of God, Least the Math. 13.
13.
people should be converted and saved; therefore he labors to corrupt the
word; or to turn away our hearts from Act. 13, 8. 2 Cor. 4, 4,
it; or to blind our understandings. Let a man betake himself to any good
action, he will presently be at his elbow to hinder him. When Joshua the high
Priest began to pray, Satan stood Zach. 3, 1,
at his right hand to resist him. If he cannot hinder us in the performance of
holy duties, then he labors to makes us overweene our selves, and to be proud
of those things which are none of our own; and if he cannot overcome us by his
own vices, he labors to ensnare us by our virtues; therefore he fills our
hearts with boasting, that thereby we might be arrogant in our own eyes. He
persuades the Minister not to preach, because the people do not regard him nor
his doctrine; and if he cannot dissuade him from preaching, then he will
persuade him to preach pleasing things, that thereby he may be admired for his
gifts and learning. Then he comes to the people, and perswads them not to
hear; and tells them the Preacher either is no Scholar, or else he vents his
own fancies, and lays open their sins out of envy, to disgrace them; and
if he cannot hinder them from hearing, then he steals away their hearts, and
fills their mind with wandering thoughts; he compasses their eyes with shows,
their ears with sounds, their senses with sleep, their thoughts with fancies;
and all to make them forget what they hear, and so to wrap them under the
curse of the Lord, doing his work negligently. He labors to discourage men
from the practice of piety, by persuading them that to be too strict in their
life, savours too much of singularity. If he meet with profane wicked men, as
drunkards, swearers and fornicatours, he tempts them to the contempt of God and
his worship, and to defend their graceless courses, and to glory in their
sins, Phil. 3,
which should be their shame. He makes those which have cast off the fear of
the Almighty, to scorn and despise the Spirit of grace, in the Children of
God, and to become his Standard-bearers, to march furiously against the
Majesty of God, to their own destruction, by discouraging and disgracing,
vexing and perplexing his children, whom he means to honor. Satan is a
cunning Merchant and a crafty Sophister, he knows how to use riches and
poverty, sickness and health, and make them instruments to serve his purpose.
He is continually in motion, and has all those which are without Christ, at
his beck and command, to take up arms against their Savior, either by
ignorance, not knowing him, or by a negligent life not following him, or by
violence resisting him. He walks any way to destroy; he tempts the godly to
destroy them, and the wicked that they may tempt others. If Jonah will run
away from his God, he shall not want a ship to carry him to Tarshish. The
Tyrant shall not want a flatterer, the Thief a receiver, the wanton a minion.
He has a sack full of oaths for the swearer, a budget full of lies and
excuses for the Liar. Whither can a man walk, but Satan will find him out?
He dares enter into the Church to hinder the word; Nay clymbe up into the
Pulpit, and broach sects and schisms. He will not leave any means
unattempted to work our ruin. He deals with us in our temptations as he did
when he destroyed Jobs children; the Text says, he raised a wind from all
the world; if the East wind failed, then the West might effect his purpose; if
the West did not, then the North and South might. So if he cannot overcome us
by the East wind of prosperity, then he will try what he can do by the West
wind of adversity; If he cannot prevail by Idolatry, he will see what he can
do by vain glory and popular applause. If he cannot overcome by drunkenness,
then he will see if he can allure by adultery. If he cannot prevail by
carelessness, he will try by distrust. If he cannot overcome by despair, he
will see what he can do by presumption. If a man be zealously affected, he
will see if he can make him factious. He is always in one extreme or other;
and by lesser temptations he makes way for greater.

Ob. How is it possible that the Devil Answ. There are infinite troops of
Devils, a whole Legion in one man, which according to the learneds Computation
is 6666. And if there were so many in one man, there must needs be many more.
Now these Devils fly about by troops in the Air, and certify one another
what is done in all places. They know every man's nature, by observing their
manners, company and employment; They know what men love and hate, what they
want* and what they desire; and so they fit their temptations according. And
though it be Gods Prerogative to know the heart, yet by outward actions, the
Devil comes to rove at the inward: for when he sees men inflamed with anger
and wrath, and their eyes sparkle, their nostrills The devil conjectures our
affections by our actions, and our inward thoughts by out outward looks*
smoke, their mouths breath out fiery, and railing speeches; by these and the
like, he knows what is within* murder and revenge, and then he hales them
forwrd unto all mischief. Thus he saw Judas repine at the ointment which was
spent upon his master, and accounts it waste, because it came not to his purse;
therefore he filled his heart with covetousness, and gave him no rest, till
he had sold his master for thirty pieces of silver, the price of a Slave.
Thus also he saw Ananias and Saphirah covetous in their hypocritical
devotion, and therefore he filled their hearts with dissimulation to lie to
the holy Ghost. He saw Abimelech ambitiously affected, therefore he tempts him
to murder his brethren, that he may make himself sure of the Kingdom. He
knows the tide of all our affections, and therefore he labors to drive us
violently to all manner of sin, and to draw us from Gods service, unto his
own.

Thus we have seen, how malicious our enemies are to destroy us. Rea^*
Come we now to examine the reasons that make and induce him thereunto. He
bears an inveterate hatred to mankind, partly for Gods cause, and partly for
our own.

1. He hates us for Gods cause, because If he cannot hurt his deity, he will
vex his humanity.
he has justly cast him out of Heaven for his pride and rebellion, and judged
him to torments in hell: now because he cannot offer violence to his sacred
Majesty, he will persecute his Image, man, with deadly hatred.

2. He envies mankind because he is ordained to that happiness he has lost.
He hates all mankind, but especially the Children of God, and tha^ because
they are contrary to him, an^ Gal. 4, 4. Revel. 12, 9.
fight against him, and were once hi^ vassalls; therefore he envies the mean^
of their salvation, and labors to hinder the proceeding of the Gospel, and to
withstand the Ministers of the Word on every side, and therefore he labors to
winnow them and to buffet 1 Thessalonians. 2, 18. Luke 22. 31 2 Cor. 12. 7.
them. And what he cannot effect by himself, he has his instruments and
servants at hand courageously to fight under his colors, and to allure to draw
men from God and godliness. Thus he had Elymas at hand to dissuade Act. 13,
10.
the Governor from the faith. And what a number of Devils has he now in the
world, which are continual instruments of wickedness, to draw men from the
practice of Piety? their trade is nothing else but to allure men unto evil;
such are they that draw men into the Alehouse, and entice them to drink to
excess; such are they that draw men to gaming houses, and stir up men to
brawling and contention. What a number of agents has he in every place, to
hinder men's salvation? Some disgrace the Ministers and raise up ill reports
against them, to make their doctrine stink in the eyes of the people; or else
to persecute them, that either they may remoove them out of their places, or
else be quickly weary of well doing. And if they take a godly man tripping in
some small error in his carriage, and that peradventure but some misprision of
their conceit, then they raise matter not only of triumph and insultation,
but take occasion to applaude and encourage themselves in their sinful
courses. What could the devil do more if he were present? He is an enemy to
all goodness, so are they: he is an accuser of the brethren, so are Revel. 12.
2 Timothy 3,
they: Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood,
Pro* 4, 16
they cannot sleep till they have done mischief. And the more God opposes
them by the power of his word, to set himself against them, the more restless
they. See this in the Sodomites; how restless were they to commit filthiness:
young and old came from all places of the City; they could not sleep till
they had done their villainy; and when Lot persuades them to desist, then they
were the more furious; and when the Angel Genesis 19, 45.
had smitten them with blindness, yet they sought al night for the door: they
strived and contended who should have the mastery in sin, therefore they
work all uncleanness Ephesians. 4, 19,
with greediness. How restless were the Jews, and how did they thirst after
Christ's blood? They send out in the night to take him; and though Christ's by
his word lay them on their backs, yet the more eager they are and restlesly
cry out, his blood be upon us and our Children. They had rather Gods judgments
fall upon them and their Children, than give over and obey the truth. See how
resolute those were, that had Bound Act. 23, 14*
themselves with an oath, not to eat nor drink till they had killed Paul. And
are there not many to be found in our age, that are as bold and impudent in
sin? Some sell themselves to commit iniquity as Ahab did. How violently are
some carried in their riotous courses of drinking, swaggering and dissembling;
as if they were swine carried by the Devil into the lake of all manner of
filthiness? Let the Magistrate and Minister seek to reclayme them, they will
rage and foame, like the Devil in the Gospel, and like desperate wretches,
will follow their lusts, though they go to hell for it. These men show
themselves as restless as their father the Devil. Now leas^ they should grow
weary of their sinful courses, they will use variety of objects, to take away
tediousness. When they are weary of gaming they will fall to drinking, and
from drinking to swearing, from swearing to quarrelling, and from quarrelling
to fighting; and from one extreme they will fall into another, drinking down
sin like water, and make it a pastime to commit iniquity. But of all the
sworn soldiers of the devils band, none serve him better than the talebearer
and the envious man. We will begin with the flattering talebearer; he is also a
busy walker, the devil walks in the greater circuit to do mischief, and
he in the little; he can quickly go from one man to another, with tales and
accusations, to make enmity and debate, and to charge men openly or secretly,
with things utterly untrue and false; sometimes blazing infirmities, which love
would have covered; and sometimes aggravating of facts or speeches, of which
charity would give a better construction. But if these wretches can fasten any
thing upon Gods Children, then are they the devil swiftest Dromedaries to carry
news, and to make it pass through Tavernes and Alehouses, Gath and Ascalon,
far and near, as current and authentical, under the seal of their good
fellowship, never to be controled until the matter be determined by that
everlasting judge at his general session and Jail delivery, at that great and
terrible day when the thoughts of all hearts shall be disclosed. There is no
name given to the Devil, but that may be applied to him. The Devil is a
liar, so is the talebearer: he is an accuser, so is the talebearer; he is an
enemy to all goodness, so is the talebearer.

A second property of the devil is to roar in his walk; so does the
talebearer, he roares like a Lion, and bellows like a bull; and rather than
fail, if he think he shall not be heard, he will tell his tale over and
over, and deprave the truth, by adding or substracting, to or from his
neighbors words; though peradventure his speeches hang together, like a sick
man's dream. Again, the devil in his walks seeks to devour, so does the
talebearer, he devours a man's good name. There is (says Pro. 30, 14.
Agur) a generation whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw teeth as knives,
to devour the poor from off the earth. Other enemies carry their swords by
their sides, these carry theirs in their mouths, that they may shoot them out
at their pleasure. These men are worse than the Crows, for they feed on dead
carcasses, but these on living men. If Serpents sting us and mad dogs bite
us, there may be some remedy found; but against the tongue of the slanderer,
there can be none. To whom shall I liken this filthy generation, they are like
an Archer, men are their mark, and evil report their arrows; Their tongue is
an arrow shot out. Hell and the tale bearers are much alike; the one is never
satisfied with sinners, nor the other with slanders.

The second Champion, for the devil is the envious man, who, says Salvian,
Lib. 5. de gubernat dei.
esteems another good, his hurt. Parum est si ipse sit faelix, nisi alter
fuerit infaelix. Therefore when Bion saw an envious man sorrowful, he would
Laertius in vita Bion.
ask him whether some evil had happened to him, or good to his neighbor.
Envy is ostium iniquitatis, the door of iniquity, by which death entered into
the world. By this Habel was persecuted of his brother, Jacob of Esau, David of
Saul, and Christ of the Jews. 2. Envy is Toxicum charitatis, the bane of
Charity; for if it were not for envy, every one would rejoice at another good,
and grieve for their harms. Therefore Augustine says, Take away envy; and
that which I Toll in vidiam, tuum est quod habeot, emeum est quod habes.
have is thine, and that which thou have is mine.

3. Envy is putredo sanitatis the corruption of health, for by envying Diez
Con. 1. ^n festo Ioa. Bapt.
others, men consume themselves. And therefore one says well, An envious man
has a great deal of less wit in his malice than the brute beasts; for
whereas no fowls nor fishes are taken in a snare without baits, the spiteful
wretch is brought to the devils hook without any pleasant bait. The
voluptuous man has a little pleasure, for his soul. The covetous man, a
little profit for his soul. The ambitious man a little honor for his soul.
But the envious man has nothing of the devil for his soul, but a little
hearts grief, and yet for all this the wretch toiles out himself in Satan's
service.

Thus you have heard how Satan has his servants at command to work the ruin
of Gods Children, and he is restless in his own endeavors, as you have
heard. He has many by-ways to bring men to hell, and therefore he has set
infinite snares before our feet, and has filled all Eoce tete^. dit ^^te pe^
nostros laequeos infint^s, and omn^ vias nostra decipulis r^ple vit ad
c^piendas an^mas nostra and quis eff^giet? Laqueos p^ suit in div^ tijs, laqueo
posuit in p^pertate, laqueos tete^ dit in cibo^ in potis and ^ August. So^loq.
cap. 1
our ways with traps to catch our souls; and who can escape them? He has set
snares in riches, snares in poverty; he has laid snares in our meat, in our
drink, in our pleasure, in our sleep. Nay he lays snares for us in our best
works, in the duties of godliness which we perform, and is ready to make us
proud of our knowledge, and overweene our selves, as you have heard before.
All his malice tends to this end, to deprive us of happiness. Thieves and
robbers steal our goods to enrich themselves, but Satan he labors to
deprive us of grace, not to do himself any good, but to do us mischief.
Thus you have seen the truth of the doctrine, that Satan watches all
opportunity to do mischief.

This doctrine is also useful and that for exhortation, reprehension, and
direction.

1. Seeing the whole world is Satan's circuit, then remember in what danger we
are in by reason of his malice. There is no place, but that he watches his
opportunity in, to do us mischief. There are but two places in the world,
where men may be safe, and they are the places of Gods worship, and the place
of our particular callings. The former because God is present in the
Congregation of his Saints, and the latter because he has promised to keep
his in all their ^sal. 91.
ways. Yet for all this, Satan is not afraid to set upon us at Church in the
time of Gods worship, and to divert our thoughts from that we hear, and fill
our minds with sleepiness and drowsinesse; and after we have heard, by
casting other thoughts into our hearts before the seed of the word is harrowed
by meditation. Now this advantage he has against us, by our own carelessness,
because we do not by prayer and meditation prepare our hearts, before we
come into Gods presence; and when we are come, do not so reverently carry our
selves as we should. Hence it comes to pass, that God has no delight in our
Sacrifice; and therefore gives Satan leave to deprive us of the benefit of the
word.

2. He tempts us in our particular callings, and makes us careless in them, or
to use some indirect courses to raise our selves by unlawful means, that
thereby he may deprive us of the Lords protection. In each of these places we
had need to look about us, as if the devil were always at our elbowes, and
with fear and trembling check our selves for giving way to such a dangerous
enemy; and when we feel his temptations begin to work, then say to our
souls, Surely this unclean spirit is here, and I was not aware.

this reprooves many, that make light account of such an adversary, whose power
is so great, Ephe. 6 12. and therefore called a roaring Lion, 1 Pet. 5. 8. A
red Dragon, Revel. 12. 1. A Prince of the air, Ephe. 2. 2. The God of the
world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. having great interest in us by reason of our sins, which
mightily take his part: and yet for all this, they will walk without their
spiritual armor, and carelessly thrust themselves into the midst of his
armed soldiers, and so with Peter in the high Priests Hall, fall fearfully
before they be aware; and so their case becomes fearful, because they have
had so many watch words, and yet will not be warned.



doing, and not to be discouraged or driven back from any good purpose and
intendment. This is a point necessary to be urged in these times, wherein the
devil labors to cool zeal, and to hinder us in the practice of piety;
sometime he puts on the sheeps skin to hide his woolvish nature; he comes to
the Minister and persuades him to pity himself, and not endanger his health
and life, by preaching so often; and the rather because the people do not
regard it, and would think better if he preached not at all, or preached
pleasing things. But against these temptations Gods children must take examples
of his vassals, who are diligent and constant in his service; who will reward
them here with shame, and eternal torments hereafter. Then should not Gods
servants be resolute in their Masters cause? who in his mercy will cover their
sins, and crown their weak endeavors, which he himself works in them, in
such a manner as that a cup of cold water, shall not go unrewarded. The
consideration hereof should make us diligent in our callings; for can we spend
our time better, than to glorify God, and save our souls? therefore let every
one of us? say to our souls, as once the Prophet did to Ahab; Get thee up,
eat and drink, for there is a sound of much rain. So should we say to our
sluggish natures, up and be doing; Get thee to thy study, to preaching and
praying, loose no time; for there is a sound of much trouble. We may be
deprived of the word, before we are aware; we may be stopped in our courses
and pious intendments suddenly, we may be deprived of our lives in a moment;
the night of sickness, adversity and death will come, and then we cannot
work. Oh what a comfort will it be to our souls when death approaches, if
then we can say in sincerity of heart with godly Hezekiah, Remember ^sa 38, 3.
O Lord, I have walked before thee with an upright heart! Therefore be not
weary of well doing; remember it is a fearful thing to begin in the spirit
and to end in the flesh; therefore let every one of us say to Satan and his
discouraging Instruments, as once Nehemiah did to his crafty Counselors, What,
should such a one as I fly? Nehem. 6, 11.
No? I will not loose my labor and that crown of life, that is promised to
all them, that are faithful to the Revel. 2, 10,
death, to please Satan and his instruments.

2. Seeing Satan is so restless in his temptations, and is so diligent a
walker; be exhorted to keep out of his walks: though he walk in all places,
yet he frequents some places more than the rest; and, they are the Alehouses,
the gaming houses, and the whore house: unto which he has other walks, and
they are gardens of pleasure, and solitary walks; in these places he eyes us,
and many times finds them fit places to set his temptations on work; in these
places he prevailed over Eve, Lot, David, etc. These places like him well, and
into such places he drove those which he possessed, Luke 8. 29. and there
usually shows himself to witches: Solitary places be his walks, and in
these he delights, because he is the Prince of darkness, and hates the light
because his works are evil: he knows how ready man is to sin when he is
alone, and when man's eye is not over him to hinder him; he knows that many
dare do that in the dark, in the presence of God, which they would blush and
be ashamed to do in the presence of a mortal man. Therefore the godly must
be careful to shun and avoid idleness which is Satan's pillow, by which
he takes many tripping, and lulls them asleep to their eternal destruction.
Therefore when we are alone let us always be speaking to God, by our prayers,
or ^rayses, or meditating of his good^esse; hereby we shall be fitted for ^ur
callings, and made more watch^ull over our ways: thus if we be ^mployed,
though Satan be always walking, and in continual action, let him walk
whither he will, for we are ^n our calling, walking with God. And if at any
time he set upon us in our solitary walks, let us take the benefit of
company as soon as we can, but herein learn wisdom; Let your company be
good, and such as fear God; else wicked and profane company are worse than
solitariness. For we hear of many, who when they are troubled by Satan,
run to sinful company, and spend their time in Carding, dycing, drinking,
and so think to cast out the devil by Beelzebub the Prince of devils; but
therein they deceive themselves, and harden their hearts against the means of
their salvation.

3. Seeing Satan goes about to tempt, and to do what mischief he can, let
Gods children take the quite contrary course, and endeavor to do as much good
as they can, by provoking one another to good works, and showing themselves
patterns of all goodness. For, shall our enemy watch for our destruction, and
shall not we watch for our preservation? Satan is a Fox, and therefore
subtle; he lays siege to the Castle of our souls, and labors mightily,
either to scale the walls of our faith, or to batter the Bulwark of our
patience, or to undermine the Turrets of our zeal and fortitude; or one way or
other to drive us from our hold, and then by some Stratageme or other to
surprise us before we are aware. We had need therefore to look about us,
and say to our souls as Dallilah did to her husband, Up Sampson, the
Philistims be upon thee. So O my soul, stand upon thy guard, and look to thy
self. What? has thy purse enemies on the highway, and ^hy goods enemies about
thy house, and have thou no enemies for thy ^oule? Satan is malicious,
therefore ^e will spare none; strong, therefore ^e will fear none; up
therefore and ^and upon thy guard. Satan is walk^ng to do thee a mischief;
therefor be thou watching and praying, ^o resist and withstand all his
tempta^ions. For Satan is vigilant and watchful, ready and cunning to abuse
^ll outward objects to our hurt. He ^abours by all means to dishonor God,
and to cross him in his providence, and to deprive all mankind ^f happiness.
Therefore he labors ^o draw such to sin which have most ^eanes to withstand
it, and have had ^ore mercies to encourage them to ^oe forward in Gods service;
and if ^ee can overcome them by his temp^ations, he knows how to dishonor God
in a high degree. If he can get ^dam to sin in Paradise, he knows how to
fill the world with sinners quickly. If he can tempt David (^ man after Gods
own heart) to commit adultery and murder, he is su^ he can make The name of
God to b^ 2 Samuel 12, 24.
blasphemed, 2 Samuel 12. 24. If he ca^ make Judas one of the twelve to betray
his Master, he thinks he hat^ shaken Christ's kingdom; and if he^ can make
Peter that great Champion to deny and forswear him, then h^ doubts not but to
lay his honor i^ the dust. So at this day, if he ca^ make the professers of
the Gosp^ careless and profane, he thinks h^ has notably dishonored God; i^
making his ordinance unfruitful a^ unprofitable. Seeing therefore he^ is so
malicious and so diligent, let ^ labor to resist him steadfastly and
constantly, Iam. 4, 7.
and then he will fly from ^ And thus much for his labor a^ diligence, he
walks through d^ places, seeking rest.

Come we now to the issue an^ event, he finds none. He walks through dry
places, seeking rest, and finds none. Hence then we may learn, That though
Satan seek the godlies Judah is stronger, and will rescue his servants, and
make him know, that his chosen are kept by the power of God 1 Pet. 1. 5.
through faith unto salvation. And though the godly be as sheep appointed to
destruction by the malice of Satan, yet they are not so in the purpose of God.
Though Satan stand like a bloody Midwife, ready to devo^^e the Child the woman
brings forth; Revel. 12. 4: yet the Lord prospered her in her travel, and when
earth could not secure the man-child she brought forth, God took up the Revel.
1^, 5.
child unto his throne. Though Satan labored by all means to overthrow Jobs
faith, yet the Lord stood by him and gave him deliverance. Though Herod that
crafty Fox pretended to adore Christ in his infancy, when he intended to
murder him, he may travel in his mischief, but he shall not effect it; for
the watchful eye of God, shall warn Joseph to fly for the Babes safety.
Though the Devil Act. 23, 31. (If they had kept their vow, they had fasted to
death. 1 King. 17, 5.
make the Jews to bind themselves with a curse, that they will not eat nor
drink till they have killed Paul, yet they were disappointed; the Lord
delivered him out of their hands* Though Iezabel vowed the death of the Prophet
Elijah, and send hue and cry after him; yet rather than she shall do his
Prophet any hurt; he will hide himself in a Cave at Hore^ the mount of God.
Though Hama^ plot the ruin of Gods people, and maliciously accuse them as
seditious and Traitors; yet he that never slumbers nor sleeps, will laugh him
to scorn, and hang him upon the Gallows, Ester 7, 10.
which he had prepared for Mordecai the kings friend. Though Saul persecute
David, and labor by subtlety to take away his life, because he thinks he
would be an hinderance to his sons preferment to the Crown; yet see how the
Lord disappoints him of his hope. Saul lays violent hands on himself, and so
prepares way for David to come to the Crown; And thus you have this truth
confirmed, that though Satan and his instruments do seek the godlies
overthrow, yet they shall be prevented: And reasons prove the same.

1. Because Gods care and providence 2 Cron. 16, 9,
in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him. And though the Lord
do not presently free them from the exercise of troubles, yet he leaves them
not till he has delivered them.

2. He that is with us is stronger than he that is against us. And for ^uk.
11, 22. ^ph^. 1, 19. ^ol. 1, 11,
this end the Son of God undertook our nature and temptations, Heb 2. 8. And
for this very end he sanctified himself, Ioh. 17. 19. therefore he has
provided an invincible armor for his children, and exhorts them to stand Ephe.
6, 10, 11.
fast. And therefore he says unto them, Fear not. Lam. 3. 57. for he is
with them, Esaias 43. 1. 2. For if one piece of this armor, namely faith, be
able to quench all his fiery darts, what will the whole do?

3. Gods promise is, yt he will not suffer his to be tempted above that they are
ble to bear, therefore at length he will deliver them, and make them see the
salvation of the Lord, and that because they are precious in his sight, and he
Za^h. 2, 8, Deuteronomy. 32, 10.
that touches them touches the apple of his eye. And therefore lest the
wicked should think that he is an idol, he shows himself strong in the
defense of his Children.

Again, he would have his Children know, that though Satan assaults them
furiously, by himself, and by his instruments; yet their power is limited:
there is an hour appointed for the power of darkness to work in; and till
that hour come, and no longer than it last, shall they molest and vex the
godly. God in his providence, has limited Satan and his instruments their
time sometime longer, as Israel in Egypt 400. years: sometime shorter, as in
the Babilonish Captivity 70. years, sometime shorter than so. Ye shall
suffer persecution 10. days; and then though heaviness may endure for a
night, yet joy shall come in the morning. Tyrants which are Satan's
Instruments, shall not live ever. Where is proud Pharaoh, railing Rabshekah?
Where is cruel Nero, bloody Bonner? Are they not gone, and their honor laid
in the dust? God has spoken to them in his wrath, and vexed them in his sore
^d. 2.
displeasure. And though the Churches enemies are malicious; yet God has a
hook in their nostrills, to pull them back, and will not suffer them to
execute their malice upon his Children. Though the King of Babylon cast the
three Children into the fiery Oven, yet he cannot command the abilon.
fire to burn them. And though he cast Daniel into the Lions den, yet he
cannot compel the hungry Lions to devour him. The worst that Tyrants can
do, is to send us to heaven in a Chariot of blood, they can do no more than
God pleases; he knows how to deliver his Israel out of all their troubles.

This doctrine is useful, and that Laban did Jacob; yet the Lord will step in,
and command him not to hurt them: though the godly live among wicked men, who
like ravenous Woolves thirst after their blood; yet the Lord will not give his
children as a prey to their teeth. Though every wicked man in whom Satan
rules, be like a Canaanite to the Israel of God, yet he will not let their
furious floods carry them away. Though the godly lie open to the snares of
Satan, and they like silly birds are ready to be carried away; yet for all
this, when Satan and his instruments, seem to have made most sure of them,
then his snares are suddenly broken and they escaped, by the providence of God.
When Herod had maliciously cast Act. 12, 3.
Peter into Prison, and that for no offense, but to please the Jews; while he
was sleeping between two Soldiers, bound in chains, the Lord delivers him
miraculously out of his hands. Seeing God is a present help in the time of
need, and able and ready to deliver his children from the malice of wicked
men. The consideration hereof, should make them go on cheerfully in the
works of their callings, and not to fear what man can do to them. Therefore
as they must look up to God for help and deliverance in the time of their
troubles; so also they must have an eye to Satan's malice to expect it, and to
be resolved not to shrink for all his temptations and cunning Stratagems.
Shall the Israelits return back to Egypt, because Pharaoh pursues them? No
no, but let them make the more haste to the land of Canaan; So let every one of
us resolve with our selves, not to give over any good action, because the world
hates us and reproaches us for it; No no, let us not neglect any good duty
which God and a good conscience requires at our hands, to please the world or
to stop the devils mouth. For if we study to please men rather than God,
then we cannot be the servants of God; Let us then courageously show our
selves on Christ's side by taking his part against the enemies of his truth,
because there is no peace to be expected with Satan or his instruments,
unless it be upon dishonorable conditions. Satan is like to Nahash the
Ammonite, that would not 1 Samuel 11,
make a league with the men of Iabesh Gilead unless he might put out their
eyes; so Satan will not admit of any conditions, unless he may cool our
zeal, and hinder us in the means of our Salvation, and therefore we had
need to stand upon our guard: for if he prevail, he will lead us captive
unto sin, and inthrall our bodies and souls to miserable bondage; and
therefore let us show our selves valiant, and encourage one another, as the
Philistines did, and quite our 1 Samuel 4,
selves like men and fight it out; away with base cowardice, we shall
prevail. Satan has no power but from God; nor is able to molest us without
his permission; to encourage us to fight, let us remember he is but a
vanquished slave. Christ our Captain has overcome him, Heb. 2. 14. with all
his ayds the world, Ioh. 16. 33. the flesh, Romans 8. 1. Again, he has promised
we shall prevail, and that if we resist the devil he shall fly from ^m. 4,
7.
us; and has promised to tread him under foot, Romans 16. 26. as he has been
by the godly before us, 1 Ioh. 2. 14. This is a point necessary to be
considered in our days, wherein Satan and his instruments so much prevail
over Gods people abroad: the consideration hereof makes many a poor soul
stagger, as if God had cast off the care of his people; and therefore they
discourage themselves with needelesse fears, and begin to fawn and curry
favor with Satan and his instruments, Papists, Atheists and the like; as if
God were like to have the worst, and his Children were like to go to the wall.
But let us renew the battle, for Christ seems to ^ll from heaven as Iehu
once, Who is ^n my side? Who? Let us then cry to ^od for help, and manfully
use those ^eapons he has sanctified for that ^urpose, the word which is
mighty ^rough God to the pulling down of ^rong houlds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. The
shield of ^aith whereby we shall be able to quench ^ll the fiery darts of the
wicked, Ephe. 6. ^6. And remember above all things, that it is not enough to
fight with Gods weapons, unless we borrow his Arm; and therefore when we
prevail, let him have the glory, Psalm. 50. 51.

2. This doctrine is useful for terror to all Satan's instruments that march
under his colors against Gods Children; they do but loose their labor, and
kick against the pricks; for God must prevail, and will disappoint all his
enemies of their hopes, and let the world see they do but loose their labor,
and pluck down vengeance upon their souls, for God will speak to them in
his wrath and vex them in his sore dispeasure. Psalm. 2, 5,


And thus much for Satan's departure and demeanor when he is gone, He walks
through dry places seeking rest, and finds none.

Then he says, I will return into my Verse. 44.
house from whence I came out, and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept
and garnished.

We are now come to the second general point propounded, wherein we are to
observe Satan's diligence to regaine his former possession, and to examine the
reasons that induce him thereunto.

Then he says, I will return to my house. The devil being ignorant of Gods
secrets, and so not knowing whose names are written in the Book of life, hopes
to gain the day upon the best of Gods Children; and if he cannot prevail, he
will not cease to be an enemy, but will come on with more and more malice; and
if he cannot prevail by policy, he will see what he can do by fury. Then he
says, I will return.

In the words observe these particulars.

1. Satan's undaunted resolution contained in these words, I will return.

2. The Terminus ad quem or place whither, To my house, which he exemplifies
by the affection he bears to it; My house whence I came out.

3. The reasons that induce him to make his re-entrie, and they are described
by 3. adjuncts.

1. The house is empty. Empty Per pigritiam et negligentiam.
2. It is swept. 3. It is garnished.
We will first endeavor to free the words from obscurity, and then according
to the method proposed, gather such instructions as naturally arise.

He finds it empty. Ob. What is meant by this? An. To be empty, is to be
void of faith, and he that has no faith, is also empty of good works. For
true faith is never alone, though in the work of justification, it justifies
alone without any dependencie of good works; yet in the declaration and
manifestation thereof, it is always joined with good works, Iam. 2.
which are inseparable companions of faith. But hypocrites are empty of faith,
the mistress, and good works the handmaide, and so being empty of both, they
are fit places for Satan to set up his rest.

2. He finds it swept. Ob. What Swept. Per consuetudinem peccati.
is meant hereby? An. Hypocrites content themselves, with a little counterfeit
repentance, and to make show of a little humiliation for the sins which the
world takes notice of. These are swept over slightly, and superficially, with
the besome of hypocrisy; but the sins of profit and pleasures, these are
baked on: but if we will be a swept house for God, then all our darling and
pleasing sins, must be scraped and pa^ed away, by greater labor than
^weeping. A stained and defiled cloth ^s not easily made clean, there must be
washing and cleansing and great pains. An old inveterate sore (says the wise
man) troubles the Physician. So old inveterate sins, which are baked and
caked to our nature, will not easily be sweeped away; it is a hard matter, to
bring men to repentance which are dyed in grain in sin, there must be much
scraping and digging, to cast out this filth; sweeping will not serve the
turn; for sin by long continuance have defiled these houses which are our
bodies. How will this appear, may some say? Do but consider how much rotten
and unsavorie communication proceeds out of our mouth; how much envy and
malice boiles in our hearts; does not this show, that there is much filthiness
within? and do we then think a little counterfeit repentance will serve the
turn? no, no, there must be powing, paring and scraping out of the
uncleanness of our nature, much purging out of the dross out of our souls;
else we are but swept houses of Satan. It is garnished. Ob. What is that? An.
The hypocrites heart is Garnished, Per hypocrysim.
garnished with hypocrisy and counterfeit holiness, his heart is empty of
faith and good works, swept and slighted over with counterfeit repentance, to
bleare the eyes of the world, and garnished with counterfeit holiness; so that
Satan shall have room enough, it is empty. He shall have it pleasing and
delightful, it is swept and garnished, it has all manner of furniture fit to
receive him. And thus you have the sense and meaning of the words. Then he
says, I will return to my house.

Here we may see the carriage and boldness of Satan, though he be expelled
and have received the foil, ^et he will return. He is audacious and will
ask no leave; though he ^e chained by his maker, yet he will ^oe as far as
he can, he will fear ^o colors. Would you know the rea^ons why he is so
bold and audaci^us. The reasons are these two.

1. He relies upon his own strength. 2. He takes advantage of man's
weakness.
1. He is able to do much by his own strength, therefore he is called the
God of this world and the Prince that rules in the air, and has all wicked
men at his beck and command, which daily he musters up to take part against
God and his children; he is the head of all Tyrants and wicked men, and makes
them do as Athaliah did, kill and persecute the godly that he may rule
himself: therefore this powerful enemy knowing his own strength, and his
Soldiers courage and fidelity, is so confident, that by one means or other
he shall prevail; and so desperate and venturous, that he will return to his
house again, nothing shall cross and hinder him. Good Lord, what will not
Satan do? If thou O tryumphant Lion of the Tribe of Judah do not hinder him,
his malice is against thee and thy glory, and cannot abide that thou should
be glorified by thy people; he hates thy worship, and therefore labors to
defile it: therefore show thy self strong to perserve thy children, and to
save them from his malice, and to keep them always in thy fear. Seeing then
Satan is so watchful and diligent to do mischief; this must teach us to be
watchful and always to stand upon our guard and be prepared to resist his
temptations: for as soon as one is gone he will come with another; he will
return to his house one way or other; and what he cannot effect by force, he
will perform by flattery. Thus many times under the name of friend, he allures
us to some one sin or other; thus he stirred up Peter to move his master to
pity himself, and not to die when he might live. So he persuades many
Ministers of the word, to pity themselves, and not to wear out themselves in
Preaching and studying, as many do; telling them that many good Ministers take
their pleasure, and yet discharge their duty well enough. But in this case, we
must say to him as our Master once: Get thee behind me Satan, for thou Matthew.
16.
art an adversary and enemy to Gods glory, and his peoples salvation. And if
he cannot prevail with friendly terms, then he persuades them, they take too
much upon them, the Lords people are holy enough, and that there needs not so
much ado. If he cannot prevail this way, then he will see if he can make
them proud of their gifts; so to make them rob God of his glory. He spends all
his time in open rebellion against God, and persecuting his children. He
works wonderfully in the Children of disobedience. Ephe. 2, 2.
Thus he wrought upon the profane heart of Esau to sell his birthright for a
mess of pottage; upon the covetous heart of Judas to betray his master. As he
is cunning in his secret temptations, so he is very crafty to delude the
senses by outward objects. Thus he deceived Saul in Samuels mantle; so in the
time of ignorance he deceived many, by entering into the corpse of some dead
body, making them speak what he pleased. Thus we have seen the malice of
our enemy, and how he is imbouldned by his own strength.

In the second place we are to see how our weakness gives him advantage: he
observes our negligence and sinful backesliding, therefore like a cunning
thief, he often comes to view the house, and to spy out the weak places
before he make any entry; he looks whether we be fallen into those sins
which before we made a show of repentance, and when he finds a man fallen
into his old sins again, then behold a swept house for Satan. He knows our
nature, what we love, delight, and hate, and so fits his temptation
accordingly. Thus he can make the covetous man dig to Hell for riches: The
ambitious man to use many indirect courses to climb to honor and preferment:
The wanton to commit fornication and adultery. With these sugared baits he has
not only deceived the wicked, as Achan, Gehazie, Saul, Annanias, but even Gods
dear children, as Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and many in our days. Thus by
knowing our nature he provokes us ^o sin, he stirrs up the choleric man
to anger and revenge; the melancholy man to despair, and distrust, and to take
things in the worst sense. So he persuades all mankind to sinful security,
and that they have time enough to repent and amend their lives; and so wraps
them under the curse of God, before they are aware.

I will return.

Satan he thinks there is none so holy, but that he may pervert; he knows
the just falls seven times a day, and therefore may take them tripping at one
time or other; and make them abuse the mercy of the Lord. Again he knows
that there is none so sinful, but that he may be converted, and therefore he
tempts all good and bad; and rather than he will fail of his temptations, he
will raise up a tempest from all the four corners of the world, as he did when
he blew down Iobes house and killed his children. If the East wind of
prosperity cannot puff up Gods children, he will see what he can do by the
west wind of adversity; he labors always and by all means to dishonor God,
and to bring mankind to ruin: and had not we need to stand upon our watch,
and to take heed of security, least he deal with us as Iael did with Sisera,
nail us to the posts of Hell before we are aware? He always stands armed, so
let us; let us not then let our armor lie rustie, but by prayer buckle it on;
let us always keep in our calling, and then we are under Gods protection, and
then we may bouldly crave his assistance. Let us remember we have a crafty
devil to deal withal, that will watch us at all turns and times; he has
his terms and vacations, his goings and commings, though sometime by Gods
restrayning power he may stay away a long time, yet he will return; therefore
be not secure, but prepare for his coming, he has not done with us, he will
by one means or other labor to get possession, and therefore we had need to
have a vigilant eye over all the parts and faculties of our souls and bodies,
least they become windows to let in Satan to take possession.

And thus much for his courage and resolution, contained in these words, I will
return.

Come we now to the Terminus ad quem, or whither he will return. I will
return to my house. Satan calls the hypocrites heart his house, and so it is
indeed, but not by creation. So every man is Gods house, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and cap.
6. 19. but by the wilful refusal of Gods mercies, they then become denns for
Satan to lodge in. Thus the proud man's heart is a house for Lucifer to lodge
in. The Adulterers heart, an Inn for Asmodius to roost in. The envious man's
heart a Cage for Beelzebub to lurk in. The revengefull man's heart is a palace
for Baalberith to domineere in. The drun^ards heart a stie for Beelphegor to
reside in. The idle man's heart is a Turret for Ashtaroth to keep Rande vows
in. Though men may flatter themselves, and think they are in good case, yet
while they live and remain in their sins, they are in Gods account no better
than unclean houses for Satan to roost in; though they fare daintily and have
sumptuous houses, yet all this while, they are but filthy Parlours for Satan.

Here we may take up a bitter lamentation, Heu dom^s antiqua, etc.
and with Jeremy weep day and night for the miseries which are befallen the
sons of men. Man was created holy and for Gods service; but now these
glorious houses are become denns for Satan to dwell in. Where pride and malice
domineers and carnal security bears sway, vice and all manner of wickedness
let in, and piety and the fear of the Lord shut out: Pride and carnal
security has barred the door against the Lord the holy one of Israel; he
stands knocking, but we will not let him in. If pride, malice and revenge
knock, we are ready to open, and willingly embrace them; but the motions of
Gods Spirit we chocke and grieve, and will not entertain them; The Lord lay
not our sins to our charge.

The Lord has wooed us by his Ministers, invited us by his mercies, and drawn
us by the bands of love, and would have married us to himself; ose. 2, 20.
but we like desperate wretches and despightfull creatures, will marry our
selves to our pleasures, to our delights, to our sins, nay to Satan
himself. O! consider this all ye that forget God, and so prefer hell before
Heaven. The Gaderens were branded for infamous wretches, for preferring their
swine before Christ the Savior of the world: And the Jews accursed for
choosing Barrabas a filthy murderer, before Jesus a meek Savior. But O alas!
how shall we be registered for infamous wretches, if we neglect so great
salvation? Let the consideration hereof move every one of us, to consider of
these things which belong to our peace, and now to make up an agreement with
our adversary; while we are in the way with him.

It follows,

I will return to my house.

See here what love Satan bears to his former house, and his wisdom and
policy to provide him a resting place; if he may not be where he would, yet
he will be where he may. If he cannot be a king in heaven, he will reign as a
god in earth; and if he cannot rest in the hearts of Gods Children, then he
will dominere in the children of disobedience; He had rather be in any place,
than in hell; therefore he will consider his future place, before he will
leave his former habitation; he would not go Math. 8, 31.
out of the man he possessed, before he had liberty to go into the swine. He
had rather be in the hogs, than no where. While he is in earth, he torments
others, but while he is in hell he is tormented himself. And therefore like
an envious wretch, he thinks he finds rest if he can revenge himself upon
mankind, or any thing that belongs to man. He can find no rest in a Papist
or Atheist, for he knows that their worme-eaten consciences lackes nothing
but searing with the hot Iron of Gods wrath; he is sure enough of them, because
they are hardened in their profaneness, and so the custom of sin has taken
away the sense of sin; yet for all this, if he cannot prevail against Gods
Children, he will to his old house again, there he is like to have good
entertainment, which is better to him, than to walk in dry places, where he
finds so much resistance.

Come we now to see what entertainment he finds; the house is empty, that
is, void of the graces of Gods Spirit; he finds the hypocrite after he is
enlightened, fitter to receive him than he was before, he finds the house
empty. The Devil shall never want room wheresoever he comes; he shall not be
troubled with inmates, nor with any thing which shall offend him. There are
many professors now adays, will cast off good motions and the performance of
many good duties, to please Satan and his Instruments, rather than they would
be termed Puritans and Precisians. Lord lay not this sin to their charge.

He finds it empty both of faith and good works. Now this emptiness
proceeds from idleness, which is the mother of all mischief. An empty house
is a cage for all uncleanness; So an idle man is a fit subject for Satan to
work upon; he knows God cannot endure idleness, but punished it in the men
of Sodom, Genesis Ezekiel. 16. 49.
19. 24. and the men of Laish, Judge. 18. 27.

And wise men in all ages have condemned it. Cato by natures light tells
Iomines ^ihil again ^o, discunt ^alo agere.
us that men by doing nothing learn to do evil: and Themistocles termed
idleness, the Toombe or grave of such as are alive; and said, that there was
little difference between an idle man and one that is dead, for none of them
do any good. Therefore the ancient Romans would not suffer men to walk in the
Streets, unless they carried their manual instruments with them; all which
shows how they hated idleness. When men are idle, then Satan has most
advantage against them. When David was walking 2 Samuel* 11.
upon the roof of his house, then Satan stirred up lust in his heart, and
made him go to his neighbors bed, and so caused the name of God to be
blasphemed: so that hence we may conclude, that the end of laziness, is the
beginning of lewdness* When Satan finds his house empty, tennantlesle; no
marvel if he make it a cage for all filthiness. Satan cannot find this
emptiness in the children of God, for their hearts are filled with the grace
of Gods Spirit; faith stands as a Porter armed with the sword of the Spirit,
which drives back all the temptations of the Devil.

The next thing that moved Satan to make his reentry is, he finds the house
swept; what a swept house is you have partly heard, how that a little
counterfeit repentance will not serve the turn to get out the dirt and filth
which is baked and seated in nature. A house that is made foul and filthy, by
much resort of people, will not be made clean by a little sweeping; there
must be paring and scraping with a paring Iron, else the filth will hang on and
will not be remooved: Even so these temples of our bodies, these earthly
houses, will not be cleansed and purged from the corruption of sin, with the
beasome of counterfeit repentance; but the sharp knife of the law must be set
on work, there must be a searching of the heart, a plowing up of the fallow
ground, there must be a mortifying of the fruits of the flesh, there must be a
de(...) of our selves in our profits, plea(...)s and delights; a little crying
of God mercy will not serve the turn, (...) there must be an aggravation of
(...)e by circumstances, sin must be ^m^lified in regard of the means that
we had to resist it, if we had had grace to use them aright; therefore when we
have failed in using our spiritual weapons, then we must condemn our selves,
and take a holy revenge upon our nature, which did in^ice us to such and such
sins. We Luk* 1^.
must do as Mary Magdalen did, she had abused her eyes to wantonness, and
her hair to pride; therefore upon her repentance she took revenge of her
self; she made her eyes, a fountain of tears to wash her Saviors feet, and
her hair a towell to wipe them; so must we, if we have offended by gluttony,
or drunkenness, we must bring under our bodies, by fasting and humiliation.
Thus did David when he had sinned against his neighbor in giving way to
sinful lusts and uncleanness: so when he had desired to drink of the waters
of Bethleem, 1 Chro. 11, 18.
and after he did see it was brought with the jeopardie of the lives of his
three Worthies, then he took a holy revenge of himself; he would not drink
of it, but powered it out as a sacrifice before the Lord. Thus the cunning men
being converted by the preaching of the word and brought to repentance, burned
their Books, Act. 19, 19,
that were dear unto them, for a revenge upon themselves for their sin; by
which they showed, both an indignation in their affections, and a just revenge
in their actions: thus if men would judge themselves, they should 1 Cor. 11, 37.
not be judged of the Lord. Man is made miserable quickly, but he is not so
soon made happy again. Esau suddenly lost his birthright, but he could not
gain the blessing with many tears. A swept house will not serve the turn, it
must be a sorrowful and contrite heart that God delights to dwell in. Let us
then set upon our sins, and up with them by the roots; down with pride,
covetousness, and all manner of sin that offends God and grieves our
neighbor; else we are but deceiptfull hypocrites, and garnished and swept
houses for Satan.

If swept houses will not serve the ways defiled our selves with vain and
unsanctified thoughts, many foul and unsavory words have proceeded out of our
mouths; and does not this show that we have filthy souls? Again, how many
lewd and sinful acts have we committed and do commit from time to time? and
will a small repentance make amends for all these transgressions? No, no, there
must be striving and preassing to enter in at the straight gate. The Luke 13,
24.
kingdom of heaven suffers violence and the violent take in by force. But
alas! how many of us sit still, sporting our selves in our pleasures and
delights? If eating and drinking, swearing and swilling, would send us to
heaven, there are a great many would come thither. There are many also to be
found, that when they are rebuked for their sins, and persuaded to amend
their lives, they will give good words, and wish that they could do as they
should, but how few of many are willing to pluck up their sins by the
roots? Many will use the broom of repentance in sweeping the house of their
soul lightly and superficially; but they will leave still behind their evil
customs and wicked habit of sin which cleaves fast to them, and is as dear
as their right eye. We see by experience, that many griping Usurers will hate
adultery, make conscience of swearing and forswearing, etc. these cobwebbes
they will sweep away; but for the filthy habit, and wicked trade of Usury,
because it is a gainefull sin, and brings them an easy life, the broom
shall not come so far. So again, many Adulterers (though well monied) hate
Usury, because it is unlawful and condemned by God, Psalm. 15. Ezekiel. 18: but
for adultery their beloved sin, this dirte, this filth must remain unswept.
The like may be said of all other sins. Thus hypocrites will indent with God
as if he kept a court of Faculties, to dispense with their darling, their
beloved sins, which they are loath to forgo. But brethren mark (I pray you)
the policy of Satan: If he can keep but one corner in this spiritual temple,
it shall suffice him, he knows how to keep possession well enough; but
brethren deceive not your selves, if the devil have any part in your heart,
God will have none, he will not admit of a Corrivall; he will be, aut Caesar
aut nihil, he will have the whole, or else let the devil take all; therefore
learn we to use violence against our beloved sins, and let the devil have
no crevisses to look into our hearts, lest he circumvent and surprise us
before we are aware, as he has and does many, deceiving them daily with
outward shows and the leaves of religion, without substance and
through-reformation of the heart; but if we will be a swept house for the Lord,
we must cast away all our sins; outward shows will not delight him, he
cannot endure a devil in Samuels Mantle.

It is garnished.

The house swept and garnished, is a similitude borrowed from the use and
custom of men, who delight to have all things handsome, clean and comely,
when they are to entertain their friends. But the devil he delights in no
such matter, this unclean spirit he delights in all manner of filthiness,
and all manner of ungodliness, nothing pleases him better.

The beastly drunkard, the abominable swearer, the lustful talker, the filthy
liver; these men are garnished houses for him; These men are as a princely
palace for him to domineere in. When men have bidden farewell to God and all
godliness, then they are fit houses for him, when the fear of God is choked
in men's hearts, and the remembrance of Gods judgments is not before their
eyes. When the house is swept from all godinesse and virtue, and garnished with
the damnable sins of swearing, lying, and all manner of wickedness then behold
these are trimmed houses for Satan to roost in.

Satan delights to have his house garnished, that thereby he might seem Gods
Ape; for God will have his house garnished, says the Apostle: For this is the
will of God, even our 1 Thessalonians. 4,
sanctification, that every one should know how to possess his vessel in
holiness and honor. God will have the beams of his house Cedar, and the
Galleries fur; he will have sanctification for the groundworke, and
holiness of life for the ornament; So the devil, he will have his house
garnished also, but the beams of his house, are the ougly works of
darkness, and the galleries sin and all manner of profaneness. Now if he
can get this house whited over with a counterfeit it show of Religion, then
this is a house well trimmed and garnished for him to dwell in.

Satan will allow his servants sometime to make show of sanctity, that thereby
they may do the more mischief; and to pretend Religion in show, that they may
act wickedness in substance. He is loath to discourage his servants, therefore
he will gratify them a little, and sometime give them the bridle in their
hands. Thus he was contented Abimelech should entertain Abraham in the best
of his land, and that Judas should be Christ's disciple; he cared not, seeing he
could allure the one to Adultery, and persuade the other to betray his Master.
If he can allu^^ any to the love of any one sin ^en he is well enough. Satan
de^^es with sinful men as Pharaoh did with the Israelits, when he was
compelled by the judgment of God to let them go; then he would have some
pawn to remain in his hand: go, says he, and sacrifice to the Lord your
God, but leave your sheep and your cattle behind you. What, had Pharaoh any
need of their goods? No no, it was not their goods that he aimed at, he had
a further reach. He knew that the Jews were covetous and worldly minded, and
therefore if they should be punished with want in the Wilderness; he knew
they would remember their cattle in Egypt, and quickly come back again for
them. So Satan deals with those he has a long time kept in bondage, if at
any time he be commanded by Moses and Aaron, that is, by the powerful
preaching of Gods word, to let the Lords people go, and come out of the Egypt
of their sins, and to travel in the desert of repentance; then how many
blocks and hindrances does he cast, how many storms does he raise to
discourage them, and to hinder them in their journey to the Caelestiall Canaan?
And if he cannot hinder us, then he labors to make our minds wander after
our profits and pleasures: but as Moses and Aaron were resolute, that they
would not leave any of their goods behind them to please the King, but were
resolved to obey the Lords command: so must we when God calls unto us to come
out of sin, we must not retain any of them to please Satan, but must keep
the temples of our bodies pure, that they may be a garnished house for the Lord
to dwell, by his Spirit.

He finds it garnished.

We have heard how a garnished house pleases Satan, and how an hypocrite may
be said to be a garnished house: we will (notwithstanding all that has been
said) spend a little more time in examining what is meant by the word (
Garnished:) by the garnished house, we may not unfitly understand also the
occasions of sin, for the occasions of sin are Satan's ^aites, whereby he is
invited to make re-entry: therefore the Apostle would ^ave us not only abstain
from sin, but also from the appearance of evil. 1 These. 5, 22.
If we cast out sin, and do not cast but the occasions of sin, we leave a
Pignus a^ud damonem relinquimus.
pledge in the devils hands, which he knows we will at one time or other
return back to fetch again, and then he will surely hold us captived. Take
heed then of the occasions of sin, for ^t is the occasion that makes the
thief. Occasio faecit furem.
If by the mercy of God, thou have repented thee of thy sins, take heed of
the occasions of sin. Have thou been a whoremaster? Now take heed of wanton
company, alluring harlots, ^ascivious talking, amorous songs, wanton pictures,
idleness and the ^ike, which are occasions of sin. If ^hou have forsaken the
damnable custom of swearing, and by the mercy of God, have bound thy tongue to
the good behavior, shun also the company of profane swearers.

If thou have forsaken the beastly sin of drunkenness, abandon also thy
boon companions, for the occasions of sin are the devils baits, which he
lays to ensnare silly souls. Iron is hard, yet at last fire will dissolve it;
so a holy man by familiarity with sinners, will quickly be brought to sin. It
fares with our corrupt nature as it does with a little fire, which though it be
almost out, yet a little Gunpowder or Brimstone will revive it and make it
flash out again; so every little occasion will make a godly man break out
into sin. Familiarity with sinners gives occasion to sin. See this in
Joseph a holy and Familiaritas saepe occasionem dedit.
godly man, his mistress could not allure him to folly; but yet the profane
Courtiers of Pharaoh quickly taught him to lie and dissemble, and to swear by
the life of Pharaoh. How Genesis 44.
quickly did the daughters of Moab entice the Children of Israel to sin, for
which the judgment of God brake out upon many thousands of ^em. Our nature is
like unto dry Number* 25. 1.
^ood, which is apt to kindle as soon ^s fire is put to it. Occasion is the
way Occasio^nim iter est quod ducit ad peccatum.
that leads unto sin. There needs ^o devil to tempt us, for if any occa^on
be offered, we are ready to tempt ^ur selves. Thus Moses knew well Nem^ l^ditur
nisi ase.
enough, therefore when the people ^ad committed Idolatry with the golden calfe
which Aaron had made, Eoxd. 32.
^e burnt it in the fire, and ground it ^o powder, and strewed the ashes upon
the water, and then made the people drink it. He would not have any
remembrance left which might put them in mind of their former Idolatry.

When godly Hezekiah saw that the people burnt incense to the brazen 2 King.
18, 4.
serpent (though it were made by Gods appointment) yet when it was abused by
Idolatry he brake it in pieces and called it Nehushtan, a piece of Brass. Our
Savious Christ teaches us, that if our right eye offend us, we must Matthew. 18,
19.
pluck it out. In many places of Scripture we find, how careful the Saints
have been, to shun the occasions of sin.

Job to prevent Adultery, made Job 31, 1.
a covenant with his eyes, that he would not look upon a maid. Happy had it
been for David if he had done the like. Solomon to prevent drunkenness, would
not have men look upon Pro, 23,
the wine in the Cup when it is red: and to prevent gluttony, would have men
offer a knife to their throat. Paul when he had received a commission from the
high priests to persecute all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus, and to
bring them bound back to Jerusalem. But being converted Act. 9, 19,
from heaven and made a chosen vessel to carry the Lords name before the
gentiles; see how careful he was to shun the occasions which might cool his
zeal, and hinder him in his holy intendments; he did not go back to the
High priests which had set him a work, for they would have befooled him, as
they did the soldiers which they sent to apprehend Christ, What, will you be
one of his disciples? which he knew well enough; therefore he joins himself
to the Disciples, that he might be the more strengthened in the knowledge of
God.

So Abraham the Father of the faithful, having received Gods commandment, to
offer in sacrifice his Son, his only Son, the Son of the promise; he
did not consult with flesh and blood, Genesis 22, 2.
nor with his wife Sarah, but early in the morning to prevent any occasion that
might hinder him, he makes himself ready to obey Gods Commandment. When
Peter, Matthew. 27. that godly man, had denied his Master in the High priests
Hall amongst those wicked servants, when he came to the sight of his sin, he
fled away out of their company, as if it had been for his life. So when Joseph
was tempted to Adultery by his unclean Mistress, he shunnes the occasion by
rushing out of her presence; whose practice and example teaches Mora dat vires.
the godly to take heed of the occasion of sin, and to stop the course
thereof in the beginning, least by entertayning them, they are plunged over
head and ears in sin before they are aware. One sin draws Non Solum
gravia sed et lev^a peccata sunt cavenda, Multa enim levia vnum grande
efficient Bernard.
on another, and great sins spring out of small occasions; be careful then
to avoid the least occasion of sin, least it usher on a greater: and the
occasions of sin, also the garnishing of the house for this unclean spirit
to roost in.

Then how may we lament the carelessness of many in our age, that are so far
from shunning the occasions of sin, as that they lay themselves open to all
manner of temptations, and so become dangerous instruments for Satan to tempt
others to sin; like Thamar that sat in the highway Genesis 38,
to tempt Judah her father in law to whoredom; and like the whoorish woman
which saluted the young man Pro. 7, 13,
in a bold and wanton manner, and to entice him to take his fill of love with
her. But let us learn to stop the course of sin in the beginning, and to
crucify the flesh, with the lusts thereof, and to say with the spouse in the
Canticles, I have put off my coat, Cant. 5, 3.
how shall I put it on again? I have washed Qui minima asperni^cadit in
maiora. Peccatum nullu^ adeo par^um est quod non cres^at neglectum. August. de
vera and falsa penitentia cap. 8. Flumina magna vi^es parvi^ de fontibu^ orta.
Ovid.
my feet, how should I defile them again? If God have washed thee by his
Spirit, and pulled from thee the filthy rags of sin, take heed of alluring
objects. For he that despises small sins, does easily fall into greater.
For there is no sin so little, but if it be neglected it will increase.

The drops of rain are but little in quantity, yet they cause great floods
which bears all before them.

We see by experience that little Parva scintell^ c^ntempta, magnum excitavit
incendium. Qu^t, Curt. Ephe. 4, 19,
sparks of fire neglected, cause great burning. Therefore if we would not
commit sin with greediness, let us learn to take heed of the beginnings of
sin. If there be nothing but a a little dust in our Chamber, a broom will
sweep it away: but if the dirt and filth be hard and baked on, there must be
a spade to dig it out: so if sin be resisted at the first, it will not easily
grow and increase. We must not give sin entertainment, least it prove our
ruin. As men are careful to kill Serpents in the shell, Ravens in the nest,
so must we do with our sins: we must strangle them in the birth, and not
suffer them to grow to perfection; else if we do not, we shall remain a
garnished house for Satan.

Motives to induce us to shun the occasions of sin.

Nature has made the creatures careful to prevent bodily danger. The horse
that has been plunged in a Quagmire, will not easily come into it again, but
will shun it with all his might. The fish which has been Ictus Pisci^ fugit
hamum.
wounded with the hook, will warily shun the bait. Then if the creatures by
natures light shun the occasions of danger, what a shame is it for man which
has not only natures light, but also is endued with reason, and has the
light of Gods word to be a Lantern to his feet and a light to his steps, if
he do not shun the occasions of sin?

And thus much for Satan's entertainment; he finds his house empty, swept,
and garnished.

Then goes he and takes with himself Verse. 45.
seven other spirits, more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell
there. And the last state of that man is worse than the first.

In these words we may observe Satan's policy, to fortify himself, he
increases his strength; his confederates are here described:

1. By their essence, they are spirits. 2. By their number, they are seven. 3.
By their malice, they are more wicked. 4. By their victory, they prevail; they
enter in and take possession. 5. The issue and event, the lamentable estate of
that man is not only miserable, but it is worse than the first.
The enemies that strive for possession are spirits, and so unresistable; they
come in the suggestion of unrighteousness, and if we consent unto them, then
we entertain them. When Ananias and Judas consented to the wicked motions
that the devil inspired into them, the devil is said to fill the hearts of
the one, Act. 3. and to enter into the other, Luke 22. 3. So all those that
walk in evil, evil has possession of them.

But it may be replied and said; so give place to the devil?

1. Ioh. 1, 8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us. Yet the devil dwells not alike in all; for those which with consent of
heart entertain his suggestions, he has full hold of them; but the godly,
when they give place to him through infirmity, they let him come into the
Suburbs and out places; but Christ by his Spirit dwells in their hearts by
faith, from which he forces him to retire. As for the wicked, if Satan get
advantage, as he will be restless in his temptations, as you have heard; so
he will be in his torments; he will spare none, old nor young; as you may
see, Luke 9. 39. 42. and if he be so cruel to children, which for want of
knowledge have done him no hurt, how cruel will he be to those which have set
themselves against him?

He takes with him seven other spirits more wicked.

The spirits are described by their number, they are seven; which is a
certain number put for an uncertain, by which is meant a number of capital
sins. These Devils are lestlesse; when Satan entered into Judas, he gave him
no rest, till he had betrayed his Master; he called and allured him by
covetousness, to get the money, and when he had it, he stirred up such
storms in his conscience that he could not be at rest, till he had hanged
himself.

These spirits are more wicked than the former, because they make those whom
they possess more wicked: and sin may be increased and made more wicked and
that in diverse respects, and that,

1. In the greatness of the mercy offered; thus Judas his sin in betraying
his Master, was worse than the Jews in conspiring his death. Judas had many
watchwords to take heed of the treason, and yet for all this, he would not
rest till he had brought the blood of his Savior upon his own soul. Sin
is increased in regard of the mercy offered, How shall we escape if we neglect
so great Heb. 2, 3* 1 Samuel 2* 17.
salvation? Thus the sins of Elies sons was greater than the peoples,
because they should have exceeded them in holiness.

2. Sin is aggravated in regard of the tenderness of Gods love, without any
difference of respect or desert. God invites all weary and Math. 11* 28. Esa,
55, ^
heavy laden souls To come unto him; again, Every one that thirsts; and
has made a firm promise that they shall not come in vain: I will ease you,
Math. 11* 29.
and you shall find rest to your souls; and therefore has sent his servants
to 2 Cor. 5* 29. 2 Cor. 6*
entreat men to be reconciled unto God. And not to receive The grace of God in
vain. And therefore he laments the folly of men, that they will neglect grace
when it is offered. O that they were wise, that they understood ^ut, 32,
this, that they would consider ^l, 8, 13,
their latter end! Now when the patience ^, 48, 18,
and mercy of God is thus neglected and abused, sin is augmented, and this
sottish negligence is inexcusable, because they do reject such gracious favor
when it is offered.

3. Sin is made worse in respect of the time: Thus to sport and play, and
follow our worldly business upon the Lords day, is a great sin, because the
time is holy, and ought to be employed in his service; which must be an item to
victualers and Inhoulders, that they do not set open their doors, to receive
idle companions to drink and tipple in their houses, when Gods house stands
open to receive his servants to hear his word; Else if they do, they open
their doors to the contempt of Gods ordinance.

4. Sin is made worse in regard of the place: for swearing and fighting in a
Church or Churchyard, is worse than in a Tavern or other place; for God will
have even the skirt of his Sanctuary kept holy. Levit. 19* 30,
Then out of the premises we may conclude, that if sin may be augmented in
regard of circumstances, then by the same reason seven new spirits may make a
sinner more wicked than he was when the first left him. The more means any one
has to escape the snares of the devil, the greater shall be their punishments,
if they neglect the means to escape them.

Then he takes to him seven spirits worse than the former.

Hence then we may learn, that there is a difference of sins, sinners, and
consequently of punishments.

The first was said to be an unclean spirit; yet the latter are seven worse.
Sin is very fruitful, how many Quot cri^ mina tot demon^^.
evils therebe so many devils.

There is always a fruitful croppe ^ccati fru^fera seget. ^^. de mor^l.
of sin; If covetousness be rooted up, lust springs up; if lust be
vanquished, ambition succeeds, and so one sin follows another, hand in
hand, according to the Proverb, An evil weed grows apace. Now these sins
increase from one degree of comparison unto another, and creeps like a Canker
which comes to maturity by degrees. Sin gets strength by committing as
figures in Arithmeticke by numbering. The first figure stands but for one, the
second for ten, the third for one hundred, and so increasing their value
according to their places; so it is in sin. ^atth. 5,
Anger without cause is liable to judgment: Exasperating gestures, to the
punishment of a Counsel; but railing speeches are worthy of hell fire. Judas
was first a cunning dissembler. Secondly, a close fisted thief. Thirdly, a
bloody traitor. And lastly, which is worst of all, a desperate reprobate. But
I would not so be understood, as if I did lessen and extenuate sin, for The
wages of sin is Romans 6, 23.
death; yet some sins shall feel the ^orments of death more than other.
Ba^abas murder was great, but Judas vil^any in betraying his Master was
grea^er; in so much, that it had bin good ^or him, if he had never been borne.

If sin be so fruitful, and be increased In rebus sacris nulla sit
deliberatio. Cyp.
delay be absent. Secondly, seeing sin proceeds from footing to roo^ing,
and from rooting unto shooting forth to increase; let us weaken the ^bility of
sin, by taking away the ^rops and sustainements of sin. If ^he currents and
passages be stopped, that leads to a Lake, it will at ^ast be dried up; take
away the props and foundation of a house, and it will at last fall of it self.
So sin if it be not cherished, will quickly be extinguished. But if men will
not make use of the means and mercies God has given them to withstand sin*
but will give the reins unto their affections, to wallow in sin, with
greediness, not resting till they have gone through Genera singulorum the kinds
of all sins, and Singula generum the particulars of all those kinds; leaving
if it were possible no sin for others to commit, retayning still Voluntatem
peccandi a will of sinning, though for age or sickness they have not
facultatem peccare, ability to sin; yet for all this, they are willing to
engrosse it into their own hands: such men deserve to be given up to a
reprobate sense, and to be pestred with seven spirits more wicked than the
former. God will severely revenge himself upon unthankefull persons that abuse
his grace and mercy, and squares out his judgments according to the pro^ortion
of the blessing conferred and ^bused.

As the seven spirits are the re^ard of him that makes much of one ^ad and
unclean one; so are seven ^ood spirits bestowed on him that ^seth one good
spirit well. God ^ownes his own graces in his chil^en, and when he finds
thankeful^esse for his mercies, he opens his ^and wider: he is delighted to
see ^is graces flourish and increase in his ^hildren, therefore he that is
righte^us, let him be righteous still, and Revel, 2, 11,
^ee that is holy, let him be holy still. God delights to have his graces
en^reased; Then if we stand still or ^oe backward in the practice of piety, ^e
may fear the doom of the un^rofitable servant that hid his talent ^n a
napkin, whose sentence was to ^e bound hand and foot, and to be ^ast into
utter darkness. God cannot endure drones in his service, but will have his
grow more and more therefore those which are dull scholars in his school,
may justly fear^ that they are in the number of thos^ whom he has rejected;
for if he ha^ had a love to them, he would have increased his graces in them.
The Apostle exhorted godly Timothy, t^ stir up the gifts of God that were in
him, 2 Timothy 1. 6. intimating unto us* that the graces of Gods spirit, are lik^
unto fire, and fire will quickly be extinguished, unless it be cherished and
blown up. Satan labors by all means to blow out the fire of our zeal, and
therefore we must use al^ means to keep it burning; else the more
inexcusable we are, if we have experience of his policy, and have no grace to
resist it.

And they enter in, and dwell there, Verse. 45.
and the last state of that man is worse than the first.

Here we may see the miserable estate of a careless and secure sinner: for
want of watchfulness Satan en^ers in, and gains possession without any
resistance. God has provided ^ complete armor for to defend his ^hildren, as
you may see described, Ephe. 6. 14. 15. 16. Stand therefore, ha^aving your
loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of righte^usnesse:
And your feet shod with the ^reparation of the Gospel of peace. Above ^ll,
take the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench all the fiery
darts ^f the wicked. This armor is firm, ^and able to secure those that
buckle it ^on, from all dangers, if they will play the men and quit themselves
valiantly; but this backslider has not a piece of it to ward off the least
blow. Satan is a cunning fencer, which knows how to handle his weapons, but
this silly wretch has never a weapon to defend himself, and offend his
enemy; but is like an unwalled City, exposed to the malice of his enemy. No
marvel then if these foul spirits enter in and take possession, seeing there
is no opposition made to resist them, nor desire to repel them.

His misery now follows:

They enter in and dwell there.

They that are fallen from common graces and illumination, are twice more
subject to Satan than they were before. He dwells in them Non tanquam
corpus locatum in loco, as the Philosophers say, as a body seated in a place;
for the Devils are spirits, and not contained in any place. Nor yet Tanquam
forma in materia, as the soul does dwell in the body; but the devils dwelling
is by his power and operation. He dwells in them by working in them. Would
you know what he works? The Philosopher says, Omne agens sibi simile agit.
Every Agent works like himself, that is, he makes them as proud, cruel,
envious, and unclean as himself. Would you know how he works in them? Satan
cannot compel or enforce any man to wickedness; yet he is able to work upon
the affections, and by a spiritual power to dar^en the minds of the ungodly,
That ^he light of the Gospel of Christ should not 2 Cor, 4, 4,
^hine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Hardening their hearts, that being past feeling,
they ^ight give themselves over unto lasci^iousnesse Ephe, 4, 19,
to work all uncleanness with greediness. Hardening their hearts from ^he
fear of Gods judgments, and so trea^ure Rom, 2, 5,
up wrath against the day of wrath. Satan sets an edge upon the affecti^ns,
and stirrs them up to desire and ^oe evil. Thus he makes the wedge ^f gold
glister in the covetous man's ^ght, the red wine in the glass plea^ant to the
drunkards sight: As he ^ets a false varnish upon sin, so also ^e makes the
way of virtue hard and ^npleasant, so that where Satan does ^ule and reign,
there he is said to ^well. The Lord defend us from his ^ower, that he may
never dwell so among us, for he is an unreasonable guest, he will not be gone
till he has eaten his Landlord out of house and home.

They enter in and dwell there.

There is room enough in an hypocrites heart for many sins; Mary Magdalen
had seven, but this wretch has eight. Absalon had pride, treason, ambition,
incest, and ingratitude; all these lodged in a small piece of flesh. He that
will carefully observe how much filthiness our blessed Lord discovers lodged
in one heart, which sends out evil thoughts, Murders, Matthew. 15, 19.
Adulteries, Fornication, Theft false witness bearing, Blasphemies; cannot but
wonder, how so small a thing could contain, so great a quantity; yet here we
see that innumerable sins are involved in one man. The devils know that a
kingdom divided, cannot stand, and therefore they are quiet among themselves.
Would God the factious spirits of our age would consider this; then there would
not be so much contention for things indifferent, as there is.

The last state of that man is worse than the first.

His state was bad enough before, but now it is worse, by reason of the strong
possession he had; but one devil before, but now he has eight; which will
the sooner work out his damnation. The last state of such a man is worse than
the former, and that in a threefold respect:

1. Of the Devils. 2. Of the Sinner. 3. Of God.
1 In respect of the devil, who now will use him worse than before; he let
him enjoy his pleasures and his vanities before; but seeing him in any good
mood, he fears least he get from him; he cannot endure that a man should
repair to the place of Gods worship or converse with good company; he knows,
the power of the word and godly conference are to convert a desperate sinner;
therefore if he can find his opportunity, he will remoove him from all means
whereby he might be saved; and harden his heart, and dead his affections, till
he has plunged him under the wrath of God unrecoverablie.

2. His state is worse in regard of himself, while he was mantled under the
garment of piety, and was clothed with the lamb skin of outward profession,
so long he enjoyed a good estimation among the godly, and enjoyed the benefit
of their prayers: but when his counterfeit holiness appears to be double
wickedness, as before his hypocrisy deceived the world, so now his Apostasy
has deceived himself; therefore his estate is worse. As before he did but
counterfeit his repentance, so now he has got not only a whoores forehead
that he cannot blush; but also, Ier. 3. 3.
he has gotten a brazen face, that he can no more blush, than a black dog.

3. His estate is the worse in respect of God, who will turn him out of his
protection: when God sees that he esteems the dung, husk and trash of this
world above him; then he forsakes his dwelling being so injuriously used, and
will not let his providence any longer take charge of him, but let him wallow
in his sins with all greediness; and so, the further he goes from Gods
mercy, the nearer he comes unto his justice. God cannot endure backeslyding,
but will severely punish it. Carnal men, they think nothing of the slacking
of their zeal, but God accounts it as a grievous thing; if any draw back, his
soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10. 38. Nebuchadnezzers Dan, 4,
fall was great when he was stripped of his Empire, and in stead of ruling men,
was turned into the Wilderness to live among the beasts; but Apostates and
backeslyders, they go from the society with the godly, to wicked Atheists
worse than beasts; yea to the company of devils. Nebuchadnezzar for all his
fall, had a stumpe Verse. 13.
left in the ground, which after seven years should sprout out again, and so
should return to a better estate than he had before; but those that are
revolters and backsliders, have no stumps at al left in the ground but are
unrecoverable. For if we sin willingly, after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for Heb. 10. 26, 27.
sins, but a fearful looking for of judgments and fiery indignation.
Nothing does so provoke the vengeance of God against men as Apostacy does. For
a man to fall from riches to poverty, from honor to abasement, is a matter of
nothing; God loves a man never the worse for his abasement in the world, as may
be seen in Job on the dunghill, or Lazarus at the rich man's gate; but when a
man falls from piety to profaneness, from the society with the Saints, to be
companions with devils; this is a lamentable thing. Against these men the Lord
complaynes, because they have changed their glory Ier. ^. 11.
for that which does not profit. Therefore he tells them, Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reproove thee; know
therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou bast
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God
of hosts. How fearful was Judas fall, to come Verse. 19.
from a Preacher to be a Traitor? Demas from a Gospeller to be a worldling?
So fearful is the case of all those which have entered into the way of
Godliness and have made a good beginning, and yet leave off the race in the
midds; such men as they are not worthy of the crown, so also they disgrace not
only themselves, but also the godly, and procure to them great reproach. For
when a man falls from the profession of the truth, the world sees he was but a
painted hypocrite when he was at the best; hence it comes to pass that they
loose their honor, and their glory is turned into shame. And if shame rested
upon them alone, it were well; but their falls opens the mouths of profane men
to insult and triumph and say, These are your professors, and Scripture men,
they are as bad as any are; therefore I will trust none of them, for such a
man's sake. Now if the spies which brought an evil report upon the land of
Canaan, were never suffered to enter into the land because they discouraged the
people; so the Apostate because he has laid a stumbling block in Gods
Childrens way, deserves to be shut out of the Lords rest, whereof the land of
Canaan was a type. Thus you have seen the fearfulness of sin, let us now
make application of it to our selves.

Is the decay of grace in the soul Ephesus have forsaken our first love? How
many are there to be found which formerly have shined like the morning stars
by their bright profession, which now are turned retrograde like wandering
Planets, and so their glory has ended in shame, because like the foolish
Galathians, they began in the spirit, and ended in the flesh. If a righteous
man turn from his righteousness and commits iniquity, all his
righteousness shall be forgotten, Ezekiel. 18. 24. Lots wife, had been as good
have stayed in Sodom, as to have gone out and be turned into a pillar of salt
for looking back.

2. Seeing the sin of Apostacy is so dangerous, then be exhorted all ye that
fear God, if ye would not have a great and shameful fall, then take
direction from Jude the servant of Jesus Christ, to Build up your selves in
your ^de 20:
most holy faith, striving every day to be better and better, for we are like a
boat that goes against the stream; if we do not labor with might and maine,
to row upward, we shall be carried by the stream of our affections downward;
therefore if we would receive the crowns of life, we must continue faithful
unto the death. For he that continues unto the end shall ^evel. 2, 10. ^ath.
24, ^3.
he saved. Therefore in the compass of our profession we must go a puncto ad
punctum, from point to point, from Alpha to Omega, from the first to the last.
Let us dig deep and lay a good foundation, that we may be able to ^ould out
when the storms of poverty, affliction, disgrace and contempt beat upon us.
For these many times come like a wirlewinde, and will be ready to overturne us,
if we be not well grounded; therefore that we may stand fast, make use of
these or the like directions.

1. Be careful to avoyde the least sin, least it usher in a greater; for
sin and Satan, as you have heard, wind themselves in by some small
temptations, till at the last like the sores of the body, which at first are
vicious humors, then swelling tumors, and after that impostumate, and so become
uncurable; so the sores of sins wax greater and greater till they breed and
bring eternal death: therefore when thou art fallen, think of our Saviors
counsel; remember whence Revel. 2,
thou art fallen, repent and amend, confess your sins daily and crave pardon
for them. Let a man turn by Redcat h^^o ^er quotidian^ ^^menta unde corruit
per van^ d^lecta ment^, Aug. de temp. Ser. 182.
daily lamentations, to that from which he is fallen, by vain delectation.
Take heed of lukewarmnesse in religion, and of backsliding. If Christ have
washed thee in his blood, bathed thee in his wounds, and cured thee with his
stripes, and took off this burden from thy shoulders; take heed of lading
thy self again by new transgressions, but if thou be made whole, sin no
more, least a worse thing happen Ioh, 5, 14,
unto thee.

2. Take heed of sin in general, so in a special manner; take heed of
vilifying the work of grace that shines in Gods servants, and is made evident
to your consciences by the word or work of God. This was the fearful sin
of the Jews, that daily saw the divine power of Christ shining in their
consciences, yet they did oppose themselves against him, and charged him that
he borrowed help of the devil, and that he cast out devils by Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils.

3. Take heed of in constancy in religion, and of time-serving. Some think
that if they be young Saints, they may prove old devils; therefore they
slack their zeal in youth, to conform themselves to the time, and resolve to
be more religious in their old age; but we see such flutter with Noah's Raven,
and hardly recover themselves again: but if we find our affections running
with an irregular motion, let us stay our selves, and make a league with
religion, as Ruth did with Naomi, resolve never to part.

4. What virtue soever you find in the Saints, endeavor to imitate, and what
God reveals unto you, be careful to practice; God looks that his talents
should be employed to his glory, therefore let not your knowledge swim idly
in your brains for vain speculation, but let it be fruitful in your lives
for others imitation.

5. Labor for the Spirit of prayer and suplication, for this is an invincible
bulwark against Satan's darts; Crave daily the Lords assistance, and commit
your souls unto him daily in well doing, and daily examine your heart by the
rule of Gods word, by which try whether you have faith to believe Gods
promises, and if you have it will make you careful to obey his Commandments;
thus he that keeps the forte of faith toward God, and a clear conscience
toward the world, Satan may assault him, but shall never Oppugnat diaboluine^
^^^ugnal.
subdue him; for whosoever can practice these directions shall be sure to stand
fast and firm.

The application does now follow, Even so shall it be to this wicked generation.

We have at large showed you Gods mercy to the Jews, and their ingratitude to
him again, and that God has paid them home, and made them spectacles of his
wrath, for all ages to look upon; therefore we will leave them unto G^ds
mercy, and in his good time to open their eyes, that they may behold their
crucified Savior, and see what may make for their everlasting good; and apply
this doctrine to our own souls.

If I should begin to number the mercies the Lord has continued unto the Land
in general, I might spend much time and yet not report the one half; of an
infinite number take a few. We were all possessed with the spirit of
blindness, as other nations were, and were tempted to as much uncleanenesse as
ever the Pagans were; but yet it pleased the Lord to expel the darkness of
Popery, and to send the light of the Gospel amongst us, which we have enjoyed
in peace and purity, this threescore and thirteen years; so that we have had
peace within our walls, and prosperity within our palaces, and no complaining
in our streets. And by the powerful preaching of the Gospel, Satan this
unclean spirit has been cast out of us; now let us take heed least he
creep into us again by hypocrisy, and unthankefulnesse for the Lords
mercies; and so make us think that our religion stands in shows, and consists
in outward formality, least we abusing the Lords mercies, and grow lean and
ill favored after we have devoured so many years of store and plenty under
the powerful preaching of the word, we arm our enemy against us, who
regaining entrance, brings seven spirits worse than he did before, and so
fortify his habitation with hypocrysie and other foul sins (for our
unthankefulnesse for the Lords mercies) and then there shall be more
profaneness than there was before. But that this fearful judgment may not
overtake us, let us speedily amend our lives, and turn to the Lord with all
our hearts; and then our latter end shall be better ^han our beginning.

Walafridus Strabo, lib. de rebus Ecclesiasticis.
Siquid in hoc (Lector) placet, assignare memento.
^d Domino: quicquid displicet, hocce mihi.
What here is good, to God ascribed be,
What is infirm, belongs of right to me.
FINIS.

