A WEDDING SERMON PREACHED AT BENTLEY in Darby-shire, upon Michaelmasse day
last past Anno Domini. 1607.

WHEREIN IS SET FORTH the Bond and Preservation.

1. The spiritual conjunction betwixt God and man. 2. The Corporal marriage
betwixt man and woman. 3 The neighbourly society betwixt man and man.
By R. ABBOT Doctor of Divinity.

Printed at London by N. O. for Roger Iackson dwelling in Fleetstreet near to
the great Conduit. 1608.

To the right worshipful Sir John Stanhope Knight, the Father of the
bridegroom Knight, my most loving and good Patron.
RIght worshipful Knight my very good Patron, albeit I made a question of
using your name, for the publishing of so small a matter as this sermon is; yet
I easily resolved that since it had pleased you to crave the copy thereof, you
would pardon me to grace it with the dedication. I might well doubt to offer so
little where I owe so much, but that I considered that small offices sometimes
are testimonies of great affections, and presumed that according to your wonted
love, you would take the will in good worth, howsoever the work seem to be of
small import. Accept it therefore I humbly pray you, as a very thankful
acknowledgement of your great favor toward me, both in calling me, first to
the place where now I live, and giving me since such respect and countenance,
as whereby I have with comfort and contentment enjoyed the same. And surely if
therein I have done in public any profitable service to the Church of God, a
great part thereof is to be reputed to you, who so freely and graciously of
your own voluntary accord, and only for the works sake which I performed,
being my self wholly strange and unknown to you, vouchsafed by your gift to
free me of that incessant labor wherein I had been employed before, for the
space of ten years in reading and preaching in the Cathedral Church and
City of Worcestor, and to setle me in a place, where I might more freely
dispose of my self, though not to withdraw my self from the service to which
I had devoted my self, yet in some part to bestow my time to the common
benefit of the whole Church, which before was limited to one only
congregation. Amidst which employments, either public or private, if I
attain to do any thing to yield you any help or furtherance in things
appertaining to God, and in Gods behalf to answer the end whereat you aimed in
your first acceptance of me, I much rejoice therein, and ever shall rejoice, and
think that hour or time happily bestowed, wherein I shall be the helper of
your joy, and 2. Co 1. 24
of that faith whereby you shall stand in the day of the Lord Jesus. As for this
sermon, being but a country exercise, if any shall think it not so well
polished as that it should be fit in this sort to go abroad, your approbation
shall be my excuse, and in that nature I commend it to you that have desired
it, wishing with it to you, and to your whole house, all happiness and honor,
and that the Olive by my service implanted into your stock, may yield many
branches, to the enlarging and strengthening thereof, so resting always

Yours in all duty, much bounden and devoted, R. Abbot.

A WEDDING SERMON PREACHED AT the marriage of Sir John Stanhope Knight, second
son to the right worshipful Sir John Stanhope Knight of Eluaston in the same
County to Mistres Olive Berrisford, now the Lady Olive Stanhope, sole daughter
and heir to Master Edward Berrisford of Berrisford Esquire.
Amos 3. 3. Can two walk together except they be agreed?
THe words are but few, yet few as they are, do minister matter of a large
discourse, of the bond and preservation of spiritual amity and conjunction
betwixt GOD and man: of corporal marriage betwixt man and woman, and of
neighborly sacietie betwixt man and man. The local use and application of the
words is to show a just reason of Gods withdrawing himself from them to whom
he speaks, and therefore they give us occasion principally to consider what
is the occasion of breach betwixt GOD and us. But the same reason being taken
from the affections and dispositions of men in sorting themselves one with
another, do lead us also to consider wherein stands either the maintenance or
the breach and disunion of those conjunctions and societies which god has
ordained amongst us. The Prophet having in the first verse of the chapter
called the children of Israel to hear the word of the Lord, propounds to
them in the second verse to call to mind the great love and mercy wherewith
he had respected and honored them above all the nations of the earth. You
only have I known, says the Lord, of all the families of the earth. Where by
knowing he means acording to the scripture phrase, the taking knowledge of
them in special love and kindness to be their God and to do them good; when as
he passed by other nations as a stranger, as if he had no respect or regard
unto them. Now whereas the consideration of this great mercy should have moved
the^ to all thankfulness and duty toward God, they contrariwise Esaias. 5. 4. 7.
, in steed of grapes brought forth wild grapes; for judgment and
righteousness, oppression and cruelty, so as that they seemed nothing less the^
to know or regard him who had so graciously of his own mere and voluntary
love accepted them. Hereupon the Prophet adds, Therefore I will visit you for
all your iniquities, says the Lord, implying herein that rule of judicial
proceeding which our savior Christ sets down as a thing certainly
determined with GOD; Luke 12. 48
To whomsoever much is given, of him much shall be required: the greater mercy,
the greater judgment; the higher the place, the more deadly the fall: Bernard.
in cant. ser. 84.
they, says Bernard, who for grace received seemed to be the greatest, for not
being grateful become of least reckoning with God. In effect therefore he
says unto them, as ye have been best beloved, so ye shall be most grievously
and severely punished: somewhat may in equity be remitted to others, but all
shall be required of you; I will visit you for all your iniquities, says the
Lord. And that it might not seem strange unto the^ that he who had undertaken
Leuit. 26* 11. 12.
to dwell amongst them, and to walk with them, should thus cast them off and
leave their company; in the words which I have proposed, he appealeth to
themselves and makes them Judges whether his doing therein be any other but
what they themselves out of their own conversation must needs justify and
make good. Can two or will two walk together except they be agreed? Will any
two of you sort your selves to converse and live together who have no accord or
agreement each with other? It is expedient to have company on the way, and there
is comfort in it; but will any man be companion to him by whom he is
continually thwarted and provoked? Does not every of you make choice of such
company as wherewith he may live at quietness and peace? How can you then expect
to have me to walk with you when as there is no concord or agreement betwixt
you and me? I call one way: you turn wilfully another way: I command one thing
and you do the contrary. You provoke me with your iniquities from day to day.
Therefore be ye well assured that your company is not for me, neither will I have
any society or fellowship with you.

2 The term of walking as it is referred to God, betokens his gracious and
healthful presence as it is applied to men, it signifies the conversation and
life of man. To make use the^ of the words, we may here observe first the life
of man compared to a walk. Secondly we are to note wherein stands the
commodity and conueniencie of this walk, and that is to walk together, in
society and company. Thirdly what is the means to hold us together; which is
concord and agreement. Of the first we have example in those exhortatio^s of
the apostle, Romans 13 13.
Walk honestly as in the day time: Ephesians, 5. 8. Ibid. ver. 15.
walk as children of light, 1. Th. 2. 12.
walk circumspectly not as unwise but as wise: h walk worthy of him who has
called you into his kingdom and glory. But what should I need to bring many
examples of that which in the scriptures is so commonly and every where to be
found? let us rather consider what is to be gathered thereof for our
instruction. A walk therefore imports, first a way wherein we are to walk:
secondly an end whereto we walk: thirdly motion in the way; and fourthly
proceeding or going forward therein, and lastly perseverance and continuance
unto the ways end, what our way for our walk* is, the Prophet David
signifies when he says, i blessed are they that are undefiled Ps. 119. 1.
in the way, and adds by way of exposition, which walk in the law of the
lord. The law of the Lord is the way wherein we are to walk. Therefore Moses
when he had given the law of God to the people of Israel bids the^ Deuteronomy. 5.
33.
to walk in all that way which the lord their God had commanded the^. And hence
are those phrases of Ex. ^2. 8. Deuteronomy. 9. 12.
turning out of the way, when we forsake the commandments of God, and Psalm.
3^. 34.
keeping his way when we observe the same. It is a great question in our days,
what way it is wherein we may safely and securely walk, and many are much
distracted and perplexed hereabout, because they see so great contention and
controversy which is the right way. But all this doubt God him self
resolves, to them that are willing to take resolution of him; the law of the
Lord, the word of God which he has delivered to us by his Prophets and
Apostles, that only is the sure and certain way. He that teaches according
to this law, he teaches the right way: he that teaches beside this law,
seem he to be of never so great authority and credit, he teaches a wrong
way. In this way God has revealed unto us, all the ways which he will have us
to go* what to believe, and how to live; what to do, and what to eschew; and
not only of such duties as are common to all, but also what concerns every
man in his special state and calling; what is the duty both of Prince and
subject, of the Pastor and of the fiocke, of the Husband and the wife, the
Parents and the children, the Master and the servants, the rich and the poor,
the high and the low; the word of God according to the phrase of our Savior
Christ, Mar. 13. 24.
appoints to every man his work, to every man that service that his master
requires of him* Gregor. Moral* li. 16. cap. 16.
By the Scripture, says Gregory Bishop of Rome, God tells us all his will;
Ibid. li. 18. ca. 14.
so that if men will speak truly, they must from thence receive that which
they will speak; August. de. vtil. cre dendi. ca. 6.
the doctrine whereof is so framed, says Saint Austine, as that there is no
man but may draw from thence that that is sufficient for him, if he come with
devotion and piety to draw, as true religion requires he should do; Hieron.
in Psalm. 86.
because the Princes of the Church, says Saint Hierome, meaning the Apostles
and Prophets, did so write, as that not a few only, but all should understand;
so as that the scripture, as Gregory says, is Gregor. ad Leand. epi^^. in lib.
Mor. cap. 4.
a stream wherein both the Elephant may swim, and also the Lamb may wade;
ye so as that Origin. cont. Cells. lib. 4.
in one and the same text, as Orig^n observes, many times are found tempered
together both the things which serve for the exercising of the stronger, and
which minister edification to to the more weak and simple. In the Scripture
we shall find that way whereof the Prophet Jeremy speaks when he says;
Ier. 6. 16.
Stand upon the ways and behold, and ask for the old way which is the good
way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Whereby he
instructed the people to take view of the ways of their forefathers, and
thence to make choice, not of that way which their latter fathers taught them,
of which elsewhere they are warned, Ezec. 20. 18.
Walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe their
manners; but of that wherein the Patriarchs and first fathers walked, who
received the same from God, and by the ordinance of God left the same recorded
for a memorial to their children. A foolish term there is used by many
ignorant persons amongst us of the old law, the old Religion, by which they
understand the religion of Popery, as if popery were the old religion, because
some ages past have followed it, and bin abused thereby. Indeed the Scribes and
Pharisees for the very same cause called their traditions Mat. 5. 21 27. etc.
the old religion, but the true old religion is of ancienter continuance, even
that way which the Patriarchs and Prophets, the Evangelists and Apostles have
traced out, and directed unto us, having themselves learned it from God, and by
the revelation of Jesus Christ, and by his appointment left the same recorded
in scripture to our use. Of this it is that the pastors and teachers of the
church are instructed to say to Gods people; Esai. 30. 21.
This is the way, walk in the same, when thou turnest to the right hand, or
when thou turnest to the left. Christ is the directour of this way: of him the
father has said, Mat. 17. 5
Hear him; and therefore Cyprian infers; Cyprian. lib. 2. epist. 3.
If Christ only be to be heard or harkened unto, we are not to regard what any
man before us has thought fit to be done, but what Christ has done, who is
before all: for we are not to follow the custom of men, but the truth of God.
And if by this rule we esteem of the way we shall soon perceive that Popery
is out of the way, because in that path which the Apostles and Prophets have
chalked out unto us, we neither find the Pope, nor his pardons, nor his mass,
nor his images, nor his relics; yea all these and the rest of his trinkets,
are easily perceived to be but false and base, and broken wares.

3 If we desire somewhat more briefly to hear the way, our Savior Christ
tells us, Ioh. 14 6.
I am the way, the truth and the life: no man comes to the father but by me.
S. Austin amplifieth the words, August. in Joan. tract. 22.
Ambulare vis? etc. Art thou desirous to walk? I am the way. Would thou not
be deceived? I am the truth. Would thou not die? I am the life. There is no
whither for thee to go but to me: there is no way for thee to go by but by me.
Christ only himself is our way to come to Christ, Heb. 10. 20.
Through the veil, that is, his flesh he has prepared the new and living way
whereby we are to enter into the holy place. His pas^^on is our redemption, his
obedience our righteousness, his resurrection our justification; he is for us
whatsoever we need to bring us unto God. Act. 4 12.
There is not salvation in any other, nor any other name given under heaven by
which we must be saved. This way must we go, if we will go the right way: but
if we seek for a way in our selves or in any other creature; if we To. 3. 10.
set up our own righteousness against the righteousness of God: another altar
and sacrifice against the cross and sacrifice of Christ; if we trust to other
mediations and merits and satisfactions, we are out of the way; we wander in
strange and crooked paths, which will never bring us to our desired end. In a
word, the Apostle willing to instruct us of the rightway, and to that purpose
setting down a brief sum of the doctrine of the gospel says thus, Gal. 6.
14.
God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ:
whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world: for in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision but a new
creature. Now hereto he adds; And they that walk according to this rule,
peace and mercy shall be upon them. Here is then the rule and way of our
walk, to rejoice, that is, to put trust and confidence of remission of sins
and salvation only in the cross of Jesus Christ, not in the cross of Peter,
or in the cross of Paul, or of the Virgin Mary, but only in the cross of
Jesus Christ, and so to be possessed with this rejoicing, as for the enjoying
of the joy hereof to be mortified to all worldly conversation, and to be
content to bear the malice and persecution of the world. They that walk in
this way and according to this rule, they shall find mercy with GOD to
attain to peace; but with the rest it shall come to pass which Jonas says:
Jonas. 2. 8
They that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy.

4 Now that peace is the end of our walk, even the ending of all our labors
and sorrows, and the fruition and enjoying of God, who is Romans 15. 33.
the GOD of peace, and of Jesus Christ our Savior, who is Esai. 9. 6.
the Prince of peace, in whom is full and perfect bliss and happiness for ever.
This is the thing whereto all our walking ought to tend, which as the mark
before the archer, so ought to be before our eyes to aim at in all the course
of our life, and the regard thereof so to ouerpasse all other regards, as that
nothing be further or otherwise regarded then as may stand with the attaining
of this end, having always in remembrance that which our Savior Christ says:
Mat. 16. 26.
what profits it a man to win the whole world and to lose his own soul?
This mind the Apostle Saint Paul expresses when he says, Phil. 3. 8.
I have counted all things loss for the excellent knowledge sake of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things loss, and do judge them to
be dung that I might win Christ etc. that I may know him and the virtue of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made
comfortable to his death, if by any means I may attain to the resurrection of
the dead* Give me hunger and thirst, cold and nakedness, sickness and sores,
torment and death, this end to attain to the blessed resurrection of the dead
makes amends for all. Give me the kingdoms of the earth and all the pleasures
and glory thereof, yet if my end be not to attain this end, I am a most
wretched man, and better had it been for me that I had never bin borne. The
more may we wonder at the strange retchlesnesse of the greatest number of men,
with whom this is least of all thought of, and least of all respected, B^rnard.
so vainley using their souls, says Saint Bernard, as if they did not reckon
that they have any souls at all; so wholly dreaming and doting upon the
things of the world, as if they were borne to no other end but to live for ever
in the world. A wandering fancy men commonly have of a desire to come to heaven,
but how few set their hearts thereupon to make it the drift of their life, the
main end of all their purposes and counsels, and do not rather drown the
regard thereof in the purposes and desires of other things? That we run not
with others into this common error, let us duly remember, that our life is
but a walk, and a walk must have an end, and therefore that it concerns us
so to frame our courses and doings, as that we may make a good end, that our
death to this world may be to us the beginning of everlasting life in the world
to come.

5 To this end we are to call to mind that walking imports moving and
stirring, and therefore aduertiseth us, that seeing our life is a walk, we are
still to be moving and stirring and doing in the way and work of God: that
being by the mercy of God brought into the right way, we are not there to sit
down at rest, idle and unfruitful, but as the life of Christ is described,
Act. 10, 38.
He went about doing good, so ought our walking and life be to do good, to
glorify God, to further the Church of God and common wealth, to further
righteousness and truth, to help the oppressed and afflicted, to comfort the
comfortles, to relieve the widow and fatherles, and to these ends to do all
other good works which either the common duty of Christianity or our own
private calling requires of us. Titus the Emperor of Rome when he had
ouerpassed a day wherein he had done no special good deed, no good turn to
any man, was wont to say: Diemperdidi, I have lost a day. Alas, what a thing is
it when a Christian man shall so spend a whole life as that in the end thereof
he may say, Vitam perdidi; I have lost a life: I have lived so as that I have
neither done any faithful service to God, nor left any memorial or example of
any good that I have done amongst men! Seneca says well, that Seneca de
tranquil. animi.
there is nothing more shameful then an old man who has no other argument to
prove that he has lived long but only that he is old; no good fruits, no good
effects, by which it may be remembered that his life from time to time has been
beneficial to other men. Even so it is: a long life is but a great reproach
when by weldoing it has left no testimony of it self. To which purpose it is
worth the noting which Gregory observes, that of good men it is said in
Scripture, that such a one or such a one died old and Greg. Moral. l. 35. cap.
15.
full of days, but never of an evil man; as whereby we should understand
that he is full of days, who has made good use of his days and bestowed them
in good deeds; but otherwise we do but lose our days, and by losing our days
loose our selves also. He that has warned us that we shall Mat. 12. 36.
give account of our idle words, does thereby advertise us that we shall give
account of our idle hours; and much more of our days, and months, and
years, which so many of us bestow wholly in a manner in pleasure and vanity,
in riotousnesse and unthriftiness, in sin and wickedness, and therefore
when they come to their end lie tumbling in their sickness, Esaias 51. 20.
like a wild bull in a net, as the Prophet speaks, full of the wrath of the
Lord, without any hope, without any comfort, because their life has been such
as has yielded them no hope or comfort toward God. Blessed is he who when the
summons of death comes, set thy house in order, for thou shall die, can say
to God as Ezechias did, Esaias 38. 3.
O Lord I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart.

6 But this walking imports not only moving and stirring, but moving and
going forward, whereby we gain the way more and more and come nearer and nearer
to the end. Even so are we still to be gaining, and growing, and going forward
in the ways of God in all virtue and goodness; not to stand still at one stay,
and as it were to run in one ring, but as we labor to thrive in the goods
of this world, so much more to increase in those things, whereby we may be Luke
12.
rich in God, Psalm. 84. 7.
To go from strength to strength, To. 1. 17.
from faith to faith, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
from glory to glory; 2. Pet. 3. 18.
to grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Thus does Solomon instruct us that Pro. 4. 18.
the way of the righteous shines as the light which shines more and more unto
the perfect day. Which he that cares not to do, is as the man that spends
of the stock, and grows thereby to decay: for Gregor. in Pastoral. par. 3.
admonit. 35.
, the soul of man in this world is like unto a ship or boat, as Gregory
says, going against the stream, which cannot rest in one place, but by the
sway of the water is carried downward, unless it be still laboring to go
upward. Therefore Bernard says; Bernard. in purific. ser. 3
Not to go forward in the way of life is to go backward; Idem epist. 2 53.
not to care to increase, is to decrease: Idem epist. 91.
look where thou beginnest not to regard to grow better, there thou quite
give over to be good at all. August. de verb. Apost. ser. 15.
If thou say, I have enough, says Austin, thou art gone, thou art utterly
undone.

7 Lastly this growth requires perseverance and continuance till we come to
the end whereto our walking is directed. The end is all in all; to give over
before we come to the end, though it be but in the last attempt, is the loss
of all our labor and reward. Therefore, 1. Cor. 9. 24.
so run, says Saint Paul, that ye may obtain; which is, Heb. 3. 14
when we keep sure unto the end that beginning wherewith we are vpholde^: that
is, hold fast to the end the true doctrine and faith of Christ, wherewith we
first began, and is a sure foundation for us to build upon; for Mat. 24. 13.
he that continues to the end, says our Savior Christ, he shall be saved.
Many begin in the spirit, and seem for the time to be nothing but spirit, and
yet afterward end in the flesh, and Gal. 6. 8.
of the flesh reap corruption. Many Luke 9. 2.
lay their hand to the plough, and afterward look back, and thereby are unfit
for the kingdom of God. Therefore let us hearken to Saint John, 2. John verse.
8.
Take heed to your selves that we lose not the things that we have done, but
that we may receive a great reward. We lose the things that we have done when
we grow weary of doing them; Gal. 6. 9.
weary of well doing, and leave to go forward in that course wherein we have
well begun. And thus much of the life of man set forth unto us by a walk.

8 It follows now that we speak of the conueniencie of this walk, which
stands in walking together, in company and fellowship, which as the Prophets
words lead us to consider, begins first at two; as we find accordingly the
first society to have been betwixt two, God and Man; and the second betwixt
two, Man and Woman: From whence spring all other societies which God has
ordained for the behoof of the life of man. God made man of the dust of the
earth, that from the earth he might have company to dwell with him in heaven;
but yet so as that first he would walk with man, and would have man to walk
together with God here upon earth. Which duty of walking with God, and of care
to have God to walk with us, though on our part it began but in one, yet is
now belonging to us all who are of that one, who either severally or jointly
ought to make it our happiness and bliss to enjoy this gracious amity and
friendship with God. Which mind the Prophet teaches us to put on, when he so
often says: Psalm. 33 12.
Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord, and blessed are they whom he
has chosen to him to be his inheritance: Psa. 144 15.
Blessed are they who have the Lord for their God: Psalm. 146. 5.
Blessed is the man that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose hope is
in the Lord his God. The reason whereof the Apostle teaches us when he says:
To. 8. 31.
If God be with us, or on our side, who can be against us? Be it that in will
and purpose they be against us, yet in act and deed they can effect nothing.
Which made the Prophet when he had but named Esaias 8. 8. 9.
Immanuel, God with us, to break out into those words of defiance, Girde your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; girde your selves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces; take counsel together, and it shall come to naught;
pronounce a decree, and it shall not stand; for God is with us. Thus the people
of God rejoice in the Psalm, Psalm. 46. 1
God is our hope and strength, a very present help in trouble; therefore will
we not fear though the earth be moved, and though the hills be carried into the
midst of the sea, though the waters thereof rage and swell, and though the
mountains shake at the tempest of the same, etc. The Lord of hosts is with us,
the God of Jacob is our refuge. The Prophet David is full of these meditations:
Psa. 27. 1.
The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom then shall I fear? the Lord is
the strength of my life; of whom then shall I be afraid? Psa. 62. 6. 7.
God is my strength and my salvation; he is my defense; I shall not be removed;
in God is my health and my glory, the rock of my might; in God is my trust.
Psalm. 73. 25.
Whom have I in heaven but thee, and what do I desire upon earth in comparison
of thee? my flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my life, and
my portion for ever. Herein stands the joy and contentment of the godly poor
man, that though he want the wealth and glory of the world, yet he has the
grace of God, he walks with God, and has God to walk with him; which though
it carry no show to the world, yet he more esteems thereof then of all the
wealth of the whole world. And without this, what is all the pomp and glory of
the world? though a man have whatsoever the world can yield him, yet what is it
all without God? The rich man in the Gospel rejoices in the abundance of his
goods; he says to his soul, Luke 12. 19.
Soul, eat, drink, take thy pleasure; thou have goods laid up in store for
many years. But it was answered to him from above, Thou fool, this night
shall they take away thy soul from thee; and then whose shall those things be
which thou do possess? so is every man, says our Savior Christ, that is
rich in this world and is not rich in God. He is a fool by the testimony of
our Savior Christ, who ioyeth to be rich in the goods of this world, and
neglects to be rich toward God, rich in knowledge, rich in faith, rich in
grace, rich in good works, rich in all things whereby we should be fitted and
prepared, Ephesians. 1. 18.
to the rich and glorious inheritance of the saints of God. In a word, the life
of the body is the soul, and the life of the soul is God; and as the body
dies in the departure of the soul; so is the soul, yea the whole man dead
when he is left of God. Without God what is all our life but a shadow, which
shows to be something, and indeed is nothing? what, but a dream, which
mocketh a man, and makes him believe that he is a king, when he is but a
peasant; that he is rich and abounding in treasure, when he is a very beggar;
Esaias 29. 8.
that he is well refreshed at a goodly banquet, when he is ready to die for
hunger. He says afterward, Me thought it was thus and thus; but he finds it
nothing so. Even so the glory of worldly state flattereth men and persuades
them that they are the only fortunate and happy men, when indeed being
strangers to God and deuoide of his grace, they are found in the end to be most
wretched and unhappy of all other. Psalm. 49. 14.
Their beauty is consumed when they are carried from their houses to their
graves; death staineth the pride of all their glory, and upon the Beer it is
written as to Baltasar upon the wall: Dan. 5. 26.
Mean: God has numbered thy kingdom, and has finished it; thou have
henceforth no kingdom, no glory; nothing but confusion and shame, but sorrow
and pain, because thou have lived without God, and art for ever dead to him.

9 Now it enamoureth every man's affection and mind to have God to walk with
him; every man will pretend a desire to have it so, and a hope that it is so.
But that we may not deceive our selves, we are diligently to consider upon
what condition it is that God yields himself to walk with us, and to
continue with us when he has begun. This condition the Prophet tells us is
agreement with God, who will by no means condescend to walk with us, unless
we have care to accord and agree with him. And what is our agreement with God,
but our agreement with the word of God, by which he is present amongsts us, and
by the fame imparteth himself unto us. A^gust d verb. dom. ser. 1.
If thou sin* faith Saint Austin, the word of God is thine adversary; and
how can thou be said to agree with God, when thou art at variance with Gods
word? As touching this point, the Apostle Saint John notably well instructs
us; 1. Ioh. 1. 5.
God is light and in him is no darkness at all; if we say that we have
fellowship with him and walk in darkness, we lie, and the truth is not in us;
but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light (which what is it else but
to agree with him?) then we have fellowship one with another (he with us and we
with him) and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all our
sins. More particularly to express what it is to walk in the light, and to
agree with God, it is said unto us; Mat. 5. 48
be ye perfect as your heavenly father is perfect; Luke 6. 36
be ye merciful as your heavenly father is merciful: Ephesians. 5. 1
be ye followers of God as dear children and walk in love even as Christ has
loved us: 1. Pet. 1. 15.
as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of
conversation, as it is written, Leuit. 11. 44.
Be ye holy, for I am holy. 1. Ioh. 3. 3
Every one that has this hope, purges himself even as he is pure. On the
other side, 2. Cor. 6. 14.
What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? says Saint Paul;
What communion has light with darkness? what concord has Christ with Belial?
etc. Wherefore come out from amongst them, and separate your selves, says the
Lord; and touch no unclean thing, and I well receive you, and I will be a
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord
almighty. This is our accord and agreement with God; he is clean, and
therefore will not have us to touch any unclean thing. What shall we say then
of those parti-colored Christians and worshippers of God, who will be one where
clean and another where unclean; who have fair faces and foul feet; who on
the one side shake hands with God, and on the other side with the Devil; yea
lift up the left hand to pray to God, and throw stones at him with the right
hand: who pretend by faith to know God, and by their works deny him; who offer
unto Christ a sponge of hollow profession, and give him therein to drink the
vinegre of evil conversation; who as Saint Austin says, August. in Psalm. 40.
Worship God for the world to come, and the Devil for this present world? They
go about a thing impossible; to join together those things which can by no
means stand together, heaven and hell, God and the Devil, Christ and Belial,
true faith and wicked life. What; can two walk together except they be agreed?
Can there be true faith to salvation where there is that life to which God has
certainly threatened destruction? can there be one foot in heaven with God when
the other foot is with the Devil in hell? Let no man deceive himself; either
let him make himself a whole burnt offering to the Lord as well in works as
in faith; as well in conversation as in religion, or else God will wholly
reject him: he agrees not with God, and therefore God will have no company or
fellowship with him.

10 It remains now to speak of humane society wherein we walk together
one with another, according to those diverse bonds of conjunction wherewith God
has tied us to be respective each to other. To which society God has so
framed the nature and condition of man, as that concerning temporal life, it
were better for a man not to be at all, then to be alone. Of the benefit
whereof Solomon instructs us, when he says Eccles. 4. 9
Two are better then one, for they have better wages for their labor, and if
they fall, the one will lift up his fellow; but woe to him that is alone, for he
falls and there is not a second to lift him up: also if two sleep together,
there shall be warmth, but to one how should there be warmth? and if one overcome
him, two shall stand against him, and a threefold coard is not easily broken.
In which words he gives us to understand, that whether we respect commodity
for wealth, or help for weakness, or comfort for cherishment, or defense against
violence, all these benefits are yielded unto us by society and company; but
being alone are bereft of all. Ratio and oration, reason and speech, which are
the two things whereby the nature of ma^so much excels all the creatures of
the world, what use have they, especially our speech, if we have none with
whom to reason, and to whom to speak? Those excellent virtues of prudence,
patience, justice mercy, fortitude and the rest, what do they serve for, if
there be not society of life for the emploiment thereof? yea the rule of
christian life which is directed unto us from God, wherein stands it for the
most part but in precepts of charity and love, and of yiedling help and comfort
each to other? So does Saint Paul instruct us, Phil. 2. 4.
Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of
other men, and hereof proposes himself for an example, 1. Cor. 10. 3.
Even as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many that they may be saved. Thus again he teaches us; 1. These. 5.
11.
Exhort one another and edify one another, admonish them that are unruly,
comfort the feeble minded, bear with the weak, be patient toward all men. So
does the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews: Heb. 10. 24.
Let us consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works, not
forsaking the fellowship that we have amongst our selves, but let us exhort
one another, etc. And thus we see in the gospel that our Savior Christ at the
last day shall specially recount those good works of charity and compassion,
the use whereof is in the society of men, and which without society have no
place; Mat. 25. 34.
Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, etc. I
was hungry and ye gave me to eat, I was thirsty and ye gave me drink, I was
naked and ye clothed me, etc. Thus is sociall life commended unto us as the
fittest course wherein to bestow our selves that we may come to God.

11 The more may we wonder that so many, so great me^ have bin possessed with
that superstitious admiration of eremiticall and solitary life, as the only
divine and heavenly state; by which notwithstanding they forsook the
fellowship which the Apostle commends, and withdrew themselves from those
good offices and duties which God requires to be performed to other men. As
if they were wiser then God in determining to themselves a more excellent kind
of life then that which God had commended in the exercise of brotherly love. As
if they were better then the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Evangelists, the
Apostles, who all lived in the society and frequency of the Church. As if it
should be a good answer unto Christ at that day to say; Lord we have not done
those works which thou speak of, but left the same as fitting men of more
weak and imperfect state, and went our selves into the wilderness where we
could do good to none, but only afflicted our selves, and Col. 2. 23
spared not our bodies by watching, and fasting, and lying on the ground. What
we had, we left it at once, and vowed never to have any thing again, so that
though thou should starve for hunger and thirst, or perish for cold, yet we
would thenceforth have nothing to releive or succor thee, Mat. 25. 15.
, Talents thou gave us, but we lapped them up and dug them into the
ground, helping no man therewith either by word or deed. Behold thou have
thine own again and scarcely that, but more then that we have gained
nothing. How well this answer shall please our Savior Christ, it rests for
them to consider whom it shall concern; to us it seems much unfitting to
that duty of life which Christ has commended to us.

12 Now in discourse of humane societies that is first and chiefly to be
considered to which the present occasion leads us, the society betwixt the
husband and the wife, which as it is the root and foundation of all the rest,
most near and strait in bond, most lovely in pleasa^ce, most commodious in
benefit and use; so specially serves in holy scriptures to describe and set
forth that conjunction betwixt God and man, to the procurement whereof the
words of the Prophet are referred in this place, for nothing is there more
usual in holy scripture then by terms of marriage to note the union and bond
of amity which is betwixt God and us; God making himself the bridegroom; his
church and people the spouse and bride, and accusing us as of adultry and
fornication when our affectios are withdrawn from him and bestowed otherwhere.
The reason of the institution of that society betwixt man and wife, God
himself delivered in the beginning; Genesis 2. 18
It is not good for man to be alone, let us make him a helper meet for him.
Therefore does he make him a helper, because it is not good, says he, that the
man be himself alone; it is good for him to have a helper like unto himself
and to be at hand with him. It is true indeed that accidentally by sin the
case of marriage is much changed, and many cares and encumbrances and
distractions are incident to married estate. For the avoiding whereof that a man
may enjoy himself wholly to himself and so to God, the Apostle says, 1. Cor.
7. 1
It is good for a man not to touch a woman; as also of the woman that, Verse.
40.
she is more blessed if she continue alone: namely, when by the gift of God
they have power over themselves to contain themselves. But if we respect the
state of innocence before the fall of man, or if we respect the case of
incontinencie which since that fall like a mighty deluge has ouerflowed the
whole nature of mankind, and from whence much greater and worse distraction
arises then from the troubles of married estate, in both these respects, to
both which we doubt not but the sentence of god has reference, the same
sentence stands good; It is not good for man to be alone: it is best for him
to have a helper like unto himself and near unto him, and as it were another
self.

13 The manner of the making of this helper is to be observed, which Moses
describes thus, that Genesis 2. 21
, GOD sent upon Adam a heavy sleep, and in his sleep took one of his ribs
out of his side, and closed it up again with flesh, and of the same rib
created the woman, and brought her to the man August de bono coniug cap. 1.
. By the side, says Saint Austin, he signified the effectualnes of this
conjunction, for they are joined side to side who walk together, and both
together look to one end whereto they walk. Upon this framing of the woman
the man pronounces, This is now flesh of my flesh and bone of my bone: she
shall be called (...), ishah, woman, because she was taken out of (...); ish,
the man: for this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall
cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh Whereupon our Savior
Christ infers in the gospel, Mat. 19. 6.
Therefore they are no more two but one flesh: let not man therefore put asunder
that which God has coupled together. By the assertion of which inseperable
union, our Savior gives us to understand that the breach and separation
betwixt the husband and the wife, because they are but one flesh, is a thing as
unnatural as is the renting and sundring of one member of the body from
another. This cannot be in the body without pain and grief: if it be in
wedlock without pain, yet is it not without wound, and the wound is so much
the more fearful and dangerous, by how much the less it appears to be a
wound, and no pain is felt thereof. Physicians say, Curaeus de sensib. lib. 2.
cap. 43. ex Galeno.
Dolor est solutio continui: pain is the parting and su^dring of that which
has continuation and is substantially compacted together. Here is a
continuation of one flesh, and if in the rupture and separation there be no
pain, it is a token that either the one side or the other or both are but dead
flesh, and without sense, and therefore expect the cauterie of Gods judgment
to cut them off that no further infection may thence grow.

14 To this bond of nature God has also added a bond of covenant and promise,
whereby the husband and the wife do undertake and vow before God and his
Church to walk together, and religiously to maintain that society to which
each with other they commit themselves. The breach of which covenant GOD
reproves as a heinous trespass, condemning it one where in the husband,
Malac. 2. 14.
The Lord is witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou
transgressest, who yet is thy companion and the wife of thy covenant: Another
where in the wife, Pro. 2. 17.
which forsakes the guide of her youth and forgets the covenant of her God;
calling it the covenant of God, because God is the author and witness of it, in
his name it is made, and he shall require the performance of it. Nature,
religion, fidelity, ciuility, equity, all cry it out that the husband and the
wife should walk together; and yet the cry of all these avails not, but that
lamentable ruptures and divisions betwixt husband and wife are every where to
be seen amongst us, specially amongst men of higher place, yea so common in
many places as if it were a thing out of fashion for great men and their wives
to live and to walk together. What great inconveniences and mischiefs hereof
ensue, it is apparent, the ruin of houses, extinguishment of natural
affections both in parents and children, dissipation of patrimony and state,
both peril and practice of adultery and uncleanness of life offensive and
odious both to God and men.

15 For the preventing of which mischiefs and of that separation which is the
cause of them, necessary it is for them that are to walk together to agree
together, and the conscience of that bond wherewith they are joined as in one
yoke to draw together, must move them to all regard and care so to carry
themselves each to other, as that there may be accord and peace betwixt them.
Otherwise if they be yokefellowes and agree not, but one draw one way and
another another way, what do they but gall the necks and break the hearts one
of another? what is the husband in this case but a tyrant to his wife? what is
the wife to the husband but according to the quality of the ribbe whereof she
was made, a crooked rib: in stead of a help a hurt: in stead of a woman a wound
and a woe to man. The scripture tells us that GOD is the Heb. 13. 20.
God of peace, Cor. 14. 33.
not the author of confusion but of peace, Psalm. 68. 6. vulgat.
that he makes them to be of one mind that dwell in a house. If the work of
God be peace, if he make them of one mind that are in a house, what shall we
say of them who unmake that which God has made, and maintain war in stead of
peace? what do they but destroy the work of god and turn him out of doors
that he may have no place to dwell with them? we read that when God would
speak to Elias the Prophet, there 1. King. 19. 11.
went before the LORD a mighty strong wind which rent the mountains and
brake the rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind: and after the wind, came
an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake: and after the earthquake
came fire, but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire came a soft
still voice, and therein the Lord spoke. Even so is it in this case, where in a
house there are the te^pestuous and stormy winds, the earthquakes and raging
fires of brawles and contentions, of quarrelling and unquietness, the Lord is
not there: the Lord is in the soft and still and lovely voice betwixt the
husband and the wife.

For the preserving of this concord and peace betwixt man and wife, there are
three things specially to be required; religion, affection, and patience.
Religion delivers the precepts of walking together; affection practices
them; patience remooueth those stumbling blocks which befall in the way to the
interrupting and weakening both of religion and affection. Religion and the
fear of God as it is generally the foundation of all humane happiness and
felicity, so must it in special be accounted the ground of all that comfort
and bliss which man and wife desire to find in the enjoying each of other. It
has special promises made unto it by God: to the man, psa. 112. 1
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that has great delight in his
commandments: to the woman; pro. 31. 30.
Favor is deceitful and beauty is vanity (a fit of an ague staineth it; time
decays it; old age wears it quite out) but the woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be blessed. 1. Tim. 4. 8
Godliness, says the Apostle, is profitable for all things, and has the
promises both of this life and of that that is to come. They therefore whom it
concerns to walk together, both for the things of this life, and for the
obtaining of the life to come, must learn to account 1. Tim. 6. 6
godliness great gain, and then think they thrive best when amidst their
worldly thrift they best thrive in religion toward God. The fear of God
works that 1. Pet. 3. 4
meek and quiet spirit, which Saint Peter commends, and namely in the wife,
which as it is a thing with God much set by, so it is a thing lovely and
amiable amongst men, and betwixt married persons yields that contentment and
sweetness that holds them from repenting of that society which is become so
joyous and comfortable unto them. It is a pretty observation which Aben Ezra in
prou. 2 ^7 apud Page nin. in Lexic. (...).
a Jewish Rabbine gives of the Hebrew words before mentioned (...); ish, the
man or the husband, and (...); ishah; the woman or the wife, that there is
contained in them (...); Iah, which is the name of God, the letters and vowels
whereof being taken out, there remains nothing to be made of the rest but
(...), esh, and (...), esh, that is to say, fire and fire. Whereby he would
give to understand, that if God be not betwixt the husband and the wife, if
there be not in them the fear of God and conscience of duty toward him,
nothing can be expected betwixt them but fire and fire, fire of debate and
strife, fire of vexation and grieuance, fire of Gods curse consuming and
wasting both them and theirs. But if God be in their hearts; if they have in
them the fear of God, howsoever there may be sometimes upon occasions offense
and anger, yet far is it off from danger of separation, and there is pain
till the breach be repaired and healed again.

17 Religion prescribes to husband and wife the bounds, within which they are
to walk each with other; the duties which they are to perform one to another
for the preserving of that peace and agreement which God requires. It sets
forth Ephesians. 5. 23.
the husband to be the wives head; not only to import that he is to be her
director and Pro. 2. 17.
guide as the head is of the body, but as the head in natural compassion and
love stoopeth and inclines it self to the debilities and weaknesses of the
meanest part of the body, and uses the tongue to ask, and the ear to hear,
and the eye to look for the easing and helping thereof, and though he cannot
prevail for the curing of it, yet does not in mad fury torment his own
flesh, nor aggrauateth or exasperateth the malady, but still cherishes the
part, and makes the best of all; so and much more ought the husband to yield
the same affection and honor to his wife, to apply the understanding and
discretion that God has endewed him with above his wife, to the covering and
hiding of her imperfections and infirmities, always to make the best of them,
and either medicinally to cure them, if it may be, or with patience to bear
what he cannot cure; considering always his wife to be made, not of the
basest or vilest parts, as if she were to be reputed or entreated like his
vassal or slave (even the very heathen man accounting it Bodin de repub. lib.
1 cap. 3. ex Catone.
a point of sacrilege for a man to strike his wife) but of a part nearest to
his heart, and therefore that she has still right above all other to
challenge a place there. On the other side it teaches the wife to remember her
self, as not made of the foot to be trodden upon, so neither of the head to be
as a master or commander, but of the side; and though as a companion, yet an
inferior to her husband; and therefore that she ought Ephesians. 5. 22
to submit her self to her husband, that Genesis 3. 16.
her desire is to be subject unto him, and he is to rule over her, that 1. Tim.
2. 12.
she is not to usurp authority over her husband, but 1. Cor. 14 34.
to be in subjection as the law teaches. It teaches husbands 1. Pet. 3. 7
to dwell discreetly with their wives, giving honor to the wife as unto the
weaker vessel, even as they who are heirs together with them of the grace of
life. Again it teaches the wife to be Genesis 2. 18.
a helper to her husband, as was said before, and not a hinderer, Eccles. 36.
24.
a pillar for him to rest upon, not a stumbling block to make him fall: Pro.
12. 4
the glory of her husband, not an infamy and reproach to him; a means 1. Pet.
3. 1
to win him by her good conversation, if he do not yet obey the word, not an
occasion to offend him and drive him further off from the liking of the word.
It teaches 1. Cor. 7. 33. 44.
the husband in the things of the world to care how he may please his wife;
and the wife likewise in the same to care how she may please her husband. In a
word, it teaches both husband and wife to set God before their eyes, and to
consider marriage as his ordinance and institution, and that to him they shall
give account how they have used it with that honor and regard which he has
required as due unto it.

18 Which that it may be the more duly performed, necessary it is that with
religion there be joined affection, and without affection religion suffices
not. Affection, I say, whereby each is entertained and lodged in the heart of
other, and do yield each to other that contentment and delight as that it may
be betwixt them which Solomon says; Pro. 5. 18
Rejoice with the wife of thy youth, let her be unto thee as the loving Hind,
and as the pleasant Roe, let her breasts always satisfy thee, and delight
thou in her love continually. It is very worthy to be noted how the holy Ghost
in the Canticles to describe the amity betwixt Christ and his Church,
demeaneth himself to the phrases of amity betwixt the husband and the wife,
Cant. 2. ^0. and 4 10. and 5. 2.
my fair one, my sister, my spouse, my love, my dove, my undefiled, and such
like, as to consecrate and sanctify the same to the use of chaste and faithful
love, so to import what the affection ought to be, which is to utter it self
by the issues and streams of such gracious and lovely words. It was truly
said by him that said it, that Bodin. de repub. lib: 1. cap. 3. ex Artemidore.
marriage love ought to exceed and ouerpasse all other kinds of amity and
love: and therefore the foundations of marriage are to be laid accordingly, that
affection truly and faithfully obtained on both parts may be thenceforth as an
impregnable fortress and castle never to be conquered or overcome. Therefore
rash and hasty and casual marriages are to be condemned, wherein their wants
time and occasion, and means to linck together the hearts and affections of
them that are to live together, and that barbarous and wicked counsel is
followed which sometimes is given, to marry first and to love after. Whereby
it comes to pass that marriages many times are but discontentments and draw
after them a long cord of misery and sorrow and grieuance of the one party
against the other, and both advisedly repent of that which they unadvisedly
begun. Of the same kind are those marriages which Hierome speaks of when men
make choice of wives, Hieron. idu. Iouini au. lib. 1.
non oculis sed digitis, not by their eyes but by their fingers, not by their
eyes by which the person and behavior is discerned and approved, but by the
fingers by which the money is told, that only being respected how rich she is
in the purse, not how well to be liked in her self, the man many times by
this occasion thinking that he has a good marriage if the woman were away, and
the woman by like occasion thinking her self well married if the husband were
away, and the one hoping and wishing soon, the sooner the better, to be rid
of the other. Lascivious and wanton eyes are indeed greatly to be condemned;
but yet in honest and lawful love the eye is the window by which affection and
love enters into the heart, and if the eye bear not some stroke in choice of
a companion to live so nearly with, so as that the husband be to the wife,
Genesis 20. 16.
the veil of her eyes to stay her from looking to any other, and the wife to
the husband, Ezech. 24. 16.
the pleasure of his eyes, that he may joy to behold her, ill is that marriage
sorted, and whatsoever other contentments there may be in it, there wants
that which should be the seasoning and sweetness of all the rest.

19 From religion and affection must grow patience both in husband and wife,
whereby upon occasions of hear and anger, without which hardly ca^ our life
pass, each can kindly bear with other; and each is careful to take that
notice and knowledge of the nature and disposition of the other as may serve to
prevent and exclude those uncomely extremities to which intemperate and
unbridled fury carries headlong both one and other. We are all flesh and
blood, we all have our imperfections and ouersights; but patience and love
digesteth all, and still heals that which offense wounds. But if there be
no patience; if by impatiencie the one be fire and the other flax and
gunpowder, what must needs follow but the blowing up and burning of the whole
house? To be short, Eccl. 25. 1.
three things are there, says the son of Syrach, which rejoice me, and
whereby I am beautified both before God and men, the unity of brethren, the
love of neighbors, and a man and wife that agree together. The more gracious
and gladsome these things are, and namely the amity betwixt the husband and
the wife, so much the more it concerns all parts to use all care for the
preserving of amity and unity as a jewel most precious in the estimation and
acceptance both of God and men.

20 Now here I might further speak of the other two, the unity of brethren,
the love of neighbors, and generally of peace and concord, as the garland and
crown of heaven, the glory of the earth, the strength of kingdoms, the
preservation of families, the joy and happiness of all societies, the light of
all men's eyes, and the marrow of all men's bones; as on the other side discord
and variance to be incapable of heaven, the confusion of the earth, the
destruction of kingdoms, the overthrow of families, the bane of all societies,
as thorns in all men's sides, and as fire in the bones of all men. But I have
already stood long, and therefore will here end, leaving the rest to be
understood by that that I have said. etc. To God the Father, God the Son,
God the holy ghost be all honor and Glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

