THE LORD COKE HIS SPEECH AND Charge.

With a Discovery of the Abuses and Corruption of Officers.

LONDON Printed for Christopher Pursett, dwelling in Holborne next Staple Inn
at the sign of Marie Magdalens Head 1607.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Earl of Exceter, Kinght of the most Honorable
order of the Garter: and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel. R. P. wishes all increase of Honor and endless happiness.
MAy it please your Hon. The observation which this world begets, may teach
experience truly to report, that Love and Charity are for the most part grown
so cold, even in the hotest Sunshine of our Profession, as that despised
Poverty, though addicted to the Religious exercise of endeavors commendable, is
in the best employment (which seems with greatest Favor to smile upon his
Hope) so coldly recompensed, as that poor unpitied dejected miserable Poverty
knows neither Means nor Place how or where to warm it self.

Unhappy I, in this best time of greatest happiness, who being as I am a Poor
despised, hated, scorned, and unrespected Soldier so unfortunate as no
commended means, though many used, with confirmation both of love and
Loyalty, can be of power from dispayers Gulf, to raise a Spirit drowned, in
worst of misery: but were I not indeered unto those by heaven made mine, who
are indeed, to me, the^ life, more dear from who^ there is no way to run,
unless in me, self being be disolued, I would assueredly by heavens
assistance in some honest War with use of Arms, give to my life so long as I
should live, a living maintenance: but now Immured in my native home,
unseperably Yoakt with leane-fac't poverty. I have experience to conclude
that as it is most certain Pax Procreat Bellum, so is it no less true, that a
confirmed Peace, Non amat Fillios belli, until she has need of them.

In this estate no knovving how to me^d my self, Religious Law shall make
my resolution honest, and though Rerum conditionem mutare non possum, yet I
will have power to say Hoc possum magnum sumere animam et viro forti dignum,
with patience therefore shall my grieved thoghts joyfully be thrown upon my
makers providence by whose assistance I will still resolve with a constant
Boso^e to persist in the prosecution of commended deeds, for this I know Spes
mea, Christo viuens, Est viuere vt semper viuam.

And thus, my Honorable Lord, having breathed forth a sight unto the grace of
your compassionate respect: I humbly crave your Honor will vouchsafe, to
patronize in this little book (by me collected) not my own but the words of
that reverend and learned Judge, the Lord Coke, who at his coming to Norwich,
did at the Assizes thereupon the bench, deliver a charge so exelent as that it
vvorthyly deserves to be continued in perpetual memory, which being thus
prodused to a public view, I hope it shall unto our Publickeweale remain a
worthy persedent, wherein Romes champions may with shame decerne their long
continued shameful practices, Puritans and Sismatickes learn to konvve with
what Injustice they disturb the happiness of our most happy peace, our
Justices, inferior officers, Jurors, and Commons generally, may in this book
find out commended documents and instructions profitable as well directing how
to govern as to be governed: all which particulars the learned Judge has
wisely handled with such plausible Oratorical wisdoms eloquence, as that when
I heard him speak, I thought the Poet had just cause to say, Prospera lux
orritur linguisque animisque fauete; Nam dicenda bono sunt bona verba die. If
therefore in this following work my Memory has given a true instruction to my
pen, I hope my labor shall be accounted profitable, when it administers a
Public benefit.

Thus Right Hon. Earl, what I have hereinto performed, together with my most
unworthy self, I humbly refer unto your Honored wisdoms consideration,
remaining as I will always rest,

Your Honors in all humbleness of Duty, R. P.

The Lord Coke, the Preface to his Charge given at the Assizes houlden in
Norwich, the fourth of August. 1606.
BEcause I perceive the time has more swiftly passed then I did expect: my
strife and labor with my self, has bin in my self to abreuiate what I
purpose to speak. And though my speech shall principally be directed to you of
the Jury, which are sworn: yet for that I know the scope and sum of my
endeavors are solely dedicated to Gods glory and my countries public benefit,
I hope that all my words shall extend unto the general good of all these here
present; unto whom they are spoken. For I do purpose in my course, as it were
with a finger to point out those growing and groaning evils, which do not only
for the preset time disturb and hurt our Public Weal, but do also strive,
and that with a most dangerous force to deface, ruin, and utterly subvert the
Honors of our ancient name, and our now Great Britains Monarchy. But before
the substance of my intended speech receives his purposed beginning, I think it
not amiss first to begin with my self, and of my self to speak thus much.

There was a certain young Roman, whose youth so directed his labors, with
industrious care to attain to knowledge by the reading and study of good
letters, as that the Senate of Rome amongst themselves determined to make that
young man a Judge: thereby with honored reputation to recompense the travels of
his youth, and to give encourageme^t unto other Roman Citizens by their good
endeavors to attain unto like estate and credit in the government of Romes
Public Weal.

It happened that shortly after the determination by the Consuls and Senate
agreed upon, the yo^g man upon who^ the place of a Judge should be co^ferred,
coming unto the knowledge thereof, fell presently into a deep consideration
with himself about the force and Office of that worthy place whereunto he
should be called. And first considered that in his own opinion, he was most
unfit: sufficito^ly to execute the subctantiall and sometimes dangerous (though
most commended duties) properly belonging to so great a dignity. For this young
Roman having many Friends, Kinsfolks, and Allies, some of the^ of such Rank
and Place, in the authority of government, as that their love or hate could not
aptly draw unto it self a light or triuial respect (amongst who^) this young
man thought that coming to be a Judge; time might unhappily produce so^e such
occation wherein his sentence, in the place of Judgment might give distaste,
procure enemies, loose Friends and gain suspect of hateful partiality. From
which corrupt and most impoysoned evil, though this young Roman did never so
much desire, to stand cleared, yet Judging amongst Friends, and Kinsfolks, he
should assuredly (as he thought) by some detractors, be thereof suspected.

The Roman Citizen having thus unto himself presented diverse obstricles and
Objections, which could not in his own sense receive sufficient contradiction,
he resolved by no means to take upon him the Place and person of a Judge: but
did use all his Friends and greatest power of meanees to persuade the Senate,
to alter their determination concerning him and to bestow so great an Office on
some other, that might more worthily deserve the same.

Whilst this young man continued in a discontented passion, with purpose to
desire some good advice, he goes unto a faithful friend of his, whom he
acquainted with what the Senate purposed, and how loath he was to undertake so
high an Office as to be a Judge. His friend upon hearing the cause, presently
concluded, that he had great reason to shun the execution of such an Office,
in the discharge whereof, so much danger rested. For (said he) Cave ne sis
Iudex inter Amicos because inter Amicos Inditare, Amongst friends to judge, is
a thing nothing more dangerous. And therefore he co^sta^tly advised, that in any
wise he should refuse such honor, though offered unto him: and rather be
contented with a mean and private life, then in such a place to be employed: in
which he should assuredly loose old friends, and get new enemies.

This young man (though thus by his friend advised, and in himself resolved
never to take upon him any such, as he accounted dangerous dignity) yet when
he understood, that the Senate would not be altered in their purpose, but that
by them the place was decreed unto him, he then determined with himself, to
try the counsel of some other friend, whose Judgment and Experience might
bear some general note, in directing the high affairs to the State
belonging. And in this purpose he went unto a certain Nobleman, whose prudent
wisdom had often bin used in business of most w^ighty consequence: unto whom,
when he had laid open his mind, showed his grief, and signified the Senats
pleasure. The noble Gentleman with pleasant, yet grave alacrity of spirit
(seasoned with the soundness of a learned and understanding wisdom) did most
powerfully advise, that this young man should cheerfully accept so worthy an
Office, being so freely bestowed upon him. And that he should by no means seem
to neglect the gracious clemency of supreme authority: Nor in any sort
account it dangerous amongst friends to judge: for in the Office and execution
of Judgment, he that is a Judge ( Desinet esse Amicus) cease to be a friend:
for in the manner of judgment, no acquaintance, no griefs, no friends, no
remembrance of fore-passed present, or hope of future friendship must direst
the thoughts of him that is a Judge. All that on judgments seat is done, must
be, because Justice commands the doing thereof, and that with no other
affection, but only because it is just. And therefore said this Noble
Gentleman unto his friend, arm thy self, in the constancy of a conscionable
vprightnes, and be noe longer loath to execute the Honorable Office of a Judge,
but in thy love to Romes Commonwealth, dedicate thy labors to her public
benifit.

By the grave and sage advice of that Honored Lord, this young man was persuaded
contrary to his former purpose, with humble thankfulness to accept that Office,
which the Senate without any means of his, was pleased freely to bestow upon
him: and yet generally made show as if he meant the contrary. and soddainlie
preparing a sumptuous Feast, unto which he enuited all his Friends, Kinsfolk,
and familiar acquintance, seeming that in regard he did rather choose to leave
his Country, then to take upon him the Office of a Judge: he had provided a
Ba^quet or Feast, to Banquet with his Friends before his departure: and in
some solemn manner would take leave of them all. Who being, as they thought, to
this end assembled: did sorrowfully expect the occation of their grief, by the
departure of their friend, which when the young man perceived, he spoke thus
unto them.

It is true that I purpose as I must, to take my leave of you all, and to be a
stranger to my dearest friends, and nearest Allies: I must forget all former
friendships, and my most familiar Acquaintance, I must account as greatest
strangers unto me; Thus must I depart from you, and yet continue amongst you,
for by the love, power and authority of the Senate, I am appointed to be a
Judge, and in the seat of Justice, I must forget the remembrance of your
former friendships and acquaintance, and only in the person of a Judge, with
respect to keep my conscience clear, I must with equity and vprightnes,
justly administer justice unto you all. And this is my cause, by the love and
favor of my greatest master King James, in whose royal and gracious
disposition I am, ( Sine precatione, vel precatio, without price or request,
freely called unto this great Office, by the favor of my King) Unto whose
service, my life, and all I have is humbly bound, by him, and by his gracious
Clemency, I am thus sent to be a Judge amongst my Kinlfolkes and familiar
friends, even in bosom of my native Country.

I must therefore as the young Roman did, take leave of all former
Acquaintance, and do that which is just unto all Estates and Degrees, without
partiality. Which duty (by Gods permission and assistance) I will faithfully
perform, so long as God and my King shall please: that in this place I be
employed in the uprightness and equity of Judgment, shall all my performance
entirely consist. The contrary whereof shall (as I hope) neither be desired
nor expected. And thus much for my self.

Here follows the words of his Charge in Order.
AS concerning the manner and Method of my charge, I will for order and memory
sake, extract or draw forth all that I purpose to speak, from five words in
his Majesty's Commission contained: the words are these; Quis, Quibus, Quid,
Quomodo, and de Quibus. Quis, from whom the Commission comes; Quibus, to whom
it is directed; Quid, what it concerns; Quomodo, how it ought to be executed;
and de Quibus, of who^, and of what causes, we are to enquire by virtue of the
Commission unto us granted: and this last, De Quibus is of all the rest the
greatest.

As touching the first word, Quis, whom, or from whom our Commission comes,
that is, from the Imperial Majesty of Great Britains Monarchy, our dread
Lord, and Sovereign, King James, the lawful Heir unto our Kingdoms Throne:
whose Princely Scepter is his proper own, by a most royal and lineall
descent. It is his Commission, by whose powerful authority we are now and at
all times commanded to do him service: for the awful sway of his Sovereign
government does, ought, and must inioyne all his subjects to a due subjection
and obedience; for he is over us the Lords anointed, and in these his Realms
and Dominions, in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as
Civil, next under Christ Jesus our supreme Governor. Unto his Highness then
let our lives submission bend; let our faiths loyalty dedicate it self unto
his virtues praise: and for the long continuance of his Majesty's most happy,
powerful, and victorious Rule, let all good subjects pray.

Now that I have spoken from whom our Commission comes, the next word which
does direct my work is, Quibus, To whom it is directed, that is, To us his
Majesty's Justices of Assise, to whom by virtue of the Kings Commission is
given such power, as that in the administration of Justice we do represent
the person of our King: So as if in the time of the Assizes one shall strike
another in the presence of the Judge, be it no more then a blow on the ear,
the Law provides, That the offender shall loose his hand, wherewith he gave
the stroke, because the offense was done as in the presence of the Prince: For
the Law has so much care to protect the person of a Judge: As that if a
Justice of Assisc shall happen by any in his Circuit to be slain, the Law
adiudgeth it to be Lose Crimen Maiestatis, An offense done against the
Majesty of the King, and is punishable, as in cause of Treason.

To show the worthiness of our Place and Office, you shall understand, That
the Kings Majesty at his Coronation is sworn to do Justice unto all his
Subjects, which in his own Person it is impossible to perform. And therefore
his Highness is constrained by his Ministers, Deputies, Justices, and Judges,
to administer Justice unto all his people. Men therefore (in such place
employed) ought with wondrous care, and conscionable diligence to discharge
the trust in them reposed: for unto them, and into their hands, is (as it were)
delivered the Kings own Oath; because, what he is sworn unto, must be by
them in his behalf performed. See then the dignity of Justices and Judges of
Assizes, Assignauimus vos Iusticiaries nostros, We have assigned you our
Justices, that you may administer Justice unto our Subjects. Thus by the Kings
Commission the Kings own Oath is put into our hands: and at this instant (in
the place and person of a Judge) my Sovereigns Oath into my hand is put: I
(though his unworthy Subject) am by his gracious clemency Authorized (as in
his own Person) according to his own Oath, to administer Justice unto you his
Subjects: Which duty (by Gods assistance) as I have vowed, I will faithfully
perform: For if any (with a Kings Oath trusted) shall be so vilde, as to
falsify their trust, such offense is more then Capital.

The Place of a Judge then, the greater that it is, so much the more should
their care be, to discharge the same, upon whom so weighty an Office and
Honorable Authority is bestowed.

From whom our Commission comes, and to whom it is directed, has bin
briefly specified: I will now proceed, and show out of this word Quid, what is
in the Commission contained. Briefly therefore, it is that bounded limit, in
which solely does consist the strength of our authority; beyond which compass
we are commanded not to pass: For it appoints unto us the Justices of
Assizes, what it is that we must execute, as well in causes betwixt party and
party, as also the King and party depending. So as we are not only to
hear, judge, and determine, such Causes of Controversy, as shall by Writ of
Nisi prius be tried, but also to examine, acquit, or condemue all such
Prisoners, as shall for any offense against his Majesty be brought before us,
to receive their Trayall. So that by virtue of our Commission we have
authority, as in the person of our Sovereign, to judge in causes, that do
concern the life and death of the Subject.

That our Commission then is very Large, Ample, and Absolute, containing in it
self a powerful Authority, may by your selves be judged. And to the end,
that Justice may by us receive the more full sound and perfect Execution, Our
Commission, when it has largely described unto us what we may do therein, it
then most sweetly does Appoint, Limit, and Command.

What manner of doing we must use in those things appointed to be done, so
that it does not only give unto us authority, what to execute, but does
also lay down unto us the manner how our Authority must be executed, and to
the understanding hereof, my next word Quomodo does direct it self.

We then, the Justices of Assizes and Gaole-Deliuerie, are by his Majesty
appointed to administer Justice unto his Subjects; but Quomodo, how, not
according to our own Will, Conceit, or Opinion, but Secundum Legem and
Consuetudinem Maneriae Anglicanae, According to the Law, Custom, and Manner
of England: Which Law, Custom, and Manner must be executed with Knowledge,
Judgment, Understanding, and Equity. For we must know our selves, and Place
wherein we are: We must Know and Understand each cause before us brought,
and according to our Knowledge and Understanding, we must uprightly Judge,
according to Equity, without (in the least sort) being drawn, by respecting
either Person or Profit, to bear a Partial Hand in the Execution of
Judgment.

Partiality in a Judge, is a Turpitude, which does soil and stayne all the
Actions done by him. A Judge that will be Partial, will receive a Bribe, and
such an one cannot by any means be just, in his manner of Judging. Brybes,
and Partial dealying does defile the Purity of Justice, with great suspected
Evil: For a Judge, if but in some things he be known to take a Bribe, or be
approved Partial, he leaves no one Action done by him, free from the like
suspect. A Judge that for a Bribe will speak, and but once execute a Justice
purchased, all his words and Actions for ever after may justly be suspected,
though never so uprightly done or spoken.

A Judge must uprightly, with an equal and indifferent ear and mind fully
hear and understand each cause before he judges; otherwise, it is not
possible that justice should be justly executed: And to judge in a point of
difference, hearing but one party speak, is assuredly to be unjust; for this
sentence is directly true: Qui Indicat causam part inaudita altera, Aequu^
licet, Statuat, Iudex iniquus est: Who judges a cause for the one party, not
hearing the other, though what he does, may stand to be upright, yet is the
Judge unjust.

Our ancient Fathers did in their Pictures and Emblemes oftentimes enclose a
very great and substantial wisdom: Justice (as you know) uses ever to be
painted with a Sword in the one hand, and a pair of Scales or Balance in the
other; thereby signifying, That Justice never strikes her Stroke, till first
the cause be weighed in the Balance; her Blow comes not, until the weight of
the Cause to be tried, has by an upright hand equally received sufficient
trial: for then she knows rightly how to strike her stroke, and not before:
when the glory of her dignity shall receive perfectious Honor, as well by
protecting the Good, as in punishing the Bad.

Me thinks, that oftentimes when I ride by the way, I see the Effects of
Justice rightly resembled, when I behold a River with a silver current,
bounded in her equal course, with what just proportion she does disperse her
streams, without bewraying any little rage of intemperate violence. But if the
passage of that stream be stopped; then how like a raging Sea, she ouer-flowes
her banckes: and that then by an unresisted force, the Meadows, humble
Valleys, weak and low grown Shrubs are drowned up; enduring a recure-lesse
wrack, whilst Hills and Mountains stand safe from fear of harm. Even so
it fares with us: The equal course of Justice being stayed, the poor and
meaner sort of people they are overwhelmed with wrongs oppression, whilst
great and wealthy men, like Hills and Mountains, buyld their Stations sure,
being freed from any cause of grief: Justice withheld, only the poorer sort
are those that smart for it.

Justice unto all estates does measure an even proportion to rich and poor,
her met-wand keeps an equal length, being sealed with the testimony of an
upright conscience. To Kings, Rulers, Judges, and Magistrates, this sentence is
proper Vos Dijestis; you are Gods on earth: when by your execution of Justice
and Judgment, the God of heaven is by your actions represented: but if by us,
that so are called Gods, Justice and Judgment be perverted; it will be heavy
for our souls, when we shall dye like men.

Briefly, the office of a Judge, is patiently to hear each party speak
soberly; to answer or object, directly; to see (as near as may be possible)
each truth substantially proved: And then to Judge with an upright heart
according to Justice and Equity: Never in any one thing preferring Conclusion,
before a conscionable, wise, and judicial Consideration. In which
uprightness, the execution of Justice used by the Right Honorable (my most
worthy Predecessor) in this place shall be an Example, which I will desire to
follow.

Of all the Moral virtues, Justice ( Queene-like) is enthroned: for unto her
only is a Throne ascribed, because her Execution does nearest represent
Heavens eternal Deity. Justice and Mercy are inseparable Virtues; Mercy and
Judgment, as it was Righteous King David's, and lately our good Queens,
heavenly Elizabeth: so it is now virtuous King James his Song, in whose
princely breast Mercy and Judgment are most gloriously united. And to the
end, that I his Subject, and in his place his Substitute, and you his Subjects
may execute Justice as we ought, I will now out of my last word, de Quibus,
declare unto you, of whom, and of what Causes we are to enquire, that Justice
and Judgment may thereby receive a more clear and powerful Execution.

Those then of whom we are in the first place to enquire, are such, by whom
our King is most disobeyed, his State disturbed, and Kingdoms threatened:
Whereof (if you consider) it will be evident, That all those growing and
desperate attempting evils, by which, we are most prowdly menaced and
Aflicted, do principally proceed from three sorts of Recusants living amongst
us. Of all which, the Popish Recusant is the most dangerous with our English
Romanists will I therefore at the first begin, and in the description of their
Actions and practices, I do desire that my words may be entertained with
your best Attention.

Our Worlds Admired Queen Renowned Elizabeth, did (as you know) in the
beginning of her Reign, change the State of Religion in this Kingdom in her
first Parliament, by the consent of her Lords Spiritual and Temporal, being
especially by the Lord of Heaven directed, Error, Popish blindness, and
Faithless Constitutions grounded upon Human Traditions were extinct. And
Religions Purity according to the Law of Faith, was Reestablished, being built
upon the unremoved foundation, of the alone Autenticke word Canonical. The
books of the old and new Testament, from the truth whereof, she did always
direct the course of her so happy and Tryumphant Government.

Notwithstanding, the Change of Religion, it cannot be denied. That for the
first ten years, of her Majesty's Reign, the estate of Roman Catholic
in England was Tolerable, though some were Committed in the beginning of her
Coming to the Crown, yet none but those whose precedent Actions, had caused
the faith of their Allegience to remain doubtful, and so was the manner of
their commitment mixed with such gracious Clemency. As that they rather
endured a favorable restraint, then any straight or rigorous imprisonment, But
as well those so restrained, as generally all the Papists in this Kingdom, not
any of them did refuse to come to our Church, and yield their formal Obedience
to the Laws Established. And thus they all Continued, not any one refusing to
Come to our Churches, during the first ten years of her Majesty's
government. And in the beginning of the eleventh year of her Reign,
Cornewallyes, Beddingfield and Silyarde were the first Recusants They
absolutely refusing to come to our Churches. And until they in that sort began
the name of Recusant, was never heard of amongst us.

In the beginning of the eleventh year, when three Recusants, were only in
this Kingdom to be found. In the same year, Pope Impius, though abusiuely
surnamed Pius Quintus, his Hellishnes was informed by some of our English
Jesuits, that such was the number of Roman Catholics here in England, as
that if his Horriblenesse would denounce an Excommunication against the Queen
there was in this Realm and Kingdom, a power Catholical which would presently
upon an instant be in readiness, to enter into open hostility with force
sufficient to depose, and utterly to supplant her Highness; and to reestablish
the Roman faith.

Pope Impius of that name the first, upon the Information specified the better
to sever his hope in his good meaning to this Kingdom, presently plotteth with
the King of Spain for asuddaine Invasion upon the present Excommunication of
the Queen. And to this end one Robert Rodulphy a gentleman of Florence, was
sent by the Pope, under color of Merchandise, to solicit a Rebellion amongst
us. And gave order unto him for the receiving of one hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns, to set forward this Attempt. And Phillip King of Spain, by
the instance of the Pope, had determined to send the Duke of A^lna into
England, with all his forces in the Low Countries To Assist some great men
amongst us, who were by the Pope Solicited, to be the principal Agents in a
most Rebellious enterprise, unto whom some of the one hundred, and fifty
Thousand Crowns was delivered, and some other part sent into Scotland for the
like effect.

Thus as you have heard even at the same time, when her Majesty the late
Queen, dealt most mercifully with the Papists, did the Pope with them conspire
to work her Ruin, and this Kingdoms Overthrow, secretly complaning how on
sudden they might bring upon us Distructions, Spoil, and general Desolatton,
when our then Sovereign that Queen of Virtue, knowing She had diserued no
such evil, did not in the least sort suspect any such danger.

The Pope having as he thought surely Established the foundation of his hopes;
He then Denounced the Excommunication against the Queen which was not unto
her self made known, until the intended Rebellion in the North brake forth,
a little before Christmas, in the year 1569, being the twelfth year of her
Highness Reign. And then it was known, that the Pope had Excommunicated her
Majesty. And thereby freed her Subjects as the Bull imported, from their
Subjection and Obedience. But God was pleased that the Popes Bull was so
Bayted, as that the Rebellion by it procured, was suddenly suppressed; For the
Pope whose labor is to defend Lies, was himself deceived with a lie, for the
strength of the Papists here not being such as he was informed, The true
hearted Protestants taking part with the Sovereign, did quickly Cut the
Throats of our English Romans, dryuing some of the heads of that Rebellion,
unto a shameful flight, and brought the rest by our Laws Justice, to a
shameful death.

Her Majesty in the thirteenth year of her Reign, having made the Law before
specified, the very next year following, out Comes Sanders Book de Visibili
Monarchya, wherein he plainly seteth down how the Pope had sent one Morton
and Web, two Priests before the said Rebellion to the Lords and Gentlemen in
the North, to Excite them, with their followers, to take up Arms, signifying
unto them the Popes Commandment: Alleging, That her Majesty being
excommunicated, Her Subjects were released from their Obedience. And therefore
he does Directly Justify the said Commotion. Ascribing the evil success
thereof to the late publishing of the said Excommunication. Because it was not
generally known, until the year after it was Denounced. When Felton had set
it upon the Bishop of Londons gate. Affyrming that if it had bin published the
year before, or when the Rebels were in Arms, they had assuredly prevailed
against the Queen, and executed the said. Sentence at the same time, for her
deposinge from the Crown.

Thus Traitorously with more then Brazen Insolence, did that Traitor Sanders
spitt out his poisoned venim. Thereby desiring to Corrupt the hearts of her
highness Subjects, and to make them fit for a new Rebellion, which course by
him taken, was Immitated by Parsons, and many others to the like effect. Who
ceased not by there Heretical and Lying Pamphlits, with most Traiterous
impudency, to abuse her Majesty and the State. And not thus contented, in the
year one thousand five hundred seventy and nine, Stukely assisted by Sanders,
and other Catholics, both English, Irish, and Italian, with the Popes
Commission, entered into Ireland. The Pope himself, in the furtherance of that
Course sending thither certain forces upon his own Charge, Whilst all that
time, her Majesty that Queen of mercy was so far from being moved, as that
with Patience, she endured all these Injuries, only enforcing that one Law,
which as you have heard, she most Justly made against them.

Whilst Ireland by the Popes procurement remained in Combustion. It happened
that, Pius Quintus dyed, and Gregory the thirteenth succeeded in his place,
who presently Renews his Predecessors former Bull, and denounced her Majesty
to be Excommunicated, with Intimation of all other particulers in the former
Bull mentioned, which done, there was by him sent over into England* Campion
and Parsons, they came unto us in the year one thousand five hundred and
eighty, there coming was to Alienate the hearts of her Majesty's Subjects,
from their due obedience. And to make a party strong to depose the Queen,
Joining with the Pope, and King of Spain, by whom there was then an intended
preparation against us. But the Attempts and practices of them both at that
instant failing in England. The Pope as a Temporal Prince, displayeth his
Banner in Ireland, with purpose to deprive her Highness. First from that
Kingdom, and then by degrees to depose her from this. Notwithstanding so mild
was the proceedings of her Majesty against them, as that there were in the
space of Ten years, not much above twelve persons, that were by the Justice
of her Laws adjudged to die, and the most of them Semenaries, and all of them
Convicted in causes of Treason.

Her Majesty when she heard of the second Excommunication, and had seen what
followed in her Kingdom upon the first. She was then in all Christian
Pollecie enjoined to preuenr the success of dangers imminent. Her Highness
therefore, in the year one thousand five hundred eighty and one, caused a
Proclamation to be made for the calling home of her Subjects from beyond the
Seas, such especially as were Trained up in the Seminaries, perceiving that
they learned nothing there but disloyalty, and Treason. And presently after
this her Proclamation, she called a Parliament, wherein a Law was agreeable
in effect to the said Proclamation, enforced with a penalty of death, for any
Ies^ite or Seminary Priest, to repair into England, and for any to receive or
intertaine them, she would willingly that those of such profession, should
keep themselves without the Lymits of her Kingdom.

But if against her will, they would come into her Land to sow the seed of
Sedition, and Rebellion amongst her Subjects, and to lay, their plots how to
supprize her life, and to make a way for Foreign Enemies with bloody hands
to enter upon her Dominions. And by Hostill Invasion to bring her Kingdoms to
distructition, and to expose her people unto the Slarie of a servile yoke,
What should her Majesty less have done in the prevention of such a
Lamentable evil, but to hang up them that were the principal Actors in so
bloody and Tragecall a Tyranny.

From the year eighty one, to eighty eight, her Majesty was not free from
Continual Traitorous and Rebellious practices, desperately attempted against
her life, or intended subuertion of her Kingdom. First the Popes forces being
overthrown in Ireland, the Pope and King of Spain, presently joined with the
Duke of Guise, for the executing of a most desperate disignment against her
Majesty. Arden and Someruilde, would have laid vyolent hands upon her sacred
person. Dostor Parrie, intended the like villainy. Northumberland revolted from
his Obedience. Mendoza the Jesuit, and others of that Crew or Sect, appointed
by the Pope to order and Manage these deuelish designments.

In the year eighty, to forerunne the purposed Spanish Invasion, against
which time Campion, Parsons, Haywoode, and all the Jesuits and Seminaries, had
so besturred themselves. There is certain books printed beyond the Seas, sent
over into England, thereby to prepare the hearts of our people, to Join with
Spain, and to take up Arms against their Sovereign, with persuasions
grounded upon this position. Viz. That in all wars which may happen for
Religion: every Catholic man is joined in conscience to employ his person and
forces by the Popes direction, that is, how far, when, where, and how either at
home or abroad, he may and must break with his temporal Sovereign, and that
upon pain of deadly sin. Upon a foundation so diabolical: What fruits other
then devilish can be expected? And yet, do but further note how damnable a
spirit is in their books and writings bewrayed.

All the Papists in this kingdom, were most violently persuaded, that upon the
Spanish invasion, they should all join their greatest force with Spain. It
was in them accounted an error of conscience, want of courage, and effeminate
dastardie, that they had suffered her Majesty almost thirty years to reign
over them. They were threatened with Excommunication, and utter ruin, both of
themselves and their posterity, if they did any longer obey and defend, or
acknowledge her highness to be their Queen or superior, and did not forthwith
join their forces to the Spaniards. And to the end, that this most godless,
traiterous, inhumane and unnatural appointment, by subjects to their lawful
anointed Sovereign, and native country, might receive the better acceptance;
There was used a most insinuating, though faithless manner of persuasion,
gilded over with a seeming show of Holiness: (For thus,) our English Roman
Catholics were promised) That in the king of Spaines army, there were diverse
Priests ready to serve every man's spiritual necessity, by confession,
counsel, and all consolation in Christ Jesus, and that they should be so
assisted by the blessed patrons, both in heaven, and in earth, with the guard of
all Gods holy Angels, with our blessed Savior in the sovereign Sacrament, and
with the dailye, most holy Oblation of Christ's own dear body and blood. As
that it could not fall out otherwise, but that they should assuredly prevail:
Hereby may the world perceive in what Angelike manner of brightness Popish
doctrine can suite treasons damnable, even as black as hell.

You have heard what preparation was provided by the Pope and Papists, for the
furtherance of Spaines intended invasion, we will now proceed to matter of
action. And but call to our remembrance (that ever to be remembered) powerful
wo^ke of God:) for our deliverance in the year 88. The king of Spanes Armado,
that admirable, and warlike navy, so well furnished with valiant soldiers,
and all munition fit for war, when suddenly we were in danger by a Potent
enemy to be surprised, when her late Majesty's Royal Navy, was scar^ly put
forth to sea. And the best ships of strength not fully furnished with shot and
powder, as was necessatie in so weighty a business: yet to the never dying
glory of a maiden Queen, such was her princely power, although at sea but in
part' unprovided, as that by the love and grace of heavens eternal providence,
her Majesty by a most noble Battle at sea, even in the presence of her
kingdoms Territories, did utterly disperse and overthrow, that surnamed
invincible Spanish navy, so that not any Spaniards floate, (unless brought
captive could arrive) upon her Englands shore. Nor but very few of their so
much admired fleet of ships, returned to their native home. Thus did God on
Queen Elizabeth bestow a glorious victory, even in the despite of Pope,
Papist, traiterous Jesuits, Seminaries, Monks, Friars, and all the rablement
of that Antichristian See.

The power of Spain, was brought against us, by the procurement of our English
Papists, and what recompense was intended for them, in the charity of their
catholic profession may appear, by that which the Duke of Medina Sidonia
affirmed, which was, That both Catholics and Heretics that came in his way,
should be all one to him, his sword could not discern them, so he might make
way for his master, all was one to him. Thus did* Papists, as still they do,
desire to work our down fall in the certainty of their own destruction.

God having showed his love to our late Queen and kingdom, by that wonderful
deliverance before described: The Pope to further his accustomed endeavors,
practiced with Spain, about a new invasion, and the better to bring his
purpose to pass: Parsons, that ancient Jesuit, and most notorious traitor,
under the Pope, chief governor of all the Jesuits, (principal enemies to
Jesus,) was placed in the Spanish Court, by whose persuasion there was a new
Seminary erected at Valedolyde, from whence in three years, there was sent
thirteen priests into England, to prepare a passage for the new intended
invasion. Whereupon in the year 1591. a Proclamation went forth for the
apprehending of all such Priests or Seminaries, as should come from Spain.
Because their intention was known unto the State here. But to the end the
Devil (the Pope I should say) might want no instruments for the effecting of
murders, treasons, and rebellions, by Parsons procurement, more Seminaries
were erected in Spain, (and England still troubled with Romes traiterous
disciples.) But the new invasion being twice set on foot, God did so war
against their purposes, as that their prepared Navy was at sea, dispersed by
storms, so as most of them endured shipwreck.

That expectation failing, then was the Infant of Spain entitled to the
Crown of England: (and to that end, sundry books diuulged) Queen Elizabeth
was by them accounted a tyrant: more tyrannical then Nero, Decius, Dioclesian,
Maxentius, or any the greatest persecutors of the Christians: Not thus
contented, from the year 88. to the year 99. there were continual treasons
practiced against the Royal person of her late Majesty, Patricke, Collen,
Lopez, York, Williams, Squier, all attempting to murder her Highness.

All these attempts, plots, proiects, and traiterous stratagems, taking no
effect. Then was there from the Pope a new Bull sent, whereby the Papists were
commanded to use a formal manner of obedience, until they might grow to be a
strength sufficiently strong to depose the Queen. Which expectation once
accomplished, then had they power by the said Bull to take up arms against
her. Thus they never left continual practicing, until a little before her
Majesty's death: about which time, by some of the principal Agents, in the
last most horrible treason, there was complotted another Spanish invasion: For
the accomplishing whereof, the younger VVinter was a messenger unto the king of
Spain, and Guydo Fawkes unto the Pope, and a third was employed to the
Archduke.

The king of Spain at that time being our enemy, entertained VVinters motion,
with most kind acceptance, protesting that the English Catholics should be as
dear unto him, as his home-borne Castillians, and in love to the intended
business, vowed in the word of a king, to defend their safety, (all which, as
soldiers say) with policy in war he might do) being then our enemy. But
it is a matter clean out of my Element, and therefore I will dispute no
further about it: But the Counsel of Spain holding a conference about the
mannaging of the plot by VVinter laid. It was objected that there would be want
of horse for such a business. Whereupon Winter undertakes to furnish them
with a certain number, and receives gold to that end. At last the purposed
designement being embraced with a general consent, a soldier standing by,
being some Commander, a Captain, or such like, ruffles out this soldier like
Latin, Nunc tempus pro nobis erit aliquid obtinere: Now shall it be time for
us to get something. But in the midst of this intended preparation, it
happened, that her Majesty Royal, and most gracious Elizabeth died: And our
now Imperial Sovereign King James, did both inherit her kingdoms and her
virtues.

His Majesty being with peace established in his royal seat, the king of
Spain would no longer embrace his former purposed appointment: Nor would
consent, that any thing should against a king be plotted, with whom he never
had war: Nor by whom he never received any injury. So as our Papists were in
that behalf dismissed of their expected hope: and enforced to seek out some
other means; and now I will bewray a secret (I am sure not generally known.)
In the discourse whereof I do desire attention.

Pope Clement the ninth, who was accounted the last best of many Popes, (all
notwithanding being naught.) He understanding Spaines purpose, as before is
specified, concerning an invasion, supposing that the Queen might die before
that business took effect: And foreseeing unto whom these kingdoms should of
right descend, sent secretly a Bull into England, which was so closely
concealed, amongst our Papists here, as that her Majesty in her life time
knew not thereof. (For if she had) I am sure, that by reason of mine
employment near unto her: I should have heard if she had known any such
thing* But assuredly both her self, and the State, were ignorant thereof.

But now this Bull being brought to light (which my self have seen and read)
it imports thus much* qua^do contingeret illam miserima^ Elizabetha^ mortua^
esse That when that miserable wench Elisabeth should happen to dye, Tunc nos
volumus, Then we will, that all and every of you, do use your best and
uttermost endeavors quibuscunque modis et vi^s, by what strength or means so
ever, to keep out the Scottish Heretic, that in any wise he may not be
admitted to the kingdom of England, unless he would reconcile himself to
Rome, and hold his crown of the Pope, and conform himself and all his
subjects to the religion of the Roman Church. This Bull until Garnet was
taken, slept in England, being filled with a most proud, scornful and
Traiterous boldness.

When that miserimam foeminam Miserable woman or wench Elizabeth shall dye, had
the Papal proud usurper, no other attribute to bestow upon a Queen then
Miserable wench? she lived Renowned thorough all the Corners of the world,
she ruled in peace, beloved of all her Subjects, unless those infected with
the Roman Leprosy, she was admired, and feared, co^fre^^ing all oppositions,
with undoubted confidence, she was a Prince potent enough, to defend her
Kingdoms and to help her Neighbors being oppressed with glorious victory
she beat Spain from off her coasts, and rifled him in the bosom of his own
kingdom, wrapping his towns and ships in clouds of fire and smoke. She
swayed the Royal Scepter of her kingdoms, government with triumphant
victory; maintaining peace amongst her people, even in the worlds despite, 44
years her unmatched wisdom, and unconquered prowes crowned her the
Peerless wonder of her sex: she lived and di'd a Queen, her life beloved,
and her death lamented: And yet for all this, was she no more in the Popes
account, then a miserable wench. Let the Popes pride sink to hell: whilst
heavens Elizabeth (whose blessed soul from earth to heaven is taken) does, and
shall with God and Christ for ever live in the heavenly glory of eternal
happiness.

Pope Clement the ninth, having by his Bull, as before specified, given
commandment that the Papists should by all means howsoever, withhold our now
Sovereign from his lawful right. (And notwithstanding that Rebellious
Commission,) his Majesty being with great joy peaceably enstalled. Peersie and
Catesby went unto their great Provincial Garnet, and of him enquired, whether
the king being as he was already established, they might by virtue of the
Popes Bull, use any means to supplant or depose him, considering they were not
of force to withstand his coming at the first. And Garnet answered, that
undoubtedly they might, whereupon they presently resolved to put in execution,
that most horrible powder treason, the like whereof, until that time, was
never to the world reported.

Some are of opinion, that if a tolleration of religion had bin admitted unto
the Papists: that then no such bloody stratagem should by any of them have
been practiced. But if you shall consider the tenor of the Popes Bull, you may
then perceive, that their request of indifferent Tolleration was but a
colorable pretense in them. For that might not have served their turns: For
they were enjoined to work his Majesty's overthrow, unless he would reconcile
himself to Rome, hold his Crown of the Pope, and conform himself and all
his subjects to the Religion of the Roman Church: It is not then a toleration
only which they seek, nor could they have been contented therewith (although
so much shall never be granted unto them.) They may therefore easily despair
of the rest (though they the Pope and the Devil) do never so much conspire to
bring their Hell-borne practices to pass.

As touching the last horred treason, by inhuman savages complotted: I know not
what to speak, because I want words, to describe the traiterous, detestable,
tyrannical, bloody, murtherous villainy of so vilde an action. Only this had
their horrible attempt taken place. This Sea-Inuyrond-Iland, the beauty, and
wonder of the world. This so famous and far renowm'd great Britains
Monarchy, had at one blow endured a recouerlesse ruin, being overwhelmed in
a sea of blood, all those evils, should have at one instant happened, which
would have made this happiest kingdom of all kingdoms, the most unhappy. Our
conquering Nation, conquered in her self: her fair and fertile bosom, being
by her own native (though foul vnaturall children) torn in pieces, should
have been made a scorn to all the nations of the earth. This so well planted,
pleasant, fruitful worlds, accounted Edens paradise, should have been by this
time, made a place disconsolate, auast and desert wilderness, generally
ouerrunne with herds of bloud-desiring wolves. This so well governed,
Populous, potent Monarchy, had in one moment been left without either King,
Queen, Prince, State, Nobility, Law, Justice, or any strength of government,
suddenly had we then been thrown not only to the cruelty of civil war,
that too too murtherous Domestic spoiling enemy: But also even in that
instant generally have been exposed unto the all-deuouring hand of foreign
Enemies, in our Congregations, the songs of Syon had no more been sung: But in
their steed had bin brought unto us the songs of Gehenna sent from Rome: that
Satan's synagogue, all our best-freedomes liberty, had by this been turned into
the worst bondage of most slavish servitude: Papists, Roman Catholics that
would have wrought all our destructions thus; Should not Justice, justly then
command their actions chiefly to be enquired of.

If what has been spoken, be unto your memories committed, you may then
consider, that from the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, until the
third year of our now Sovereigns government, the Papists have continually
labored to advance the supremacy of the Roman Church, which to accomplish they
have contended thirty four years, in which time they have not omitted to
practice Treasons and Rebellions only amongst us here at home. But have also
complotted to bring upon us Foreign Invasions, and that from time to time, so
soon as they were dismissed of one hope, they presently set a foot some other
project: both at home and abroad: and still being by the love and mercy of GOD
toward us continually prevented: At last, taking counsel with hell, and
Satan, they had practiced a most hellish attempt. wherein their Diuellishnesse
brought it self nearest to the nature of the Devil, making fire and brimstone
the instruments of our destruction. And though the principal Actors of that
evil, have thereby themselves destroyed: yet the former experience of their
continual attempting may give us warning, that they will not yet sease to
attempt, and though that Jesuits and Seminaries have been the principal
Agents in all the several complotted treasons, and that the Papists amongst us
cannot generally be accused, yet thus much I must say, those persons, and that
Religion whereby Jesuits and Seminaries are received, protected and concealed,
are equally to be accounted dangerous, for were there not such receivers
amongst us, Romes state, Traitors would not so fast come, swymming from Tyber
hither, to arrive at Tyborne, only, I conclude therefore, that if in great
Britain, there were no Papists, this Monarchy should be as free from treason
as any Nation in the world.

But now dear Contrimen, seeing you have heard what godless and dangerous
practices have continually by Romes favorites been plotted against us. I
desire that with attention you will understand what it is (as they say) for
which with such vehemence they contend. The world is made believe, that the
advancement of Religion is the only cause for which they strive, wherein they
join themselves unto the Pope, because there is no religion good, but that
which is by the Pope allowed, wherein my purpose is to bind all Papists unto
their own assertion.

That Pius Quintus whom those of their side do account to have been a good
Pope (though by false persuasions too much misled) before the time of his
excommunication against Queen Elizabeth denounced, sent his letter unto her
Majesty, in which he did allow the Bible, and Book of divine service, as it
is now used amongst us, to be authenticke, and not repugnant to truth. But
that therein was contained enough necessary to salvation, (though there was not
in it, so much as might conveniently be) and that he would also allow it
unto us, without changing any part: so as her Majesty would acknowledge to
receive it from him the Pope, (and by his allowanc) which her Majesty denying
to do, she was then presently by the same Pope excommunicated: And this is the
truth concerning Pope Pius Quintus, as I have faith to God and men, as I have
oftentimes heard it auowed by the late Queen her own words: And I have
conferred with some Lords that were of greatest reckoning in the State, who
had seen and read the letter, which the Pope sent to that effect: as have been
by me specified. And this upon my credit, as I am an honestman, is most true.

By this then all our English Papists, either Jesuits or Seminaries may
learn to know that it is not Religion that they strive for, but only to
maintain the Antichristian head of Romes usurped supremacy. And if there be
in this presence any Roman Catholics, or so many of this nation, as shall
hear of that which has now been spoken. I entreat them, as my dear and
loving Country men, that they will no longer be seduced, by any living
spirit sent from Rome, the Pope, whom they believe, has himself allowed,
that in our Church, We have a doctrine of Faith and Religion, sufficiently
necessary to Salvation: Dear Countrymen, we have then enough, and need not
the help of any Pope, Sythence all the Papists generally came unto our
Churches before our late Queen Elizabeth was excommunicated.) Against our
Dread Sovereign there is no Excommunication denounced. In Gods name, then let
us join in our prayers, and Sacraments, and persorme a due obedience to God,
and to our King, as we are all of one Nation, so let us be all of one Church,
and christ being only our head, let us all desire as in one sheepfolde, to be
the sanctified members of his glorious body.

If there be any Papists so foolish, and altogether reasonlesse, as to expect
that in time his Majesty may be drawn to such alteration, or Tolleration: as
they desire. I will them assuredly to know, they hope in vain, for his
Majesty is, and ever has been confidently resolved, in matter of Religion,
to continue the self same order and profession, which he now professes.
Whereof I will give you an instance, Since the time of the Earl of
Northumberlands Imprisonment, there was amongst his papers found a letter,
which was objected against him in Star Chamber, when himself was called unto
his answer: The letter was directed to the Kings Majesty, that now is, as he
was then King of Scotland. In which amongst other things, the Earl had advised
his Highness not to desire to be proclaimed Heir apparent to this Crown,
nor proclaim Prince Henry to be the Prince of Wales, But to stay the time,
until the Queens death. And that then he would resolve at his coming to
admit unto the Catholics a Tolleration for their religion, which he requested,
because the Papists did put some trust in him, to Solicit that business in
their behalf. This letter being read, his Majesty's own answer was showed:
(Till that time, by Gods own hand preserved) to signify unto the world' his
religious unremoved confidence. To the first part of the Earls letter, his
Highness answered, that he had no contrary purpose, but to attend Gods
leisure. And for his motion concerning the Catholics tolleration, he was
purposed to come unto this kingdom in peace. But as touching matter of
Government, he was resolved never to alter anything, either in Church or State.
His Majesty's most noble and Kingly resolution, not enduring then to temporize
under any pretext of humane policy. Can it now be thought, that his Highness
will be removed in matter of Religion, from that Station whereupon his Souls
salvation stands built.

Such Papists (as notwithstanding the impossibility of their hope will still
remain perverse) despising to be admonished: Let them know for certainty, that
the laws concerning them, shall receive a most strict and severe execution,
you therefore of the jury, ought to be very careful in that business. And all
the justices in their several Limits, are in their allegiance to the King,
bound in conscience to use all diligence so to observe the Papists, as that
unto their houses, there be not any lesuites or Seminaries intertayned. For
there practice, is to Alienate the hearts of our English Subects, from the
obedience to their sovereign. In which employment, though the Jesuits be
most notorious, yet I account the Seminary Priests more dangerous; Because
their estimation steals to it self a better opinion in the hearts of the
simple. Notwithstanding, all their work is directed to one and the self same
end; If all good subjects then shall desire the administration of Justice,
according to the Laws established: they may either be converted or supplanted.
By whom our subversion, and utter supplanting has so often times been
attempted. I therefore leave them, their actions and proceedings to be judged
off, and carefully to be looked into, by your most mature consideration and
best diligence, least that our too too much conueniencie, does yet untimely
bring upon us some dangerous mischief. Them and their actions therefore are
principally in the first place to be enquired of, and that with such regard as
their cunning may be no means outreach the meaning of the Statute Law inacted
for their punishment, wherein though there be as much concluded, as the wisdom
of our state could devise, in the prevention of any future evil, yet as I
hear, the Pope has already granted such dispensation, as that by their
hellish, Sophistry, of Equiuocating, they may take a course wherein to deceive
our hope of there amendment, but in Gods name let the law provided, receive a
just and faithful execution, and then doubt not, but their faithless Popish
policy shall be sufficiently prevented. And that in time the most sacred
person of Gods anointed King, whom Pope Clement the ninth, cold proudly dare
to term the scottish Heritike, shall underneath his Princely foot tread down
Romes faithless Papal proud and Antichristian heresy, and now in hells
despite, virtuous King James being the Imperial Majesty of great Britains
Monarchy, the strength of whose established awful government, makes the
proudest Territories and most strong foundation of earths Babilonde to shake, I
doubt not but in his royal self and his most blessed posterity, as is already
by force of his commanding power, not without just cause fearfully suspected,
the destruction of the scarlet whore shall be made certain to her, and her
adulterates, when they together shall be with wrath destroyed for the
acco^plishing of which most glorious work, let all true believing protestants,
like faithful subjects to their lawful Sovereign yield there best obedience
to his highness laws, and thus much concerning Roman Catholics.

Those that you are in the second place to enquier of, are a second manner of
Recusants, though nothing so dangerous as the Popish recusant is, yet are they
a Sect not to be tolerated in any Monarchyall government. They are a certain
Brotherhood, which can endure no Bishops: The original founder of their
schism, as they now profess, it has (as some of them say) turned an Apostate,
to his first profession, so as now they are ashamed of his name, and will by no
means in their fraternity be derived from him, yet they remain known to the
world, by the name of Brownings. The most part of them are simple, and
Illiterate people. And they together with those of that sort, which seem to
have learning, are as all the rest, only arrogant, and wilfully perverse,
fitter to be reformed by punishment, rather then by argument: And though their
ignorance understands not what they do, yet do their endeauours strive to
shake in sunder the whole frame of our Imperial government, for if (as they
desire) the form of our Civil Laws were abrogated, Then should our Common
Law, and it of necessity fall together. For they are so wouen and incorporated
each in other, as that without the one, the other cannot stand: for example.

An action Real, being brought at common Law, in Bar thereof Bastardy is
pleaded, our common Law can then proceed no further, until by the civil Law
the matter of Bastardy be determinned, So is it in the right of a Woman's Dowre,
and in the trial of Wills; In all these, and diverse others without the
Assistance of the civil Law, the common Law has no power to determine. If then
the civil Law must of necessity remain, it is no less necessary that the
judges thereof should be continued.

And again without the grave assembly of our Reverend Bishops, his Majesty's
high court of parliament, should be unfurnished, no law being there enacted,
but that which is by the King, his Lords spiritual and temporal confirmed.
These therefore that would have no Bishops amongst us, do in their desires
strive, from his highness, and the dignity of his State, to pluck the right hand
of government, and as much as in them lies to break in sunder, the golden
frame of just Authority for if no Bishops, then no Laws, if no Laws, no King;
and to this height does their presumption clime, although their idiot blindness
seems as if they did not understand so much, the mischief of their schism is
most insufferable: For never was there a nation known to flourish having a
Monarchy in the kingdom, and a Mallachie in the Church. And therefore you of
the Jury fail not to enquire of all such Sectaries and present them.

It is therefore the faith full Protestant, that only sets the Crown upon our
Sovereigns head, and holds it up so fast, as no opposition can make it shake.
And by their loyal hands will Heaven bepleased, to keep it safe from falling,
which Mercy in the most Royal issue now established, God for christ's his sake
confirm unto us, so long as Sun and Moon endures.

The last sort of Recusants, though trouble some, (yet in my conscience the
least dangerous) are those which do with too much violence, contend against
some ceremonies used in the Church, with whose indirect proceedings, in mine
own knowledge, his Majesty is not a little grieved. But I will hope (as his
Highness does) that in time, they will grow wise enough to leave their
foolishness, and consider that ceremonies not against the Analogy of Faith,
nor hindering Faiths devotion, are no such bug-beares as should scar them from
the exercises of divine duties, nor cause them to disturb the peace of our
Church, whose government is more consonant to Scripture then all the best
reformed Churches at this day in the world. You of the Jury fail not
therefore to enquire of their abuses, which do delay to conform themselves
unto the laws obedience, that such of them as do grow insolent, may not go
unpunished: And thus much concerning our three sorts of Recusants.

Thus having touched these groaning evils, which being well considered, do
cry for justice against themselves, threatening (if not suppress) To make our
Commo^wealth to groan under the burden of enforced calamity. I will now, from
them proceed unto those growing enormities, whose vngouernd height is already
to such imperfection grown, as that the justice of this kingdoms government,
receives scandal by their means, and the public weal grieved by unjust
oppression.

I hear a general complaint against the multiplicity of Ecclesiastical
Courts, and that causes are in them continued longer then an upright and
orderly proceeding would necessarily enforce, by means whereof, his Majesty's
good subjects, do receive loss, and are much hindered, by there so often
constrained attendance. But in this Diocese, I hope the occasion of any such
complaints, shall no more be heard of, Because I speak before those reuerned
Magistrates, The L. Bishop and the Chancellor of that dioces being then
present upon the bench.
in whose authority consists sufficient power to reform those abuses already
complained upon, I will therefore insist no further, few words content the wise,
what I have spoken, I know is heard by an approved wisdom.

As touching the pennall Statutes for the punishing of any vnreuerent demeanure
in Churches, or violence offered to the ministers, or quarrelling stryking, or
drawing of any weapon in Church, or Church yard, I know they be ordynary
matters, given in every charge. And therefore you are not ignorant of the Laws
in that case made and provided: I will therefore in respect of the shortness of
the time, only point out unto you some several officers, whose actions not
being sufficiently looked into, many abuses are committed, which do pass
unpunished.

Our common wealth, Receives much injury by our Escheators, who by abusing
their commission, do most intolerable wrong, to many of his Majesty's good
Subjects, for an Escheator will come into the country, and being informed of
an honest Yeoman deceased, be it that his Lands, be not above the yearly value
of forty or fifty Pounds, and leaving an Heir behind him, an inquiry shall
be made, by what evidence every acre of ground is holden, and finding but one
piece, for which an express evidence cannot be showed, for that particular
parcel, Then by a Jury to that end Summoned by the Escheator, that piece of
ground must be adjudged to be held in Capite. And so an office being found:
all the whole inheritance must be taynted, and the young heir a ward to the
King, who then being presently Begged by some one or other, by then he has
compounded for his wardship, sued out his livery, and then perhaps married to
one stark naught, or not worth any thing, the young heir shall be left just
worth so much, and no more: And this (as I think) is a most lamentable thing.
God forbid that every man should be enforced by such course, to prove his right
in every particular acre of ground which he has. For many particular pieces
are often included in one evidence, without being distinguished by several
names. So that it is impossible, but by such course, as the Escheator takes,
lands that never held in Capite, must needs be brought in compass of such
Tenure. And again, the intent of the Law, for the benefit of the king, looks
only to Manors, Lands, and Tenements of great value, without having respect to
such petty things. Where an heir to clear the encumbrance, must overthrow his
estate, loose his inheritance, and be undone for ever. But this
notwithstanding, so the Escheator may have his part, in the spoil, he cares
not to use any indirect corruption. You of the Jury therefore for the good of
your selves and yours, carefully look to the proceedings used in this case,
and such abuse as you shall find therein, let it be presented. And such as
shall be found offenders, they shall know, that we have laws to punish them.
For proof whereof, I would you could find out some, of whom there might be
made an example: But if you will be content to let the Escheator alone, and not
look unto his actions, he will be contented by deceiving you, to change his
name, taking unto himself the two last syllables, only with the Es left out:
and so turn Chetor.

We have then an excellent Officer, surnamed the Clarke of the Market,
concerning whose office, for mine own part, I see not the necessity thereof,
considering the Justices of peace in their several limmits, are at every
Sessions to enquire of, and to punishall those abuses which are by the Clarke
of the market continued, under show of reformation. For he will come down and
call before him all waights and measures, and where a fault is found, there
must a Fee be paid, which is divided betwixt him and the Informer: So the
offender pays for his offense, to the end it might be continued, but not
reformed. And thus the Clarke of the market by receiving bribes, enricheth
himself, by abusing his Majesty's laws, and wronging his Subjects. It was
once my hap to take a Clarke of the market in these tricks: But I aduanst him
higher then his fathers son; by so much as from the ground to the top of
the Pillorie. If you of the Jury will therefore have a care to find out these
abuses, by Gods grace they shall not go unpunished. For we have a Coyfe, which
signifies a Scull: whereby in the execution of Justice, we are defended
against all oppositions, be they never so violent.

There is a certain ruffling officer, which will seem to command much by the
authority of his Commission. And he will be known to be a Purueyor. Some of
which officers, if they can find nothing to be dealing with, they will puruey
money out of your purses: if you will suffer them. But know there is no money to
be purueyed, unless by the high way side, and any Purueyor that shall take
such course, is but in his passage, the high way to the gallows.

But to speak of that, which may by them be lawfully done, admit a Puruey or
comes down with Commission, to take up timber for the Kings use; What timber
is it then that he must take: He cannot come and pull down any timber in my
house, what then? May he go into any of my woods which I purpose to preserve,
and there mark out of my best timber, and enforce me to suffer it to be
felled, and carried away at the kings price? No, There is not any such
authority granted unto him. But only thus, If I have any timber felled, which
I purpose to sell: then may the Purueyor (the King having use of timber) come
and make choice of what trees he will: For there is great reason, that in such
case the king should first be served. But if any of you do desire to preserve
your timber growing, be not scared with a Purueyors warrant: Nor do not
preserve the standing of your trees, by bribing any one of them. The dignity
of his Majesty's prerogative Royal is not used to enforce his subjects to
endure wrong. But the rust being scoured off, which abused time, has cast upon
it, then will the glory thereof shine in the perfection of an uncorrupted
brightness. You of the Jury therefore look into the abuses done by Purueyors,
and present them.

Besides these spoken of. There is also a Saltpeter man, whose Commission is
not to break up any man's house or ground without leave. And not to deal with
any house, but such as is unused for any necessary employment by the owner.
And not to dig in any place without leaving it smooth and level: in such
case as he found it. This Saltpeter man under show of his authority, though
being no more then is specified, will make plain and simple people believe,
that he will without their leave, break up the floor of their dwelling
house, unless they will compound with him to the contrary. Any such fellow, if
you can meet withal, let his misdemenor be presented, that he may be taught
better to understand his office: For by their abuse the country is oftent
times troubled.

There is another trouble some fellow called a Concealer, who is indeed little
better then a plain Cosiner, and would in many things be proved so, if well
looked unto. There by many Satute laws to prevent the occurrence of his
mischief, give him not a penny for any of his claims or titles: For they are
mere illusions, and like himself not worth any thing.

There be 4 sorts of people, whom if you observe, you shall find not any of
them to thrive. I have always known them little better then beggars, and may
easily be known by these names. A Concealer, of whom I have spoken: unto whom
is rightly joined a Promo^ter, a Monopolitan, and an Alcumist: The Promooter is
both a beggar and a knave, and may, if well looked unto, in the part of an
Informer, (For many abuses) by your information, either be well punished or
reformed. Their Office, I confess, is necessary: And yet it seldom
happens, that an honest man is employed therein: yet there is some hope, that
by punishing their abuses, they may at the last be made honest against their
wills. In which employment, you of the Jury shall do well to use a respective
diligence.

As touching the Monopolitane, he for the most part uses at a dear rate to
pay for his foolishnes: For some of that profession, have been so wise, to sell
twenty, thirty, or perhaps forty pound land a year, and bestow most part of
the money in purchasing of a Monopoly: Thereby to anoy and hinder the whole
Public Weal for his own private benefit: In which course he so well
thriueth, as that by toyling some short time, either in Starch, Vinegar, or
Aquauitae, he does in the end thereby purchase to himself an absolute
beggerie, and for my own part, their purposes and practices considered, I can
wish unto them no better happiness.

But then our golden Fool the Alcumist, he will be striving to make Gold and
Silver, until he leaves himself not worth a pennies weight in either of both.
I will not deny, but to understand the nature, quintessence, and spirit of the
Minerals, out of them to extract a Metaphisicall and Paracelsian manner of
Physic, may according to art becommendable, but by the study of Alcumie, to
desire to turn imperfect metals into Gold and Silver, such labor I account
ridiculous: And oftentimes by those of this C^micall Science is Felony
committed: For by any imperfect commixture, to use multiplication, either in
Gold or Silver, is directly Fellonie by Statute Law: you of the Jury are
therefore to enquire of such offenders, and present them.

Because I must have unto an end, I will request that you will carefully put in
execution the Statute against Vagarants: Since the making whereof, I have found
fewer thieves, and the Jail less pestered then before.

The abuse of Stage players, wherewith I find the Country much troubled, may
easily be reformed: They having no Commission to play in any place without
leave: And therefore, if by your willingness they be not entertained you may
soon be rid of them.

You are also concerning Innes and Alehouses diligently to observe what the
Statute Law determines. As also to keep the orders set down by my honorable
predecessor, concerning which, there is now by the appointment of the Lords of
the Counsel, certain Briefes to be delivered unto all the Justices in their
several Limmits. And assuredly, if you of the Jury, petty Constables, Chief
Constables, and Justices of Peace, would together labor that the Laws
carefully Enacted for our good, might receive a a due and just execution,
abuses would then be reformed, God and our King faithfully served and honored.
And the tranquillity of our Public weal preserved: which so great
happiness, that it may the better be accomplished, I would request, that all
employed in any place of authority, would have an special care to suppress
that root of evil, from whence all mischiefs do proceed, and that is Idleness:
For idle persons are those of whom the Psalm speaks, They do wickedly all
the day long, they imagine wickedness upon their beds, the imaginations of
their hearts are evil continually, and such for the most part are all those,
given over to an idle disposition: who by their wickedness do make themselves
worse then beasts: For, Homo malus infinitis modis plura mala perpetrauerit
quam bestia, an evils man by an infinite manner commits more evil then a
beast. For the reformation of which dangerous evil: you shall do well to have
an especial eye unto the company that frequent Tauerns, Innes, Alehouses,
Bewling allies, and such like thriftlesse places of resort, where you shall
find Tradesmen, and Artificers,, which have no other means whereby to live,
then only the lawful use of their Science, or Manual profession. And yet
such is their unthrifty idleness, as they will spend their time and labors
profit, at some, or all the places before recited: whilst their wives and
children sit at home and weep, wanting necessary maintenance: Those of such
condition, let them be enquired of and presented: For were the Justice of the
Law rightly executed upon such offenders (they receiving condign punishment
for their offense) would be enforced to betake them selves unto a better course
of life, and live as becomes good Subjects in the list of a more commended
obedience.

Of that idle company, you shall also find some of our accounted Gallants
young Gentlemen, vpstarts, perhaps honest yeomens sons, that by their
intemperate Ryote, love to spend their inheritance before they come to inherit,
and being questioned for their chargeable and expensiue manner of living, they
will bravely answer that they spend nothing but their own: And will seem as
if they scorned to be reformed by admonition or authority. The law provides a
course whereby to teach such vain and idle royoters so to spend, that they may
keep their own: For when by their misdemenor all their own is spent; Then
their next course is to live upon the goods of others: and then at last, such
Gallants turning stark thieves, do make their last period at the Gallows,
reaping to themselves, by an untimely death, the fruit of idleness.

There is also a sort of idle seeming Gentlemen, whom if you do observe, you
shall find them walking with a gray-hound in a slip, or a birding piece upon
their neck, and they forsooth will make a path over the Statute Law, and into
any man's Grounds, Lordshippes, or Liberties, pass and repasse at their
pleasure: As if it were lawful for every Fellow to keep a Graye-hound, and
to hunt, when and where he lists, or as if a birding piece were no Gunne, and
so not included in the Statute made against Gunnes.

But if you would find out those Fellows, and present them, they shall be
taught to know themselves: And that the wisdom of a Kingdoms state, in the
framing of a Statute Law, could not be deluded by a vain and shallow brained
idleness of their ridiculous Foolery. Let them be therefore punished whose
misdemenor in this case offends.

The better to prevent the Ryotous expense of unthrifty idleness, you shall
do well to have a special care unto the Statute for Apparel, by the neglect
whereof too much abuse is nourished.

As touching all the abuses last recited, have great respect to punish one
abuse, in which all our idle Gallants and disordered disolutes do desire to
swim, until themselves, and their whole estate do sink, in the Slymie dregs
of Swinelike drunkenness, to drunkards therefore have especial heed, you know
the Law provides for their punishment, and were such offenders duly
presented, Indicted, Fined, and imprisoned, they may by such good means be in
time happily refined from that contagious evil, their continual amiss, being
continually with Justice punished, to the utter suppressing of such vild
occasion: From whence as from Hels mouth flames forth, Ryoats, murders,
man-slaughters, quarrels, fightings, whoredemes, and presumptuous blasphemies,
all proceeding from that sink of sin, in whose sick healths is drunk the
bodies Surfiting, and the Souls damnation. In this, as in all the rest of the
abuses specified, use your best indeauors for the furtherance of a settled
Reformation, according to the Laws established: For you must know, that Vita
and, vigor Iuris, in execucione consistit, The life and strength of the Laws,
consists in the execution of them: For in vain are just laws Inacted, if
not justly executed.

And now my loving Country men, because I would that all which I have spoken,
may receive a profitable remembrance. I will thus conclude, Similes and
Comparisons do best confirm our understanding: and do fastest cleave unto the
memory; my conclusion therefore, shall consist upon this one Similitude.

There was a certain man, who having a great account to make unto a mighty
King, made trial of his best Friends, that might accompany him, in that
dangerous journey, and not forsake him until his account were made. This man
upon his Inquisition found one friend that would go with him a great part of
the way, but then forsake him. And that was his (Riches.) Some other Friends he
found that would go with him until he came in sight of the Kings palace, but
then they would also leave him and bear him company no further, all these
Friends were his wife and children, that would follow him to his grave. But at
last, he found one Friend that would go with him into the presence of the King,
and not forsake him, until he had seen his account made, and for ever bear
the greatest part with him, either in woe, or happiness, and this Friend was
his Conscience; Dear Countrymen betwixt God and your Consciences therefore,
make your peace, for he is the King, unto whom all of us must make a strickt
account of all our actions done* This then considered, such would be our care,
as God and our King should be obeyed, and our peace in this life, and in the
world to come preserved. Unto which eternal grace be we all in Jesus Christ
committed.

FINIS.

