A CLOSET for LADIES and GENTLEVVOMEN, OR, The Art of preserving, Conseruing,
and Candying. With the manner how to make diverse kinds Syrups: and all kind of
banqueting stuffes. Also diverse sovereign Medicines and Salues, for sundry
Diseases.

AT LONDON Printed for Arthur Johnson, dwelling near the great North door of
Paul's. 1608.

An especial note of CONFECTIONARY.
To preserve Pippyns red.
TAke your best colored Pippins and pare them, then take a percer and bore a
hole through them, then make syrup for them as much as will cover them, and so
let them boil in a broad preserving pan: put into them a piece of Cynamon
stick, and so let them boil close covered very leasurely, turning them very
often, for if you turn them not very often, they will pot, and the one side
will not be like the other, and let them thus boil, until they begin to
gelly, then take them up, and pot them, and you may keep them all the year.

To Preserve Pippins white.
TAke fair large Pippins, and after Candlemas pare them, and bore a hole
through them, as you did for the red ones, then make a weak Syrope for them,
and so let them boil till they be tender, then take them up, and boil your
syrope a little higher, then put them up in a Gally pot, and let them stand all
night, and the next morning the Syrope will be something weaker, then boil the
Syrope again to his full thickenesse, and so pot them, and you may keep them
all the year. If you please to have them taste a pleasant taste more then the
natural Pippin, put in one grain of musk, and one drop of the Chymicall
oil of Cynnamon, and that will make them taste a more pleasant taste.

To preserve Pippins green.
TAke Pippins when they be small and green of the tree, and pare three or four
of the worst, and cut them all to pieces, then boil them in a quart of fair
water till they be pap, then let the liquor come from them as you do from your
quodiniacke into a basin, then put into the^ one pound of sugar clarified, and
put into this as many green Pippins vnpared as that liquor will cover, and so
let them boil safely, and when you see they be boiled as tender as a quodling,
then take them up, and pill of the outtermost white skin, and then your
Pippins will be green, then boil them in your Syrope again till the Syrope
be thick: and so you may keep them all the year.

To preserve Apricockes.
TAke a pound of Apricockes, and a pound of sugar, and claryfie your sugar with
a pint of water, and when your sugar is made perfect, put it into a
Preseruing-pan, and put your Apricockes into it and so let them boil gently,
and when they be boiled enough and your Syrope thick, pot them and so keep
them. In like manner may you preserve a Pear-plum.

To preserve Mirabolans or Malacadonians.
TAke your Malacadonians and stone them, and per boil them in water, then pill
of the outward skin of them, they will boil as long as a piece of beef, and
therefore you need not fear the breaking of them, and when they be boiled
tender make Syrope for them, and preserve them as you do any other thing, and
so you may keep them all the year.

To preserve Pomcitrons.
TAke your Pomcitrons one pound and a half, and cut them some ^ halfes, some
in quarters and take the meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair
water, then take two pounds of sugar being clarified, and make Syrope for them,
ahd let them boil in syrope a quarter of an hour very gently, then take them
up, and let your Syrope boil til it be thick, and then put in your
Pomcitrons, and you may keep them al they year. If you please you may pare
some of them, forsome delight the skin, and some pared.

To preserve Cherries.
TAke of the best and fairest Cherries some two pound, and with a pair of
sheeres clippe of the stalks by the midst, then wash them clean, and beware
you bruise them not, then take of fine barbary sugar, and set it over the fire
with a quart of fair water in the brodest vessel you can get, and let it
sees til it be somewhat thick, then put in your Cherries, and stir them
together with a silver spoone and so let them boil, always scumming, and
turning them very gently, that the one side may be like the other, until they
be enough, the which to know, you must take up some of the syrope with one
Cherrie, and so let it cool, and if it will scarce run out it is enough, and
thus being cold, you may put them up, and keep them all the year.

To preserve red Rose leaves.
TAke of the leaves of the fairest buds half a pound, sift them clean from
seeds, then take a quart of fair water, and put it in a earthen pipkin, and
set it over the fire until it be scalding hot, and then take a good many of
other red Rose leaves, and put them into the scalding water, until they begin
to look white, and then strain them, and thus do until the water look very
red: then take a pound of refined sugar, and beat it fine, and put it into the
liquor with half a pound of Rose leaves, and let them sees together till they
be enough, the which to know is by taking some of them up in a spoone, as you
do your Cherries, and so when as they be through cold, put them up, and keep
them very close.

To preserve Oranges and Lymonds.
TAke your Oranges and Lymonds large and well colored, and take a raspe of
steel, and raspe the outward rind from them, then lay them in water three
days and three nights, then boil them tender and shift them in the boiling
to take away their bitterness, and when they be boiled tenderly, take two
pound of sugar clarified with a pint of water, and when your syrope is made,
and betwixt hot and cold, put in your Lymonds and Oranges, and there let them
be infused all night, the next morning let them boil two or three walmes in
your Syrope, let them not boil too long in the sugar, because the rinds will
be tough, take your Lymonds out and boil your Syrope thicker, and so when it
is cold, put them up and keep them all the year.

To preserve Quinces.
TAke your Quinces two pound, and core them, and then perboyle them, and pil
off the outtermost white skin, and then weigh them, and put them into claryfied
sugar one pound, and then boil them closly covered upon a very gentle fire,
putting unto them a stick or two of good Cynnamon, cut into small pieces, and
so stir them continually that they may be well colored on every side: and
when the syrop is come to the height of a perfect gelly, take them off the
fire, and so keep them, for the higher your syrope is, the better will your
Quinces keep.

To preserve Peaches.
TAke a pound of your fairest and best colored Peaches, and with a wet linen
cloth wipe of the white hoare of them, then perboyle them in half a pint of
white wine, and a pine and a half of running water, and being perboyled, pill
off the white skin of them, and then weigh them; take to your pound of Peaches,
three quarters of a pound of refined sugar, and dissolve it in a quarter of a
pint of white wine, and boil it almost to the height of a Syrope, and then put
in your Peaches, and let them boil in the Syrope a quarter of an hour or more
if need should require, and then put them up, and keep them all the year.

To preserve Eringus Roots.
TAke your Eringus Roots fair, and not knottie one pound, and wash them
clean, and when they be washed, set them on the fire, and boil them very
tender, pill off the outermost skin of them, but see you break them not, and
as you pare them put them into cold water, and let them remain there till all
be finished, and then you must take to every pound of Roots, three quarters of
a pound of clarified sugar, and boil it almost unto the height of a syrope,
and then put in your roots, but look that they boil very gently together,
with as little stirring as may be for fear of breaking, until they be
enough: and when they be cold, put them up, and so keep them.

To preserve Barberies.
TAke your Barberies very fair and well colored, and pick out every stone of
them, and then weigh them, and to every ounce of Barberies, you must take three
ounces of hard sugar, and with half an ounce of the pulpe of Barberies, and
one ounce of red Rose water, you must disolue your sugar: and then boil it to
a syrope, being so boiled, put in your Barberies, and let them boil a quarter
of an hour, and then take them up, and as soon as they begin to wax cool,
put them up, and they will keep their color all the year.

To preserve Goos-berries.
TAke of your large Berries, but not thoroughly ripe, and pick off all the
staulkes from them, and wash them clean, take a pound of them, and set them on
the fire, till they be hot, and then take them off, and let the liquor run
from them, then take ten ounces of hard sugar, and four ounces of sugar Candy, and clarify it with a pint of water and the white of an egg, and boil
it to a thick Syrope, and then put in your Goos-berries, and let them boil
one walme or two, and so betwixt hot and cold, put them up, and keep them all
the year.

To preserve Damsins.
TAke of your Damsins large and well colored, but not thorough ripe, for then
they will break, and pick them clean and wipe them one by one, then weigh
them, and to every pound of damsins, you must take a pound of Barbery sugar
white and good, and dissolved in half a pint or more of water, and boil it
almost to the height of a Syrope, and then put in your Damsins, keeping them
with continual scumming, and stirring, and that with a silver spoone, and so
let them boil until they be enough upon a gentle fire, and when they be
enough, take them up, and keep them all the year.

To preserve Raspises.
TAke of your fairest and well colored Raspises, and pick of their staulkes
very clean, then wash them, but in any case see that you bruise them not: then
weigh them, and to every pound of Raspises you must take six ounces of hard
sugar, and six ounces of Sugar Candy, and clarify it with half a pint of
fair water, and four ounces of juice of Raspises, being clarified, boil it
to a weak Syrope, and then put in your Raspises, stirring them up and down,
and so let them boil until they be enough: That is, using them as your
Cherries, and so may you keep them all the year.

To preserve Enula Campana roots.
TAke of your Enula Campana roots, and wash them, scrape them very clean,
and cut them thin unto the pith, the length of your little fingar, and as you
cut them, put them into water, and let them lie in water thirty days,
shifting them twice every day to take away their bitterness, weigh them, and to
every pound of roots, you must take xij. ounces of clarified sugar, first
boiling your roots as tender as a Chickin, and then put them into your
clarified sugar, and let them boil upon a gentle fire, until they be enough:
and so let them stand off the fire a good while, and betwixt hot and cold put
them up to your use.

To preserve Saterion Roots.
TAke your Saterion Roots, and pick out the fair ones, and keep them by
themselves, then wash them, and boil them upon a gentle fire, as tender as a
quodling, then take them off, and pare off the blackest skin of them, and put
them as you pare them into fair water, and so let them remain one night and
then weigh them, and to every pound of roots, you must take xj. ounces of
clarified sugar, and boil it almost to the height of a syrope, and then put in
your roots, but take heed they boil not too long, for then they Will grow
hard and tough, and therefore when they be boiled enough, take them off, and
set them a cooling, and so keep them according to the rest.

Here ends the Preservatives.
To make Manus Christi.
TAke half a pound of refined Sugar, and some Rose water, and boil them
together, till it come to sugar again, then stir it about while it be
somewhat cold, then take your leaf gould, and mingle with it, then cast it
according to art, That is, in round gobbets, and so keep them.

To Candy Ginger.
TAke very fair and large Ginger, and pare it, and then lay it in water a day
and a night, then take your double refined sugar, and boil it to the height of
Sugar again, then when your sugar begins to be cold, take your Ginger, and
stir it well about while your sugar is hard to the pan, then take it out
race by race, and lay it by die fire for four hours, then take a pot and
warm it, and put the Ginger in it, then tie it very close, and every second
morning stir it about roundly, and it will be rock Candied in a very short
space.

To Candy Rose leaves as naturally as if they grew upon the Tree.
TAke of the fairest Rose leaves, red or dammaske, and on a Sunshine day
sprinkle them with Rose water, and lay them one by one upon fair paper, then
take some double refined sugar, and beat it very fine, and put it in a fine
lawne searce, when you have laid abroad all the Rose leaves in the hottest of
the sun, searce sugar thinly all over them, then anon the Sun will candy the
sugar, then turn the leaves, and searce sugar on the other side, and turn
them often in the Sun, sometimes sprinkling Rose water, and some times searsing
sugar on them, until they be enough, and come to your liking: and being thus
done, you may keep them.

To Candy Marigolds in wedges the Spanish fashion.
TAke of the fair yealow Marigold flowers, two ounces, and shred them, and dry
them before the fire, then take four ounces of sugar, and boil it to the
height of Manus Christi, then pour it upon a wet Preplate, and betwixt hot and
cold, cut it into wedges, then lay them on a sheet of white paper, and put
them in a stone.

To Candy all manner of flowers in their natural colors.
TAke the flowers with the staulkes, and wash them over with a little Rose
water, wherein Gum-arabecke is dissolved, then take fine searsed sugar, and
dust over them, and set them a drying on the bottom of a sieve in an oven, and
they will glister as if it were Suger-candy.

To Candy all sorts of flowers, fruits, and spices, the clear rock Candy.
TAke two pound of Barbary Sugar, great grained, clarified with the whites of
two eggs, and boil it almost as hie as for Mantus Christi, the^ put it into a
Pipkin, That is, not very rough, then put in your flowers, fruits and spices,
and so put your Pipkin into a still, and make a small fire of small coals
under it, and in the space of twelve days, it will be rock candied.

To Candie Eringus roots.
TAke your Eringus ready to be preserved, and weigh them, and to every pound of
your roots, you must take of the purest sugar you can get, two pound, and
clarify it with the whites of eggs exceeding well, that it may be as clear
as Crystal: for then it will be very commendable: it being clarified, you
must boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and then dippe in your roots,
two or three at once, till they be all candied, and so put them in a Stow, and
keep them all the year.

To Candie Elecampane.
TAke of your fairest Enula Campana roots, and take them clean from the
Syrup, and wash the sugar off them, and dry them again with a linen cloth,
then weigh them, and to every pound of roots you must take a pound and three
quarters of sugar, and clarify it well, and boil it to the height of Manus
Christi, and when it is so boiled, dippe in your roots, three or four at
once, and they will candie very well, and so stone them, and keep them all the
year.

To Candy Violet flowers.
TAke of your Violet flowers which are good and new, and well colored, and
weigh them, to every ounce of your Violet flowers, you must take four ounces
of refined sugar, which is very white and fair grained, and dissolve it in two
ounces of fair running water, and so boil it til it come to sugar again, but
you must scum it often, least it be not clear enough, and when it is boiled to
sugar again, then take it off, and let it cool, and then put in your Violet
flowers, stirring them together till the sugar grow hard to the pan: this done,
put them into a box, and keep them in a stoaue.

To Candy Goos-berries.
TAke of your fairest Berries, but they must not be two ripe, for then they
will not be so good, and with a linen cloth wipe them very clean, and pick
off all the staulkes from them, and weigh them, and to every ounce of Berries,
you must take two ounces of sugar, and half an ounce of Suger-candy, and
dissolve them in an ounce or two of Rose water, and so boil them up to the
height of Manus Christi, and when it is come to his perfect height, let it
cool and put in your Berries, for if you put them in hot, they will shrink,
and so stir them round with a wooden spatter, till they be candied: and thus
put them up and keep them.

To Candy Rosemarie flowers.
TAke of your Rosemarie flowers, ready picked, and weigh them, to every ounce
of flowers, you must take two ounces of hard sugar, and one ounce of
Suger-candy, and dissolve them in Rosemarie flower water, and boil them till
they come to sugar again; which done, put in your Rosemarie flowers, when as
your sugar is almost cold, and so stir them together, until they be enough,
and then take them out, and put them in a box, and keep them to your use in
your stoaue.

To Candy Borrage flowers.
TAke your flowers, and pick them very clean, and weigh them, and use them in
every respect as you did your rosemary flowers, save this, that who they be
candied, you must set them in a still, and so keep them in a sheet of white
paper, putting every day a chafindish of coals into your Still, and it will be
candied very excellently, and that in a short spare.

Here ends the sorts of Candying.
To make Past of Pippins the GENVA fashion, some with leaves, some like Plums
with staulkes, and stones in them.
TAke your Pippins, and pare them, and cut them in quarters, then boil them in
fair water till they be tender, then strain them, and dry the pulpe upon a
Chafindish of coals, then weigh it, and take as much sugar as it weighs, and
boil it to Manus Christi, and put them together, then fashion them upon a
Pie-plate, and put it into an Oven, being very slightly heat, the next morning
you may turn it, and put them off the plates upon sheets of paper upon a
hurdle, and so put them into an Oven of like heat, and there let them remain
four or five days, putting every day a Chafindish of coals into the Oven,
and when they be through dry, you may box them, and keep them all the year.

To make Past of Eglantine of the color of thrred Coral.
TAke your Eglantine Berries otherwise called Hips, and stamp them in a
mortar, with Gum-tragacant and Rose water, then strain it thorough a strayner,
then take half a pound of refined sugar, beaten and searsed, and work it up
into Past with this strayning, then print it with your moulds, then stoaue it,
and then guild them.

To make Past Royal white.
TAke a pound of refined sugar beaten and searsed, and put into an Alabaster
mortar, with an ounce of Gum-tragacant, steeped in Rose water, and if you see
your Past be too weak, put in more sugar, if too dry, more gum, with a
drop or two of oil of Cynamon, so that you never deceive your self to stand
upon quantities, beat it into perfect Past, and then you may print it with your
moulds, and when it is dry, guild it, and so keep them.

To make Past royal in spises.
TAke of Cynamon and Ginger, of each a like quantity, being finely searsed,
mingle it with your searsed sugar, and Gum-tragacant steeped in Rose water, and
work it into Past, as you did your Past royal white, and then you may turn
it upon sticks made of pieces of arrows, and make them hollow like Cynamon
sticks: in like sort you may make it taste of wh^^ spices you please.

To make Past of Genua the true way.
TAke two pound of the Pulpe of Quinces, and as much of peaches, and strain
it, and dry it in a pewter platter upon a Chafindish of coals, then weigh it,
and take as much sugar as it weighs, and boil it to the height of Manus
Christi, and then put them together, and so fashion it upon a Pie-plate, and
dry it in an Oven with a Chafindish of coals, until it be through rough dry,
and then if it please you, you may spot them with Gold.

To make Past of Violets.
YOu must take of your Violets, which are ready picked, and bruise them in an
Alabaster or marble mortar and wring the juice from them into a porringer, and
put as much hard sugar in fine powder as that juice will cover, dry it, and
then powder it again, and then take as much Gum-tragacant steeped in rose
water, as will bring this sugar into a perfect past, when it is perfect, take it
up and print it with your moulds, and so dry it in your Stoaue, and not by the
fire for fear of danger, and when it is dry, guild it. It is a fine
banqueting conceit.

To make Past of Goos-berries.
TAke of your Goos-berries, and cut them one by one, and wring the juice from
them, till you have gotten so much as you think will serve your turn, boil
your juice a little, that it may be the thicker, then take as much double
refined sugar, as your juice will sharpen, and dry it as you did for your
Violets, and being dry, beat it very fine, and take as much Gum-tragacant
steeped in Red rose water as will serve, and beat it into perfect past in an
Alabaster mortar, and then take it up, and print it with your moulds, using it
in every respect as your past of Violets: This is excellent good for one that
has a weak stomach.

Here begins Banqueting conceits, as Marmalades, Quodiniackes, and such like.
To Make Muskadine Comfits.
TAke half a pound of Musk sugar beaten and searsed, then take Gum-tragacant,
steeped in Rose water, and two grains of Musk, and so beat them in an
Alabaster mortar, till it come to perfect Past, then drive it very thin with
a rolling pin, and then cut it into small pieces like Diamonds, some cut with
a roll spoone on the sides: being thus cut, stoue them, and so keep them all
the year.

To make Diacitonium simplex of Quinces.
TAke of your Quinces, and pare them, and cut them in pieces, and boil a pound
of these pieces in a quart of fair water, till they be very soft: then let the
liquor run from them, then take a pound of Suger-candy, and beat it fine,
and put it into that liquor, and let it sees till you see it stand like Gelly,
then take it from the fire, and put therein four drops of oil of Cynnamon
and Nutmegs, and then put in five and twenty leaves of fine gold and stir it
together, and so put it in fine Crystal Glasses, and keep it all the year.

To make fine Christ all Gelly.
TAke a knuckle of veale, and four Calves feet, and set them on the fire with
a Gallon of fair water, and when the flesh is boiled tender, take it out, then
let the liquor stand still until it be cold, then take away the top and the
bottom of that liquor, and put the rest into a clean Pipkin, and put into it
one pound of clarified sugar, four or five drops of oil of Cynnamon and
Nutmegs, a grain of Musk, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour leasurely
on the sire, then let it run through a gelly bag into a basin with the whites
of two eggs beaten, and when it is cold, you may cut it into lumpes with a
spoone, and so serve three or four lumpes upon a plate.

To make white leach of cream.
TAke a pint of sweet cream, and six spoone-fuls of Rose water, and two
grains of Musk, two drops of oil of Mace, or one piece of large Mace, and so
let it boil with four ounces of Isin-glasse: then let it run down through a
gelly bag, when it is cold, slice it like brawne, and so serve it out: this
is the best way to make leach.

To make a Walnut, that when you crack it, you shall find Biskets, and
Carrawayes in it, or a pretty Pofey written.
TAke a piece of your Past royal white, being beaten with Gum-tragacant, and
mixed with a little fine searsed Cynnamon, which will bring your past into a
Wolnut shell color, then drive it thin, and cut it into two pieces, and put
the one piece into the one half of your mould, and the other into the other,
then put what you please into the nut, and close the mould together, and so
make three or four Walnuts.

To make Quodiniacke of plums.
TAke two pound of plummes, and put them into a posnet with a pound and half
of brasill sugar, clarified with a pint of fair water, and let it boil till
the plummes break, then take it off, and let your liquid substance run through
a strayner, and then put it again into the posnet, and so let it boil till it
come to his thickness, and then print it with you: moulds on what fashion you
please.

To make Biskatello.
TAke two ounces of very fine sugar, beaten and searsed, and put into it half
a spoon-full of Amidum, That is, white starch, a grain of Musk, then beat it
into perfect past with Gum-tragacant steeped in Rose water, then make it into
little pretty loaves, the fashion of manchets, and so put a wafer in the
bottom of every one of them, and bake them in a baking-pan, but take heed
your pan be not hot, and so specke them with gould, and so box them. It is a
very fine banqueting conceit.

To make a special sweet water to perfume clothes in the foulding, being
washed.
TAke a quart of Dammaske rose water, and put it into a glass, put unto it a
handful of Lauender flowers, two ounces of Orris, a dram of Musk, the weight
of four pence of Ambergris, as much ciuet, four drops of oil of cloves,
stop this close and set it in the Sun a fortnight: put one spoonful of this
water into a basin of common water, and put it into glass, and so sprinkle
your clothes therewith in your folding, the drugs left in the bottom, (when
the water is spent) will make as much more, if you keep them, and put fresh
Rose water to it.

To make Moss powder.
TAke two pound of Moss of a sweet Apple Tree, gathered between the two Lady
days, and infuse it in a quart of Dammaske Rose water four and twenty
hours, then take it out and dry it in an Oven upon a siues bottom, and beat
it to powder, put unto it one ounce of Lignum-aloes, beaten and searsed, two
ounces of Orris, a dram of musk, half a dram of Ambergris a quarter of a
dram of ciuet, put all these into a hot mortar and pestell, and beat them
together, then searse them through a course hairen searse, and put it into a
bag, and lay it amongst your clothes.

Tr make Aromaticum Lozenges.
TAke of fine sugar, half a pound, boil it with red Rose water, until it
come to the height of Lozenges, and in the cooling put in of the spices of
Aromaticum rosarum four drams, with a little Confectio Alchermes, and so make
them into Lozenges, guilding them first, and then cut them square with a knife
for that purpose, and when you guild them, if your guilding will not stick on,
wet them gently with a little Rose water, but not too much in any case.

To make a Marchpane, to ye it, and garnish it after the Art of Comfit making.
TAke two pound of small Almonds blanched, and beaten into perfect Past, with a
pound of sugar finely searsed, putting in now and then a spoonful or two of
Rose water, to keep it from oyling, and when it is beaten to perfect Past,
roll it thin, and cut it round by a charger, then set an edge on it, as you
do on a tart, then dry it in an Oven, or a backing pan, then ye it with Rose
water and sugar, made as thick as batter for fritters, when it is iced garnish
it with conceits, and stick long comfits in it, and so guild it, and sure it.

To make all sorts of banqueting conceits of Marchpane stuff, some like Pyes,
Birds, Baskets, and such like, and some to print with moulds.
TAke a pound of Almond past, made for the Marchpane, and dry it on a
Chafindish of coals, till you see it wax white, then you may print some with
mouldds, and make some with hands, and so guild them, then stoue them and you
may keep them all the year. They be excellent good to please children.

To make all kind of Birds and Beasts to stand on their legs in cast work.
TAke Barbary sugar, clarify it, and boil it to the height of Manus Christi,
then pour it into your mouldes, they being seasoned as for your Quodiniacke:
let them stand a quarter of an hour and they will be cold, and then you may
take them out and guild them.

To cast all manner of frutage hollow in turned work, and put them in their
colors, as Oranges, Lymonds, and such like.
TAke your Sugar, being boiled to the height of Manus Christi, and put it into
your Alabaster mouldes, being made of three pieces, turn it round about in
your hand while it is hot, and when it is cold, take it out and put them in
their natural colors.

To make Prince biscuit bread.
TAke a pound of very fine flower, as much sugar thoroughly searsed, one ounce
of annisseeds clean picked, take eight eggs and a spoonefull of Muskadine, and
beat all into batter as thick as for fritters, beat it thus in a bowl one
hour, then put it into your coffins of plate, or frames of wood, and set in an
Oven, and let it remain there one hour, you may slice some of them when they
be a day old, and dry them again upon a hurdle of wicker, you may also take
one of your loaves, and wash it over with the yolke of an egg, beaten with a
little Rose water, and while it is green, cast biskets and carrawaies on it
and a little white candy, and it will show as if it did hail on it, then spot
it with gold and give to whom you please.

To make the usual biscuit sold at Comfitmakers.
TAke a peeke of flower and four ounces of corriander seed, one ounce of
anniseed, take three eggs, three spoonefulls of ale yeast, and as much warm
water as will make it as thick as past for Manchets, make it in a long roll,
and bake it in an Oven one hour, and when it is a day old pare it, and slice
it, sugar it with searsed sugar, and put it again into the Oven, and when it
is dry, take it out, and new sugar it again, and so box it and keep it.

To make an especial sweet Powder for sweet bags.
TAke of the purest orris one pound, of red and dammaske rose leaves, of each
two ounces, of Cloves three drammes, corriander feed one dram, Ciprus and
Callamus, of each half an ounce, Benzoin and Storax, of each three drammes,
beat them all save the Benzoin and the Storax, and powder them by themselves,
and mix it with the rest of the powder, then take of Musk and Ciuet, of each
twenty grains, Ambergris ten grains, mix these with a little of the
foresaid powder with a warm pestle, and so by little and little you may mix
it with all the rest, and so with Rose leaves dried you may put it up into your
sweet bags, and so keep them seven years.

To make an excellent Marmelate which was given Queen Mary for a New-yeares
gift.
TAke a pound and half of Sugar, boil it with a pintos fair water till it
come to the height of Manus Christi, then take three or four small Quinces,
one good Orang pill, both very well preserved and finely beaten, and three
ounces of Almonds blanched and beaten by themselves, Eringus roots preserved,
two ounces and a half, stir these with the sugar till it will not stick,
and then at the last put in of Musk and Amber, dissolved in rose water, of
each four grains, of Cynamon, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, of each three drammes,
of oil of Cynnamon two drops, this being done, put it into your Marme late
boxes, and so present it to whom you please.

To make another sort of Marmelate very comfortable and restoratiue for any
Lord or Lady whatsoever.
TAke of the purest green Ginger, six drammes, of Eringus and Saterion
roots, of each an ounce and a half, beat these very finely, and draw them
with a silver spoone through a hair searse, take of nut kirnells and almonds
blaunched, of each an ounce, Cocks stones half an ounce, all steeped in honey
twelve hours, and then boiled in milk, and beaten and mixed with the rest,
then powder the seeds of read nettles, of rocket of each one dram, Plantane
seeds half a dram, of the belly and back of a fish called Scincus marinus
three drammes, of Diasaterion four ounces, of Cantarides add a dram, beat
these very finely, and with the other powder mix it, and so with a pound of
fine sugar dissolved in rose water, and boiled to sugar again, mingle the
powder and all the rest of the things, putting in of leaf gold six leaves,
of pearl prepared two drammes, oil of Cynnamon fix drops, and being thus
done and well dried, put it up in your Marmelate boxes, and guild it, and so
use it at your pleasure.

To make a blaunch for any Ladies face.
TAke of white Tarter two drams, Camphire one dram, Coperas half a dram,
the whites of four eggs, juice of two Lymonds, oil of tarter four ounces,
Plantane water as much, white Mercuri a pennyworth, bitter almonds two ounces,
all must be powered and mixed with the oil and water, and then boiled upon a
gentle fire, and strain it and so keep it: The party must rub her face with
a scarlet cloth, and then over night wash her with it, and in the morning wash
it off with bran and white wine.

To make printed Quodiniacke of Quinces a rubye color.
TAke two pound of Quinces, pared and cut in small pieces, and put them into a
posnet with three pints of fair water, and so let them boil till they be
tender, then put into them a pound of sugar, and let it boil till the fruit
fall to the bottom of the pan, let the liquor run through a strayner into a
basin, and put it into a fair posnet, and let it boil till it come to his
color and thickness, then print it with your moulds, you shall know when it
is ready to print by rolling a little upon the back of a spoone, and if you
see it will stand and not run down print it, in like sort you may make your
Quodiniacke of Pippins, your Pippins will hold all the year.

To make Quodiniackes of Raspises or English Coriants.
Take Raspises ripe and well colored and put them in a dish, and put them
iiiij spoonfulls of rose water, and mix them together with the back of a
spoone, then wring the lyquid substance through a linen cloth, season it by
your mouth with sugar till it be sweet enough, then boil it on a chafindish
of coals in a dish till it be reddy to print: then print it in your moulds and
box it, and so keep them.

Here ends the conceits of Banqueting.
Your mouldes must lie in water one night before you use them: and an hour
before you print with them, take them out of the water.

CORDIAL Waters.
Aqua Coelestis.
TAke of Cynnamon six ounces, Cloves one dram, Nutmegs one dram and a half; of
Ginger two drammes and half, of Gallingale one dram and half, Cubebs two
drammes, Callamus roots one dram, all brusen and keep in a paper, then take of
Bettony and sage flowers of each a handful, Maxioram, Penneryall, of each
half a handful bruised likewise, then take of these pouders, of Aromaticum
Rosarum three drammes, Diambrae Diamargariton frigidum, Diamoscum dulce, of
each a dram and half, you must put all these into a gallon of spirit of wine,
and steep them three days and three nights shaking them well every day, and
then distill it in your Limbeck, and when it is destilled, you must hang half
an ouce of yellow Sanders and twenty grains of Musk and amber in it.

To make Cynnamon water.
TAke one pound of the best Cynnamon you can get, bruise it well, and put it
into a gallon of the best sack, and infuse it three days and three nights,
and then distill it as your Aqua coelestis.

To make Doctor Steeuens water.
Take of Rose leaves one dram, Borage, Buglosse, violets and rosmarie flowers,
of each a dram and half, Spiknard a dram, Cinnamon two ounces, Ginger one
ounce, Cloves and Nutmegs of each half an ounce, Cirdamons a dram and half,
Gallingale two drams, Cubebs a dram, Pepper three drams, Aniseeds Carraway
seeds and Fennill of each an ounce, Lignum Alloes half a dram, Coral and
Pearl in fine powder of each one dram, bruise these and put them in a pottle of
Aquavitae and a quart of Sack, using it in every respect as your Aqua coelestis.

To make Baume water.
TAke Baume dry three ounces, time, Peneryall of each an ounce Cynnamon four
ounces, a dram of Cardomons, Grames half an ounce, sweet Fennil seeds one
ounce, Nutmegs and Ginger, of each a dram, Galingale one ounce, Caliamus and
Cyprus, Cubebs and Pepper, of each two drammes, of Caper roots half a dram, of
Diptamus one dram, bruise these things, and put them to a pottle of sack, and
steep them xxiiij. hours, and then use it as the former waters.

Angellica water.
TAke Cardus dry a handful, Angelica roots three ounces, of Mirh one dram,
Nutmegs half an ounce, Cynamon, ginger, of each four ounce, Saffron one dram
and half, Cardamons, Cubebs, Galingale and Pepper, of each a quarter of an
ounce, Mace two drams, Grains one dram, Lignum Aloes, Spicknard, Iuncus
odoratus of each a dram, Sage, Borage, Buglosse, Violets, and Rosemary flowers,
of each half a handful: bruise these and steep them in a pottle of sack
xij. hours, and distill it as the rest.

Rosa Solis.
TAke Liquerish eight ounces, Aniseed, Caraway, of each an ounce, Raysons
stoned, Dates, of each three ounces, Nutmegs, ginger, Cynamon, Mace, of each
half an ounce, Gallingale a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs one dram, Figs two
ounces, Sugar four ounces, bruise these and destill it with a gallon of Aqua
vitae as the rest: but when it is distilled, you must color it with the herb
Rosa Solis, or else Alkanet root.

Wormwoode water.
Take of Wormwoode two ounces and half, Sage, Betony, and Rue, of each half a
handful, Rosemary tops a handful, Cinnamon 3. ounces, Nutmegs half an ounce,
Cloves and Mace, of each half a dram, Ginger, an ounce, Gallingall, Cubebs,
and Spicknard, of each a dram and half, of Scordium half a handful, bruise
these and put them into a pottle of Sack and a pint of Aqua vitae, and steep
them four and twenty hours, and distill them as the the rest.

Here begins Consarues.
To make Marmelade of Quinces.
TAke your Quinces and boil them tender, then pare them and cut them to the
coare, then draw the pulpe, That is, the Quince through a hair searse and
weigh it, to every pound of pulpe, take a pound of clarified sugar, and boil
them together till they come to a perfect color, putting to them in the
boiling a little oil of Cynamon, and when it is boiled enough that it will not
stick to the pan, put it into your Marmelade boxes. But your conserve must
not be boiled so high in any case, for then it will not be so good.

To make conserve of red and damask Roses.
TAke of the purest and best colored buddes you can get, and clip off the
whites from them and to every pound of leaves you must take three pound of
Barbary sugar, and beat them together till they be very fine, and then with a
wodden spatter take it up, and set it on the fire till it be through hot, and
then presently put it up, and it will be of an excellent color.

To make Conserve of Violets.
TAke of your Violet flowers, and pick off all the blew flowers, and keep
them and weigh them, and take to every ounce of flowers three ounces of refined
sugar, and beat them in a alabaster mortar till they be very fine, and then
take them up and put them into an earthen Pipkin, and set them upon the fire
until such time as they be thorough hot, and then take them off, and put
them up and keep them.

To make pectorall rowles for the Cough.
TAke liquorish powder finely searsed one ounce, of the spices of
Diatragacanthum frigidum ij. drams, of Gum-arabecke and Tragarant in fine
powder, of each a drum, white starch half a dram, Aniseeds in fine powder one
ounce mingle with the rest, then take of sugar six ounces, of Pennits an ounce
and half, Suger-candy one ounce powdered and mingled with the former powder,
then take Gum-tragacant steeped in Rose water and bear it into past, and so
make it into long rowles and so dry them, and keep them.

To make Conserve of Borage flowers.
TAke of your Borage flowers well colored and pick the blacks from them, then
weigh them, to every ounce of flowers you must take three ounces of sugar, and
beat them together in an Alabaster mortar with a wooden pestle until they be
very fine, so that you cannot discern any sugar in Iumps, then take them out
and put the conserve into a pipkin, and heat it through hot, and having thus
done put them up and keep them all the year.

To make conserve of Rosemary flowers.
TAke your Rosemary flowers, fresh and good and pick them from the green
tuske, weigh them, and take to every ounce of flowers three ounces of
Suger-candy, and beat them very fine, using them in every respect as you did
your other Conserues.

To make Conserve of Buglosse flowers.
TAke your buglosse flowers, and pick them as you did your borage flowers, and
then weigh them, and to every ounce of flowers you must take two ounces of hard
sugar and an ounce of sugar Candy, and beat them together till they be
exceeding fine, and then set them one the fire to dissolve the sugar, and when
it is dissolved and the conserve hot, put it up and keep it all the year.

To make a Pomaunder.
TAke of Beazou in one dram and half, of storax, half a dram of Lignum aloes
in fine powder half a scruple, of Labdanum half an ounce, powder all these
very fine and searse them through laune, and then take of musk a dram, Amber
greese ten grains, Ciuet ten grains, and dissolve them in a hot mortar with a
little rose water and so make them into a pomander putting into it six grains
of Ciuet.

To make Consaure of Barberies.
TAke of your Barberies which are very red and ripe and pick them from the
stalks and then wash them and put unto them a pretty deal of fair water and
set them on the fire in an earthen pan and so scald them, and being thoroughly
scalded pulpe them thorough a fine searce, and to every pound of pulpe take a
pound of powder sugar and boil them til it be enough that is, till it will cut
like marmelade.

To make Consarue Cichorie flowers.
TAke of your Cichory flower new gathered; for if you let them lie but one
hour or two at the most they will loose their color and do you very little
service, therefore ware them presently, and to every ounce of flowers you must
take three ounces of dubble refined sugar and beat them together in a mortar
of Alabaster and a wooden pestle until such time as they be thoroughly beaten,
for the better the flowers and sugar be beaten, the better will your Conserve
be, let this always be for a general rule, and being very well brayed, you
must take them up, and put it into a chafer clean scoured, and set it on the
fire til it be thoroughly hot, and then take it off, and put it up and keep it
all the year.

To keep Cowecumbers in pickle all the year.
TAke four gallons of Conduit water and put unto it three quarts of bay salt,
two handfuls of Sage, one handful of sweet Marioram, and four handfulls of
Dill, let these boil til it come to three gallons, and then take it off, and
when it is almost cold, put in a hundredth of Cowcumbers into that liquor, into
a butter barrel and keep them all the year, but look that always the herbs
lie upon them, and thus done, it will be a most excellent sallet with oil,
vinegar, and pepper.

An exceeding fine pill used for the gout.
TAke of Aloes two ounces, Mastick three drammes, Agricke half an ounce,
Ginger half a dram, let these be poudred very fine, then take of the
extraction of Rhubarbe three drammes, and with white wine let them be
incorporated into a mass of pills, adding unto them a drop of oil of
cloves, and as much or Nutmegges.

A Medecin for the Gout.
TAke of the slippes of stars to the number of four, and then take to every
stippe four snayles, and put them into an earthen pot, and sprinckle four or
five handfuls of salt upon them, and then put to them Sage, Rue, Wormwood, and
Hyssope, of each four handfuls, and so distill them, and when you have
distilled them, put to them a quart of wine Vinegar, wherein an ounce of white
Mercury is dissolved, and so bath the place infected with the gout, and it
will ease them presently.

To make Syproupe of Pomcitrons
TAke of Pomicitrons, and cut them in halfes and juice them, but beware you
writing them not too hard, least it be slimie, and then take to every pint of
juice three quarters of a pound of refined sugar, and boil it in an earthen
pipkin, till it come to the height of a Syrup, and take heed in any case that
you boil it not on too hot a fire, least it burn, and then when it is boiled
enough, put it up, and keep it all the year.

To make Syrup of Violets.
TAke your Violets, and pick the flowers, and weigh them, and then put them
into a quart of water, and steep them upon hot embers, until such time as the
flowers be turned white, and the water as blew as any violet, then take to that
quart of infusion and take four pound of clarified Sugar, and boil it till it
come to a syrup, scumming them and boiling them upon a gentle fire, least it
turn his color, and being boiled, put the Syrup up and keep it.

To make Syrup of Liquorish.
TAke your Liquorish eight ounces, and scrape it very clean, and briuse it
very well, and maiden hair one ounce, Any feed, and Fennel seed of each
half an ounce, steep these in four pintes of rain water half a day, and
then boil it to a quart, then take a pound and a half of clarified sugar, and
boil it with that liquor, till it come to a Syrup, and then put it up and
keep it.

To make Syrup of Hore-hound.
TAke of Hor-hound two handfuls, of Coults foot a handful, of time, peneriall,
and Calamint of each two drams, of Liquorish one ounce and a half, of figs
and raysons of the sun of each two ounces, Pionye kernels a quarter of an
ounce, Aniseeds, and Fennel seeds, of each a quarter of an ounce, boil these
in a gallon of fair water, till it come to a pottell or three pintes, and then
strain it, and take three pound of Sugar, and three eggs, and clarify that
liquor, and so boil it to a Syrup, and so keep it all the year.

To make Syrape of Maiden hair.
TAke of Maiden hear six ounces, of Liquorish one ounce scraped and sliced,
steep these four and twenty hours in four pintes of Conduit water, and
then boil them to quart, and then take two pound of clarified Sugar, and boil
it with that liquor upon a gentle fire, upon Charcoales, until it come to a
Syrup, scumming it very often, that it may be the clearer, for the clearer it
is the better it is, and being boiled enough, put it up.

To make Syrup of Hyssop.
TAke of Hyssop one handful, of Figs, Raysins, Dates of each an ounce, of
Calamint half a handful, of French barley one ounce, boil these in three
pintes of water to a quart, and then strain it, and then clarify it with the
whites of two eggs, and two pound of Sugar, and so boil them to a Syrup, and
being boiled enough, keep them all the ye are.

To keep Cherries all the year to have them at Christmasse.
TAke of your fairest Cherries you can get, but be sure that they be not
bruised, and take them and rub them with a linen clothe, and put them into a
Barrel of hay, and lay them in rancks, first laying hay in the bottom, and
then Cherries, and then hay again, and then stop them up close, that no air
may come near them, and lay them under a fetherbed, where one lies
continually, for the warmer they are, the better, yet near no fire, and thus
doing, you may have Cherries at any time of the year.

To make a Syrup of Mulberries.
TAke your Mulberries which are very ripe, press out the juice from them,
thorough a linen cloth between two sticks, and then to every pint of juice,
take a pound of sugar and boil it to the height of a Syrup, and then keep it
all the year long, and if it wax any thing thinner a month after you put it
up, boil it again, and then put it up.

To make Syrup of Lymonds.
TAke your Lymonds, and cut them in halfes, and betwixt your fingers juice
them, and the liquor that runs from them will be very clear, then take to a
pint of juice, a pound and a quarter of hard sugar, which is very white and
boil it to a Syrup, and it will keep excellent well.

To make Syrup of Roses sollitiue.
TAke of Dammaske Roses, and pull them, then take a gallon of water, and when
the water is hot, put a good many Damask Rose leaves, and take them out when
they look white, and do so ten times, and then the water will look red, and
then to every pint of that liquor, put a white of an egg* and a pound of
sugar, and clarify it, and boil it to a Syrup, and keep it all the year,
the thicker the Syrup is the better it will keep.

To make Syrup of dry Roses.
TAke of red Roses dried four ounces, and infuse them in a quart of fair
water upon hot embers, till the roses have lost their color, then take a pound
and a half of Sugar, and clarify your Liquor and Sugar with two eggs, and
then boil it to the height of a Syrup: but take heed in any case that you set
not your Syrup upon too hot a fire, for then it will loose his color, and be
worth naught.

A Medicine to give a woman in travel, to make her have throws.
TAke Coral, amber, date stones, Pearl, Piony seeds, Saffron, Commine, beat
all these in powder, and put it into Malmesey, and take Unicorns home, and put
it into a spoone with a little Malmesey, and give it to her, and presently let
her drink a draught of the Malmesey with the powders aforesaid, warming of it
a little.

A Medicine for the falling down of the matrisse to the bearing place.
TAke Chicke-weede, and sees it in an earthen pot, then lay of it upon a piece
of scarlet, as hot as the party may suffer it, let her take it to the privy
place, and as one plaster coooleth, so lay another, and use it.

Another for to be taken to the Navel, and to the back right against the
Navel for the same.
TAke a red Onyon, and roast it very tender, then take of Allysander seeds,
and bruise them in a wooden dish, and mingle the Onyon and the bruised seeds
together, and lay it upon a piece of linen cloth, so lay it to the Navel a
little warm, roll that on, and let it lie on xxiiij. hours, then change it,
and take a new one till it be whole.

It is good for the Midwife to hold musk below, tied in a little Lawne to
draw down the Child.

Take Torch-wort, and lay a leaf of it to the Crown of a woman's head warm,
to stay other flowers.

A Medicine for a woman after burden, if need be to bring it down.
TAke Sowtherwood, and wash it clean, and stamp it, and strain it in strong
Ale, and give it her to drink warm.

To stop the Whites in women.
FRy Hemlock in fresh swines grease, lay it as hot as she may suffe it to
the secret place.

For a Teter.
TAke Oats and sees them in water, and where the Teter is, hold over the
reeke thereof as hot as may be, laying a cloth over it to keep in the reeke,
so that the cloth do not touch the Teter, use this five times morning and
evening.

To make a Seare-cloth for an Ache that is nextly come.
TAke Boares grease, Camphire, and wax, and boil them altogether, and so make
a Seare-cloth thereof, and lay it to the grief.

For a Felon or an Andcome.
TAke Hearbe-grace, rustie Bacon, sower leaven, and Snayles that be with shel
on their backs, taking them out of their shells, and beat all these together,
and lay it to the grief.

For to heal any, if they be scalded with hot liquor.
TAke Alehose and Auens, Sheep suet, and Sheeps dunge, and Goose dung, and
when you have washed the herbs, break them altogether a little, and so fry
them together, and then strain it, and make plasters thereof, and lay it to
the grief, warm it a little when you lay it too, laying new plasters to it
twice a day, you may take the juice of Houseleeke, and Sallet oil, and water,
and beat them together, and wash the grease before you use this plaster.

A Medicine for the Whites.
TAke a quart of new milk of a red Cow, x. spoonfuls of red Rose water, a
Pomgarnet pill beaten, and a little Cynamon beaten, and sees it half away,
and sweeten it with sugar, and drink a draught morning and evening, and two
Whites of eggs beaten.

A Medicine for them that are given to bleeding.
MAke a posset, and take of the curd, and take Liuer-wort, and beat it, and put
the juice thereof into the Posset drink, and drink it morning and evening
warm.

For the heat in the Kidneys.
TAke Houseleeke and Plantine, and not wash them, but wipe them with a cloth,
and beat them and strain them, and put to the juice thereof red Rose water,
and wine Vinegar and woman's m^lke, and take the herbs and put them into
clothes, and tie the clothes with thread like a couple of balls, and you must
(when you do use it) have one to do it for you in the morning when you are in
your bed, and the party must take the balls, and dippe them in this liquor,
and so bath your Kidneys, and as soon as one of the balls is hot with doing
of them, take the other, and so use it an hour every morning.

A Medicine for the Stone.
TAke Pelitorie of the wall, Smaladge, Holihockes, Mallows, Tansie, and
Saxifrage, of each a handful, chop them small, and quilt them in a little
linen bag, then take three pints of cream, half a pint of Malmsey, a quarter
of a pint of running water, and let them on the fire, and when it does sees,
then put in the bag of herbs into the pot, and when the bag is thoroughly
hot, wring it between two trenchers over the pot to save the liquor, then
lay the bag to the grief, as hot as you may suffer it, and as soon as it
cools, make it hot again in the same liquor, and so apply it to the grief.

For the Woormes.
TAke a handful of Basil mintes, a handful of Lauender Cotton, as much of
Wormwood, Peach leaves as much, Fertherfue a handful, of unset Leeks a
handful, and boil them together in three spoonfuls of of wine Vinegar, and of
his own water as much, and quilt them in a bag, and so lay it warm between
his Navel and his stomach,

To heal a sore Breast that comes with the infection of the milk.
TAke Mallows and Saffron, and sees them in milk, and when it has sodden a
good while put in some crummes of leaven bread, and boil them well together,
and a little before you take it up, put some Salet oil into it, you must let
it boil till it comes to a Poultis, and so lay it warm to your breast, and if
you perceive this that will not help your breast without it be broke, you must
roast a Lilly root, and lay it to your breast, where you will have it break,
and when it is broken, you must tent it with leaven and milk sodden thick
together, and make a plaster thereof, and lay it to the place where it is
broken, you must dress it twice a day, laying the Poultis all about your
breast, saving the place that the plaster lies on, you must dress it both with
new Poultis, and a new plaster twice every day, until it begins to heal,
and then once a day is sufficient.

To stench bleeding at the Nose.
TAke Bolerminake, and the white of an egg, and Vinegar, and beat them
together, and make Plasters thereof, and lay them to your Temples.

To stench Bleeding of a wound.
TAke of unset Hyssope, and bruise it a little, and take the powder of the bone
that is to be found in a Capers head, and strew the same powder on the Hyssope,
and lay it to the wound.

Another for to stanch the bleeding of a wound.
TAke Hogs dunge hot from the Hog, with Sugar, and lay it to the wound.

For the weakness in the back.
TAke Clarie and Dates, and the pith of an Ox, and chop them together, and
then put them to your cream and eggs, and grated bread, and Fry them
together, and straw Sugar on it, and eat it in the Morning fasting, and you
must put some white Saunders in it also when you temper it together.

For the Worms.
TAke Mares milk, and drink it as hot as you can have it from the Mare, in
the morning fasting.

To know whether a Child has the Worms, or no.
TAke a piece of white Leather, and pecke it full of holes with your knife, and
rub it with Worme-word, and spread honey on it, and starwe the powder of
Alesackatrina, and lay it on the Child's Navel, when he goes to bed, and if
he have the worms, the plaster will stick fast, and if he have them not, it
will fall off.

For one that is bruised with a fall.
TAke stone Pitch, and beat it, and drink it with whit wine, or Sack, or
Malmesey, and if you have none, then take some other liquor, then melt
Parmacitie, and anoint the place where the bruise is.

For the wind Collicke.
TAke Parsley seed, and bruise them, and sees them in Sack, and drink it warn
when you have your pain.

For the Gout that is newly come.
TAke Rhubarbe, and grate it, and mingle it with Conserve of red Roses, and
eat thereof query morning fasting a pretty quantity.

A Water to wash a sore.
TAke of Plantane, and Woodbind leaves, and white Roses, and still them
together, and when the water is stilled, put a quantity of Camphire into it,
and so let it lie in the water continually.

For the shrinking of the Synewes.
TAke the marrow of a Horse bone, and the crops of Elders, and as much of Sage,
and chop them together, and boil them in the marrow, and then strain out the
herbs, and put to the liquor one spoonefull of honey, two spoonfuls of Aqua
composita, and a quantity of Pepper, and boil it again, and keep it for your
use.

For the Pyles.
TAke a quantity of Ragwort, and a quantity of ground Iuie, and the marrow of
the hinder Leg of a Bullock, and beat the marrow and the herbs together,
and boil them on a soft fire, and strain them, and keep it for your use.

A Salve to take dead flesh out of a sore.
TAke a spoonefull of Vinegar, and a spoonefull of honey, and aquantitie of
Verdigrease, and as much Allom, and boil all these together, and keep it for
your Use.

For the staying of the Flux.
TAke a new laid egg, and take off a little of the top of it, and pour out
a little of the white, and fill up the egg with Aqua composita, and stir it
together, and roast it and sup up the egg in the morning fasting, till you be
well use this.

Another for the same.
MAke Rise pottage with Almond milk, you must not blaunch the Almonds, and
make little Balls of Virgins wax, make them less than Pease, and when you
do eat of the pottage, take three or four of the Balls, and put them in
every spoonful as you do eat it.

For the Gowte.
TAke an earthen pot, and put into it a quart of Aquacomposita, and take two
handfulls of Hen-bane, and break it, and put it into it, and set the pot in
the earth all the month of May, and it will come to an oil, and at the end of
May, you must take it up, and keep it for your use, you must cover the pot
very close when you set it in the ground; and when you anoint the greese
therewith, you must do it against the fire.

For the Pyles.
TAke Martylmasse Beef, and dry it, and beat it to powder, and then put it
into a Chasindish of coals, and set it in a Chair and sit over it.

For an Ague.
IF it be for a child, take two spoonfulls of good ale, and sees it, and scum
it, and one spoonful of the Syrup of roses, and let him drink it luke warm:
If for an old body, then take three spoonfulls of good ale, and two spoonfulls
of the Syrup of roses.

To make a fresh Cheese.
TAke a quantity of new milk, and set it on the fire, and let it boil, and
take half a dozen yolks of eggs, and beat them and stir them in the milk on
the fire, then take it off the fire, and keep it stirred, until it be luke
warm, and then put runnet into it, and stir it, and let it stand until it
be gathered together and take up the curd, and put into it Cinnamon and Ginger,
and stir it about, and make dishes of it, as you think good.

A Medicine for a Pestilent Ague, or to drive any thing from the heart.
MAke a posset with white wine, and take away the curd, and take horse dung of
a stone Horse, as hot as you can get it from the horse, and strain it with
the Posset drink, and put a little Me^h^idate, and Cardus Benedictus water,
and Unicorns horn, and if you have no Unicorns horn, then put Iuorie, or
Seahorse tooth, and give it to the sick to drink fasting in the Morning,
warming it, and you must put the Unicorns horn into the spoone, and take it
with some of the Posset Drink, and so drink the Posset presently after it,
and use this two or three mornings.

A Medicine for the soreness in the throat that comes with the Rhume.
TAke half a pint of Hony-suckle water, and two Jews ears, of Plantane, and
Sinckefield half a handful, and a few columbine leaves, these must be sodde
with as much white Suger-candy, as will bring the liquor to a Syrup, you must
put in a little Howell, Cynnamon, and so take it in the morning, and in the
evening, and at such times as your throat is dry.

Another for the falling of the Eualow, or other pain in the throat.
TAke a handful of read Sage, a spoonefull of Dill seed, a piece of leaven,
boil these in a little new milk, until it be thick, then lay it on four
fine clothes, and lay one cloth to the nape of the neck, and another to the
throat, and to each temple one, and bind the clothes, and do this as often as
need shall require, for it has been proved.

A salve for a green wound.
TAke a pound of Rosin, half a pound of wax, four ounces of old Swines
grease, one ounce of Verdigrease, boil them altogether upon a soft fire, and
strain them.

A Water to beale all sores in legs and Ulcers.
TAke a pound of roch-allom, four ounces of green Coperas, beat them
somewhat small, and put them in a pan on the fire, ever stirring them until
they be molten and dried again ready to be powdered, and beat them again in
fine powder, and keep them to your use. When you will make your water, set a
pottell of fair Conduit water over the fire, until it boyleth fast, then take
it away, and as soon as it leaves boiling, cast abroad your powder upon the
water, the which will make it to boil, as long as your water rises, so long
cast your water in, and when it leueth rising and is black in the bottom, then
it is perfect, then if you see a dangerous sore Leg, first cast you powder
presently thereon, and lay thereto three or four fold of linen cloth wet in
the water, and roll it up, do so till the ulcer be clean.

A very good water for a sore mouth.
TAke of Conduit water a pint, one handful of Hyssope, of whit wine, and of
Almonds a pound, of Roses three ounces, sees them altogether till the herbs
be tender, then take it from the fire and strain it, and keep it, and keep
it for your use, you must always wash your meat, and rub it after meat, and
in the morning.

A Castile to break any swelling that is ready to break.
TAke of Commine, of Hyssope, and of quick lime a like quantity, bray them
together in a mortar, till it be very fine, when you would open an impostume,
lay it as big as an haysell Nutte upon the next place, and bind it very
hard, and let it remain there four hours, then take it off, for it will make
the place dead, and then you may let out the matter without grief to the
patient.

A Catitus Plaster.
TAke of Litrage of gould powdered very fine, common oil, hogs grease a pound,
white Coperas four ounces, put them all together in a brazen pan, and sees
it over a very soft fire of coals, and try it continually until it come to
a body, and in the boiling you must cast into it one ounce of good Rose water
or two, and now and then a spoonefull, and when it is come to a good body take
it off the fire, and stir it till it be cold and ready to be made up in a
roll, and then make it up.

To make Populier.
TAke of Populer buddes a pecke, of Hogs grease four pound, sees them both
together a quarter of an hour, and then take it off, and strain it, if it be
two thin, put in a little wax.

Basilicon.
TAke Pitch, Rosin, Wax, sheep suet, common oil, a like quantity, beat
these small, and put them in a brazen pan, and melt them all together, then
take them of the fire, and strain them through a course linen colth, for the
pitch will not be molten, this is good for all manner of sores, and when you
will put in a tent, mix it with the yolke of an egg.

Maturacum poultnis.
TAke Onyons, garlic, dowe, Lilly roots a like quantity, roast them all in a
wet cloth under ashes, and then put them in a mortar, and beat them small, this
is good for all impostumes to break them out.

A Medicine to heal old sores.
TAke Plantine, bramble tops, Orpin, Betonie, Egremonie of each one handful,
strain them, and put thereto Rosin, and wax of each a quarter of a pound,
fresh Hogs grease, and sheep suet, of each four ounces, boil them all
together, till the juice be confirmed, then strain it, and keep it to raise
flesh, and heal old sores.

A Plaster to heal old sores, after they be made clean, and filled with flesh.
TAke Sallet oil half a pint, Lead a quarter of a pound, boil these until
they be black, and keep them for your use.

To cleanse a sore, and take away the dead flesh.
TAke Woodbinde flowers, white Roses, Plantine, and still them together, and
when it is stilled, then six pennsworth of Camphire, and put it into a quart of
the water, and set it in the Sun for ten or twelve days, and so wash the
sore withal.

A Medicine for a sore abroate.
TAke a pint of milk, half a handful of Collumbine leaves, half a handful
of Gasell, and half a score leaves of Sinkefield, two Jews ears, and so the
party must use it evening and morning, and gargase it in his throat,

A Medicine that will heal any wound or sore, and keeps it without proud
flesh or dead flesh.
TAke half a pound of wax, a quarter of a pound of Sheep suet, a quarter of a
pound Rosin, and a quarter of a pound of Turpentine, half a pint of Sallet
oil, two handful of Bugle which grows in the wood, a handful of Smallage,
a handful of Mallows, a handful of Valerin, a handful of Grunsell, and a
handful of balm, stamp and strain the herbs, and put the juice into the
foresaid things, being a while boiled, then sees them together a quarter of an
hour, then take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be cold, then take
away the Smallage from the bottom, then take some of your Balm water, and put
into it so much as will make it green, and let it boil together a half
quarter of an hour, and so take it to your use.

A Glister.
TAke Camamile, Betonie, Dil, Pellitorie of the wall, Hyssope, Rue, of each a
handful, boil these in the broth of a sheeps head, til the broth be very
slippery, then take a pint of the broth strayned, and put two of the Pills of
Diabes, for each a crown weight and a half, Diaca tholice, Diaphenicon, of
each half an ounce, oil of Camomile, oil of Dill, of each an ounce, a little
salt, and a Glister: if you will have it break wind, put into the aforesaid
Common seed, fenell seed, Anniseedes, of each bruised two good handfuls, and
boil all together, and strain it, and make it as aforesaid, and put in the
Glister.

To take away the heat of a burn or out of a Scalde.
TAke eggs and roast them hard as a stone, then take out the yolks of them,
then take a frying pan and put in the yolks of the hard eggs, and so let it
frye til it cone to an oil, then strain it and anoint the burn withal then
take a bladder and anoint it with sallet oil, and lay it to the burn.

To make another Glister.
TAke running water and ij. handful of Carmon, a handful of Mallows, a
handful of Wormwood, a handful of Marcury, an ounce, of Commine, two ounces,
of Fennel seeds two ounces, of Aniseeds, and beat all your seeds, and set
your herbs a boiling and strain them.

A Medicine for one that is broken.
TAke a quantity of Comfrie, a quantity of Knehome, a quantity of knotted
grass, a quantity of Riberuorum, and a quantity of Polipodie, and stamp them
altogether, and strain them in ale, and then give the Patient the same to
drink cold, and trusse him up with some bolster, and let his diet be but
competent, eschewing all slipperie meats, as butter, and such like, provided
always, that the Patient keep his bed six or seven days, lying upon his
back, and sometimes hold his belly with his hand.

To make a Poultis for swelling
TAke the crome of manchet, and sees it in milk till it be thick, then put
in a piece of new butter, about the quantity of a wale nut or somewhat more.

For the Rhewme.
TAke a little quantity of Masticke, and as much of Pellitorie of spain cut
in small pieces, sew them in a little bag of linen cloth, keep the bag in your
mouth till the Pellitory and the Mastick be consumed, and spit in the mean
time as much as you can.

For the toothache and the rhume.
TAke a quantity of Gum ot Iuie, put it in a little bag of linen, then wet
your bag in Aqua vitae or vinegar, and keep it in your mouth till the Gum of
Iuy be consumed, hold the bag over or upon the hollow tooth.

A water for the eyes.
TAke a pint of white wine, then heat a stone called Lapis Calaminaris read
hot nine or ten times in the fire, and quench it eurey time in the wine, the
last time you quench your stone stir it about in the wine, then keep your
water in a clean glass, and let it stand, use to put in your eye one drop or
two morning and evening.

For the eyes.
TAke Rosemary, Housleek, reedle Fennill, and roast an egg, and take out the
yolke, beat these herbs together and strain them.

For pain in the head.
TAke of the best sallet oil you can get, and the flowers of wild primroses
and put them into the oil, and then set it on the fire, and let it boil half
an hour very softly, then put it in a glass and set it in the sun three
weeks, and then rub your temples evening and morning. E. C.

A Gargas for to purge the head.
TAke a pint and a half pint of wine vinegar, Musterd seeds, Ginger, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Pellitory roots, about the quantity of one ounce, when they are
beaten, put it into the liquor, and stir them together for the space of a
week, then gargas it every morning before you use the oil to your head.

For a pin and web.
TAke the oil compacted of the bone of the Gooses wing, and rub it in the
palm of your hand that no shiuers of the bone do stick in it and put it in
with the point of a pin, for the bigness of a pinnes head is enough at once.

For a swelling.
TAke Barrows grease, and Sutherenwood, and Aqua vitae, and boil it together,
and when you have boiled it, strain it in a pan.

For a bone ach.
TAke two or three handfuls of Camamill, a quarter of a pound of Sheep suet
chopped small, and a piece of stony pitch of the quantity of a Wall nut, and a
piece of leauened bread in it crumbled very small, boil it in your own water,
until it be very thick that you may spread it upon a cloth like a plaster, and
lay it on the place where the ach is for xxiiij. hours, and so dress it three
times, if you do, it will take away the ach.

A medicine to heal an old sore or a new.
TAke a quarter of a pound of Rosen, and melt it in a pan till it have left
cracking, and then take half as much wax and a little Turpentine and sheep
suet choped small, and a spoonefull of oil olive, and boil them al together,
and when you have done so, strain them in a paile of water, and make it up
even as you will occupy it, and draw your plasters thin, and dress it three
times a day, that is to say, at morning, noone, and evening, till it be almost
whole, then dress it but twice a day, morning and evening, but if there be any
coare that does hinder the healing of it, take a little Mercury, and put it in
two spoonefulls of water, and when the Mercury is melted in the water and
congealed together, take a fether and drop in two or three drops, and lay a
plaster upon the wound, and it will bring forth the core.

For an Andcom.
TAke half a dozen knottes of a young Oak, and put them in a firepan, and burn
them to a red cole, and take Bores grease, and fine fuet, and two or three
corns of salt and stamp them very fine, and so make a plaster of it, and if it
do draw and heal too fast, lay lint underneath the salve, and you must dress
it twice in the Winter days, and thrice in the Summer days.

The Copy of Doctor Stephens water.
TAke a gallon of the best Gascoine wine, then take Ginger, Gallingall,
Cynnamon, Nutmeegs, Grains, Cloves, Aniseeds, Fennel seeds, Garaway seeds, of
every of them a dram weight, then take wild Time, Hisope, Lauender, Sage,
mynts, red Roses, garden Time, Pellitorie of the wale, and Rosmarie, of every
of them one good handful, and bray the herbs very small, and stamppe the
spices all together very small, put all together into the wine, and close it
fast twelve hours and stir it diverse times, then still it in a Limbecke, and
keep the first water for it is the best, and then keep the second for it is
good, but not so good as the first. E. C.

A dram weight of the seed of Colembyn, bruised with half a penny weight of
Safron drunken with wine, is good for the Ianders, then go to bed and provoke
sweat, the flowers distilled is good for the same purpose, and against
swondings.

Pymypinell.
THis herb is good against the pestilence, to be taken fasting in a morning,
and good against the stone, the roots sodden condited in sugar, may profit
them that have cold stomachs, and are troubled with two much fleame, the
Collicke and stone, this root any way taken is good against poison.

Mouseare is hot and dry, some use to give the juice of this common Mouseare
to hinder the cold of a quartan Ague, some use togather the roots in May, and
dry it and give it to them that be broken, it is good for the bloody flix,
the great scouring of the Mother, for worms both outward and inward, common
flixes, for vomitting of choler, and spitting of blood and brusting, and
specially, for breaking of the brain pan.

The Juice of Coste-mary drunken, kills both small and great worms in the
belly, it is good for a cold Mother, it strengthens the stomach whether it
be drunken or laid to, and stays vomiting, the herb of his nature, whether
it be strawed, or else perfume be made thereof, drives away Serpents, and it
is good against their poisons, and it helps and strengthens the head.

To take out the heat of a burn.
TAke the fat of hogs guts, and Sheep tirdles and boil them, and put
them in a pot, and this will heal the party, and take out the fire, and will
keep good a hole year, this has been proved.

To take the heat out of the face.
TAke running water and elder flowers, Plantane, white Daysie roots, and herb
Robert, put them in the running water, and wash your face morning and evening
therewith.

A Medicine for a canker in ones mouth, proved.
TAke running water, a handful of wood bind leaves, a handful of Bramble
leaves, a handful of Collumbind leaves, a little Rosemary, and boil them
together until half the water be wasted, then put two or three spoonfuls of
honey, and a piece of roch Allom, three or four spoonfuls of wine vinegar, and
wash your mouth with the sodden herbs thereof three or four times every day.

The Diet drink.
FIrst buy a diet pot of the common sort, such a one as will cost eight pence
or ten pence, then put into it half a pound of Liquorish scraped and
bruised, half a pound of Aniseedes bruised, three quarters of a pound of
Lignum vitae bought at the Turners, and one ounce of the bark of the same
wood, which is to be bought at the Apothecaries, half a pound of Raysons of
the Sun, the stones taken out, a good handful of Scabias, an ounce of Chiny,
two ounces of Salyprilla, a quantity of white wine, then fill up your pot
with fair water, saving a pint, then cover your pot with his cover, and
close it round about the brimme with past, then set it on a soft fire of
coals, and let it boil three hours till the fourth part be wasted* then
strain it, and let it settle, and then put the cleerest into bottles, and
drink it Morning and Evening a good draught, and so use fourteen or fifteen
days.

If you put a little of the wood into the fire, and there fry out of it like
oil, then you shall be sure it is good.

For the head ach.
TAke two handfuls of Veruine, Betonie, Camamill roots, Letcie, Checmete, of
each sort two handfuls, dride Roses, put them to powder of Nutmegs, boil this
in white wine, take out the herbs then and fry them in oil olive, and
strain them in a cloth, and make an ointment thereof, and therewith anoint the
head.

To make the rhume medicine.
TAke five quarts of Hyssop water, it must be stilled when the Hysop bears
flowers, and one pound of English Liquorish clean scraped, and cut in little
pieces, bruise them and then put it to the water, and boil them till half be
consumed away, then strain it in shallow pans, and set it in the sun and stir
it now and then, and sometimes set it over the fire, until you see it wax
black, but do not boil it, and it will wax stife with standing in the Sun,
that you may make it in little cakes.

A salve for a cut.
TAke six ounces of Dear suet, four ounces of Wax, four ounces of Rosin,
and stamp and strain Velerian, and take the juice as much as you think will
make the saul look green, and boil them together till it come to a salve.

A medicine for the stopping of the liver, very good for them that have the
Ianders.
TAke Parsley roots, Fenell roots, Asperigon roots, Kneeham roots, Succory
roots, of each the weight of half a crown in silver, of Docke roots, the
weight of xij. pence, a little Liquorish, half a handful of Raysons of the sun
stoned, boil this in three pintes of water unto a quart, and make Almond milk
with the liquor, and take two parts of sweet Almonds, and one part of
bitter, sweeten it with Sugar, or else with syrup of Sucory, and drink a
draught three morninges togethere, fasting three hours after it, use this
every month: you may put in Batly husked, Saxifrage, Maiden-haire, and
Liuerwoort.

For the Worms
THe powder of Coralina to the weight of three pence in silver, given in the
water of Couchgrasse.

A Medicine for a quartan or a tertian Ague.
TAke the herbs and roots called Harts-horne, Plantan, and Orpine, and beat
them with a little white wine and a little bay salt, and so lay it on a cloth
upon your wrist, but be sure it lie on the pluces on both arms changing it
every twenty four hours, but be sure that you lay it two hours before the
fit comes, and hang nine roots of the Hartshorne about your neck in a silk
bag, so that it may lie upon the hollow of your stomach, and let it hang till
your Ague be gone, you must not wash neither herbs nor roots, and you may
take the roots when you cannot get the herbs, and use them so.

For the Canker in the mouth or rawnesse, or in the lower part of the woe.
TAke red Fennel, red Sage, Hysop, Hearbe-grace, Rosmary, Honysuckell leaves,
Fetherfewe, and Daysie leaves, of every one a like quantity, in all two
handfulls, boil these in a quarte of running water to a pint and strain it
and let it stand until it be clear, and put therein a spoonful of English
honey, and as much roch allom beaten as the bigness of a bean, and boil it
together, you must take off the skumme as it does arise when it is boiled, put
it into a glass and keep it for your use, you must warm it when you take it.

A good medicine for an Andicome, or a Boch, or a sore breast or Carbunckell,
to ripe or break them.
TAke a quantity of Herb-grace, a quantity of leuened bread well crummed,
half a spoonful of sallet oil or Capons grease, and boil these in good ale
grounds, and keep it with stirring until it be thick, and when you do use
it, lay it upon a cloth warm to the grief: this Medicine will resolve a
breast without breaking of it, without it need breaking, you must change it
every day once.

A good salve to heal it when it is broken.
TAke a quantie of Barroes grease, a quantity of Rosin, of each a like
quantity, you most scrape the wax and beat the Rosin, and boil them together
till they be melted, then take Lapis calaminaris and Roch alom as much as a
bean of each, and beat them together, then take a spoonful of english honey
and put them together and boil them again, and when it is well boiled, pour
it into cold water, and make it up in rowles, and keep it for your use.

A medicine for a bruise.
TAke a quantity of stone pitch and as much gray soap, and beat the pitch
finely to powder, and boil them together with stirring until it be boiled,
then take it off the fire and let it cool, and then spread it upon a cloth and
lay it to the grief, it must not be through cold, for then it will not spread,
and if one do not heal it, then lay on another cloth spread with the same.

An Ointment for an Ague sore, or other sores, and for swellings.
TAke a Bryome root, and cut off the outside thin, some do call it wild
Vine, slice it and lay it all night in a pint of sallet oil, and then boil
it and and strain it keep it for your use, for this is good to annoint any
Ague sore, or any other swelling.

Then take half a pint of Sallet oil, and as much red lead as you can buy
for two pence and boil them together, and keep it stirring until it look
black, and then take as many clothes as you think will drink up the oil and
the lead, and then cool it and keep it for your use This oil and lead is
good for Ague sores and other sores Remember to annoint the sores with the
ointment aforesaid first, and then lay on the seare-cloth, doing this twice a
day until the sore be hole. And for swelling, you must use the Bryome roots
and the oil only, without the oil and the lead.

An approved good medicine for the Tooth ache.
TAke Rose water either red or Damask, take yellow wax a quantity, and fresh
butter of either an equal quantity, and mingle them together in a dish upon
the coals, and then take a linen cloth and dip it therein, and lay it unto
that side of your iawe where you are greened, as hot as you can suffer it, the
hotter the better.

A midicine for the bloody flixe.
TAke two tosts of cheat bread and tossed them and two eggs and roast them hard,
and take the yolks of them and the liver of a chick, and beat all this
together small, then put all this into a pint of charne milk, then take half
an ounce of Cynnamon and beat it small, and put it in the medicine, and then
take of it evening and morning fasting, for so it most avails you, but if
your stomach be weak, then put in some sugar to sweeten it.

For the pin and web in the eye.
TAke the juice of Parsley and half as much Honey, and with a fether drop it in
the eye, and after it you must put in some powder of white Sugar Candye: you
must dress it thus very often.

For to take the Ague out of any place where it does fall.
TAke Succory a pretty quantity of it, and mingle it with some Bores grease,
and spread it upon a cloth, and warm it against the fire, and lay it to the
place.

A medicine for a green wound.
TAke a quantity of Venice Turpentine, and wash it in fair water until it be
white, then take a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the wound until it be drawn,
then take the yolke of a new laid egg, and add thereunto a small quantity
of fine wheat flower, and a little fresh butter, and mingle them together, and
lay a plaster thereof unto the wound after it is drawn with the Turpentine.

Another medicine to be taken inwardly for a green wound to be taken in Ale or
Beer, it is likewise good for the shutting of a bone broken or cut, either for
man or beast.
TAke juice of an herb called Bonwort, to the quantity of iij. or iiij.
spoonfulls or more, according to the stomach of the party that is hurt, take
the same quantity, and drink it either in the milk or as before it is
written, three or four several mornings fasting, or oftener as you will, and
it will free the party, when the herb is not to be gotten, then you may use
the root, and it will avail as much.

If the wound be but little, either this drink or the Medicine before written
will help it, but if it be great, you must use both together.

For to heal wounds and sores.
TAke Rosin and Frankincense, of each four ounces, of white wax and Olibinum,
of each three ounces, of Hearts suet, of Mastick, of each an ounce, Venice
Turpentine, half an ounce, white Wine a pint, melt the Rosin, the
Frankensence, and the Hearts suet together, then strain it in a pan, and put
thereto all the white wax, the Olibinum, and the Masticke made into powder, and
the white wine, boil all together till the wine be consumed, then take it from
the fire and stir it till it be almost cold, then put in the Turpentine and
make it in a roll, and keep it in parchment or lether,

Another.
Take Callamint, Penniriall, of each a like quantity, Nigella romana seed a
little bruised, a French crowns weight, boil all these in posset drink made
of white Wine and ale, a good draught evening and morning you must drink.

A medicine for the head burning that long time has been.
TAke a quantity of the gaul of a Hare, and as much of honey, mingle it
together a good while till it turn read, and with it anoint the forehead,
and all the aching shall be taken away, this is a precious ointment.

For to set in a bone, or heal a broken bone in man or beast.
TAke the juice of Comfrey roots, and wild Daysie roots, and boil them with
Turpentine and yellow wax, and make a flat plaster thereof, and lay it to the
grief, and set splinters about it, and roll it to keep it stiff once in
five days till it be hole: and you must drink the juice of the roots nine
days in some liquor, either to man or beast when you use the plaster.

For the Pyles.
TAke new milk and chicken it with otmeale finely fifted through a five, and
let it sees till you make it up like suppositaries, and then take it up and
cut off the outside of a race of ginger, and grate it and mingle it together,
and some of it make into a Plaster, and the rest make like suppositaries, and
put them up as you do suppositaries, and then lay a plaster on the place, and
use this until you be hole.

A medicine for a Rupture in old or young.
TAke Knotwort, Ribworte, and Comfrey, of each a like quantity, wash them and
dry them, and set them in the oven when the bread is drawn so that they may
dry, then beat them to powder, them s^^rce them finely through a searce
^^^siue, and look what quantity you take of the herbs when they be dried,
take half so much Aniseede, and beat them with the powder of the herbs and
searce them, and thus having made the powder ready, when you will use it, take
as much of the powder as you can lay or take upon a good broad sixpence, and
xiiij mornings together give it to the party to drink with a little malmesey
fasting, and anoint the place first with oil of spike mingled with any other
thing, and also take such herbs as you make your powder of, and sees them in
fair running water, till they be tender, wringing the water out of them, and
apply them to the place as hot as the party can suffer it, and let not the
trusse be too straight, lest it force the place do rent further, take the
herbs to make the powder with, in May when the chief strength is in them,
the Knotwoort bears a little wachet flower: This has been proved on
children so borne, and on old folks that have been four and twenty years
broken, and does help al sorts that with good usage do not abuse themselves
through the grace of God.

A medicine to be used during all the time of the Plague, good agaiast
infection.
TAke a pint of white wine vinegar, and half a pint of Iene, Tickell, and a
quantity of Bole Armonacke, otherwise called Bolles verus, and stir all this
together, and take three spoonfuls in the morning, fasting, and fast an hour
after it, and take three spoonfuls an hour after supper.

Another medicine for pain in the head.
Sees leaves of Agrimony with honey, and give them to drink, and draw it
through a cloth, and keep it in a box, and therewith anoint your head, and
wash your head in the water that Celondine is sodden in.

For aching of the head.
Sees Pulioll in Aysill, and then put in thy nose.

Take Rue and Fennel, and sees them together in water, and wash therewith the
head.

For a Fellon of the head that swells the head of a man: and that before
written is for the same.
TAke the grease of an Heart, and honey, and barley meal, and ote trest, and
moicell, and stamp them together, and after shave thy head, and then make a
plaster, and lay it to thy head as hot as you may suffer, and let it lie
until it be whole.

For all Ebilles of the head.
TAke Rue, and stamp it with strong Aysill, mingle it and wash the head
therewith.

For the Carbuckle or the Postume in the head.
TAke wormwood, Origanum, Mayron, byeuen, porcod, and sees them in sweet
wine, and after that wring out the juice, and lay it to the ears of the sick
with two sponges, as hot as he may suffer it, and use this two or three
times, and he shall be whole.

For the Mygrims, Postume, Dropsy, Fever, and all manner of akings in the head.
TAke a penny weight of the root of Pellitory of Spain, six penny weight of
Spicardy, and grind them together, and sees them in good vinegar, and take a
saucer full of honey, and five of mustard, and when the liquor that is boiled,
is cold, do thereto the honey and the mustard, and stir them well together, and
let the sick use thereof, half a spoonefull at once, and hold it still in his
mouth, the space of two creedes saying, and then spitte it out into a vessel,
and do so ten or twelve times, a good while after he has eaten at noone, and a
little before even ten or twelve times, and when he goes to bed, take and wash
clean his mouth, and drink a draught and go to bed: use this Medicine three
days and he shall be whole.

For the headache,
TAke and seethe veruine and betonie, filles and wormwood, and wash the
parties head with the water thrice in the week, and take the herbs and make a
plaster, and lay it upon the upper part of the head, on this wife.

TAke the herbs aforesaid when they are well sodden, and wring out the juice
of them, and then stamp them in a mortar, and temper them with the water
wherewith they were sodden, and do thereto the branne of wheat, for to hold
the juice of the herbs that it go not out, and make a garland of linen that
may go about the head and bind the plaster under it, as hot as the sick may
suffer it: do this three times, and he shall be whole.

Another.
Cloves comfort the stomach, liver, and heart, they help disgestion, and
stop the belly, they quicken the eyesight, and scowre away the clouds and
hawes of the eyes, they are good against all cold diseases, and they are hot
in the third degree: the oil of Cloves is very good for a cold stomach, and
for any other places that has need of warming, as a rumaticke brain.

Another.
TAke of litrage of lead sour ounces, of vinegar, of common oil a like
quantity, put the lytrage in a mortar, and put a little of the vinegar, and a
little of the oil, and beat them together, and so put in by a little and a
little all your oil and vinegar, you must beat them two hours together, it
must be as thick as your green salve.

Another.
TAke Camphorie, harts-ease, priuit, plantan, of each of them one handful
bruise these in a mortar, and put thereto of Hearts suet, of fine sallet oil,
of each dim a lib, mingle them well together, and let them stand four and
twenty hours, then put them into a pan or brass pot, and put thereto of
wax and rosin broken in small pieces, of each dim a lib, let these boil all
together over a fire of coals, until the juice of the herbs be consumed,
and the ointment green, then strain it through a canuase cloth into some pot
that you will keep it in, and when it begins to be cold, then put
thereunto four ounces of venis turpentine, and stir all together until it
be through cold, and keep it close covered.

Another.
THe wine of eyebright is made for the eyes, by putting the herbs into the
must, until it be perfect wine, whose use make the eyes of old men look
young, for it is hot and dry, and the powder of it beaten with the yolke of an
egg it works the same effect: the powder received in wine, if the wine be
too strong, put in fenell water or sugar.

A medicine against the stone in the back or bladder, or for the weakness of
the back, which is called the running of the raynes.
TAke venis Turpentine, and wash it in rose water, either read or damask,
until it look white, then divide it into small balls, as you may easily
swallow to the full quantity of thret hasell nuts or there about, then roll
them in sugar, to make them the more esie to be taken, then swallow them in the
morning fasting, and fast four hours after them: take these three or four
several mornings together, and in your water you shall find much gravel.

To take away the pocke-holes, or any spot in the face.
TAke white rose water, and wette a fine cloth therein, and set it al night to
freeze, and then lay it upon your face till it be dry, also take three
poppies, the reddest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the garbitch,
then still them in a quarte of new milk of a red Cow, and with the water
thereof wash your face.

To make Snow.
TAke the whites of five or six eggs, a handful of fine sugar, and as much
rose water, and put them in a pottle of cream of the thikest that you can get,
beat them all together, as the snow rises, take it off with a spoone, you must
beat it with a stick cloven in four, then must you take a loaf of bread and
cut away the crust, and set it upright in a platter, then set a fair rosemarie
branch in the loaf, and cast your snow upon it with a spoone.

A medicine for the Piles.
TAke the herb called Torchworte, is grows hie, bearing a yellow flower,
blowing out of the stalk, the leaves look boar. Take the juice and boil it
with fresh butter a little while, and keep it close, and use it evening and
morning: If a cowes vdder be stung or bitte with a snake or such ltke: Take
Lauender, and wash it clean, and sees it in chamber-lye a good while, and
wash it evening and morning warm, you may put a little fresh butter in it, and
milk out the milk when you do it.

A medicine for a cold, or burn, or a sore, approved.
TAke water-sucke leaves, otherwise called Hogwort leaves, alliehouse daisies,
roots and leaves and all, and a little Rosemary, and wash them and stamp
them, and boil them in cream until it is butter, then strain them, and
apply it warm to the burn, prick the water-sucke leaves, and lay them upon
it, dressing it twice a day, or three times if need: To heal a sore, put
Turpentine, Rosin and wax in it, dressing it with linte.

For the stich.
TAke stich-wort, bay leaves, holly without prickles, of each a like quantity,
the juice, grains beaten, drink it in ale warm.

For the swelling.
TAke the grounds of good Ale, glouers shreddes, and white bread crumbes, and
sage, boil them, lay it to warm, it will swage the swelling and the ache: it
has been proved.

For the toothache.
TAke organny that grows close to the ground, that tastes like aqua-vitae,
bruise it, lay it to the tooth: Bursa pastoris will do the like.

For a bite, or Fellon, or sore leg.
Sees a pint of ale to two spoonfuls like a syrope, prick a piece of leather
with a pin, it will heal it without breaking: if it be broken, take linte to
the whole with some salve, let it lie four and twenty hours, lay it to cold.

For the scrathes of a horses leg.
TAke vinegar, mustard seed, gunpowder, boil them, wash it hot three or
four times, proved.

For the Gowt.
TAke Mallows, and sengren, beat them and boil them in water, then strain
them, put oate-meale groats soked in vinegar and sheep suet untried, then
boil it to a poltesse, proved.

For the Ague.
TAke a red onyon cut small, six and fifty grains of pepper beaten small,
bind it to the wrist half an hour before the sit, proved.

For the Gowt.
TAke a fat whelpe of a hound, scald him like a pigge, garbage him in the side,
take then red nettles stamped with two ounces of brimstone, and four ounces of
turpentine, four yolks of eggs, stuff the belly and sow it up, roast it with
a soft fire, save the dripping, oynt the place, it is good for sinews, and
crampe, it will drive it away: for the like effect, oil netles, white wine,
boil them, apply them hot.

For the Ciatica.
TAke the gail of a Bull, a quart of wort, boil it to a pint, the^ put in a
pint of vinegar, frankyncense one ounce in powder, of honey half a pound, of
commin half a pound in powder, boil it thick, spread it on leather, lay it
to hot two or three days, lay a linen cloth between the skin and the
plaster, the plaster will serve many times. proved.

For the toothache.
ALlom as big as a walnut, garlic an handful, twenty beans, an handful of
bay salt, pepper, beat it together, lay it to the wrestes twenty four hours
or more.

For to stop the bleding of a wound.
THe wool of an incke-horne, sanguis draconis, and boll armonycke, and the
whites of eggs laid on towe.

For a Consumption, either for old folk, young folk or children.
TAke longwort, liuerwort, hearts tongue, of each an handful, red mints, red
sag, mother of time, of each an handful, parsley and fenell roots, the piths
out of each half an handful, liquorish on ounce, annise seeds on ounce,
sceeney two ounces, turbet on ounce, tappe dates two ounces, synamon on ounce,
nutmegs two ounces, white sugar candy sour ounces, rubarb on ounce sliced,
stamppe your spices and your seeds, and beat your other poite carry stuff,
and shred your herbs fine, boil it in iij. quarts of renish wine to a pottell,
strain it, drink four times a day a quarter of a pint at a draught warm put
in a peniworth of aqua-vitae, and as much safron beaten fine: after it is
boiled, if the patient be laxatiue, leave out your rubarb, sceeney and turbith,
and boil it in wort, it is best in wort for children: for aged folks that be
weak, boil in the stone of a Bore, or a ram, or a horse is best, on stone
is enough for one time, you may take one to purge, and another not to purge,
the second receipt is enough, purge first.

To make one make water.
TAke the stones and kernels of peaches and medlers, beat them fine, sift them
through a searce, put in sugar, drink it in white wine.

To make a Scare
TAke a pound of stone pitch, as much rosin as a great walnut, and twice so
much clean wax, a spoonful of fresh Swines grease, boil all together til it
be well mixed, then cool it in water, then oil your hands with hogs grease,
and labor it in your hands an hour and more, till it will cleave to your
hands.

For the same, and the lest for all manner of aches.
TAke Rosin dim. li. of perroson a quarter of a pound, as much gum masticke, a
quarter of a li. of Dear suet, two ounces of turpentine, one ounce of cloves,
and mace, of saffron two ounces, and the licoure must be oil of roses.

For a great ach, a soueragine medicine.
TAke sparmacitie eight peniworth, ot oil two d. of black soap half a pound,
of butter without salt, as much as a great walnut, boil it on a chafindish of
coals half an hour, stirring it well from the the bottom, spread it on
leather, as broad and as long as your grief, lay it too four or five days.

To make a good ointment or salve for any sore.
TAke a good handful of Sage, as much of Plantane, as much of brown wort, as
much of honey suckles as much of tursame, as much velerion, boil all these in
May butter, till it be brown, then strain it, and put in a quantity of
virgin wax, then boil it again.

A good Receipt for all manner of sores, old or new, named the gift of God,
praise be to him.
TAke Bectonie, veruin, pimpernell, bugle, smallage, plantane, Scabeas water*
agrimony, of each a like, stamp them together, boil them together in a gallon
of white wine to the third part, then strain them, and put to them a quantity
of sheep suet, and half a pound of wax, di. li. of rosin, di. li. pitch,
one li. of olibanum, and boil it again.

For bags in the Fundament.
TAke the yolke of an hard egg roasted, the oil of roses, and marygold leaves,
beat it together, lay it to hot.

To kill a Tetter.
TAke green Broom, boil it in a quart of running water half away, bath it
with it.

For the Pestilence.
TAke the water of Beetony, and pimpernell, turmentill, of Scabeas, mix it
together, drink it nine days fasting, and fear no pestilence.

For one that is taken within the body, or any place.
TAke Rose cakes, aqua-vitae, and rose water, heat it on a chafindish of
coals, lay it to the stomach, they shall mend by Gods grace.

For the Ague or cold.
TAke green Alderstickes, take the inner rine a handful, bear them, drink
it in ale fasting, fast iij. hours, walking after it, then eat a caudle.

Another for the Ague.
TAke a spoonefull of juice of orenges, as much aqua-vitae, mingle it with a
yolke of a new laid egg in the shell, suppe it up fasting once or twice.

King Henry the eight his perfume
TAke six spoonfulls of compound water, as much of rose water, a quarter of an
ounce, of fine sugar, two grains of musk, two grains of ambergris, two of
Ciuet, boil it softly together, all the house will smell of Cloves.

For the Strangurion.
TAke horehound one handful and an half, red wine half a pint, of olive
oil five spoonfulls, boil it together, put it in a linen cloth to the small
of the back, as hot as may be.

To cleanse a wound.
TAke beer, wheat, stone flower, and honey, boil it thick, apply it to.

For the Gowt.
TAke wornwood, walwort, wheaten branne, Cow dung, and salt, boil it in
vinegar, plaster it to the grief.

For a Bruise.
TAke half a pint of sallet oil, as much oil of roses, as much aqua-vitae,
and three or four scour snailes that bear shelles, stamp them small, boil
them to oil.

To keep one Laxatiue.
TAke a new lade egg, put out the white, then put in new butter unsalted, heat
it, then eat it, use it often.

Two remedies very good against worms in little children.
TAke flower of wheat well boulted as much as will lie upon three crounes of
gould, and put it in a glass and power into it well water so much as will
steep the said sloure, and make it look as if it were milk and no thinner,
then give the child drink of it, and you shall see with his excrements the
worms come forth dead, which is a very good remedy.

The second remedy against worms.
FOr children that be so little, that the medicine cannot be ministered at the
mouth, you must take very good aqua vitae wherewith you must wash or wet the
stomach or breast of the child, then power it upon the said place with the
powder of fine myrhe, and lay the child down a little while with his breast
upward, and you shall see incontinently the worms with the childs dung come
fourth dead.

To heal children of the lunaticke disease which happens unto them by reason
of a worm with two heads that breeds in their bodies, the which worm
coming to the heart causes such a passion in the child that often times it
kills them.
TAke the tender stalks of a wilding Tree and dry them in the in the shadow,
then stamp them well and sift them, and take of the said powder and roots of
Gention and of long Pyome of each of them a quarter of an ounce, and a quarter
of an ounce of myrhe, all these well beaten to powder, you must put in a dish,
or in some other vessel, and moist them with a little water, then take of it
with your two fingers, and wet the lips and mouth of the child, do this
three or four times, and you shall see the worm come forth dead with the
excrementes.

A remedy for the falling sickness.
TAke Germander gathered in may when it is in the blossom dry it in the
shadow, and make it in powder and when you will use it take the yolke of an
egg or two, and stir and break it with a spoonefull of the said powder, then
sees it, and give it to the pacient to eat, do this morning and evening
eight days, abstayning from wine, carnal Company of women, from all pulse,
beans pease, fetches, tares, and such other from Salates, salt fish, and from
al other things which are hard of concoction and digestion a very good and
notable secret.

A remedy to cure the bytinge of all venemouse beasts.
AS soon as the party feels himself bitten with any venemouse beast, or as
soon after as may be, take green leaves of a fig tree, and press the
milk of them three or four times into the wound, and for this serves also
mustarde seed mingled with vinegar.

To draw an arrow head or other iron out of a wound.
TAke the juice of valerian, in the which, wet a tent and put into the wound
laying the said herb upon it stamped, then make your binder as best fitteth,
and by this means you shall draw forth the Iron, and after heal the wound.

For a knock or fall, causing a bunch upon the head.
TAke an ounce of bay salt, raw honey three ounces, Comen three ounces,
Turpintine two ounces, mingle all these well upon the fire, then spread it upon
a lynnen cloth, and make thereof a plaster, and lay it hot to his head, the
which will assuage the swelling and heal the hurt.

A secret remedy against the plurisie.
OPen a white loaf new baked, in the middle, and spread it well with good
Treacle, on both parts, upon the crummy sides, and heat it at the fire, then
lay one part upon the place of the disease, and the other part on the other
side of his body directly, and so bind them that they stir not, leaving them
so a day and a night, or until the impostume break, and then take away the
bread and immediately the patient will spit forth the putrefaction of the
impostume, and when he has slept a little, let him eat, and by Gods help he
shall shortly be well.

A very good remedy for a wound with a sword, staff, stone, or such like.
TAke Taxus Barbatus, stamp it and take the juice of it, and if the wound
bleed, wipe it and make it clean, washing it with white wine or water, then
put the juice upon the wound, and the herb upon it out of the which you took
the juice, then bind up the wound, and in one day you shall see a wonderful
effect.

Against the disease or grief of the flanks, and the collicke passion,
experimented, and proved diverse times.
TAke half a glass or lose of the juice of Barberies, when they be very ripe
and red, and put into it as much red Corrall as will lie upon ij. groats well
broken into powder, and give the patient to drink thereof.

Another perfect remedy for the same disease, and to make a man piss within
half an hour that has not made water in three or four days, and will
break the stone within ten or twelve days.
TAke fine powder of Virga Aurea, and put a spoonful of it into a new laid
egg, soft roasted, and give the patient thereof in the morning to his
breakefast, and let him not eat in four hours after, and then shall he make
water in less then half an hour, and let him use this for the space of ten
or twelve days as aforesaid, the patient shall void the stone without any
pain or grief.

A remedy for spitting of blood, occasioned by the breach of some vain in the
breast.
TAke mise dung beaten in powder as much as will lie upon a groate, and put it
into half a glass full of juice of plantane with a little sugar, and so give
the patient to drink thereof in the morning and evening continuing the same, he
shall be found.

Against the grief of the lungs and spitting of blood, a remedy experimented
and tried.
TAke an herb called farfara or Tussilago of the Apothecaries Vngula
cabellina, in English called Colts foot, in French, pat de lion, incorporate
it well with the larde of a hog chopped, and a new laid egg, boil all
together in a pan, and give the patient of it to eat nine mornings, this is
also good to make one fat.

Against stinking of breath.
TAke Rosemary leaves with the blossoms, if you can get them, and sees them in
white wine with a little myrhe and Cynamond, and you shall find a marueilouse
effect, if you use it often in your mouth.

Against the biting of a mad dog, and the rage or madness that follows the
party bitten.
TAke the blossoms or flowers of wild thistles dried in the shade and beaten
into powder, half a nutshell full, put into white wine and drink it, and in
thrice taking it you shallbe whole, A thing tried and experimented.

A medicine for waterish eyes.
TAke a red colelease, and anoint the leaf with the white of an egg when
you go to bed, lay the same to your eyes.

A medicine for sore eyes.
TAke a little ground Iuy, and strain it and woman's milk together, and let it
be somewhat green of the Iuy, and then drop a drop or two into the eyes.

Another for the same.
TAke Fannell water stilled, and live honey, and mingle them together, and put a
drop or two into the eye, these are approved.

To make water for the eyes to kill the heat of any sore.
TAke read sage and boil it in Smithes water, until the third part be
consumed, then strain out the sage very hard, and put into it a quantity of
the liquor, a penny worth of Allome, and as much of white coperas, after you
have taken it from the fire, and annoint your eyes therewith.

Another for the same.
TAke the leaves of read brambles, and of plantan, and hony-suckles, and boil
all them in running water, from a quart to a pint, and use it to the sore.

A medicine for the pin and web in the eye.
TAke the white of an egg, being hot, take out the yolke clean and put
thereto a good quantity of sugar candy, then strain it hard through a cloth
and therewith make a water, and every day two or three times drop it into the
eyes.

A medicine to clear the sight.
TAke red rosewater, clean mirhe, as much as a nutte and break it into
powder, and bind it in a linen cloth, and let it lie in the water xij.
hours, then take of this water and put in your eyes, and it will clear your
sight.

For a pearl in the eye.
TAke red Fennel, and the leaves and roots of white dasies, use them without
any liquor, and put together three spoonfulls of either of them, then take one
good spoonful of clarified honey, and two or three spoonfuls of woman's milk,
and drop this into your eye three or four times a day, and if there be any
sight in the eye this will cure it.

For eyes that are blasted.
TAke a tossed made of broune bread, and lay it in red wine that is not
mingled, and let it lie until it be soked half an hour, then put it into a
fine cloth, in two pieces for each eye one, and the fine cloth must be between
the eye and the tossed, dress it when you go to bed at night.

To purge the head and eye sight.
TAke the juice of Hei-hoo, and put it into your nostrels, and the fleame shall
follow and the running water.

For the eyes that be red and sore.
TAke Fennel, Verueine, Roses, Salendine, and Rue, of each two ounces, and
distill it all together, and when need is, then put a drop or two into the
sore eye, for it is good for all manner of diseases in the eye.

Against the pain of the eyes.
TAke the yolke of an egg roasted hard, and laid to with rose oil and saffron,
the juice of Basil put in.

For to see well.
TAke eye bright, red Fennel, of each half a handful, of Rue one quarter of
a handful, cause these to be distilled, and wash your eyes daily with the
water.

For the taking in the leg.
TAke a piece of sour leaven, and as much barme, and as much black soap, and
temper them all together, and so spread it upon a linen cloth and put it to
your leg where the heat is, and change it twice a day, and by Gods help it
will heal you in three or four dressings.

A diet drink for the consumption.
TAke a gallon of running water, measured by ale measure, and put thereto an
ounce of Cynamon, an ounce of cloves, and an ounce of mace, a dram and a
half of Acter roots, and boil it until it come to three quartes, let this
be your only drink till you do mende.

A medicine for the headache.
TAke a handful of Rosemary, and two handful of Bettony, and a spoonefull of
honey, and sees them al in Malmesey, and wash your head therewith.

Another for the head ach.
TAke five nutmegges, and grate them, and sees them in malmesey till they be
thick, and make a plaster thereof and lay it to your temples.

For wind and shootings in your head.
TAke Egremony and Cynamond, and bay them, and put them in ale and lay it to
the temples of the head, and if the pain remove, lay it where the pain
remoueth.

Another for the head ache.
TAke a handful of Camomill, a handful of penneryall, a handful of sage, a
handful of wheat branne, chop them altogether small, and boil them in a pint
of sharp vinegar till they be thick, and thereof make a plaster and lay it
to the temples of the head as hot as you may suffer it, and it shall (by Gods
help) do you good.

Another for the same.
TAke a piece of raw beef, and lay on the nape of your neck, and shift it
every night when you go to bed, and use this as often as you see good,
proved.

Another for the same.
TAke an ounce of oil of Roses, two ounces of white Vinegar, iiij. ounces of
plantane water, mix these together, and wette a linen cloth in it, and lay it
to the temples.

A medicine for Megram in the head.
TAke Housleeke, and Garden worms, the greater part being Housleeke, stamp
them together and put thereto fine flower, and make a plaster in a fine cloth
and lay it to the forehead and temples.

Another for the same.
TAke musterd seed and temper it with vyneger and make an ointment therefore,
and lay it to the temples in a plaster, and an other in the nape of the neck
behind, where it is not sore, and it will avoid and shortly be hoale.

A medicine to keep up the pallat of ones mouth.
TAke a piece of wheaten leven, and Commen seed beaten in a mortar, a
quantity of bay salt, and red Rose vyneger, and red Rose water, put them
into a bag of cloth, and lay it to the mould of the head.

To dry up Rume in the head.
TAke a quantity of dried rose leaves, the flower of Camamell, Bassell, Margerum
all dried a quantity of Cloves and mace, gross bruised, a nutmeg, and a
quantity of dill seed, all quilt in a cap.

A Poultis to cool any place either face, or any where else, that is red and
full of heat pimples.
TAke housleeke, mallows, pursaline, water roses, called numium, beat all
these, and take the juice of them, and put a little oil of Roses to them, and
wash the place with it, or stamp the herbs till they be thick like pappe,
then sees it with a little rose oil and wax, and then you may lay it on as a
plaster.

Against red pimples of the face.
TAke an ounce of camphire, as much of brimstone beaten, mirh, frankincense, of
each four drammes, of rose water a pound, put al these in a glass, and set it
in the sun ten days and then lay it on the places.

Another.
TAke the distilled water of ash tree, tamaredes often eaten, wine of
strauberries laid upon the face.

Another.
TAke the distilled water of mulline, and a little champhire mixed together,
and laid to the face.

A medicine for them that are deaf so that they have heard before.
TAke juice of bittanie, woman's milk, that has a man child, mingle them
together, and dip a piece of black wool into it, and put a piece of it into
your care for the space of ten or a leven days or more, if it happen that this
will not take away the deafnes, then take the milk of a cow, and sees it
with oatemeale, and juice of bittany and lay it plaster wise over the ears,
night and day for a long time.

To make an ointment for a red face.
TAke half an ounce of Camphire, and two drammes of Sulpher vinum, and an
ounce of Deeres suet, melt the suet and the camphire together, then put in the
Brimstone, fine ground in a mortar, when the other is almost cold, and set them
no more over the fire after the Brimstone is put in, These being laid on all
night, will take away the heat and the pimples.

Another for the same.
TAKe as much Mercury sublimate as a Bean, and twice as much Allom, and put
them in a quart of fair water, and boil them together with two or three
corns of bay salt, and bath your face there with often in a day with the same
cold, and open the pimples with your fingars before you wash.

For a sore mouth.
TAke a quart of white wine, and a quart of water, and a pint of wine vinegar,
and a good quantity of red sage, two penyworth of mercury, and half an ounce
of roch Allom, and a quantity of Rosemary, and a greater quantity of woodbine
leaves, and iij. spoonfulls of honey, sees them together, and wash your mouth
therewith.

A water for a Canker and sore mouth.
TAke rosemary crops, Sage, Singfield, woodbine leaves, Allom, live honey, or
pure honey boiled in spring water, half a handful of each of the foresaid
herbs boiled in three pints of water, til they be boiled a third part away,
and keep it in a glass stopped, and wash your mouth with it.

For a canker and s^arnes in the mouth.
TAke two ounces of fine coperes beaten into powder, half a pint of fair
water, and let the same coperes be distilled or steeped, two days and two
nights, then strain the same softly through a linen cloth, then take a
spoonefull thereof, and wash your mouth and throat with it so^tly, blood warm,
but dr^nke none of it, this medicine will not continue good above foureteen
days, therefore you must make it fresh as occasion serves, you must take it
morning and euenning.

A medicine for the mother in a woman's side that ryseth.
TAke Aqua-composita, and beat bay berries in powder, and put it into the
aqua-composita, and put a spoonful or two in a draught of beer or ale, and so
drink it.

A medicine for the pricking of a nedle, or thorn in the joint.
TAke fair boulted flower of wheat, and temper it with wine, white or read,
and a little oil olive and a few rose leaves, and sees them together till it
be plaster thick, and lay it to so hot as you can suffer, It will draw
forth the nedle, and ease the Ache.

A medicine for a Canker that eats man's flesh.
TAke wheat branne of the smallest powder, the juice of smallege, the juice of
woodbine, and burnt allam, beat into powder, and a little honey, mingle all
these together and make a plaster of it, and lay it to the sore, and it shall
destroy the Canker.

For a bruise.
TAke Virgin wax, and commen seed well beaten, mix them together, and lay it
to the bruise plaster wise.

For a white scalde.
TAke sallet oil beaten with the whites of eggs till they be thoroughly wrought
together, cut away the hear, and so annoint the head and lay a bladder upon it.

A medicine against all stiches.
TAke linseede and boil it in new milk, and make a plaster thereof and lay
it to the place grieved.

A medicine for a sore breast.
TAke groundsill and chop it small, the grounds of small beer, wheaten branne,
and sheep suet beaten in mortar, and boil them altogether, and lay it
plaster wise to your breast.

A medicine for swelled breasts.
TAke white wine, wheat bran new bolted, rose leaves, old and new, sees them
until they be thick, then lay it to the breast as hot as she may suffer it,
from even till morning, and shift it again.

To break the fleame of the breast.
TAke butter without salt, and honey, of each a quantity, fair bitter Almonds,
blanch them, and beat them fine, and eat a little every day.

A very good medicine for any ache or sore breast, often approved.
TAke Frankincense, fine wrought Wax, Bores grease, and Rosin, of every one of
them a like quantity, and sees them together to a cake, spread it on a cloth
as broad as the sore or pain is, and lay it too four and twenty hours, or
twelve at the least.

An approved medicine for a sore breast.
TAke a handful of mallows, sees them very soft in fair water, and then let
the water run away from the mallows, then choppe or shred them, then put
them in a dish with bores grease, and heat them very hot and lay it in a
plaster of linen cloth to your breast, as hot as you can suffer three or
four times a day heating it, this has been approved very good.

A remedy for the pains of the breast.
TAke hysope, parsley, and sage, stamp them together, and lay them to the
breast, and they will be whole.

Another for the sloping of the breast.
TAke Rewe, and sees it with allegant, and drink it three or four times.

A medicine for the bloody flixe.
TAke as much fine linen cloth, as will make a suppositary, being rapped
together button wise, then wet the same in the best aqua vitae, or aqua
composita, and let the party grieved convey the same into his fundament, and
it will help them by the grace of God, within three or four dressings, this is
approved, and has holppen many that have been brought low and thought past
cure.

Doctor Smithes medicine for the collicke and stone.
TAke posset ale made of Rennish wine, boil Camamill, running time, parcelie,
pellitorie of the wall, with a good spoonefull of commen seeds, till the third
part and more be consumed, then strain them with sugar sufficient, drink a
good draught warm, and use it as occasion serves.

A medicine for the Chin-coffe for a child.
TAke boares grease, and warm the souls of the feet to the fire, and chafe
them with that, and go to bed and keep it warm, and lap cloths to it.

To stay a Laxe.
TAke half a quarter of a pound of almonds, and parch the^ upon two new tiles,
beat them in a mortar, and take a quarter of fair water, and set it on the
fire, and put half a handful of knot-grasse, and half a handful of plantine
leaves, and let them sees a good while, then take the water, and strain the
foresaid almonds therewith, and make an almond milk thereof, and put in a
piece of sugar then take date stones, and beat them to powder, as small as may
be, and put some of that powder into the almond milk, so drink it luke warm.

An excellent medicine for a child that cannot part with his water, or urine.
TAke three or four hiue bees, kill them, then dry them upon hot flat, being
thorough dry, bruise them to small powder, then put the powder into a quarte of
small ale, and give the sick to drink, and he shall have present remedy.

A medicine for the pain of swelling in the stomach.
TAke a good quantity of rosemary, flowers, boil them in whit wine, and as
hot as may be suffered, apply it to the stomach.

An approved medicine for the spleen.
TAke a quarte of claret wine, a pint of oil of oliffe, two good handfulls of
camamill being shred small and boil the wine and camamill together from a
quarte to a pint, and annoint the hardness of the spleen, morning and evening
therewith, and it will dissolve.

A medicine for a fellon or and come.
TAke Rustie bacon, and Colewort leaves stamp them together, then take a piece
of dogs leather, being pricked full of holes, and spread it upon the lether,
laying it to the soar twice a day, and when it begins to heal, but once a
day.

A medicine for the ytch of the body.
TAke sweet butter, unwrought wax, vinegar, brimstone, a little Rose water,
red cloves hole, boil them together, till they be like a salve, then annoint
the flesh, three sundry nights by the fire therewith, and no more.

A medicine for the Canker in the body.
TAke bollarmoniacke, roch allom, and honey, then beat them to powder, take
twice as much of the allom, as of the bollarmoniacke, and stir them together,
till they come to a salve, and so annoint the soar.

A medicine for the heat or ache in the body, or legs or else where.
TAke red docke roots, and take out the over pith and sees them in running
water, then draw the water from them, and beat it with thick cream, and so
annoint the place that is grieved, or with a cloth dipped in the same, and laid
over the place.

A medicine good to cleanse the body.
TAke bawme and lay it in white wine, till it be well steeped, and then distill
it, the water thereof is good for any disease that is in the body, but you must
distill the wine and all together, drinking a spoonefull or two in the morning,
proved.

A medicine for a fistula.
TAke veruon, and dry it upon a tile, and make powder thereof, and make clean
the soar with a linen cloth, and fill the hole full of the powder.

A remedy for one that vometeth to much.
TAke coliander seeds, fine beaten in powder and drink it with minte water.

To make a scare cloth for all manner of aches.
TAke a pound of unwrought wax, half a pound of rosin, two ounces of
frankincense, a pound and half of sheep suet and boil them altogether, and
strain them in a fair basin, and then put them in a chafindish of coals, and
dip a lynnen cloth therein, and so lay it to the soar.

A medicine for a ring worm or Tetter.
TAke red docke roots, and slitte them, and lay them in vinegar, and so wash
the ring worm or tetter.

A medicine for the stich.
TAke wheat flower, and bake a cake and cut it in the midst, then strike the
dowe sides all over with tar, and lay it to the patient as hot as may be,
you must lay the one half of the cake to the one side of the patie^t, the
other half to the other side.

A Poultis for all manner of swelling.
TAke a lapfull of wild Mallows, and sees them in running water till they be
tender, and then swing them, and choppe them small, then take a penyworth of
sweet butter, and the crummes of white bread, and put the mallows and all into
a quart of milk, and sees it till it be thick, and stir it well, then lay
it to the grief as warm as can be suffered.

A medicine for the Cough.
TAke musterd seeds and put it into figs, and sees it in ale and drink it.

A medicine for the Mother.
TAke Rosin and beat it very fine, and put into sallet oil and white wine and
drink it, and it will do you good.

A medicine for the bloody flixe.
TAke the pills of Pomegranut, beat them, and drink them with red wine,
Morning and Evening blood warm, and heat a brick red hot, and lay it under
a close stool, and cast rosemary and malmesey on it, and let the patient sit
over it.

A very good medicine for the Piles.
TAke the hard row of read herring, and roast it hard, then take the seeds of
nettles, and beat them together small, then beat them with barrowes grease,
and boil them together, and anoint the piles therewith, then take a chafindish
of coals, and set it under a close stool, and cast a little Frankincense
thereon, and let the patient sit over it when they be anointed with the
foresaid ointment.

A medicine for a burn.
TAke oil of Roses and woman's milk, and put it into the open place, and it
will heal it.

Another for the same.
TAke a linen cloth clean washed, and burn it, and make a powder thereof, and
take the oil of eggs, and anoint the sore, then straw the powder thereon.

A medicine for the dropsy.
TAke Anny seeds, cotiander seeds, spignard of spain, use this in your meat
and drink eight days together, and it will do you good.

A medicine to dry a sore.
TAke a pot of smiths water, a quarterne of roch Allom, half a pint of oil
of olives, and put thereto a handful of sage and boil them together till they
be half consumed, then use it to the soar, and it will dry it.

A medicine for an ache that comes against reign.
TAke the horns of a stag, cut them in small pieces, and boil them in water,
till it be consumed from a gallon to a quart, then pour the water from the
bones, and it will gellie when it is cold, and therewith annoint the grieved
place against the fire, evening and morning.

A medicine for a burn or scald
TAke mallows and smaleg, and sees them in water, and when they be tender,
take them forth, and wring out the water clean, chop them small and set them
on a chafindish of coals and put to it a little sheep suet, and make of it a
salve, and lay it to the sore place thick, and lay a cloth upon it, and tie it
on.

A salve for any old sore.
TAke the inner rind of an oak that is not very old, and burn it to a coal,
then quench it and make thereof a powder, and temper it with the yolke of an
egg, and make thereof a salve.

To make a drink for a burning Ague.
TAke a quart of running water, and half a pint of vinegar, half a quarter of
a pint of Rose water, a quarter of a pound of Sugar, and one stick of
Cynamond, and boil them all together, let it cool, and give the sick to
drink.

A medicine for the heat of the Liver.
TAke wort of the first tappe, and drink it every morning next your heart for
a month together, and it will help you.

A medicine to make a young Child go to stool.
TAke May butter, and chafe the Navel therewith against the fire, then take
some black wool that grows between a black sheep legs, and dip it in
the May butter, and dry it, then lay it to the Navel, it is good for an old
man also that cannot take no inward medicine.

An approved medicine for the Navel when it comes out with crying.
TAke wax which is used no other way, but to take the honey from it, and when
you have an occasion, melt some of the wax in a Saucer, and dippe black wool
in it, and lay it to the Navel, and it will help it.

A medicine for the swelling of a Child's coddes.
TAke red rose leaves, and bray them, and boil them in red wine an hour,
then wette a cloth in it, and lay it to the child's navel, as hot as you can
suffer it.

A medicine to staunch the flixe.
TAke a saucer full of the juice of Milfoyle, and as much of the juice of
plantine, and wheat flower, and temper it with the juice of the herbs and so
make a cake of it, and bake it and eat it hot.

For to slaunch blood at the nose, or at a vein that is cut, proved.
TAke feathers burned to powder, and lay it upon the vain that is cut, and
also take a wette cloth and lay it round about the members, and wette the cloth
three times, and lay it to cold every time, and it shall stench wheresoever it
be, proved.

For to help a drunken Man or Woman for ever.
Give him a purgation, and after that give him a swallow to drink in powder
for the space of twelve days, and for a months space give him every day to
eat iiij. Almonds with four leaves of wood beaten, you must eat them in the
morning next your heart, proved.

For scabbes.
TAke snayles and prick them, and take the water that comes out of them, and
anoint the scabs therewith, and take vine leaves and bind them to the scabs, and
do it every morning and evening, and you shall be whole, proved.

To dry Scabbes.
TAke gumme-arabecke and put it in rose water till it be consumed, and wash
them therewith, proved.

For the palsy or shaking in the hands.
TAke Sell and Eysill, and sees them together, and wash thy hands therewith,
and eat sage with musterd fasting.

To restore a man to nature that is in a consumption.
TAke the oldest Cock you can get, scald him and draw him, and cut him all in
pieces in a glassen pot, and stop him as fast as you can, and put amongst
these pieces cloves, mace, small reasons, and salt, and then put this glass
into a great pot, and let all these sees together till they be a gelly, and
then strain it into a clean vessel, and give it to the sick first and last,
blood warm.

To restore the brain.
TAke powder of Bittany, and use it in your pottage, it will restore the brain
and destroy the stone.

For a perrilous Cough.
TAke Sage, Rue, and Commin, and stamp them with pepper, sees them together
with honey, and thereof make an electuary, and use thereof a spoonefull Evening
and Morning, and by the help of God it shall do you good.

For them that cannot see, and have red eyes.
TAke white vinegar, and rub upon a whetstone in a fair basin, and take as
much salt as powder, and grind them well together in a basin, and temper them
with wine, and let it stand a day and a night, and put it in a violl of glass,
you must take the thinnest that stands above in the basin, and put in your
glass, and when the patient goes to bed, take a fether and wet therein, and
anoint your eyes.

To annoint the face and to make it white.
TAke fresh Bacon grease, and the whites of eggs, and stamp them together,
and a little powder of bays and annoint your face therewith, and it will make
it white.

For a fair face, proved another way.
TAke Plantane and white vinegar, and still them together, and wash your face
therewith fifteen days, morning and evening, and after this, drink a draught
of vinegar in the morning once in three days.

To make the face white and fair.
TAke Rosemary and boil it in white wine, and wash thy face therewith, and you
shall be fair, then take Erigan, and stamp it, and take the juice thereof,
and put it all together, and wash thy face therewith, prob.

To help the face with red pimples.
TAke Bay berries and pluck off the husks and make fine powder thereof, and
temper it with honey, and annoint thy face therewith six times, and it will
help you.

To draw broken bones forth of the head.
TAke Bittany, Verueine, and Rue, and stamp them all together very small, and
put thereto Rye meal, or wheat, and the white of an egg, and make a plaster
and lay it to the head.

To quench ones thirst.
TAke the root of Louege, wash it clean, and stamp it, and temper it with
water, and drink a good draught of it five nights together, and drink not in
two hours after it.

For one that speaks in his sleep.
TAke Southernwood, and temper it with Wine, and let the diseased drink
thereof in the morning, and when he goes to bed.

For a woman that has too much of her flowers.
TAke the foot of a hare, and burn it to powder, and drink thereof with red
wine, and Cynamond first and last nine days, and it will help her.

FINIS.

